A Modern Introduction to Logic (Susan Stebbing, 1930)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.190795). Stebbing's landmark logic textbook — the analytic tradition's standard introduction for a generation.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

A MODBEN
INTRODUCTION  TO
LOGIC


BY

L.  S.  STEBBING,  D.Lit.,  M.A.

KrOfeSSOR  in  philosophy  in  the  university  op  LONDON
SOMETIME  FELLOW  OP  GIRTON  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE


“A  Science  wKich  hesitates  to  forget  its
founders  is  lost.  To  this  hesitation  I ascribe
the  barrenness  of  logic.” — ^A.  N.  Whitehead,


THIRD  EDITIfH


METHUEN  & 00.  LTD.  LONDON
36  Essex  Street,  Strand,  W.G.2


First  Published
Second  Edition,  Revised  ,
Third  Edition


. October  i6th  19 jo
. July  1933
194^


PRIKTEP  IN  CtREA.T  BRITAIN


VIVIAN


To

. SHEPHERD


PEEFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION

The  present  edition  has  been  carefully  revised ; four  ap-
pendices and  some  new  pages  have  been  added.  Some
sections  and  chapters  have  been  completely  rewritten.
A more  extensive  rewriting  would  have  been  desirable,  but  for
various  reasons  has  been  impossible.  Wherever  I have  agreed  with
the  criticisms  I have  seen  in  print  I have  tried  to  make  alterations
to  meet  them,  I still  remain  convinced  of  the  soundness  of  the  line
of  approach  to  logic  adopted  in  this  book.

Some  of  my  critics  seem  to  have  had  difficulty  in  understanding
what  I meant  by  ‘ Traditional  Logic  I tried  to  make  that  clear
in  the  original  Preface.  I had  supposed  that  there  would  be  general
agreement  with  Mr.  Joseph  that  ‘ there  is  a body  of  what  might
be  called  traditional  doctrine  in  Logic  the  source  of  which  is  in
Aristotle.  In  common  with  Mr.  Joseph  I distinguish  this  Traditional  j
Logic  from  the  logical  doctrines  of  Aristotle  himself.  His  followers  i
did  not  improve  upon  his  work ; they  merely  elaborated  it.  Advance
in  logic  has  come  about  through  recognizing  that  the  whole  of  Axis-
totelum  logic  falls  within  a more  general  symbolic  logic.  On  this
point  I have  nothing  to  add  to  what  is  said  in  the  first  edition  of
this  book.

The  original  Chapter  XIX  was  on  'Method  in  the  Historical
Sciences  For  this  I have  now  substituted  a chapter  on  ‘ The
Contrast  between  Experimental  and  Historical  Sciences  in  which
I have  attempted  to  show  more  fully  how  the  advance  of  the  physical
sciences  involves  increasing  abstractness.  Only  the  last  section  of
this  chapter  has  anything  in  common  with  the  original.  Accord-
ingly, in  this  edition,  nothing  is  said  about  the  methodology  of  the
social  sciences.  I have  come  to  the  conclusion  that,  on  this  subject,
nothing  useful  can  be  saidjbriefly.

Chapter  IX,  slightly  altered  in  title,  covers  the  same  ground  as
the  original  chapter.  The  order  of  treatment  is,  however,  qmte
different.  I hope  this  change  is  an  improvement,^  In  the  revision
of  this  chapter  I am  under  the  deepest  obligations  to  Professor
G,  B.  Moore,  He  kindly  sent  me  a detailed  criticism,  not  only
pointing  out  many  appalling  blunders,  but  also  showing  me  how
best  they  might  be  remedied,  I cannot  feel  confident  that  I have


A.  MODEEN  INTEODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


viii

not  fallen  into  other  mistakes,  but  I know  that  this  chapter  is  much
better  than  it  was  before.  The  linking  up  of  this  chapter  with  the
newly  written  sections  of  Chapters  IV  and  V is,  I hope,  an  improve-
ment. I have  introduced  and  defined  the  phrase  logically  inap-
propriate expressions  ’’  (Chap.  V,  § 5)  in  order  to  stress  the  danger
of  relying  upon  linguistic  similarity  as  a guide  to  logical  form.  This
danger  is  first  pointed  out  to  the  student  in  the  discussion  fii  exis-
tential propositions  (Chap.  IV,  § 6),  the  erroneous  traditional  analysis
of  which  led  to  a mistaken  view  of  the  universe  of  discourse,  and
hence,  to  the  conception  of  different  ways  of  existing.  The  indirect-
ness of  reference  of  our  ordinary  linguistic  expressions  has  been
further  explained  in  Appendix  A.  An  attempt  has  been  made  both
in  this  Appendix  and  in  Chapters  III  and  IX  to  make  clearer  the
distinction  between  referend  and  de^iotation.  A brief  discussion  of
EusselFs  theory  concerning  Logical  Constructions  is  given  in  Ap-
pendix B.

The  account,  in  the  last  chapter,  of  the  development  of  logic
as  the  science  of  pure  form  has  been  expanded  by  the  addition  of
a few  pages,  whilst  Appendix  C contains  a further  discussion  of  the
system  of  Pnneipia  'Matheimtica.  I have  attempted  to  remedy
my  original  mistake  of  failing  to  mention  the  important  work  of
C.  S.  Peirce.

Not  much  alteration  has  been  made  in  Part  II,  but  page  267
has  been  rewritten,  and  an  appendix  on  Thing  and  Cause  has  been
added.

The  ' Xote  to  Students  mentioned  in  the  original  Preface,  has
been  withdrawn.  I now  think  it  is  suflS.cient  to  suggest  that  those
who  have  no  previous  knowledge  of  the  subject  should  proceed  from
Chapter  VII  to  Part  II.

I should  like  to  thank  those  who  have  made  helpful  criticisms,
and  have  pointed  out  misprints.  Of  these  I especially  desire  to
thank  Professor  S.  Alexander.  I was  unable  to  make  use  of  s
number  of  suggestions  sent  me  by  Professor  Porteous ; they  arrived
too  late,  since  the  mam  work  of  revision  was  completed  in  October,
1931.  My  chief  debt  is  to  Professor  Moore  to  whom  I owe  more
than  I can  say.


May^  J933


U SUSAK  STEBBIXG


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION

The  science  of  logic  does  not  stand  still  Mr.  Bradley,
writing  in  1883  the  Preface  to  the  first  edition  of  his  Logic,
said  ‘ Logic  is  not  where  it  was,  and  cannot  remain  where
it  is  I The  statement  is  applicable  to  the  development  of  logic
to-day.  It  is  true  that  the  recent  developments  of  logic  have  not
tended  in  a direction  of  which  Bradley  would  have  approved,  but
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  " logic  is  not  where  it  was  I During
the  last  half-century  greater  advances  have  been  made  than  in  the
whole  of  the  preceding  period  from  the  time  of  Aristotle.  But  the
introductory  text-books  now  being  used  in  British  Universities  show
no  trace  of  these  developments ; in  the  main  they  follow  the  tra-
ditional lines,  differing  chiefly  in  the  accuracy  with  which  they  fol-
low Aristotle  himseff,  and  with  regard  to  the  exclusion  or  inclusion
of  a certain  amount  of  metaphysical  discussion.

Books  on  logic  may  be  regarded  as  falling  into  four  main  groups,
to  be  distinguished  according  as  the  approach  is  traditional,  meta-
physical, pragmatic,  or  mathematical.  The  line  of  approach  is
determined  by  the  conce;^tion  of  the  nature  and  scope  of  logic.
The  most  widely  used  English  text-books  belong  to  the  first  group.
Traditional  Logic  is  based  upon  the  doctrines  of  Aristotle,  of  the
schoolmen,  and  the  Port  Royal  Logic.  Aristotle  founded  the  science
of  logic  when  he  realized  the  importance  of  the  form  of  a proposition
and  was  thus  led  to  recognize  that  all  deduction  is  formal.  This
achievement  should  surely  constitute  sufficient  title  to  fame.  But
the  ‘ Father  of  Logic  ’ has  been  venerated  after  the  fashion  of  a
Tictorian  parent ; his  authority  has  been  unquestioningly  accepted
even  when  his  doctrines  have  been  felt  to  be  erroneous.  Thus
Leibniz,  for  instance,  was  hindered  in  his  attempt  to  create  sym-
bolic logic  because  he  was  uiiable  to  admit  that  Aristotle  could  be
mistaken.  This^  veneration  of  the  authority  of  the  Master  is  con-
trary to  the  spirit  of  Aristotle  himself.  He  would  assuredly  have
been  surprised  had  he  foreseen  the  failure  of  his  disciples  to  develop
the  science  which  he  founded.  Nothing  in  the  whole  course  of
human  speculation  is  more  astonishing,  or  in  its  way  more  depress-
ing, than  the  contentment  of  the  traditional  Logicians  with  the
restriction  of  the  forms  of  propositions  to  the  fourfold  schedule.

ix


X


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


This  restriction  was  due  to  Aristotle’s  failure  to  carry  his  analysis
far  enough.  This  failure  also  resulted  in  the  traditional  doctrine
that  every  proposition  ascribes  a predicate  to  a subject.  Respect
for  Aristotle  bhnded  the  traditional  Logicians  to  these  defects,  and
prevented  them  from  criticizing  the  unsatisfactory  assumptions
upon  which  his  logical  doctrine  rests.

^ The  phrase  ^^traditional  Logicians”  is  here  used  to r describe
those  writers  on  Logic  who  have  not  sought  to  go  beyond  the  logical
doctrines  of  Aristotle  but  have  contented  themselves  with  the
elaboration  of  technical  details.  These  include — to  adopt  a phrase
from  Lewis  Carroll — ^ the  writers  and  editors  of  Logical  text-books
which  run  in  the  ordinary  grooves  Common  to  these  Logicians
is  the  acceptance  of  the  subject-predicate  doctrine,  of  the  traditional
schedule  of  propositions,  and  the  restriction  of  deduction  to  the
syllogistic  form.  The  traditional  "Formal  Logic’  is  based  upon
these  views.  The  " Inductive  Logicians  of  whom  J,  S.  Mill  is  the
foremost  example,  have  made  no  attempt  to  remedy  the  deficiencies
of  the  traditional  Formal  Logic.

Qj  The  metaphysical  Logicians  were  dissatisfied  with  the  traditional
^ogic  only  in  so  far  as  it  was  " formal  They  protested  against
the  " severance  ’ of  " Logic  ’ from  " Reality  ’ ; they  made  central
the  doctrine  of  judgement,  and  were  concerned  with  the  relation  of
the  knowing  mind  to  what  it  knows.  Their  chief  representatives
dn  this  coirntry  are  Bradley  and  Bosanquet.  To  the  latter  is  due
the  conception  of  Logic  as  " the  morphology  of  knowledge
Drafiley^^the  attempjL.tcL^de]mbp^^^  science^seemed  to  rest
upon7a^lEeef“"i]lusion The  views  of  these  wxtes  have  noiEKing
in  commorTwiffiT^  of  logic  which  underlies  this  book^

Neither  Bradley,  nor  Bosanquet,  nor  any  of  this  school  of  Idealist
Logicians,  has  ever  succeeded  in  making  clear  what  exactly  is  meant
by  the  principle  of  identity-in-difference  upon  which  the  meta-
physical logic  of  the  Idealists  is  based.  Their  logic  ends  in  " sMp-
wreck  as  one  of  them,  Mr.  Joachim,  pointed  out  in  his  important
hook  The  Nature  of  Truth.

Discontent  both  with  the  traditional  and  the  metaphysical
Logicians  inspired  the  revolt  of  the  Pragmatisi®.  They  sought  to
" humanize  ’ logic,  to  relate  reasoning  to  other  human  activities^
and  thus  to  base  logic  upon  psychology.  agreement  with  the
metaphysical  Logicians,  they  have  decried  the  study  of  "formal
logic  whilst  at  the  same  time  they  have  vigorously  protested

^Symbolic  Logic,  p,  163.  Whately,  Bain,  and  Fowler  may  be  cited  aa
typical  nineteenth-century  examples  of  such  writers.  It  may  safely  be  said
that  every  elementary  text-book  in  logic  now  in  use  in  this  country  falls  under
the  description  of  traditional  Logic.  I have  followed  Lewis  Carroll  in  giving
the  traditional  Logicians  the  dignity  of  a capital  * L %


XI


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION

against  tlie  Idealist  theory  of  truth.  Certain  of  the  pragmatists,
notably  Mr.  Alfred  Sidgwick,  have  made  valuable  contributions  to
the  ‘ art  of  thinking  but  they  have  not  advanced  the  science  of
logic.

The  fourth  line  of  approach  is  determined  by  the  conception  of-
logic  as  essentially  formal,  which  results  in  the  identity  of  pure
logic  a.nd  abstract  mathematics.  This  is  the  conception  that  imder-
li'es  this  book.  A new  impetus  has  been  given  to  the  study  of  logig'
by  the  work  of  the  symbolic,  or  mathematical,  logicians.  The
expression  “symbolic  logic”  requires  some  explanation.1  The
use  of  symbols  for  the  expression  of  logical  principles  is  an  accidental
convenience ; their  use  is  no  doubt  psychologically  indispensable,
but  it  is  not  logically  necessary.  The  importance  of  a special  sym-
bolism is  that  it  makes  possible  the  revelation  of  form.  Symbolic
logic  is  formal.  It  is  now  recognized  that  the  ideal  of  logic  is  to
exhibit  form.  The  rigorous  anal5^is  of  mathematical  “ proofs  ”
has  shown  that  such  “ proofs  ” are  demomtrative  only  when  they
are  cpitmltitely.  iormaL  Hence,  mathematics  is  the  science  of  pure
form.  It  follows  that  the  achievement  of  the  ideal  of  logic  maTroa
it  indistinguishable  from  £ure  mathematics.  It  might  be  supposed
that  £Se  science  of  lo^  thus”  conceived  has  nothing  in  common
with  Aristotle’s  conception  of  logic.  But  that  would  be  a mistake.
There  are  considerable  grounds  for  supposing  that,  in  recognizing
that  the  ideal  of  logic  is  the  exhibition  of  form,  the  mathematical  |
logicians  are  carrying  on  the  work  which  Aristotle  himself  initiated.  1
In  Chapter  XXV  an  attempt  is  made  to  indicate  the  nature  of  this
development,  and  throughout  the  book  emphasis  is  laid  upon  the
continuity  of  some  of  Aristotle’s  doctrines  with  those  of  the  noathe-
matical  logicians.

This  continuity  of  development  is  of  itself  a sufficient  justifica-
tion for  the  inclusion  of  a chapter  on  the  Traditional  Syllogism.
But  there  is  another  reason  why  the  elementary  student  should  be
initiated  into  logic  through  the  syllogism.  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  syUogism  is  a form  very  often  exemplified  in  our  ordinary
reasoning;  moreover,  it  is  psychologically  the  simplest  form,  so

*Ttoro  i«  eonniderabfe  diveigenoe  in  the  tenninology  used  by  modem
lo^csians.  “ Symbolic  logic  ” is  often  used  as  a synonym  for  “ matbematioal
Mo  ” ; sometimes  the  tern  “ lomstio  ” is  preferred.  The  use  of  the  name
“fogistio  ” to  denote  what  is  usually  called  “ symbolic  logic  ” was  suggested
at  the  Xntormtionai  Congrm  of  FfaitoBophy  held  at  Paris  in  1904,  and  it  has
geoamlly  beeoi  adopted  hf  oontinental  lo^oians,  but  Bnglish  and  Amerioan
writers  usually  prefer  the  name  “ symbolic  logjo  It  is  desirable  not  to  use
these  names  «i  exact  synonyms,  but  to  confine  “ aymbolio  lo^o  ” to  the  study
of  special  types  of  dMuotivs  systems,  using  “mathematical  logio”  as  a
i^yncrnym  for  tl»  “ seknoe  of  pure  form  The  expression  “ an  dgehra  of
logio  ’*  will  then  be  appropriately  used  to  denote  a special  set  cd  postulates
and  primitive  eonoopts,  such  as  the  fikdutoedm  s^^tem.


xii  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC  ,

that  syllogistic  argumcEts  provide  the  easiest  means  of  enabling  the
student  to  apprehend  form  as  such  and  to  realize  that  the  validity
of  reasoning  depends  upon  its  form.  But  it  must  be  admitted  that
many  of  the  technical  traditional  developments  of  the  syllogism  are
nothing  but  elaborate  triviahties.  So,  too,  are  the  technicalities  of
the  traditional  doctrine  of  immediate  inference.  An  endeavour  has
been  made  to  reduce  the  consideration  of  these  technicalities  to  the
TT^’T^^’TmiTn  required  to  enable  a student  to  pass  elementary  examina-
tions in  logic.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  time  is  not  far  distant
when  University  examiners  will  no  longer  require  proficiency  in
these  technical  dodges,  but  will  seek  to  test  the  student’s  grasp  of
logical  principles.  But  that  time  has  not  yet  arrived.  Its  date
must  doubtless  be  postponed  until  there  are  suflScient  text-books
written  from  a more  modern  point  of  view.  It  is  difficult  to  break
through  the  vicious  circle  constituted  by  the  dependence  of  examiners
upon  the  text-book,  and  by  the  dependence  of  the  text-book  upon
the  requirements  of  University  examinations.

The  conditions  of  examinations  apart,  some  knowledge  of  Aris-
totle’s logical  doctrines  ought  to  form  part  of  the  equipment  of  an
educated  man.  These  doctrines  and  the  terminology  in  which  they
are  expressed  have  entered  so  deeply  into  the  structure  of  Western
thought  and  language,  that  an  understanding  of  them  is  necessary
for  the  proper  appreciation  of  much  great  literature  as  well  as  of
Western  philosophy.  Certainly  the  student  who  intends  to  read
philosophy  would  be  seriously  hampered  in  his  xmderstanding  of
the  great  metaphysical  systems  were  he  completely  ignorant  of
Aristotelian  logic.  But  it  is  Aristotelian  logic  that  he  should  study,
not  the  accretions  due  to  the  traditional  Logicians.

The  plan  of  this  hook  requires  some  explanation.  Its  intention
is  to  provide  a text-hook  suitable  for  students  reading  for  the  first
examinations  for  University  degrees,  and  also  for  first-year  work
for  Honours  examinations.  This  double  purpose  has  made  a cer-
tain amount  of  repetition  unavoidable.  This  is  regrettable,  but  is
rendered  necessary  by  the  present  transitional  state  of  the  teaching
of  logic.  A ‘ Note  to  Students  following  this  Preface,  suggests
the  order  in  which  the  chapters  should  be  read  by  those  having
no  previous  knowledge  of  the  subject.

It  has  not  been  my  intention  to  Jiake  the  student  very  far  into
mathematical  logic,  but  only  to  enable  him  to  realize  that  the  prin-
ciples of  sjonholic  logic  are  not  peculiar  to  a special  kind  of  study
but  are  principles  exemplified  in  everyday  reflective  thinking  no  less
jthan  in  mathematical  deductions.  I have  not  sought  to  write  an
'introduction  to  symbolic  logic ; my  purpose  has  been  to  emphasize
|the  connexion  between  Aristotelian  logic  and  symbolic  logic,  and
thus  to  write  a text-book  which  will  include  as  little  as  possible


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION


xiii

that  the  stiideat  lias  subsequently  to  unlearn,  or  for  the  teaching
of  which  the  modern  logician  feels  it  necessary  to  apologize.

In  writing  this  book  1 am  conscious  of  having  learned  most  from
Professor  A.  N,  Whitehead,  Mr:  Bertrand  Russell,  Professor  G.  E.
Moore,  and  Dr,  C,  D.  Broad.  The  numerous  footnote  references  to
their  ^writings  do  not  sufficiently  indicate  the  extent  of  my  obliga-
tions to  them.  I have  also  learnt  much  from  Mr.  W.  E.  Johnson.
In  personal  discussion  I owe  more  than  I can  say  to  my  friend,
Miss  E.  M.  WhetnalL  She  has  re^d  nearly  the  whole  of  the  book
in  manuscript,  and  has  discussed  most  of  the  chapters  with  me  in
detail  In  consequence  of  her  extremely  helpful  criticism  at  least
some  serious  mistakes  have  been  avoided.  I am  also  greatly
indebted  to  my  friends,  Mrs.  Roberts  (Susan  Miles)  and  Miss  Helen
M.  Smith,  who  have  read  some  of  the  chapters  and  have  made
valuable  criticisms.  For  help  in  the  correction  of  the  proofs  I am
indebted  to  various  friends,  and  in  the  compilation  of  the  hidex
to  the  students  of  my  advanced  logic  class.  I am  especially
indebted  to  Mr.  A.  F.  Dawn  for  his  help  in  the  final  revision  of
the  proofs.  To  all  of  these  and  to  some  other  friends,  whom  I
have  not  named  but  who  m different  ways  have  helped  and  en-
couraged me  in  the  writing  of  this  book,  I desire  to  record  here
my  grateful  thanks.


London,
July,  1930


L.  SUSAN  STEBBING


Anal  Priora  .
Anal  Posl
F.L.

Introd.  •

Int.  Math.  PM

W.  K.  J.

Proc.  Anal  ^oc.


abbreviations

Aristotle:  Analylica  Priora.  {O.V.P.)
Aristotle:  ArMytiaa  Posterma.

J N Keynes : Formal  Logic.

. B,  A.  W.  B-dA  » Kpfc—

Philosofliy^


W.  55-  Job-tisoa:  Logic.

Proceedings  of  the  Afistoman  Society.


New  Series.


CONTENTS


PAGE

Preface  to  the  Second  Edition vii

Preface  to  the  First  Edition ix


PART  I

CHAPTER  I

Reflective  Thinking  in  Ordinary  Life 1

CHAPTER  IT

Language 10

(1)  Language  and  Signs — (2)  The  Hearer-Speaker  Attitude — (3)  The
Two  Uses  of  Language — (4)  Vagueness  and  Ambiguity.

CHAPTER  HI

4^quaintance  and  Description 22

(1)  The  Ambiguity  of  “ Knowing  ” — (2)  Proper  Names  and  Descrip-
tive Phrases — (3)  Connotation  and  Denotation — (4)  Names  and  Con-  ^

notation*

CHAPTER  IV

Prok)sitions  and  their  Constituents  ......  33

yfl)  The  Proposition — (2)  Kinds  of  Propositions — (3)  The  Tradi-
tional  Schedule  of  Propositions— (4)  Distribution  of  Terms  in  A,  E,

1,  U Propositions— (Oj  Kinds  ot  TL'erms — (6)  The  Universe  of  Dis-
course and  Existential  Propositions.

CHAPTER  V

The  Comkjund  Proposition  and  the  Relations  between  Propo-

sitions 57

f (1)  The  Seven  Relations  between  Propositions  and  the  Figure  of
Opposition — (2)  Immediate  Inferences  of  A,  E,  I,  0 Propositions —

(3)  The  Relations  betweeft  Compound  Propositions — (4)  The  Dia-
grammatic Repres^tation  of  A,  E,  I,  0 Propositions — (5)  Logically
Inappropriate  Expre^ions.

CHAPTER  VI

The  Traditional  Categorical  Syllogism 81

(1)  Definition  of  Syllogism— (2)  Figure  and  Mood— (3)  |t,ulos  of  *
the  Reduction  and  the  Antilogism-  (5)  Ambiguity

of  Symbols  in  the  Traditional  Syllogism.

xvii


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION'  TO  LOGIC


CHAPTER  VII

COMPOtJKB  AeCHTMENTS  AND  IeREGULAE  SYLLOGISMS  ....  lOS
(1)  The  Modi — (£)-  The  Dilemma — (3)  Polysyllogisms — (4)  Epi-
cheirema  and  Abbreviated  Arguments — (5)  Relations  and  Relational
Arguments.

CHAPTER  VIII

Symbols  and  Form

(1)  The  Utility  of  Symbols — (2)  Illustrations  from  the  Symbolism
of  Mathematics— (3)  Form  and  Function— (4)  Illustrations  from
the  Symbolism  of  Principia  Mathematica,

\ CHAPTER  IX

General  Propositions,  Descriptions,  and  Existence  . . .139

(P  jMJj,eneral,  PxopQsitions— (2)  The  Analysis  of  Descrip-

tions—(3)  Mr.  Russell’s  Theory  of  Incomplete  Symbols— (4)  The
^stematic  Ambiguity  of  “Exists”.

CHAPTER  X

The  Generalization  of  Logic  ....  1^3

Logie-(2)  Relations-(3)  The  £ogical  Propcrtira
of  Deductive  Relations-(4)  The  Construction  of  a Deductive
bystem— (5)  The  System  of  Propositions  and  Classes.

CHAPTER  XI

System  and  Oedek  ....  ^F)

(1)  The  MatMrej3£.aHtem;^(2)  The  Kature  of  Ord'cr-f.-ii  Sim'ilaritv
and  Structure-(4)  The  Method  of  Interp^efatior  ^ I

' CHAPTER  XII

Inference  and  Implication  .

-f3?Th?™ Conditions  of  Valid  Inference  ^
(3)  ihe  VaMrty  of  the  Syllogism  as  a Form  of  Proof— (4)  Im-
plication and  Deduction.  i


PART  II
CHAPTER  XJII

The  Nature  or  SoiENTmo  Inquiry  ...  .

• GIThe  Impdrtance  of  Order— (2)  “ Science  ” and  “ Scientific  Method  ”

2^3)  Com^n-sense  Thinking  and  Scientific  Method — (4)  The  Im-
portance of  Relevant  Knowledge-(r,)  The  Form  of  Scientific  Meth<S.

chapter  XIV

Induction:  EN0MEyj?ioN  AND  Analogy

(1)  Induction^j^l^)  Simple_  Enumeration— (3)  Analogy.

, " CHAPTER  XV

Causality  ....


CONTENTS


XIX


PAGE

CHAPTER  XVI

Hypothesis  . . . 291

(1)  The  Choice  of  an  Order — (2)  The  Development  of  Hypothesis-
es) Experimental  Testing  of  Hypothesis — (4)  The  Use  of  Hypothesis
— (5)  Newton’s  Conception  of  Scientific  Method.

CHAPTER  XVJI

J^RINGIPLES  OF  CaXISAL  DeTEBMINATION

(1)  The  Search  for  Causes — (2)  An  Example  of  Experimental  In
vestigation — (3)  The  Special  Principles  of  Causal  Determination—

(4)  Mil’s  Four  Methods  of  Experimental  Inquiry — (5)  Mil’s  Con
ception  of  Scientific  Method.

CHAPTER  XVIII

Dedxtctivb  Causal  DETERMrNATiox  and  Functional  Analysis  . 344
(1)  The  Analysis  of  Complex  Effects — (2)  Concomitant  Variation
and  Quantitative  Analysis — (3)  Correlation  and  the  Use  of  Statistical
Methods — (4)  Probability — (5)  Measurement.

CHAPTER  XIX

The  Contrast  between  Experimental  and  Historical  Sciences  . 375
(1)  The  Elimination  of  the  Substantive — (2)  The  Aim  of  the  His-
torical Sciences — (3)  Method  in  History.


CHAPTER  XX

'i'HE  Nature  of  Scientific  Theories  ......

(1)  Explanation  at  the  Level  of  Common-sense  Thinking — (2)  The
Aim  of  Science — (3)  Constructive  Descriptions.


CHAPTER  XXI

Tfips  Problem  of  Induction 400

(1)  The  Faith  of  the  Scientist — (2)  The  Problem  of  Justification —

(3)  The  Special  Problem  of  Scientific  Method — (4)  Hume’s  Problem
and  its  Critics.  --  - ^


PART  III

CHAPTER  XXII

The  Theory  of  Definition 421

(1)  The  Nature  of  Definition — (2)  The  Theory  of  the  Predieables  and
its  Relation  to  the  Traditional  Theory  of  Definition — (3)  Classification
and  Division  in  Relation  to  Definition — (4)  Definition  and  Analysis.

CHAPTER  XXITI

Abstraction  and  Generalization .

(1)  The  Abstractness  of  Science — (2)  The  Method  of  Extensive
AbstraSion— (3)  ' AbstracHon  and  Occam’s  Razor— (4)  Logic  and
Mathematics.

CHAPTER  XXIV

The  Characteristics  of  Logical  Thinking  • , / * • •

(1)  Persuasion  and  Conviction— (2)  Logical  Prindidfia  .and,.,the  Tra-.
ditional  “ Laws  of  Thought  (3)  The  Normative  Aspect  of  Logic.


XX  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC*

PAOE

CHAPTER  XXV

^ Sketch  of  the  Histobicae  Development  of  Logic  . . . 476

''  (1)  Tlie  Origin  of  Logic  in  the  Analysis  of  Reflective  Thinking —

^ (2)  The  Development  of  Logic  as  the  Science  of  Eorm — (3)  The
j Development  of  the  Conception  of  Scientific  Method.

Appendix  A.  Meaning,  Refeeence  and  DESCRiraoN  , . • , 499

Appendix  B.  Logical  Constructions 602

Appendix  C.  PostulationalSystems  and  Pruvcipi^  AfATHEiiATioj  506


Appendix  D.  Thing  and  Cause 510

Bibliography  512

Index . 515


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO

LOGIC

PART  I

CHAPTER  I

REPLECTIVE  THINKING  IN  ORDINARY  LIFE

‘ Only  connect.’ — E.  M,  Forster,

Logic,  in  the  most  usual  and  widest  sense  of  the  word,  is
concerned  with  reflective  thinking.  We  all  constantly  use
the  words  ^ thinking  ’ and  ‘ thought  So  long  as  we  are
not  asked  to  define  them  we  feel  confident  that  we  know  what  these
words  mean.  But  we  do  not  always  use  the  word  ‘ thinking  ’ in
the  same  sense.  Sometimes  we  contrast  I think  of  ’’  with  I am
now  seeing  , In  this  sense  we  are  using  think  ’’  to  denote  our
awareness  of  something  not  directly  presented  to  sense.  Thus  any-
thing that  ^ j)asses  timough  our  heads’  is, palled  a thought  Bor
example,  lying  on  the  sea-shore  on  a hot  sunny  day,  iii  ah  idle  mood,
we  may  have  a train  of  thoughts,  a set  of  more  or  less  disconnected
ideas  passing  through  our  minds.  These  thoughts  may  be  intimately
bound  up  with  our  present  sense-impressions — ^the  heat  of  the
stones,  the  sound  of  the  waves,  the  call  of  the  sea-gulls.  In  such
a mood  we  do  not  connect  one  thought  with  another ; we  are  at
the  mercy  of  any  sense-impression  that  may  break  in  upon  us.
Suppose  now  that  the  idler  on  the  rocks  is  aroused  hj  such  loud,
insistent  shouting  that  he  recogni^ies  " in  a flash  as  we  say,  that
this  shouting  has  some  peculiar  significance  for  him.  His  reverie
ended,  he  jumps  up  and  looks  around.  Let  us  suppose  that  he
now  sees  the  water  breaking  on  the  rocks  just  below.  He  turns
round  to  find  that  the  rock  on  which  he  is  standing  is  completely
cut  ofi  from  the  shore  in  front.  Behind  is  a steep,  overhanging  cliff,
which  he  could  not  scale.  The  tide  will  soon  completely  cover  the
place  where  he  has  been  Ijdng.  He  cannot  swim.  What  is  he  to
do  ? Ho  supposes  that  the  people  on  the  cliff,  who  shouted  to  him,
have  probably  realised  his  situation.  He  wonders  whether  they  can
hdpMm.  Looking  up  he  sees  that  some  one  is  pointing  to  the  face
I 1


2 A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

of  tLe  cliff.  Does  that  mean  that  there  are  footholes  ? He  looks,
but  can  find  none.  Then  he  observes  above  his  head  a narrow  pro-
jection of  cliff.  If  he  could  clamber  on  to  that  perhaps  he  would
be  out  of  reach  of  the  incoming  tide.  Would  that  be  so  ? Again
he  looks,  and  sees  that  just  below  the  ledge  there  is  the  dark  brown
discolouring  of  the  rocks  that  is  the  mark  of  high  tide.  That  ledge
then,  will  be  safe,  if  he  can  reach  it.  ,

In  the  above  situation  we  have  a concrete  illustration  of  the


to  his  sense-impressions ; nor  was  his  tbinbmg  consciously  controlled"
But  as  soon  as  he  was  conscious  that  the  situation  was  one  of  danger
he  was  confronted  with  a jrpblem  to  be  solved.  Consequently  he
was  forced  to  think  aSmifWe  situati’&ff' SO  as  to  alter  it  in  accord-
ance TOth  his  practical  needs.  He  becomes  aware  of  the  sea  as
imnacing ; he  not  only  sees  the  water  near  his  feet,  he  sees  it  as  a
sign  of  danger  because  he  interprets  it  as  signifying  ‘ retreat  to  shore
cut  off ’.  Similarly,  he  not  only  hears  people  shouting  ,•  he  interprets
their  shouts  as  having  special  meaning  for  him.  He  not  only  sees
the  various  shades  of  brown  on  the  face  of  the  cliff,  he  intermets
them  as  signs  of  high  tide  level.  Suppose  now  that  he  asks  himself
the  question  whether  the  tide  is  likely  to  rise  above  the  normal  level
to-day.  He  considers  that  last  night  the  moon  was  in  its  first  quarter  •
therefore,  it  wiU  be  a neap  tide  ; hence,  if  he  can  reach  the  ledge  he
wm  be  safe.  In  this  last  stage  of  his  refiective  thinking  he  is  ob-
viously relymg  upon  previous  knowledge  of  facts  relevant  to  the
situation  Ke  rerynbers  that  the  moon  was  at  its  first  quarter  the
night  before ; he  knows  that  a neap  tide  is  coimected  with  the  moon
m that  position,  he  infers  that  the  tide  will  not  rise  high  to-day
Z thinking  directed  to  a practical  end  it  is  unlikely

that  the_  thinker  will  consciously  use  words.  He  may  have  merely
a TOual  image  of  the  appearance  of  the  moon  as  he  saw  it  yesterday
and  pass  dmeotly  to  the  reflection-' a neap  tide’,  and  thence,  to

remembered  appearance
he  wlS  5o  W.  “ ’ ^ » idgiaying  wiat

Suppose  that,  once  he  is  perched  on  the  ledge,  the  man  looks
about  him  to  distract  his  thoughts.  ,He  sees  on  the  other  side  of

iifn  TtT’  ® headlaaid  that  juts

mto  the  sea,  a mde  openmg,  not  previously  noticed,  or  taken  to

be  a natural  cl^  m the  rock.  Now  that  his  attention  is  directed
to  It,  he  sees  that  the  openmg  is  not  the  entrance  to  a cave,  for
he  can  d^cem  bncks  cemented  together.  Taken  in  itself  there  is

® ^ tius  situation  its  discover

suggests  the  question  how  a brick  wall  came  to  be  there.  It  cairt


EEFLICTIYE  THINKING  IN  OEDINAEY  LIFE  3

be  the  remains  of  a house,  for  it  is  about  half-way  up  in  the  side
of  a steep  cliff  below  which  the  tide  never  goes  out.  The  headland
is  seen  to  be  connected  with  the  mainland  by  a narrow  ledge  of  rock
more  than  a hundred  feet  high.  He  knows  that  on  the  top  of  the
headland  are  the  ruins  of  a castle  which  is  supposed  to  have  been
King  Arthur’s.  Perhaps  the  brick  wall  was  once  right  inside  the
rock,  the  face  of  which  has  now  fallen  away.  That  is  a reasonable
supposition,  for  it  is  a stormy  coast  and  rocks  that  have  evidently
fallen  are  piled  below.  In  that  case,  however,  the  bricked  chamber
would  have  had  no  outlet  to  the  light.  Perhaps  it  is  a secret  chamber,
or  a dungeon.  In  that  case  it  is  probable  that  there  will  be  some
connexion  with  the  mainland — ^perhaps  a secret  underground  passage.
At  this  point  of  his  reflection,  he  must  perforce  cease  his  q[uestioning.
In  his  present  position  he  has  no  means  of  testing  his  suppositions.
Next  day  he  may  proceed  to  test  the  correctness  of  his  theory  with
regard  to  the  brick  wall.  On  investigation  of  the  headland  he  finds
a disused  shaft  which  he  calculates  to  be  in  the  right  position  to
connect  with  the  chamber.  He  discovers  a not  unsimilar  shaft  on
the  main  cliff,  near  the  church.  He  reflects  that  a passage  running
from  the  one  shaft  to  the  other  would  pass  beside  the  brick  wall,
and  connect  the  underground  chamber  with  the  church.  At  this
point  he  will  feel  that  he  has  accoxmted  for  the  brick  wall  in  the
cliff.

Simple  as  these  two  illustrations  are,  they  suffice  to  show  how
thinking  essentially  consists  in  solving  a problem.  The  first  was  a
practical  problem,  namely,  how  to  reach  a place  of  safety.  The
second  was  a problem  arising  out  of  the  perception  of  something
unexpected  in  a familiar  situation.  In  this  case  the  solution  of  the
problem  was  sought  merely  for  its  own  sake,  in  order  to  answer  the
question,  Why  is  so-ard-so  such-and-such  ? ” — a question  asked
only  when  tlm  smh-and-such  has  features  that  would  not  he  expected
to  occur  in  the  given  situation.  The  occurrence  of  these  unexpected
features  is  felt  to  be  explained  as  soon  as  they  are  related  to  a situa-
* tion  in  which  their  occurrence  would  not  be  unexpected.  The  ex-
planation consists  in  finding  intermediate  links  that  connect  the
brick  wall  and  the  cliff.  It  is  reached  as  a process  of  reflective
thioking  in  which  each  link,  brick  wall,  disused  shaft,  castle,  church,
is  attended  to  not  for  its  owjj  sake  but  as  being  a sign  of  somethmg
else.  Such  a process  of  reflective  thinking  is  known  as  inferring.
In  tMs  case  there  was  a passage  from  something  sensibly  presented
to  something  not  presented  but  inferred,  which  may,  or  may  not,
be  the  case.  " To  determine  whether  it  is  the  case,  or  not,  the  infer-
ence must  be  further  tested.  Such  testing  may  be  carried  out  in
two  widely  different  ways.  The  inferred  conclusion  may  admit  of
direct  inspection.  In  this  case,  the  test  would  consist  in  verifying


4


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


tlie  conclusion  by  direct  observation  of  something  presented  to  sense*
Clearly  it  is  not  always  possible  to  perform  such  a test  as,  for  example,
in  our  illustration,  which  was  concerned  with  a question  about  a
state  of  affairs  in  the  past.  In  such  cases  the  conclusion  is  tested
by  its  power  to  connect  together  various  observable  items  which,
apart  from  the  supposed  connexions,  would  remain  disconnected.

We  have  spoken  of  * directly  observing  something  \ But  what
we  directly  observe,  see  with  our  eyes,  for  instance,  is  a very  small
part  of  what  we  observe  when  we  say  that  we  are  perceiving  so-and-so.
Thus,  for  example,  in  looking  at  a puzzle  picture  where  a man’s
head  is  suggested  by  the  lines  drawn  to  indicate  the  leaves  of  a tree,
we  suddenly  discover  the  head.  Knowing  what  we  are  in  search  of
we  attend  to  some  only  of  the  lines  drawn  and  actively  connect
them  with  others,  finally  making  out  of  the  set  of  lines  attended
to  the  representation  of  a man’s  head.  No  hard  and  fast  line  can
be  drawn  between  what  is  actually  seen  and  what  is  suggested  by
what  is  seen.  We  see  what  we  have  a mind  to  see.  In  the  situations
of  everyday  life  our  senses  are  being  constantly  stimulated  by  a
variety  of  sense-impressions  amongst  which  we  have  learnt  to  pay
attention  to  some  as  being  specially  significant^  that  is  as  being  signs
of  something  else  in  wMch  we  are  interested.  When  one  thmg
signifies  another,  there  is  between  them  that  connexion  which  en-
ables us  to  pass  in  thought  from  the  one  to  the  other.  The  sun  setting
in  a bank  of  clouds  may  be  noticed  merely  for  its  shape  and  colour,
and  appreciated  for  its  beauty.  But  it  may  also  be  apprehended
as  signifying  wet  day  to-morrow^'  Again,  waving  a flag  may  be  a
si^  of  Mgh  sphits,  or  of  a certain  state  of  mind  called  patriotism.

V Thinking,  we  have  seen,  essentially  consists  in  solving  a problem.
The  ability  to  think  depends  upon  the  power  of  seeing  connexions.
Reflective  thinking  consists  in  pondering  upon  a given  set  of  facts
so  as  to  elicit  their  connexions.  “ I didhi’t  think  ” often  means  I
failed  to  connect  ”,  that  is,  ''I  didn’t  recognize  that  given  that,  I
must  have  this  ”/  There  are  various  kinds  of  connexion  from  the
bare  juxtaposition  of  this  and  that  to  the  essential  connexion  of  an
X with  a Y which  must  be  if  X is.^  The  mere  addition  of  one  fact
to  another  would  be  of  little  value  for  reflective  thinking.  It  is
unlikely  that  we  ever  have  mere  additions,  even  in  the  idle  reverie
of  day-dreamhag.  In  day-dreams  ohg  idea  follows  another  with  no
apparent  connexion;  they  are  said  to  occur  ‘at  random’.  Yet
modem  psychologists  say  that  there  are  ‘ reasons  ’ why  this  idea
follows  that.  Freud,  for  instance,  has  attempted  to  explain  these

^ Compare,  for  instance,  the  connexion  implied  in
‘ A rainbow  and  a cuckoo’s  song
May  never  come  together  again,’

with  the  connexion  implied  in  ‘ All  eqnilateal  triangles  are  equiangular


REFLECTIVE  THINKING  IN  ORDINARY  LIFE  5

occurrences,  i.e.  to  set  out  the  conditions  upon  which  the  succession
of  ideas  is  consequent  although  the  day-dreamer  himself  may  not
be  aware  of  any  connexions.  When,  however,  we  contrast  day-
dreaming, taken  as  it  occurs,  with  directed  thought,  even  of  such
a simple  type  as  in  our  two  illustrations,  we  seem  to  be  moving  on
a difierent  plane.  Directed  thought  is  thought  directed  to  the  solu-
tion of  .a  problem  ; it  originates  in  a felt  difficulty  and  is  controlled
throughout  by  the  initial  apprehension  of  the  conditions  of  the
problem.

( without  some  degree  of  direction  there  is  nothing  in  our  mental
processes  which  merits  the  name  thinking  Day-dreaming  must,
therefore,  be  excluded  since,  in  so  far  as  it  is  directed,  it  is  directed
by  factors  which  lie  outside  the  course  of  the  reverie  itself.  ^ In  the
widest  sense  of  the  word  thinking  ’’  every  one  thinks.  In  the
strictest  sense,  in  which  to  think  ” means  ''  to  think  logically
some  people  never  think,  and  no  one  is  always  thinlcing  even  when
be  appears  to  be  doing  so.  ‘ It  may  be  doubted,  for  instance,  whether
Mrs.  Nickleby  ever  thought.  Consider  the  following  extract :

‘ I tLink  there  must  be  something  in  the  place  said  Mrs.  Nickleby,  who
had  been  listening  in  silence  ; ‘ for,  soon  after  I was  married,  I went  to  Strat-
ford with  my  poor  dear  Nickleby,  in  a post-chaise  from  Birmingham — was  it
a post-chaise  though  ! ’ said  Mrs.  Nickleby,  considering ; ‘ Yes,  it  must  have
been  a post-chaise,  because  I recollect  remarking  at  the  time  that  the  driver
had  a green  shade  over  his  left  eye ; — in  a post-chaise  from  Birmingham,  and
after  we  had  seen  Shakespeare’s  tomb  and  birthplace,  we  went  back  to  the
inn  there,  where  we  slept  that  night,  and  I recollect  that  all  night  long  I dreamed
of  nothing  but  a black  gentleman,  at  full  length,  in  plaster-of-Paris,  with  a
lay-down  collar  tied  with  two  tassels,  leaning  against  a post  and  tiiinking ;
and  when  I woke  in  the  morning  and  described‘  him  to  Mr.  Nickleby,  he  said
it  was  Shakespeare  just  as  he  had  been  when  he  was  alive,  which  was  veiy
curious  indeed.  Stratford — Stratford  ’,  continued  Mrs.  Nicldeby,  considering.

‘ Yes,  I am  positive  about  that,  because  I recollect  that  I was  in  the  family
way  with  my  son  Nicholas  at  the  time,  and  I had  been  very  much  frightened
by  an  Italian  image  boy  that  morning.  In  fact,  it  was  quite  a mercy,  ma’am
added  Mrs.  Nickleby,  in  a whisper  to  Mrs.  Wititterly,  ‘ that  my  son  didn’t  turn
out  to  be  a Shakespeare,  and  what  a dreadful  thing  that  would  have  been  I ’

Au  examination  of  Mrs.  Nickleby’s  mental  processes,  as  revealed
in  this  passage,  shows  no  sign  of  direction  to  an  end’.  Clearly  Mrs.
Nickleby  , could  observe,  and  she  was  able  to  recollect  what  she  had
observed.  But  her  recoUectiqns  were  at  the  mercy  of  random  associa-
tions ; there  is  a connexion  but  it  is  the  connexion  of  temporal
contiguity.  What  happened  is  remembered  and  recorded  m it
happen^.  There  is  no  selection,  no  omission  under  the  influence
of  an  explicit  relevant  interest.  What  she  observes  does  not  signify
anything  beyond  itself ; hence,  its  suggestive  power  is  confined  to
what  happened  next,  and  then  to  what  happened  after  that,  and
so  on.  There  is  no  thinking  here,  for  there  is  no  direction  to  a


6 A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

conclusion.  Presumalbly  Mrs.  NicHeby  would  stop  for  lack  of  breath,
or  of  listeners.  There  is  no  train  of  thought  that,  having  worked
itself  out  to  a conclusion,  comes  to  a natural  end.

Contrast  now  Boswell’s  report  of  a conversation  with  Samuel
Johnson :

‘ Mr.  Langton  told  us  that  he  was  about  to  establish  a school  upon  his
estate,  but  it  had  been  suggested  to  him  that  it  might  have  a tendency  to
make  the  people  less  industrious.  Johnson  : “ No,  Sir.  While  learning  to
read  and  write  is  a distinction,  the  few  who  have  that  distinction  may  be  the
less  inclined  to  work ; but  when  everybody  learns  to  read  and  write,  it  is  no
longer  a distinction.  A man  who  has  a laced  waistcoat  is  too  fine  a man  to
work ; but  if  everybody  had  laced  waistcoats,  we  should  have  people  work-
ing in  laced  waistcoats.  There  are  no  people  more  industrious,  none  who
work  more  than  our  manufacturers ; yet  they  have  all  learnt  to  read  and
write.  Sir,  you  must  not  neglect  doing  a thing  immediately  good,  from  fear
of  remote  evil ; — from  fear  of  its  being  abused.  A man  who  has  candles  may
sit  up  too  late,  which  he  would  not  do  if  he  had  not  candles ; but  nobody
will  deny  that  the  art  of  making  candles,  by  which  light  is  continued  to  us
beyond  the  time  that  the  sim  gives  us  light,  is  a valuable  art,  and  ought
to  be  preserved.”  Boswell  : “ But,  Sir,  would  it  not  be  better  to  follow
nature ; and  go  to  bed  and  rise  just  as  nature  gives  us  light  or  withholds
it  ? ” Johnson:  “No,  Sir;  for  then  we  should  have  no  kind  of  equality
in  the  partition  of  oiy  time  between  sleeping  and  waking.  It  would  be  very
different  in  different  seasons  and  in  different  places.  In  some  of  the  northern
parts  of  Scotland  how  little  light  is  there  in  the  depth  of  winter.”  ’

In  this  conversation  each  statement  is  connected  relevantly  with,
tke  next  and  the  whole  is  directed  by  the  initial  suggestion.  Although
Johnson  passes  from  the  consideration  of  the  advisability  of  educating
the  people  to  a reflection  with  regard  to  the  length  of  a winter  night
in  northern  Scotland  there  is  no  abrupt  break.  The  transition  is
effected  for  the  purpose  of  adducing  relevant  examples.  In  each
example  there  is  the  selection  of  a characteristic  that  bears  upon
the  conclusion,  whilst  those  that  are  irrelevant  are  ignored,  i,  Reflec-
tive thinking  is  essentially  selective,  and  thus  involves  abstraction.
The  characteristic  that  is  abstracted  from  a total  situation  may  be
by  no  means  obvious.

Consider,  for  instance,  the  following  passage  :

‘A  rope  suggests  other  ropes  and  cords,  if  we  look  to  the  appearance;
but  looking  to  the  use,  it  may  suggest  an  iron  cable,  a wooden  prop,  an  iron
girding,  a leather  band  or  bevelled  gear.  In  spite  of  the  diversity  bf  appear-
ance, the  suggestion  turns  on  what  answers  sf  common  end.  . . . We  become
oblivious  of  the  difference  between  a horse,  a steam-engine,  and  a waterfall,
when  our  nadnds  are  engrossed  with  the  one  circumstance  of  moving  power.
The  diversity  in  these  had,  no  doubt,  for  a long  time  the  effect  of  keeping
back  their  first  identification ; and  to  obtuse  intellects,  this  identification
might  have  been  for  ever  impossible.  A strong  concentration  of  mind  upon
the  single  peculiarity  of  mechanical  force,  and  a degree  of  indifference  to  the
general  aspect  of  the  things  themselves,  must  conspire  with  the  intellectual
energy  of  resuscitation  by  similars,  in  order  to  summon  together  in  the  view,


EEFLECTIVE  THINKING  IN  OEDINAEY  LIFE  7

three  structures  so  different.  We  can  see  by  an  instance  like  this,  how  new
adaptations  of  existing  machinery  might  arise  in  the  mind  of  a mechanical
inventor.’  ^

This  example  affords  a good  illustration  of  tlie  way  in  wticli
an  unobvious  characteristic  may  be  abstracted  by  the  thinker  in
order  to  farther  a relevant  interest.  The  similarity  between  objects
having^any  differences  that  would  be  important  in  other  connexions
may  be  noted  because  it  is  relevant  in  Ms  connexion.  Hence  the
importance  of  abstraction.  Without  abstraction  there  can  be  no
recognition  of  similarity  ; without  the  recognition  of  similarity  there
can  be  no  advance  in  knowledge.  Every  human  being  is  capable
of  some  degree  of  abstractness  in  thinking,  that  is,  of  imaginatively
selecting  some  one  character  out  of  a complex  situation  so  that  it
may  be  attended  to  in  isolation.  There  is  an  effort  of  abstraction
required  in  the  case  of  the  puzzle  picture  mentioned  above.  So
long  as  the  observer  sees  the  line  as  constituting  part  of  the  foliage
of  the  tree,  he  will  fail  to  see  it  as  part  of  the  face  he  is  trying  to
discover.  In  a way  strictly  analogous  to  this,  the  scientific  genius
selects  from  a mass  of  facts  characteristics  that  are  ignored  by  the
ordinary  man.  In  the  practical  affairs  of  everyd^  life  we  normally
attend  only  to  stimuli  that  are  insistent  and  striking.  Familiarity
with  a complex  situation  enables  us,  we  say,  to  Hake  it  in  at  a
glance  But  this  rapid  glance  may  fail  to  reveal  features  that
are  of  significance  in  certain  connexions.  Moreover,  our  reactions
to  situations  rapidly  become  habitual  and  are  not  modified  in  response
to  small  variations  in  the  situation  itself.  Undoubtedly  rapidity  of
habitual  response  is  necessary  in  order  that  life  may  be  preserved
and  its  ordinary  busmess  successfully  carried  out.  But  the  success
of  habitual  response  checks  the  impulse  to  wonder  and  is  thus  inimical
to  the  development  of  reflective  thinking.  A situation  that  seems
perfectly  familiar  fails  to  arouse  inquiry ; it  is  accepted  at  its  face
value.  Accordingly,  it  does  not  become  the  occasion  of  investiga-
tions designed  to  lead  to  the  acquirement  of  fresh  knowledge.  The
familiar  use  of  language  which  enables  us  to  refer,  sometimes  by  a
single  word,  to  a complex  situation,  may  hinder  us  from  noting
unexpected  features  that  are  nevertheless  present.  For  instance,  if
a doctor  observing  a set  of  symptoms  were  to  label  the  disease  from
which  the  patient  was  suffering  as  “ influenza  and  were  then  con-
tent to  treat  the  diagnosis  as  complete,  he  might  be  led  into  serious
error.  It  might  be  necessary  for  him  to  look  for  some  symptom  not
commonly  associated  with  the  other  set,  which  would  lead  him  to
make  a fresh  diagnosis.  What  seemed  to  be  influenza  may  turn
out  to  be  typhoid.  We  shall  see  later  how  the  advance  of  knowledge

^ Bain^  The  Senses  nnd  the  Int^led,  p,  52b


8


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


ia  dependent  upon  tLe  ability  to  attend  to  wbat  is  unusual  and  to
observe  its  connexions  with  what  is  already  familiar.

Reflective  thinking  is,  then,  relevant  thinking.  What  is  relevant
in  a given  situation  depends  upon  its  connexions.  The  detection
of  relevant  factors  presupposes  a large  fund  of  knowledge  bearing
upon  the  situation,  which  may  not  all  be  consciously  present  in  the
process  of  reflection.  In  ordinary  life  we  often  possess  a consider-
able  amount  of  knowledge  relevant  to  the  situations  within  which
we  are  called  upon  to  act.  We  take  for  granted  a number  of  generali-
zations that  can  be  directly  applied  to  a given  case.  We  say,  It
will  rain  to-morrow,  because  the  sun  has  set  in  a bank  of  clouds
Don’t  wear  that  dress  at  the  seaside,  for  it  will  fade”.  If  we  were
asked,  Why  will  it  fade  ? ” our  reply  might  be,  ''  Oh ! that  is  the
shade  of  blue  that  always  does  fade  in  sea  air  This  latter  state-
ment is  an  empirical  generalization,  that  is,  an  assertion  that  a
certain  set  of  characters  have  in  our  past  experience  been  found
to  be  conjoined  on  an  indefinite  number  of  occasions,  with  the  im-
plication that  they  will  continue  to  be  so  conjoined.  If,  however,
the  reply  were : Because  that  blue  colour  is  due  to  a dye  that
is  chemically  unstable,  so  that  it  becomes  unfixed  under  the  in-
fluence of  strong  sea  air  ”,  a beginning  would  have  been  made  in
analysing  the  factors  contained  in  the  total  situation  blue  dress  and
sea  air,  and  thus  in  connecting  one  relevant  factor  with  another.
This  process  of  analysis  and  subsequent  synthesis  plays  an  important
part  in  the  process  of  discovering  true  generalizations  with  regard
to  what  happens  in  the  world.  This  process  is  sometimes  known  as
induction,  with  which  we  shall  be  later  concerned.  At  present,  it
is  suflS.cient  to  notice  that  we  constantly  make  generalizations  going
beyond  what  has  been  observed,  which  we  proceed  to  apply  to
particular  cases.  Thus  a certain  character  m comes  to  be  recog-
nized as  a sign  of  another  character  p ; whereupon,  we  conclude
that,  since  ihis  S has  w,  it  has  p.

Were  it  not  the  case  that  we  find  in  experience  that  characters
are  constantly  conjoined  in  such  a way  that  one  may  be  taken  as
the  sign  of  another,  reasoning  would  be  impossible.  ^Thus,  whenever
we  reason  we  recognize  that  a certain  state  of  affairs  is  the  case
because  it  is  signified  by  some  other  state  of  affairs.  The  latter  is
said  to  be  the  ground  upon  which  our  belief  in  the  former  is  based.
This  belief  is  the  conclusion  of  the  reasoning.  The  conclusion  is  a
reasoned  conclusion  because  it  is  based  upon  evidence ; something
is  taken  as  the  sign  of  something  else.,?  A mistake  may  be  made
on  both  counts.  ^ What  is  may  not  be  what  we  have  taken  it  to  be ;
or  it  may  be  that^  and  yet  may  not  be  connected  in  the  way  we  have
supposed.  Even  in  such  a case,  however,  the  conclusion  would  be
a reasoned^  though  a faulty,  conclusion.


EEFLECTIVE  THINKING  IN  OEDINAEY  LIFE


9


To  sum  up.  We  have  distinguished  between  reflective  thinking
and  idle  reverie.  We  have  further  distinguished  between  <&ected
thinking,  which  alone  merits  the  name  of  thinking,  and  reminiscent
thinking  of  the  kind  indulged  in  by  Mrs.  Nickleby.  We  have  seen
that  reflective  thinking  originates  in  a problem  to  be  solved  and  is
throughout  controlled  by  the  conditions  of  the  problem  and  is  directed
to  its  «solution.  .Hence,  reflective  thinking  has  a natural  end,  the
conclusion  of  the  reflection.  The  various  stages  in  this  process  are
related  to  the  conclusion  as  the  grounds  upon  which  it  is  based.
These  grounds  may  be  called  premisses.  Eelatively  to  the  con-
clusion the  premisses  are  taken  for  granted.  The  premisses  may  be
obtained  by  means  of  direct  observation  or  as  the  result  of  a previous
process  of  reasoning.  In  either  case  the  apprehension  of  the  premisses
depends  upon  a considerable  amoxmt  of  relevant  knowledge  which
does  not  enter  explicitly  into  the  reflective  thinking.  There  are
various  relations  that  may  hold  between  premiss  and  conclusion ;
these  will  have  to  be  distinguished.  They  are,  however,  all  various
modes  of  signifying.  Wherever  a relation  such  as  that  of  signifying
holds,  there  is  a basis  for  reasoning.


CHAPTER  II
LANGUAGE


‘ God,  having  designed  man  for  a sociable  creature,  made  bim  not  only
with  an  inclination  and  under  a necessity  to  have  fellowship  with  those  of  his
own  kind,  but  furnished  him  also  with  language,  which  was  to  be  the  great
instrument  and  common  tie  of  society.’ — John  Locke,

§1.  LANGUAGE  AND  SIGNS

WE  use  language  because  we  desire  to  communicate  our
thoughts,  feelings  and  desires  to  others.  Whatever  may
he  the  historical  origin  of  spoken  language,  there  can  be
no  question  that  its  motive  hes  in  the  desire  of  man  to  affect  those
with  whom  he  is  in  contact.  Language  is  a social  phenomenon.
Men  speak  in  order  that  they  may  be  heard ; they  desire  to  be  heard
in  order  that  they  may  express  themselves  to  others  and  thereby
influence  them.  Hence,  men  use  language  in  order  to  be  understood.
To  understand  anyijhing  is  to  apprehend  it  in  its  connexions  or  to
apprehend  it  as  a sign  of  something  else.  We  saw  in  the  last  chapter
that  one  thing  may  be  a sign  of  another,  e.g.  the  sun  setting  into  a
bank  of  clouds  may  be  the  sign  of  a wet  day  to-morrow.  It  is  a
sign  only  for  the  spectator  who  has  learnt  from  past  experience  to
associate  the  one  occurrence  with  the  other.  There  is  no  sign  with-
out an  interpreter.  Hence,  to  signify  requires  (1)  what  is  signified,
(2)  the  signifying  sign,  (3)  the  interpreter  of  the  sign  as  signifying.

The  man  stranded  on  the  rock,  in  the  illustration  in  the  first  chapter,
interpreted  the  gestures  of  the  people  on  the  cliff  as  signifying  some-
thing connected  with  his  own  safety.  On  investigation  he  correctly
interpreted  the  signs  as  meaning  ''  that  ledge  will  be  safe This
is  an  example  of  a demonstrative  gesture  interpreted  as  signifying
something  visibly  presented.  But  what  the  man  saw,  and  what  the
sign  meant,  was  something  more  than* was  visually  apprehended.
He  saw  not  merely  a projecting  ledge  of  rock  but  a place  out  of
reach  of  the  rising  tide.  Had  he  been  completely  ignorant  of  the
phenomena  of  tides  he  could  not  have  interpreted  the  sign  as  he
did.  All  the  signs  we  are  capable  of  interpreting  occur  in  this  way,
namely,  in  a context  of  experience  which  alone  can  make  these  signs
significant  Throughout  the  discussion  of  logical  method  we  shall
see  how  the  ability  to  connect,  hence  to  interpret  the  occnrreneee.

XQ


LAITGUAGB


11


of  nature,  depends  upon  tlie  power  to  recognize  certain  occurrences
as  significant  of  otlier  happenings.

It  is  impossible  to  think  without  using  signs,  for  to  think  is  to
go  beyond  what  is  sensibly  presented.  This  is  not  to  say  that
thinking  is  impossible  without  words,  for  words  are  only  one  kind
of  signs.  In  the  widest  sense  of  the  word  language  ’’  we  use
language  whenever  we  deliberately  use  something  as  the  sign  of
something  else.  A sign  consciously  designed  to  stand  for  something
will  be  called  a symbol.  We  should  not  say  that  the  sxm  setting
into  a bank  of  clouds  ” symbolizes  wet  day  to-morrow  ” ; we
should,  however,  say  that  the  printed  marks  just  read  and  under-
stood by  the  reader  symbolize  what  they  served  to  call  up  in  his
mind.  It  is  not  possible  to  draw  a hard  and  fast  line  between
sign  ’’  and  symbol  ” as  these  words  are  here  used.  Were  that
possible  there  would  be  less  doubt  as  to  the  historical  origin  of
languages.  But  in  the  developed  language  in  which  this  book  is
written,  the  difference  between  sign  and  symbol  is  quite  unmistak-
able. How  does  this  difference  come  about  ? As  has  just  been
indicated,  only  an  approximate  answer  to  this  question  can  be  given.

Signs  may  be  natural  or  artificial,  i.e.  conventional.  The  simplest
kind  of  language,  that  is,  the  simplest  system  of  consciously  devised
signs,  is  gesture  language.  A gesture  language  is  one  in  which  the
signs  are  either  demonstrative,  that  is,  consist  simply  in  pointing
to  what  is  to  be  indicated ; or  imitative,  that  is,  a sign  which
imitates  or  copies  what  it  signifies.  For  example,  if  a man  indicates
that  he  is  thirsty  by  going  through  the  movements  he  would  make
in  raising  a cup  to  his  lips,  he  is  employing  an  imitative  gesture  as
a sign.  Such  signs  are  called  ‘‘  natural  signs  ” owing  to  the  fact
that,  since  they  resemble  the  thing  or  action  signified,  they  are  the
most  natural  means  of  indicating  what  we  want  to  indicate.  These
signs  can  be  so  used  as  to  draw  attention  to  something  not  actually
present,  and  are  thus  fitted  to  fulfil  one  of  the  most  important  func-
tions of  language.  Sounds  can  be  used  as  imitative  signs,  as  when
one  signifies  a certain  bird  by  ''  cuckoo  ”,  or  a certain  game  by
ping-pong  As,  however,  most  things  have  not  a characteristic
sound,  a language  based  wholly  upon  imitative  sounds  could  not
progress  very  far.  A conventional  sign  is  one  that  is  neither  a demon-
strative gesture  nor  an  imitajive  sormd  or  gesture  ; it  is  deliberately
devised  to  stand  for  something  and  has  thus  acquired  a relatively
fixed  significance  so  that  it  can  be  understood  as  referring  to  some-
thing definite  and  the  same  on  each  occasion  of  its  use.  Gesture
language  may  involve  the  use  of  conventional  signs,  when,  as  the
msult  of  past  experience,  the  beginning  of  an  imitative  movement
is  taken  to  stand  for  the  whole  movement,  or  when  a schematic
representation  of  it  sujBfices  for  the  sign  to  be  understood,  In  the


12


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


same  way  picture  writing,  wMcLl  begins  by  being  pictorially  imitative,
develops,  whilst  stiU  remaining  ideograpldc,  into  conventional  signs.
Such  signs  have  to  be  learnt  before  they  can  be  understood  and
such  learning  does  not  form  part  of  the  common  experience  of  the
human  race.  Thus  Europeans  have  to  learn  Egyptian  hieroglyphic
and  Chinese  ideograms  just  as  they  have  to  learn  any  other  foreign
language,  although  such  writing  began  with  imitative  signs#

As  an  instrument  of  thinking  natural  signs  suffer  from  two  serious
defects.  First,  the  number  of  recognizably  different  sounds  that
the  human  voice  is  capable  of  making  and  the  number  of  different
gestures  that  the  human  body  can  perform  are  definitely  limited
and  are  fewer  than  the  ideas  it  is  desired  to  convey.  Secondly,
there  is  need  to  represent  not  only  what  is  not  actually  present  but
also  what  is  incapable  of  being  sensibly  presented,  namely,  general
characteristics  of  things,  that  is  to  say  abstractions,  e.g.  strength^
jpurposiveness,  inferiority  in  numbers,  and  so  on.  Consequently,  in
order  that  thought  should  be  developed  there  is  need  of  an  arbitrarily
devised  set  of  signs  that  are  in  no  sense  imitative.  Such  a set  of
signs  constitutes  a non-representative  language.

The  reader  of  this  book  is  so  thoroughly  familiar  with  his  own
language,  so  steeped  in  its  normal  associations,  so  familiar  with  the
context  supplied  by  its  social  use,  that  he  will  probably  find  it  diffi-
cult to  think  of  these  English  words  as  merely  conventional  signs.
Yet  the  word  man  ”,  for  instance,  is  a shape  (as  here  printed)  or
a sound,  if  it  be  spoken  aloud,  that  is  arbitrarily  devised  to  stand
for  something  with  which  the  reader  is  familiar.  It  is  well  known
that  primitive  people,  not  excluding  some  of  the  Greeks,  have  been
apt  to  assume  that  a word  has  an  mherent  fitness  to  represent  what
it  signifies.  Heraclitus,  for  instance,  regarded  words  as  sensibly
embodying  the  nature  of  things.  Thus  Mi.  F.  M.  Cornford  says  that
for  HeracMtus  “ The  Logo^  is  revealed  ih^speech.  The  structure  of
man’s  speech  reflects  the  structure  of  the  world ; more,  it  is  an
embodiment  or  representation  of  it  It  is,  moreover,  well  known
that  many  primitive  peoples  are  reluctant  to  tell  strangers  their
names  lest  power  over  them  should  be  acquired.  It  is  probably
some  relic  of  this  belief  that  has  led  many  to  attempt  to  trace  all
language  to  an  onomatopoeic  origin.^  Aristotle,  however,  clearly

^ Comford,  From  Edigion  to  Philosophy,  p.  45.

2 Cf.  de  Morgan,  Formal  Logic,  pp.  246-7.  ‘ If  all  mankind  had  spoken
one  language,  we  cannot  doubt  that  there  would  have  been  a powerful,  perhaps
a universal  school  of  philosophers  who  would  have  believed  in  the  inherent
connexion  between  names  and  things  ; who  would  have  taken  the  sound  rmn
to  be  the  mode  of  agitating  the  air  which  is  essentially  communicative  of  the
ideas  of  reason,  cookery,  bipedality,  etc.  The  writers  of  whom  I speak  . . .
treat  words  as  absolute  images  of  things  by  right  of  the  letters  which  spell


LANGUAGE


13


recognized  tiat  spoken  and  written  words,  language  jpar  excellence,
are  conventional  and  not  imitative.  Thus  he  says  that  a noun  is

a sound  significant  by  convention  ” and  he  adds  : The  limitation
^ by  convention  ’ was  introduced  because  nothing  is  by  nature  a
noun  or  a name — it  is  only  so  when  it  becomes  a symbol.’’^

How,  then,  does  a word  become  a symbol  ? That  is  to  say,
how  does  a written  mark,  or  a spoken  sound,  become  a conventional
sign  of  something  quite  unlike  itself  ? To  answer  this  question  fully
would  be  to  write  a history  of  the  growth  of  languages,  and  a study
of  the  child’s  development  in  using  and  understanding  language.
But  it  will  be  sufficient  for  our  purpose,  if  we  can  indicate  the  way
in  which  a new  word  comes  to  have  meaning  for  us.  The  reader
of  this  book  is  not  a child  and  is  probably  unversed  in  the  psychology
of  language,  but  he  can  readily  recall  from  his  own  experience  how
some  word  which  he  did  not  -understand  came  to  have  meaning.
Suppose,  for  instance,  that  he  had  not  met  the  word  “ triforium
but  that,  being  in  the  Church  of  Notre  Dame  at  Paris,  some  one  had
said  to  him : That  is  a triforium  ”.  He  would  then  know  that
the  verbal  symbol  ''  triforium  ” stood  for  an  open  gallery  above  the
arches  of  a church.  Again,  suppose  he  did  not  know  what  saxo-
phone” meant.  If  some  one  showed  him  one  of  these  musical
instruments  and  told  him  that  it  was  called  a saxojphone,  he  would
imderstand  the  word,  that  is  to  say,  he  would  know  the  object  to
which  it  refers.  There  is  another  way  in  which  its  meaning  might
be  conveyed  to  him.  He  might  be  told  : A saxophone  is  a musical
instrument  something  like  a U-shaped  trumpet  This  somewhat
inadequate  description  might  enable  Hm  to  recognize  a saxophone,
supposing  that  he  already  knew  what  a trumpet  was.  If,  on  sub-
sequently seeing  a saxophone,  he  were  able  to  give  its  name,  it
would  be  clear  that  he  understood  what  ‘‘  saxophone  ” means.

A word,  then,  has  meaning  for  us  when  we  know  what  it  is  ^
which  the  word  refers.  We  saw  that,  in  order  that  anything  should
be  a sign,  there  must  be : (1)  the  si^,  (2)  the  thing  signified,  (3)  an
interpreter.  We  shall  find  it  convenient  to  use  the  word  referend  ”
to  stand  for  that  which  is  signified,^  A word  is  the  special  Mnd
of  sign  called  a symbol  A word  is  understood  when  it  is  recog-

them.  “ The  French  ”,  said  the  sailor,  “ call  a cabbage  a shoe ; the  fools  I
Why  can’t  they  call  it  a cabbage,  when  they  must  know  it  is  one  ? ” *

^ de  Interpretatione,  16a,  20,  25.

^ It  is  perhaps  unfortunate  to  have  to  introduce  new  terminology,  but
the  word  “ object  ” is  not  suitable  for  the  purpose  for  which  I use  the  tech-
nical term  “ referend  The  referend  is  that  which  is  being  referred  to.  Messrs.
Ogden  and  Bichards  have  suggested  the  word  referent  ”,  {The  Mmning  of
Meaning,  p.  13.)  But  “referent”  is  already  in  use  among  logicians  as  a
technical  term  in  the  logic  of  relations.  (See  p.  Ill  below.)  Of.  Susan
Miles,  “ Intuition,”  The  Monist,  July,  1925.


14


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


nized  as  a sign  signifying  a referend.  Thus,  for  instance,  we  und
stand  ‘‘  horse  if  we  can  interpret  it  rightly  as  applying  to  the
animals  that  are  horses ; we  understand  “ whatnot  if  we  c
interpret  it  rightly  as  applying  to  those  articles  of  furniture  cal]
by  that  name,  and  so  on.  It  is  possible  to  understand  a given  wc
when  we  are  provided  with  a correct  description  of  its  referend,
with  a definition  of  it  in  words,  the  referenda  of  which  we.kno
It  is  in  this  way  that  we  come  to  understand  such  technical  ter]
as  polygon  ‘‘  diapason  ''  marlmg-spike  But  we  may  und<
stand  a word  although  we  cannot  describe  the  referend  in  otl
words,  stiU  less  be  able  to  define  the  word.  The  reader  would  pre
ably  hesitate  were  he  asked, ''  What  does  the  word  ^ table  ’ mean  ?
but  he  would  be  right  in  saying  that  he  Tenows  what table  ” mean

It  is  important  to  notice  that  in  the  strict  sense  of  understand
— ^with  which  we  are  here  concerned — what  we  understand  is  alwa
a symbol.  People  sometimes  talk  vaguely  about  understandi:
the  universe  ”,  or  “ understanding  life  ”,  or  “ understandiag
person  In  these  phrases,  ‘‘  understand  ” is  used  loosely  to  signi
y knowing  certain  facts  about  ” or  having  certain  attitudes  to
or  capable  of  making  certain  responses  to  ”,  or  all  of  these  at  one
But  this  is  not  a use  of  the  word  that  is  suitable  to  logic.  On
signs  can  be  understood,  and  to  understand  a sign  is  to  know  wh
it  signifies.  Hence,  to  xmderstand  a verbal  symbol  is  to  know  wh
it  refers  to,  i.e.  to  know  the  referend  for  which  it  staiKis.  The  wo;
symbolizes  the  referend.  It  should  now  be  clear  that  the  relatic
of  symbolizing  ” is  fundamentally  different  from  the  relation
‘‘  imitating  ” or  copying  In  the  case  of  onomatopoeic  word
e.g.  splash,  ping-pong,  cuckoo,  the  symbols  are  themselves  imitativ
but  as  symbols  they  simply  stand  for  what  they  symbolize.  The:
is  no  need  to  dispute  that  onomatopoeia  has  played  a part  in  tl
historical  origin  of  languages.  But  in  a developed  language,  recoj
nized  as  such,  i.e.  as  a system  of  arbitrary  signs — ^what  Aristot
called  sounds  significant  by  convention— it  has  no  place.  But
must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  earliest  use  of  language  is  to  stimulai
actions  and  evoke  responses,  not  to  communicate  thoughts  and  i
indicate  properties.^

§2.  THE  HEARER-SPEAKER  ATTITUDE

In  language  used  for  the  purpose  of  communication  two  persor
are  involved,  the  hearer  and  the  speaker.  For  convenience  we  sha

^ We  shall  see  later  that  the  word  “ means  is  extrem^fy  ambiguou
There  are  diferent  ways  in  which  symbols  can  mean.  (See  Chap.  IX)  Bi
it  is  a word  in  constant  use  and  is  sufficiently,  though  vaguely,  understoo
to  be  cl^r  in  this  context.

* See  § 3 below.


LANGUAGE


16


Bjinbolize  the  hearer  by  B and  the  speaker  by  A.  In  order  that
A should  communicate  something  to  B,  A must  know  something
that  B does  not  know.  Nevertheless,  A and  B must  know  some-
thing in  common  ; there  must  be  some  basis  of  common  experience
which  forms,  as  it  were,  the  context  within  which  the  communication
occurs.  Let  ub  at  present  confine  ourselves  to  that  form  of  com-
mimioation  in  which  A is  giving  information  to  B.  Then  A makes
a statement  which  B is  to  accept  or  to  reject.  Such  a statement,
offered  for  acceptance  or  rejection,  is  a proposition.  This  proposition
may  itself  be  the  answer  to  a question  originally  asked  by  B.  Sup-
pose B,  confronted  with  an  u^amiliar  object,  were  to  ask,  ‘‘  What
is  that  ? A replies  : That  is  a set  of  bagpipes  Here  that
indicates  something  of  which  they  are  both  directly  aware ; it  thus
affords  the  basis  from  which  the  communication  can  proceed.  Is
a set  of  bagpipes’^  is  the  information  given  by  A to  B.  This  is  the
simplest  kind  of  communication,  in  which  the  risk  of  the  hearer’s
misunderstanding  the  speaker  is  at  a minimum.  Let  us  now  sup-
pose that  A and  B are  in  Trumpiiigton  Street,  Cambridge.  A says :

That  Church  is  very  large”.  B replies : That  is  not  a Church  ;
it  is  the  Pitt  Press  Buildings  Here  B is  aware  of  the  referend
pointed  to  by  A,  but  refuses  to  accept  the  description  implicit  in
the  phrase  **  That  Church  ” w'hich  A uses  to  indicate  the  referend.
The  phrase  That  Church  ” is  what  Prof.  Whitehead  calls  a demon-
strative phrase”*^  If  A now  retorts,  “It  looks  like  a Church”,
here  simply  demonstrates,  and  a descriptive  phrase,  which

may  be  correct,  is  applied  to  what  is  demonstrated.

The  distinction  between  a demonstrative  phrase  and  a descriptive  ^
phrase  is  very  important.^  But  the  distinction  is  apt  to  be  obscured
by  the  elliptical  nature  of  our  ordinary  conversation  which  success-
fully takes  a great  deal  for  granted.  A demonstrative  phrase  is
like  a bodily  gesture ; it  points  ont  something  for  consideration.

A descriptive  phrase  ascribes  characteristics.  But  a demonstrative
phrase,  though  intended  simply  to  demonstrate,  nearly  always  in-
cludes an  element  of  d^criptivenm,  as  in  “That  Church”.®  We
may  then  accept  the  demonstration  and  reject  the  descriptive  element.

^ A N.  WMtehead,  TM  Cmc&pt  of  Naiure,  p.  7.  The  whole  passage  (pp.
6-12)  might  be  read  with  advantage.  The  word  demonstration  in  tins
passage  has  the  same  meaning  as  in  demonstrative  pronoun

* The  nature  of  this  distinction  may  become  clearer  after  Chapter  III  has
been  read.  It  is  a fundamental  distinction  of  great  importance  for  the  under-
standing of  much  work  in  modem  logic  and  metaphysics.  The  exact  nature
of  a descriptive  phrase  dt  the  form  “ A Gothic  Church  ”,  and  so  on,  will  be
diseussed  in  Chaptm!  IX.  The  distinotion  between  demonstrative  phrases  and
descriptive  plnsa^  will  be  seen  to  throw  light  upon  the  analysis  of  certain
propwtioite  whose  verbal  espresi^on  is  complicated.

C&am  XXXL  § I Mow.


16


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Thus,  in  the  example  given,  A succeeded  in  demonstrating  (i.e,
pointing  out)  what  he  intended  to  indicate,  since  his  demonstrative
phrase  was  understood  by  B.  But  B rejected  the  descriptive  element
whereupon  A substituted  a purely  demonstrative  it  so  that  he
might  demonstrate  without  any  element  of  descriptiveness.  It  is
almost  impossible  to  achieve  simple  demonstration  by  means  of
language.  We  constantly  attempt  to  achieve  such  demonstration
but  cannot  succeed  unless  verbal  language  can  be  supplemented  by
demonstrative  gestures.  Even  then,  our  demonstration  occurs  within
a context  that  gives  significance  and  thus  prevents  the  demonstration
from  being  purely  demonstrative.

In  complex  situations  we  are  constantly  confronted  with  the
question : “ But  what  do  you  mean  by  saying  so  and  so  ? ” The
answer  can  again  be  given  only  in  words.  In  replying  A must  find
symbols  which  (1)  correctly  sjunbolize  the  referend  he  intends  to
sjmibolize,  (2)  will  call  up  in  B’s  mind  the  same  referend.  It  is
obvious  that  the  risk  of  B’s  misunderstanding,  i.e.  mistaking  the
symbols,  will  be  the  greater  the  less  there  is  of  (i)  experiences  common
to  A and  B,  (ii)  community  of  language  available  for  referring  to
^ those  experiences.  Hence,  the  force  of  the  metaphorical  expression
used  by  people  who  have  failed  to  establish  contact : ‘‘  We  did  not
even  understand  each  other’s  language

§3.  THE  TWO  USES  OF  LANGUAGE

We  have  so  far  spoken  as  though  the  main  function  of  language
were  to  communicate  information.  This  is  no  doubt  a most  important
function.  For  science  it  is  its  sole  function.  For  this  reason  a
science,  in  proportion  as  it  becomes  what  we  call  scientific  ” finds
it  necessary  to  devise  a terminology,  i.e.  a set  of  technical  terms  which
aim  at  precision,  i.e.  uniqueness  of  reference.  A scientific  statement
is,  qwa  scientific,  precise.  It  is  important  not  to  confuse  sderm
with  scientists.  For  even  a scientist  is  a whole  man  ” who  does
not  always  achieve — even  in  his  published  writings — ^that  imperson-
ality of  thought  which  is  necessary  for  exactness  of  statement.
Moreover,  no  thinker,  not  even  the  physicist,  is  wholly  independent
of  the  context  of  experience  provided  for  him  by  the  society  within
which  he  works.^  Nevertheless,  his  aim  is  so  to  use  his  verbal  sym-

^ Thus  Comford,  writing  of  Greek  religion  and  philosophy,  reminds  us  that
* there  is  an  inalienable  and  ineradicable  framework  of  conceptions  which  is
not  of  our  own  making,  but  given  to  us  ready-made  by  society — a whole
apparatus  of  concepts  and  categories,  within  which  and  by  means  of  which
aU  our  individual  thinking,  however  original  and  daring,  is  compelled  to  move.

, . • It  is  different  for  every  age  in  history,  for  every  well-marked  group  in
the  intellectual  chart  of  mankind,  and  even  within  such  groups  in  a minor
degree,  for  every  nationality.  Hence,  the  error  of  supposing  that  human
nature  is  much  the  same  at  all  times,  and  that  since  non-human  nature  is


LANGUAGE


17


bols  as  to  achieve  uniqueness  of  reference,  and  thus  to  use  language
in  order  to  communicate  information  that  is  exact  and  precise.

Many  statements  are  made,  however,  not  for  the  sake  of  con-
veying information,  but  in  order  to  arouse  in  the  hearer  a certain
response,  to  create  in  him  a certain  state  of  mind.  That  this  is  an
important,  as  well  as  a proper,  function  of  language  will  be  admitted
by  every  one  capable  of  responding  to  literature.  Every  good
literary  critic  has  realized  that  the  poet  uses  language  not  mainly
to  express  statements  that  are  true,  or  false,  but  to  express  what
is  neither  true  nor  false.  When  Shelley  says,

‘ Life,  like  a dome  of  many-coloured  glass.

Stains  the  white  radiance  of  eternity.

Until  Death  tramples  it  to  fragments,’

he  is  neither  talking  nonsense,  nor  making  an  assertion  that  must
be  accepted  or  rejected  as  true,  or  false.  The  question  of  truth  and
falsity  does  not  arise.  Shelley  is  using  language  for  an  entirely
different  purpose  from  that  of  the  scientist  who  says,  The  specific
heat  of  air  at  constant  pressure  is  0-2734  This  statement  simply
expresses  what  the  scientist  believes  to  be  true.  He  would  call  it
a fact  The  difference  between  these  two  uses  of  language  is
not  difficult  to  apprehend  yet  they  are  seldom  clearly  distinguished.
To  mark  the  distinction  Mr.  I.  A.  Richards  has  suggested  the  con-
venient terminology  the  scientific  use  of  language  ” and  the
emotive  use  of  language  When  language  is  used  simply  in  order
to  refer  to  a referend  its  use  is  scientific.  When  it  is  used  in  order  to
arouse  an  emotional  attitude  in  the  hearer,  to  influence  him  in  any
way  other  than  by  that  of  giving  him  information,  then  its  use  is
emotive.  The  most  unmistakable  examples  of  the  emotive  use  of
language  can  be  found  in  literature,  just  because  it  is  not  the  func-
tion of  literature  to  instruct.  A writer  in  a recently  published
book  has  put  the  point  well  when  he  says  : When  words  are  selected
and  arranged  in  such  a way  that  their  meaning  either  arouses,  or
is  obviously  intended  to  arouse,  aesthetic  imagination,  the  result
may  be  described  as  poetic  diction  ”.2  He  adds,  the  same  sounds


much  the  same  too,  the  Greek  philosopher  of  the  sixth  century  B.c.,  studying
his  outer  and  inner  experience  was  confronted  with  the  same  problems  seen
in  the  same  light  as  the  Enghsh  philosopher  of  to-day.  The  difference— the
immense  differenc^between  the  two  lies  in  their  several  inheritances  of  col-
lective representation.  It  is  a difference  that  comes  home  to  any  one  who
has  to  “translate”  (as  it  is  called)  from  Greek  into  English.  He  will  soon
discover  that,  when  once  we  go  beyond  the  names  of  objects  Hke  table  or  trees
and  of  simple  actions  such  as  running  and  eating,  no  Greek  work  has  an  exact
equivalent  in  English,  no  important  abstract  conception  covers  the  same  area
or  carries  with  it  the  same  atmosphere  of  association.’  (Op.  cit.,  p.  45 )

^ " The  Principles  of  Uterary  Criticism,  Chap.  XXXIV.  See  also  The  Mean^

%ng  of  Meaning,  pp.  226-9,  255-60,  271-5.

* Owen  Barfield,  Poetic  Diction : A Study  in  Meaning,  pp.  13,  14


18


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


and  signs  may  easily  be  vehicles  of  poetry  at  this  place  and  not  in
that,  at  this  time  and  not  at  that,  to  tHs  person  and  not  to  the
other’’.  It  is  the  aim  of  the  scientist,  on  the  contrary,  so  to  use
words  as  to  eliminate  this  variation  of  response.

From  this  distinction  between  the  scientific  and  the  emotive  use
of  language  two  important  consequences  follow.  First,  a speaker
whose  aim  is  scientific  fails  to  achieve  his  aim  if  the  sjunbols  he  uses
are  either  themselves  incorrect,  i.e.  fail  to  symbolize  the  referend
intended,  or  are  such  that  they  fail  to  refer  the  hearer  to  the  same
referend.  Ordinary  language,  we  saw  above,  is  peculiarly  liable  to
involve  the  latter  failure.  A speaker  using  language  emotively  fails
to  convey  his  effect  if  the  symbols  he  chooses  are  incapable  of  arous-
ing the  correct  response  in  the  hearer.^  The  failure  may  in  both
cases  be  due  to  the  hearer.  But  in  the  latter  case  failure  is  not
seldom  due  to  the  inability  of  the  speaker  to  choose  appropriate
symbols.  Thus  the  poet  may  fail  to  get  his  effect  across
Secondly,  it  follows  that  what  is  called  logical  connexion  has  little
relevance  to  the  emotive  use  of  language,  whereas  it  is  the  condition
of  success  in  scientific  language.

Although  the  emotive  function  of  language  is  best  seen  in  litera-
ture it  is  by  no  means  confined  to  the  purpose  of  creative  art.  The
use  of  metaphors  in  argument  is  largely  emotive,  when  it  is  not
simply  the  result  of  unclear  thinking.  The  speaker,  beginning  with
a metaphor  to  illustrate,  and  drive  home,  a point,  may  be  led  in-
sensibly to  expand  the  metaphor  into  an  argument.  Thus  he  may
come  to  mistake  the  expression  of  an  attitude  for  a reasoned  state-
ment.^ Our  most  common  expressions  tend  to  be  emotive.  The
polite  phrases  of  ordinary  conversation,  such  as  How  d’you  do  ? ”,
My  dear  so  and  so  ”,  have  an  emotive  function  to  perform  to  which
precision  of  reference  is  irrelevant.  Moreover,  we  often  believe  our-

^ In  any  literary  work  of  art,  e.g.  a poem,  there  may  be  statements  definitely
intended  to  b(^  scientific.  But  here  the  scientific  function  is  for  the  sake  of  the
emotive  value.  This  topic  cannot  be  pursued  here,  but  it  may  be  noted  that
it  is  the  complexity  of  the  interrelation  of  the  scientific  and  the  emotive  uses
of  language  in  literature  that  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  that  form  of  art  pre-
sents the  greatest  difiSiculties  to  the  student  of  sesthetics.

^See  J.  M.  Murry,  The  Problem  of  Style,  Chap.  IV.

® Writings  on  political  science  and  social  philosophy  abound  in  metaphors
expanded  into  analogies  and  substituted  for  argument.  A typical  example
may  be  taken  from  Milton:

‘ The  Ship  of  the  Commonwealth  is  always  under  sail ; they  sit  at  the
stem,  and  if  they  steer  well,  what  need  is  there  to  change  them,  it  being  rather
dangerous  ? Add  to  this,  that  the  Grand  Council  is  both  Foundation  and
main  Pillars  of  the  State ; and  to  move  Pillars  4nd  Foundation,  not  faulty,
cannot  be  safe  for  the  Building.  I see  not,  therefore,  how  we  can  be  advan-
taged by  successive  and  transitory  Parliaments,  but  that  they  are  much  likelier
continuaily  to  unsettle  rather  than  to  settle  a free  government,  to  breed  Com-
motions, Changes,  Novelties  and  Uncertainties,  to  bring  neglect  upon  present


LANGUAGE


19


selves  to  be  using  language  scientifically  ^ when  we  are  in  fact  ex-
pressing our  attitudes  and  intending  to  excite  attitudes  in  our  hearers.
For  instance,  a rigid  Conservative  who  meets  a proposal  for  social
reform  by  the  comment,  That  is  simple  Bolshevism  ”,  intends  to
give  an  appropriate  description  of  the  policy  he  wishes  to  reject,  but
he  is  in  fact  condemning  it  with  a phrase.  Nor  is  it  an  easy  matter,
however  disinterested  the  speaker’s  intention  may  be,  to  draw  a
clear  hne  between  emotive  and  scientific  statements.  The  writer  in
using  the  phrase  “ a rigid  Conservative  ” has  probably  expressed
an  attitude  instead  of  naming  a type  of  politician.  In  most  con-
versation both  uses  are  combined.  The  fact  that  it  is  difficult  to
determine  precisely  where  the  one  function  ceases  to  be  useful  and
the  other  becomes  predominant  does  not  render  the  distinction  itself
unimportant.


§4.  VAGUENESS  AND  AMBIGUITY
We  have  several  times  spoken  of  ^precision  in  the  use  of  language.
We  have  now  to  inquire  what  constitutes  precise  language.  The
opposite  of  precise  is  vagm.  All  words  are  more  or  less  vague,  that
is  to  say,  vagueness  is  a matter  of  degree.  Exact  precision  is  an
unattainable  ideal.  It  is  not  a matter  for  regret  that  in  ordinary
language  all  words  have  some  degree  of  vagueness.  Were  this  not
the  case  ordinary  conversation  would  be  impossible.  A word  is
precise  when  it  stands  for  one  and  only  one  referend.  Thus  a demon-
strative symbol  which  succeeds  in  demonstrating  the  referend  in-
tended is  as  precise  as  any  language  can  be.  Btit  it  will  be  admitted
that  demonstrative  phrases  are  apt  to  fail  to  demonstrate  unless
they  are  accompanied  by  a gesture.  When,  however,  it  ” or
that  ” does  demonstrate,  then  we  have  an  example  of  a precise
word.  We  may  compare  a precise  word  to  an  accurate  scientific
instrument.  A clinical  thermometer  is  accurate  when  it  indicates
very  smaU  changes  in  temperature.  A photographic  plate  is  accurate
when  it  is  sensitive  to  very  small  differences  in  light.  A map  is
accurate  when  every  one  of  the  marks  which  constitute  the  map
refers  to  a single  one  of  the  features  of  the  country  which  the  map
is  intended  to  represent.  A badly  drawn  map  may  represent,  for
example,  either  the  outline  of  Cornwall  on  a large  scale  or  of  Italy
^on  a correspondingly  small  scale,  as  was  discoveired  by  the  advertisers

Affairs  and  Opportunities,  while  all  minds  are  suspense  with  expectation  of
a new  Assembly,  and  the  Assembly  for  a good  space  taken  up  with  th©  new
/ settling  of  itself.’  ( The  Ready  and  Easy  Way  to  Establish  a Free  GommomoeaRE,}
1 It  must  be  remembered  that  “ scientific  ” in  this  connexion  means  the
charadteristio  of  language  regarded  from  the  point  of  view  of  its  fitness  as  an
mstrument  for  the  expression  of  scientific  thought.  Such  “ scientific  language  ”
is  hot  confined  to  what  are  ordinarily  called  “ the  sciences  It  is  employed
whenever  precise  information  is  given  by  one  person  to  mother.


20


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


of  an  EnglisL.  railway  a few  years  ago.  A precise  word,  we  may
say  metaphorically,  is  one  that  is  sensitive  to  small  differences  in  the
objects  to  which  it  refers.  “ Religious  ” is  a word  that,  as  ordinarily
used,  is  clearly  very  vague.  It  refers  to  various  different  emotional
and  intellectual  attitudes  and  may  be  used  indiscriminately  to  apply
to  various  intellectual  and  emotional  levels  of  development.  For
many  purposes  we  do  not  need  to  distinguish  these  various  mean-
ings by  using  precise  words  to  distinguish  them.  If  we  wish
to  be  clear  we  add  phrases  making  the  reference  more  precise.
Such  words  as  Conservative  politician  ”,  humorous  ” are
obviously  vague.  They  refer  indefinitely  to  many  objects  which
for  certain  purposes  would  have  to  be  distinguished.  We  attempt
to  make  our  references  less  vague,  in  such  cases,  by  adding
qualif3ring  phrases,  such  as  a rigid  Conservative  ”,  a party
politician  ”,  and  so  on.  If  on  leaving  a village  concert  hall  A
says  to  B,  The  room  was  very  full  but  there  were  very  few
villagers  there  ”,  he  is  making  a vague  statement.  If  he  says.
The  seats  were  all  occupied  but  there  were  not  above  a dozen
villagers  there  ”,  he  is  making  a less  vague  statement.  If  he  pro-
ceeds to  specify  the  number  of  villagers  as,  say,  “ ten  ”,  he  is  less
vague  still.  It  may  be  said  that  in  this  case  he  is  as  precise  as  the
ordinary  resources  of  language  permit  and  as  the  practical  purposes
of  life  require.  Clearly  a vague  statement  is  more  likely  to  be  true
than  a precise  statement.  To  make  statements  that  are  both  precise
and  true  is  difficult.  Otherwise,  we  might  all  be  scientists.  A long
process  of  analysis  and  reflective  thinking  is  necessary  in  order  to
get  rid  of  the  vagueness  that  infects  our  language.  But,  we  have
insisted,  vagueness  is  a matter  of  degree.  It  is  neither  possible  nor
desirable  wholly  to  get  rid  of  it.  For,  in  the  first  place,  our  experiences
are  only  more  or  less  common.  A word  that  is  not  quite  precise
has  what  William  James  called  a fringe  of  meaning  ”,  which  enables
us  to  communicate  with  others  without  intolerable  prolixity.
Secondly,  the  speaker’s  referends  are  by  no  means  always  clear  to
himself.  He  knows  more  or  less  what  he  wants  to  talk  about.
Thus  Newton’s  vagueness  as  to  what  he  was  referring  to  by  the  word
‘‘  force  ” did  not  prevent  his  formulating  the  laws  of  motion,  nor
did  it  hinder  his  discovery  of  the  law  of  gravitation.^  Beyond  a
somewhat  uncertain  degree  precision  is  not  necessary  to  ordinary
life  and  may  even  be  a hindrance  to  progress  at  a certain  stage  of
scientific  development.  Where  precision  is  necessary,  it  is  necessary
to  invent  a symbolism  which  has  no  other  purpose  in  view  than  unique-
ness of  reference.  If  language  were  to  achieve  the  ideal  of  demon-
stration, wit  would  be  at  an  end.

In  ordinary  conversation  it  is  impossible  to  draw  a sharp  line
^ See  p.  315  n.


LANGUAGE


21


between  wbat  is  commtinicated  by  spoken  language  (i.e.  expressed
in  verbal  symbols)  and  what  is  communicated  by  intonation,  gesture,
facial  expression.  Who  does  not  know  the  expressiveness  of  a French-
man’s shrug  of  the  shoulders  ? By  such  means  we  succeed  in  reducing
the  number  of  occasions  when  we  need  to  ask : ‘‘  But  what  do  you
mmn  ? ’’  In  printed  language,  we  resort  to  such  devices  as  italics,
exclamation  marks,  periphrases,  but  always  with  some  risk  of  being
misunderstood.

Ambiguity  is  to  be  carefully  distinguished  from  vagueness.  Where-
as the  latter  serves  a useful  purpose,  ambiguity  is  a serious  defect.
A word  is  ambiguous  when  it  stands  for  difierent  referends  on  different
occasions.  Thus  ambiguity  is  largely  a matter  of  context.  A word
m a given  context  may  be  quite  unambiguous,  but  in  another  context
it  may  suffer  from  considerable  ambiguity.  Many  words  are  both
ambiguous  and  vague,  e.g.  Conservative,  politician,  artist,  ridiculous,
and  so  on.

The  traditional  Logicians  were  in  the  habit  of  calling  attention
to  words  which  they  said  were  equivocal  ” or  ambiguous  ”,  since
they  were  used  in  various  senses.  They  gave  examples  such  as,
vice  ” (standing  for  a moral  disposition,  and  a carpenter’s  instru-
ment),  ''fair  ” (standing  for  the  colour  of  a person’s  complexion,
and  for  a just  bargain).  But  these  words  are  not  amliguous;
they  are  different  words.  When  Shakespeare  says,

‘Not  on  thy  sole  but  on  thy  soul,  harsh  Jew,

/ Thou  makest  thy  knife  keen,’

te  is  not  saying  sometMng  ambiguous ; be  is  simply  making  a pun.
There  cannot  be  ambiguity  unless  -we  are  using  the  same  word  in
more  than  one  sense.  Complete  ambiguity  would  be  complete
nonseMe.  Reference  to  the  context  within  which  the  word  is  being
used  is  necessary  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  a word  is  ambiguous
or  not.  No  word  in  isolation  is  properly  ambiguous.  In  one  sense
the  demonstrative  “ it  ” may  be  said  to  be  ambiguous  since  it  stands
for  a digerent  referend  on  every  occasion  of  its  use.  Since,  however,
it  IS  precisely  its  :^ction  to  do  so,  it  would  be  better  to  say  that
words  such  as  “ it  ” are  indeterminate  in  reference.  Ambiguity
arises  when,  in  communicating  with  B,  the  language  used  by  A
refers  B to  a referend  other  than  that  which  A intended,  or  when
B (and  possibly  A)  is  led  on  to  extend  to  one  referend  what  is  true
on  y oi  another,  without  reahzing  that  a transition  has  been  made.
Oolendge  s well-known  story  of  the  two  theological  students  who
discussmg  the  attributes  of  God,  ended  with  the  conclusion ; “ I
see.  Your  'God ’ is  my  ‘ Devil  affords  a good  illustration  of
arnbigmty.  One  of  the  main  purposes  of  defining  words  is  to  get
nd  of  harmM  ambiguities.  But  it  is  a mistake  to  suppose  that  aU
words  of  which  we  know  the  definition  are  unambiguously  used.


CHAPTEE  III

ACQUAINTAlfCE  AND  DESCEIPTION


* Socrates.  I know,  Meno,  what  you  mean ; but  just  see  what  a tiresome
dispute  you  are  introducing.  You  argue  that  a man  cannot  in<3^uire  either  about
that  which  he  Imows  or  about  that  which  he  does  not  know  ; for  if  he  knows,
he  has  no  need  to  inq^uire ; and  if  not,  he  cannot ; for  he  does  not  know  the
very  subject  about  which  he  is  to  inquire.’ — Plato.

§1.  THE  AMBIGUITY  OF  ‘KNOWING’

WHEN  we  use  the  word  know  ” we  do  not  always  use  it
in  the  same  sense.  Sometimes  we  say  that  we  know
some  one  or  something ; sometimes  we  say  that  we  know
that  so-and-so  is  the  case.  For  example,  a man  might  say,  I know
him  and  I know  that  he  went  to  France  last  week.”  Some  one  else
might  say,  ^ I don’t  know  him,  but  I know  to  whom  you  are  refer-
ring.” In  these  two  sentences  the  word  know  ” has  been  used  in
three  different  senses.  I know  him  ” would  ordinarily  be  under-
stood to  mean  “ I am  acquainted  with  him  The  words  that  he
went  to  France  last  week”  express  something  that  is  true  about
him,  an^  which,  the  speaker  claims  that  he  knows.  What  he  is
claiming  to  know  is  a fact,  viz.  the  fact  that  he  went  to  France  last
weekySff^  must  distinguish  carefully  between  knowledge  of  things
(or  of  persons)  and  knowledge  of  facts.  The  latter  is  expressed  in
true  propositions.  In  English  we  use  the  same  word  ‘ know  ’ both
with  regard  to  things  and  with  regard  to  facts,  but  some  languages
have  a pair  of  words  which  to  some  extent,  but  not  precisely,  recog-
nize the  distinction.  Thus  in  Latin  there  are  noscere  and  sdre ; in
Greek,  yv^vai  and  elder ai;  in  French,  connaitre  and  savoir;  in
German,  hennen  and  wissen.  Once  this  distinction  is  pointed  out'-'
it  is  easy  to  see  that  these  two  senses  of  ‘ knowing  ’ are  quite  dif-
ferent. There  is,  however,  a third  sense  of  ‘ know  ’ which  is  more
confusing.  The  second  speaker  reported  above  disclaims  acquaint-’
ance  but  asserts  that  he  " knows  to  whom  ’ reference  is  being  made.
It  seems,  then,  that  there  are  two  ways  in  which  we  may  know
persons  or  things.  These  must  now  be  distinguished.

In  ordinary  life  we  are  said  to  be  acquainted  with  a person  to
whom  we  have  been  introduced.  In  this  sense  a man  is  acquainted
with  Ms  wife,  with  the  friend  with  whom  he  lives,  with  his  barber.

22


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCRIPTION  23

No  one  now  Kving  is  acquainted  with.  Julius  Caesar,  if  we  mean  by
‘ Julius  Caesar  ’ the  man  who  wrote  de  Bello  Gallico,  who  crossed
the  Rubicon,  and  was  killed  by  Brutus  on  the  Ides  of  March.  It
is  not  possible  to  define  acqmiintame.  It  is  an  unanalysable  rela-
tion in  which  a knower  stands  to  something.  This  relation  is  one
with  which  we  are  all  familiar.  We  are  acquainted  with  that  of
which  we  are  directly  aware.^  For  example,  we  can  be  acquainted
with  the  colour  of  the  table  at  which  we  are  looking,  and  with  the
noise  made  by  a passing  motor-car.  It  mus|}  be  carefully  noted
that  in  sa3dng  that  there  is  acquaintance  with  the  noise  made  by
a passing  motor,  the  reference  is  simply  to  the  noise.  If  we  were
to  assert  that  the  noise  was  made  by  a motor  we  should  be  assert-
ing something  about  the  noise,  we  should  not  be  claiming  acquaint-
ance with  the  motor.  As  we  are  here  using  the  word,  then,  ‘ acquaint-
ance ^ means  that  relation  in  which  a knower  stands  to  something
that  is  directly  presented  to  him.  By  a convenient  extension  of
the  term  we  can  say  that  we  are  acquainted  with  what  has  been
directly  presented  to  us  but  which  is  not  now  being  presented.  This
is  the  sense  in  which  we  might  say  that  we  are  acquainted  with
some  one  to  whom  we  have  been  introduced  but  who  is  not  now
present.  It  is  doubtful  whether,  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word
‘acquaintance’,  we  ever  are  acquainted  with  persons. ^ It  is  only
necessary  to  contend  here  that  we  must  distinguish  between  know-
ing a person  whom,  as  we  say,  we  have  met  personally,  and  knowing
some  one  in  some  other  way.

Every  one  understands  what  is  meant  by  such  a statement  as
‘ I am  not  acquainted  with  Stanley  Baldwin,  but  I know  who  it  is
you  are  discussing  What  we  have  now  to  consider  is  what  exacdy
it  is  we  are  knowing  when  we  say  that  although  we  are  not  acquainted
with  Stanley  Baldwin  we  know  who  it  is  you  are  discussing.  Sup-
pose that  we  are  at  a public  meeting  that  is  to  be  addressed  by  Mr.
Baldwin.  At  a given  moment  the  Chairman  rises  and  announces
that  he  is  to  have  the  pleasure  of  ‘ introducing  Mr.  Baldwin  The
chairman  at  that  moment,  we  will  suppose,  makes  a demonstrative
gesture  pointing  out  a certain  individual  seated  beside  him.  Baldwin
is  then  introduced  to  us.  We  may  already  have  known  Mm  as
being  the  Prime  Mmist&r  of  Great  Britain  in  1928,  or  as  being  the
chief  speaker  at  a certain  m^ing,  or  as  being  the  politician  that  smokes
a pipe,  is  fond  of  pigs  and  makes  good  after-dinner  speeches,  and  so
on.  These  are  characteristics  that  may,  or  may  not,  belong  to  the
man  who  has  Just  been  introduced  to  us.  The  phrases  by  means

^ The  phrase  * directly  aware  ’ is  used  here  in  its  ordinary  sense.  It  is

^^eethess  of  the  relation  that  is  important.

* lC'lS'’’s€Ss^oti^  is"  a logical  construction,  then  we

jcoujd  not  be  acquainted  with  a person.  (See  Ohitp,  IX)

' ' k


24


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


of  wMcli  we  refer  to  such,  characteristics  are  descriptive  phrases,
e.g.  the  politician  that  smokes  a pipe  ”,  the  Prime  Minister
We  know  also  that  the  name  Stanley  Baldwin  ” applies  to  the
individual  to  whom  we  believe  these  characteristics  belong.  Just
as  we  say  that  the  name  Stanley  Baldwin  ” applies  to  an  in-
dividual, so  we  can  say  that  these  descriptive  phrases  apply  to  the
individual  that  possesses  the  characteristics  expressed  by  the  phrases.
We  can  understand  these  descriptive  phrases  and  can  use  them
significantly  before  we  are  acquainted  with  the  individual  whom
they  describe.  Jt  is  important  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  our
understanding  of  a descriptive  phrase  is  independent  of  any  acquaint-
ance with  the  object  described;

There  are,  then,  two  different  ways  in  which  we  can  know  things.
We  can  know  a thing  by  being  acquainted  with  it.  The  only  things
with  which  we  can  be  acquainted  are  things  of  which  we  are  directly
aware.  We  can  also  know  a thing  by  knowing  its  characteristics.
In  the  latter  case  we  must  know  both  what  the  characteristics  are
and  that  these  characteristics  belong  to  this  thing.  We  are  then
said  to  know  the  thing  by  description.  Thus  we  know  Baldwin
by  description  when  we  know,  for  example,  that  the  characteristic
of  being  Prime  Minister  in  1928  belongs  to  him.  It  is  possible
both  to  know  a thing  by  description  and  to  be  acquainted  with  it.
Most  of  our  knowledge  of  things  is  knowledge  by  description.  If
our  knowledge  were  confined  to  acquaintance  we  could  Imow  very
little.  The  descriptive  knowledge  that  we  can  have  of  things  may
be  more  or  less  determinate.  Our  knowledge  of  an  object  is  more
determinate  in  proportion  as  it  is  more  precise  and  comprehensive.
The  more  characteristics  that  we  know  to  belong  to  an  object,
the  more  determinate  is  our  knowledge  of  that  object.  When  we
say  I know  a great  deal  about  that  object  ” we  usually  mean
I know  a great  many  characteristics  that  belong  to  that  object
It  is  in  this  way  that  our  knowledge  of  an  object  may  develop,
so  that  we  are  able  to  ask  questions  about  something  which,  in
one  sense,  we  already  know.  This  distinction  between  determinate
and  indeterminate  knowledge  relates  only  to  knowing  by  description,
i Acquaintance  does  not  admit  of  degrees.^

^ This  distinction  between  acquaintance  and  hnowledge  by  description  was
first  clearly  drawn  by  Mr.  Bertrand  RusselL  {See  Problems  of  Philosophy,
Chap.  IV,  and  the  references  given  in  Chap.  IZ  below.)  It  has  often  been
confused  with  the  distinction  drawn  by  William  James  between  acquaintance
and  knowledge  about.  (See  Principles  of  Psychology,  I,  p.  221.)  But  this  is
quite  a different  distinction ; it  is  concerned  with  what  we  have  called  the
distinction  between  determinate  and  indeterminate  knowledge,  whereas
the  distinction  between  acquaintaruie  and  description  has  no  such  reference.
The  analysis  of  descriptions  will  be  given  in  Chap.  IX.  Cf.  also  Chap.  IIj^  § 2.


ACQUAINTAIfCE  AND  DESCEIPTION  25

§2.  PEOPEE  NAMES  AND  DESCEIPTIVE  PHEASES  *
We  have  seen  that  a descriptive  phrase  ascribes  characteristics.
These  characteristics  may,  or  may  not,  belong  to  some  object.  If
there  is  any  object  to  which  these  characteristics  belong,  then  the
descriptive  phrase  applies  to  that  object,  or  objects.  For  example,
if  there  is  no  individual  who  is  both  honest  and  a politician^  then
“ honest  politician  ” is  a descriptive  phrase  that  describes  nothing.
If  there  are  several  individuals  who  are  honest  and  are  also  politicians,
then  honest  politician”  applies  to  each  one  of-' them.  We  can
certainly  understand  what  is  meant  by  honest  politician  ” even
if  there  are  none.  That  is  to  say,  we  can  understand  a descriptive
phrase  without  knowing  whether  there  is  anything  that  is  described
by  it,  and  we  could  use  it  significantly  even  ii  we  believed  that  there
was  nothing  to  which  the  phrase  applied.  The  reason  why  we  can
thus  understand  and  use  descriptive  phrases,  even  when  there  is
nothing  to  which  such  phrases  apply,  is  that  theic  meaning  is  in-
dependent of  the  context  within  which  on  any  given  occasion  they  •
may  occur.  That  is  to  say,  their  significance  does  not  depend  upon
a given  situation.  Descriptive  phrases  are  thus  to  be  sharply  dis-
tinguished from  demonstrative  symbols.  symbol  that  simply
demonstrates,  or  points  out  an  object,  has  no  significance  apart
from  the  object  which  it  demonstrates ; it  indicates  an  object
without  ascribing  characteristics.  A demonstrative  symbol  would
be  meaningless  were  there  nothing  for  which  it  stood.  ^

These  two  kinds  of  symbols  may  be  defined  as  follows ;

A demonstrative  symbol  is  a sjunbol  which  stands  for  an  object
with  which  we  are  directly  acquainted.

A descriptive  phrase  is  a symbol  which  ascribes  characteristics
and  is  such  that  it  has  significance  independently  of  the  context
within  which  it  is  being  used.

A demonstrative  symbol  may  be  regarded  as  a logically  proper
name,  since  it  symbolizes  an  object  with  which  there  is  acquaintance,
and  which  is  thus  immediately  given.  We  do  not  mean  to  suggest
that  a demonstrative  symbol  is  what  would  ordinarily  be  called  a
proper  name.  On  the  contrary,  if  we  attempt  to  find  an  example
in  accordance  with  the  above  definition,  we  shall  find  that  our
examples  are  very  unlike  ordinary  proper  names.  If,  fixing  your
attention  on  something  sensibly  presented  to  you,  e.g.  a patch  of
colour,  you  were  to  say  this  ”,  then  this  ” is  a demonstrative
symbol  or  logically  proper  name.  What  “ this  ” stands  for  depends
upon  the  context  within  which  it^  occurs.  It  means  different  objects
on  different  occasions  of  its  use,  i.6.  it  stands  for  different  referents
That  is  to  say,  the  referend  of  this  ” is  determined  by  Is  use  or^
every  occasion ; it  is  equivalent  to  a demonstrative  gesture,

^ Cl  Chap.  II,  p.  16.


26  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

4

Ordinary  proper  names,  e.g.  Mary  ”,  Caesar  ”,  London  ”,
resemble  descriptive  phrases  in  some  respects  and  in  other  respects
they  resemble  demonstrative  symbols.  The  Greek  use  of  the
definite  article  6 ” before  an  ordinary  proper  name  brings  out
very  well  this  double  resemblance.  Thus  d 2co^Qdrr]g  stands  for
^Hhe  individual  who  has  been  introduced  by  the  name  I!o)KQdrr]g'\
This  use  of  the  definite  article  (“  the  Socrates  ”)  is  similar  to  the  use
of  the  personal  pronoun  to  refer  to  an  individual  who  has  already
been  indicated.  For  example,  in  the  sentence,  Do  you  see  that
man  over  there  ? Well,  he  is  the  man  whom  the  police  are  seek-
ing ”,  the  pronoun  he  ” directly  indicates,  or  demonstrates,  an
individual  to  whom  a descriptive  phrase  is  then  applied.  The
individual  thus  pointed  out  is  not  always  being  sought  by  the  police
so  that  the  descriptive  phrase  will  not  always  be  applicable  to  him.
He  is,  however,  frequently  being  called  by  a name  proper  to  him-
self ; this  is  what  is  meant  by  an  ordinary  proper  name.  Suppose
we  are  acquainted  with  a particular  dog  named  Smoodger  ”.  [ If
we  could  use  Smoodger  ” so  as  simply  to  demonstrate  this  dog,
then  ‘^Smoodger”  would  be  equivalent  to  'Hhat”,  and  would
be  a logically  proper  name.  But  no  ordmary  proper  name  is  so
used ; Smoodger  ” is  used  so  as  to  contain  a descriptive  element.!
Nevertheless,  there  is  an  important  difference  between  a descriptive"
phrase  such  as  the  man  who  won  the  war  ” and  an  ordinary  proper
name  such  as  Lloyd  George  ”.  The  latter  is  equivalent  to  any
descriptive  phrase  suflS.cient  uniquely  to  indicate  the  individual  for
which  the  name  “ Lloyd  George  ” stands.  Hence,  it  is  equivalent
to  different  descriptions  as  used  by  different  persons,  or  on  different
occasions.  Its  significance  is  determined  by  the  referend  it  sjun-
bolizes.  The  descriptive  phrase  ‘‘  the  man  who  won  the  war  ” is
significant  independently  of  any  individual ; it  would  be  significant
even  if  there  were  no  such  man,  or  if  there  were  such  a man  but
he  were  not  named  Lloyd  George  [Thus  an  ordinary  proper
name  differs  from  a descriptive  phrase  since  the  former  is  both
demonstrative  and  descriptive.’  Sometimes  a symbol  that  appears
to  be  an  ordinary  proper  name  is  so  used  as  to  become  an  abbreviated
description  without  any  demonstrative  significance,  e.g.  Homer  ”,
“ Caliban  ”,  “ Zeus  ”.  When  we  ask  Did  Homer  exist  ? ”,  we  are
clearly  not  using  “Homer”  as  an  ordinary  proper  name,  since
the  question  would  be  meaningless  unless  it  were  possible  that
“ Homer  ” might  not  refer  to  any  individual,  and  thus  might  not
demonstrate  an  object.  It  would  be  nonsense  to  ask,  “ Does  the
object  named  ‘ Homer  ’ exist  ? ”,  for  a non-existent  individual
could  not  be  named.  Hence,  “ Homer  ” is  used  as  equivalent  to
some  description  such  as  “ the  man  who  wrote  the  Iliad  and  the
Odyssey Smce  it  is  logically  possible  that  no  one  man  wrote


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCEIPTION  27

both  the  Iliad  and  the  Odyssey  such  a question  would  be  significarft.

We  have  now  distinguished  three  kinds  of  symbols  used  to  refer
to  individuals :

(1)  A demonstrative  symbol,  or  logically  proper  name,  the  sole
function  of  which  is  to  indicate  the  individual  for  which  it  stands.

(2)  An  ordinary  proper  name,  which  is  used  descriptively  but  which
is  primarily  intended  to  stand  for  the  individual  called  by  the  name.

(3)  A descriptive  phrase  the  significance  of  which  is  independent
of  the  individuals  to  which  it  may  apply,  and  which  can  therefore
be  understood  even  if  it  applies  to  nothing.

§ 3.  CONNOTATION  AND  DENOTATION

The  distinction  that  we  have  been  discussing  between  describing
and  applying  to  is  of  great  importance.  It  is  closely  related  to  the
traditional  distinction  between  connotation  and  denotation.  The
latter  pair  of  terms  in  the  sense  in  which  they  have  been  generally
used  were  introduced  into  modern  logic  by  J.  S.  Mill.^  His  ex-
position of  the  meaning  he  attributed  to  these  words  is  far  from
clear  and  need  not  be  discussed  in  detail.  There  is  general  agree-
ment among  modern  logicians  as  to  the  sense  in  which  connota-^
tion  ” should  be  used.  The  connotation  of  a word  is  the  charac-
teristic or  set  of  characteristics  which  are  such  that  these  character-
istics determine  the  objects  to  which  the  word  can  be  correctly
applied,  and  which  are  therefore  sufficient  to  mark  out  these  objects
from  pther  objects.  Thus  the  connotation  of  a word  determines
its  application.  For  example,  if  the  set  of  characteristics  that
constitute  the  connotation  of  triangle  ’’  is  plane  figure  bounded
by  three  straight  lines^  then  nothing  that  lacks  any  of  these  charac-
teristics is  a triangle,  and  anything  that  possesses  these  character-
istics must  be  a triangle.  The  denotation  of  a word  is  the  object,
or  set  of  objects,  to  which  the  word  rightly  applies.  For  example,
the  denotation  of  triangle  ” will  be  aU  triangles.  Thus  **  triangle  ”
connotes  certain  characteristics  or  attributes,  and  denotes  all  the
objects  that  have  these  characteristics.  We  shall  see  later  that  the
objects  said  to  be  denoted  by  triangle  ’’  are  the  members  of  the
class  triangle.  It  will  then  be  found  that  the  notion  of  denoting
is  susceptible  of  analysis,  and  that  the  attempt  to  analyse  it  reveals
difficulties  that  Mill  ignored.  A thorough  discussion  of  denoting
cannot,  however,  be  attempted  here,  but  something  will  be  said
about  it  in  a later  chapter.  ^

The  traditional  Logicians  prefer  to  use  the  terms  intension  and
extension  instead  of  connotation  and  denotation.  But  the  tradi-^
tional  distinction  does  not  exactly  correspond  to  the  distinction'

1 Logic,  Bk.  I,  Chap.  II,  § 5.  There  is  a full  discussion  of  Mill’s  views  on
connotation  in  Joseph,  Introd,,  Chap.  V.  * See  Chap.  IX.


28


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


made  by  MiE  between  connotation  and  denotation.  Tbe  variation
in  terminology  is  due  to  tbe  difference  in  tbe  point  of  view  from
wbicb  tbe  distinction  bas  been  conceived.

Tbe  intension  of  a word  is  commonly  said  to  be  all  that  we
intend  to  mean  by  it.^  This  definition  suggests  an  unfortunate
intrusion  of  psychology  into  logic.  It  is  perhaps  for  this  reason
that  tbe  idealist  Logicians,  who  approach  logic  from  tbe  side  of
psychology  and  metaphysics,  prefer  to  use  intension  ” instead  of

connotation  But  what  we  intend  to  mean  is  vague  and  variable.
Dr.  J.  N.  Keynes  has  usefully  distinguished  three  different  meanings
of  ‘'intension’’,  which  may  be  briefly  summarized  here:^

(1)  Conventional  intension,  i.e.  those  attributes  which  are  commonly
regarded  as  constituting  the  definition  of  the  word,  such  that  if  any
of  these  were  lacking  the  word  could  not  be  applied.  The  philosopher
John  Locke,  for  instance,  raises  the  question  whether  a certain
kind  of  shape  is  to  be  included  in  the  definition  of  " man  ”,  and
he  points  out  that,  if  so,  certain  abnormal  persons  must  be  refused
the  name  of  " man  Conventional  intension  corresponds  to  some
extent  to  what  Mill  meant  by  connotation.

(2)  Subjective  intension,  e.g.  those  attributes  which  the  use  of  a
word  calls  up  in  the  mind  of  a person  using  it.  This  has  sometimes
been  called  the  psychological  meaning  of  a word.  For  example,
the  word  " home  ” calls  up  different  ideas  in  different  people’s
minds,  so  that  its  subjective  intension  may  vary  considerably  from
one  individual  to  another.  This  is  a notion  that  is  quite  useless
for  the  purposes  of  logical  thinking.

(3)  Objective  intension,  i.e.  all  those  attributes  which  are  in  facfc
possessed  in  common  by  all  the  objects  to  which  the  word  applies.
Dr.  Keynes  uses  the  word  comprehension  as  equivalent  to  objective
intension.  As  we  never  know  all  the  attributes  possessed  by  an
object,  this  notion  is  not  of  much  utility.

Extension,  as  used  in  relation  to  intension,  is  an  extremely
ambiguous  word.  The  traditional  treatment  of  this  topic  is  very
unclear  owing  to  the  fact  that  quite  different  notions  have  been
confused  and  the  topics  coimected  with  each  of  them  have  been
dealt  with  together.  These  confusions  run  throughout  the  tradi-
tional Logic,  which  is  based  upon  the  metaphysical  theories  implicit
in  Aristotle’s  theory  of  logic.  We  shall  constantly  be  concerned
with  difficulties  that  would  not  have  arisen  had  it  not  been  for  these
deep-rooted  confusions.  They  can  be  cleared  up  only  as  we  proceed.
One  very  important  confusion  may,  however,  be  dealt  with  at  once.

The  relation  of  a class  (e.g.  Frenchmen)  to  a vidder  class  witMn

^ See  Joseph,  Introd,,  Chap.  VI,  p.  121.  “ The  intension  of  a term  verbal
is  what  we  intend  by  it,  or  what  we  mean  by  it  when  predicated  of  any
subject.”  2 FX.,  Ft.  I,  Chap.  II.


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCEIPTION


29


wHch  the  former  is  contained  (e.g.  Europeans)  is  quite  different
from  the  relation  of  an  individual  (e.g.  Napoleon)  to  a class  of  which
this  individual  is  a member  (e.g.  Frenchmen).  These  different  rela-
tions were  not  distinguished  by  the  traditional  Logicians,  who  treated
them  both  as  examples  of  extension.  Thus  the  class  Europeans
was  said  to  ''  extend  over  or  to  include  in  its  extension  ’’  the
class  Frenchmen ; also,  the  class  Frenchmen  was  said  to  include  in
its  extension  all  individual  Frenchmen,  e.g.  Napoleon,  Mazarin,
Villon,  Bossuet,  etc.  ^ To  use  one  word  to  express  both  these  relations
was  bound  to  lead  to  difiSculties.  The  confusion  was  increased
by  the  attempt  made  by  some  logicians  to  include  in  the  extension
of  Frenchmen,  not  only  all  those  Frenchmen  who  have  lived,  are
living,  and  will  live,  but  also  all  French  characters  in  fiction,  e.g.
Jean  Valjean  (in  Victor  Hugo’s  Les  Miserahles),  M.  Paul  Emmanuel
(in  Villette),  and  so  on.  If  extension  be  used  in  this  third  sense
it  is  the  correlative  of  subjective  intension  rather  than  of  connota-
tion. Dr.  Keynes  accordingly  proposes  to  call  it  subjective
extension  ”,  which  he  understands  to  mean  the  whole  range  of
objects  real  or  imaginary  to  which  the  name  can  be  correctly  applied  ”.
This,  however,  raises  quite  a different  problem  from  the  problem
of  distinguishing  psychological  meaning  from  conventional  intension,
so  that  Keynes’  terminology  is  not  helpful.  We  shall  be  concerned
later  with  the  difficulties  due  to  this  third  interpretation  of  extension.

We  have,  then,  distinguished  two  quite  diferent  senses  in  which
extension  ” is  used  and  two  different  interpretations  of  the  latter
sense.  Thus  extension  ” is  said  to  mean ;

(1)  The  relation  of  a class  to  the  sub-classes  it  includes ; (2)  the
relation  of  a class  to  the  individual  members  which  compose  the
class,  these  individuals  being  understood  to  be  either  (a)  all  those '
which  may  be  said  to  exist,  in  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word
exist  ”,  or  (6)  all  individuals  real  and  imaginary.

Neither  (1)  nor  (2)  corresponds  exactly  to  what  Mill  meant  by
denotation  but  (2a)  approximates  to  it.

The  interpretation  of  “ extension  ” in  sense  (1)  has  been  held
to  involve  what  has  been  called  “ the  inverse  variation  of  extension
and  intension  What  this  means  can  best  be  made  clear  by  means
of  an  example.  If  we  consider  the  classes : squares,  rectangles,
parallelograms,  quadrilateral  figures, see  that  they  fulfil  the  follow-
mg  conditions : (1)  each  class  (taken  in  order  from  first  to  last)
includes  fewer  individual  members  than  the  succeeding  classes
(since,  e.g.,  all  squares  are  rectangles,  but  not  all  rectangles  are
squares) ; (2)  each  class  has  a greater  number  of  characteristics
than  the  succeeding  class.  Thus,  for  example,  if  we  know  that
a given  plane  figure  is  a sqmre  we  know  a greater  number  of  charac-
teristics with  regard  to  it  than  if  we  only  knew  that  it  was  a rectangle.


30


A MODEEN  mTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


The  fulfilment  of  these  two  conditions  is  said  to  constitute  the
inverse  variation  of  extension  and  intension.  Since  inverse
variation  ” stands  for  an  exact  mathematical  notion  it  cannot
be  appropriately  applied  to  these  two  vaguely  conceived  condi-
tions. 'Nor  could  this  relation  be  said  to  hold  between  intension
as  such  and  extension  as  such.  It  is  a relation  that  could  only  hold
between  classes  arranged  in  a certain  order,  namely,  in  which  a
smaller,  or  sub-class,  is  grouped  under  a wider  class,  which  is  grouped
under  a wider  class,  and  so  on,  as  in  our  illustration.  Such  an
arrangement  of  classes  according  to  a definite  plan  is  called  classic
fication.  The  doctrine  of  inverse  variation  results  from  the  attempts
of  the  traditional  Logicians  to  deal  with  the  characteristics  of  classi-
ficatory  series.  As  their  conception  of  classification  was  dependent
upon  their  conception  of  e^ension,  it  is  not  free  from  confusion.
The  difficulties  of  this  conception  must  be  postponed  to  a later
chapter,  since  it  is  not  possible  to  reach  a clear  conception  of  the
relations  between  classes  until  we  have  a clear  conception  of  class, ^

§4.  NAMES  AND  CONNOTATION

The  difierent  senses  in  which  logicians  have  used  the  words

connotation  ” and  intension  ’’  naturally  gave  rise  to  controversy
as  to  what  names  had  connotation  and  as  to  what  properties  con-
stituted the  connotation  of  those  words  that  are  connotative.  From
our  discussion  of  proper  names  it  should  now  be  clear  that  a logically
proper  name,  such  as  this  has  no  connotation ; its  function  is
‘purely  demonstrative;  An  ordinary  proper  name,  however,  since
it  contains  a descriptive  element  is  not  purely  demonstrative ; it
certainly  has  subjective  intension.  If  connotation  be  not  taken  as
equivalent  to  definition,  an  ordinary  proper  name  may  be  said  to
have  restricted  connotation,  the  restriction  being  to  the  context
within  which  the  proper  name  is  being  used.  It  is  obvious  that
descriptive  phrases  are  connotative.

The  confusion  in  the  traditional  treatment  centres  round  the
proper  name.  IJiU,  having  taken  connotation  to  be  equivalent  to
conventional  intension^  or  definition,  naturally  discovered  that
ordinary  proper  names  have  no  connotation.  Bosajaquet,  who  may
be  regarded  as  typical  of  the  traditional  Logicians,!  having  taken
connotation  as  equivalent  to  subjective  intension,  says  : ^ A Proper
Name,  then,  has  a connotation,  but  not  a fixed  general  connotation.
It  is  attached  to  a unique  individual,  and  connotes  whatever  may
be  involved  in  his  identity,  or  is  instrumental  in  bringing  it  before
the  mind.  ’ ^ MiU  had  given  an  unfortunate  twist  to  the  controversy
by  his  definition  of  a proper  name.  He  said:  'A  proper  name  is
but  an  unmeaning  mark  which  we  connect  in  our  minds  with  the

^ See  Chap.  XXII,  § 3.

^Essentials  of  Logic,  p.  93*  Cf,  also  Bosanquet’s  Logic,  I,  pp.  47-51.


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCEIPTION


31


idea  of  tte  object,  in  order  that  wherever  the  mark  meets  our  eyes
or  occurs  to  our  tbouglits,  we  may  think  of  that  individual  object.’  ^
This,  as  it  stands,  is  an  absurd  statement.  An  ''  unmeaning
mark  ” would  not  be  a mark  in  the  sense  in  which  Mill  clearly  in-
tends to  use  the  word  ‘‘  mark  ”,  viz.  as  a sign,  or  a symbol ; it  would
be  a mere  shape.  2 The  difficulties  that  have  arisen  in  the  discussion
of  this  controversy  are  to  some  extent  due  to  the  excessive  ambiguity
of  the  word  “ meaning  The  word  was  freely  used  in  the  dispute
about  proper  names,  yet  no  one  thought  it  necessary  to  attempt
to  define  what  he  meant  by  it,  nor  to  ascertain  what  exactly  it  was
that  other  logicians  had  said  wlSch  he  was  concerned  to  dispute.

If  what  we  have  said  about  proper  names  is  correct,  it  is  clear
that  Mill  was  right  in  recognizing  an  important  difference  between
ordinary  proper  names  and  descriptive  phrases ; he  was  also  right
in  recognizing  that  a symbol  may  stand  for  a referend  without
ascribing  any  characteristics  to  it.  Logically  proper  names  are
such  symbols.  But  Mill  was  mistaken  in  not  seeing  that  names
such  as  Baldwin  ”,  ''  Mary  ”,  Smoodger  ” are  not  logically
proper.  He  made  tlie  further  mistake  of  supposing  that  “ meaning  ”
is  unamhi^ously  equivalent  to  “having  connotation”.  Conse-
quently, since  he  regarded  cormotation  as  eqxdvalent  to  conven-
tional intension,  he  first  reached  the  conclusion  that  ordinary  proper
names  are  not  connotative,  and  then  concluded  that  they  are  “ un-
meaning marks  Even  if  the  first  conclusion  were  correct,  the
second  would  not  follow.®

There  is  a further  confusion  in  Mill’s  account  of  connotation,
which  must  now  be  considered.  Although  in  distinguishing  between
connotation  and  denotation  Mill  was  thinking  of  the  distinction
between  ^cribing  and  applying  to,  he  failed  to  see  that  there  may
be  descriptive  names  that  apply  to  nothing.  His  definition  of  a
connotative  name  shows  this.  He  says : ‘ a connotative  term  is
one  which  denotes  a subject  and  implies  an  attribute.  By  a subject
is  here  meant  anything  which  possesses  attributes.  Thus  John,

^ Logic,  Bk.  I,  Chap.  II,  § 5.

* Cf.  the  folloteg  statement  from  Mill : ‘ If,  like  the  robber  in  the  ArcAian
Ntghts,  we  make  a mark  with  chalk  on  a house  to  enable  us  to  know  it  again,
the  mark  has  a purpose,  but  it  has  not  properly  any  meaning,  . , . The
object  of  making  the  mark  is  merely  distinction.  . . . When  we  impose  a
proper  name,  we  perform  an  operation  in  some  degree  analogous  to  what
the  robber  intended  in  chalking  the  house’.

»MU’s  theory  of  the  proper  name  as  an  “unmeaning  mark”  has  been
carried  to  its  logical  conclusion  by  Mr.  Bertrand  Russell  He  defines  a
proper  name  as  a word  for  a particular,  such  as  “ this  ”.  He  maintains  that
ordinary  proper  names  are  “ abbreviated  descriptions  This  account,  how-
ever, neglects  the  demonstrative  element  that  is  essential  to  the  significance
of  an  ordinary  proper  name.  The  problem  is  more  complicated  than  Mr.
Bussell  seems  to  admit.  (See  Russell’s  articles  in  the  Monist,  1918.  n 623
seq. ; Int.  Math.  PhU.,  p.  174)


32


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


or  London,  or  England  are  names  whicli  signify  a subject  only.
Whiteness,  length,  virtue  signify  an  attribute  only.  But  white,
long,  virtuous,  are  connotative.  The  word  white  denotes  all  white
things,  as  snow,  paper,  the  foam  of  the  sea,  etc.,  and  implies,  or  in
the  language  of  the  schoolmen,  connotes,  the  attribute  whiteness
Thus  Mill  so  defined  connotative  name  ’’  that  it  follows  that  if
a name  is  connotative  it  must  apply  to  something — ^which  is  what
Mill  meant  by  d^enoting.  But,  as  we  have  seen,  a descriptive  phrase
which  is,  of  course,  connotative  may  have  no  application,  e.g.
‘ glass  mountain  ’,  ‘ circular  square  ‘ consistent  philosopher
' impeccable  statesman  ^ It  is  clear,  then,  that  ''  connotation  ’’
cannot  be  defined  as  Mill  defined  it.  A word,  a name,  or  a phrase
is  connotative  when  it  means,  or  stands  for,  a characteristic  or
set  of  characteristics  such  that  anything  that  possesses  these  char-
acteristics is  denoted  by  the  word,  or  the  name,  or  the  phrase.
Thus  connotation  determines  denotation  provided  that  the  connota-
tive word  does  apply  to  something ; but  a connotative  word  need
not  denote.  A word,  a name,  or  a phrase  is  non-connotative  when
it  does  not  stand  for  any  characteristic  but  simply  demonstrates
its  referend.  Hence  a non-connotative  word  is  a demonstrative
symbol.  To  understand  a non-connotative  word  we  must  be  ac-
quainted with  its  referend.  This  is,  we  have  seen,  the  case  with
logically  proper  names  such  as  this  The  words  that  stand
for  simple  qualities,  such  as  red  sweet  ”,  loud  ”,  are  non-
connotative  words  which  denote  simple  qualities.  In  order  to
understand  what  red  ” means^  we  must  have  seen  something
red.  Thus  red  ” demonstrates  the  quality  for  which  it  stands.

To  sum  up  this  discussion.  The  distinction  between  describing
and  applying  to  is  important,  and  is  the  basis  of  the  traditional
distinction  between  connotation  and  denotation.  But  it  is  a mistake
to  suppose  that  all  words,  or  names,  must  both  describe  and  apply
to  something.  Hence,  we  must  reject  Mill’s  definition  of  connotation
and  the  traditional  treatment  of  intension  as  alike  offering  confused
accomts  of  the  distinction.  We  conclude  that : (1)  some  names
have  no  connotation,  e.g.  demonstrative  symbols,  logically  proper
names  and  names  of  simple  qualities  ; (2)  there  are  different  kinds
of  names,  or  words,  that  have  connotation,  viz.  ordinary  proper
names  and  descriptive  phrases  ; (3)  some  names  have  no  denotation,
e.g.  descriptive  phrases  which  describe  nothing,  e.g. ' glass  mountain  ’,
^centaur’.  With  regard  to  the  distinction  between  two  kinds  of
connotative  words  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  connotation  of  des- '
criptive  phrases  determines  the  denotation,  whereas  the  denotation
of  ordinary  proper  names  determines  their  restricted  connotation
within  the  context  in  which  they  are  used.

1 Loc.  cit.


CHAPTER  rV

PROPOSITIONS  AND  THEIR  CONSTITUENTS


‘ Only  the  proposition  has  sense ; only  in  the  context  of  a proposition
has  a name  a meaning.’ — Wittgenstein,

§1.  THE  PROPOSITION

WHEN  we  attempt  to  analyse  an  example  of  reJSective
thinking — such  as  the  examples  given  in  Chapter  I —
we  find  that  it  consists  of  propositions  either  asserted  to
be  true,  or  supposed  to  be  true,  from  which  propositions  other
propositions  can  be  inferred.  Thus  the  unit  of  logical  thinking
is  the  proposition.  This  must  now  be  precisely  defined  :

'A  proposition  is  anything  that  is  believed,  disbelieved,  doubted, '
or  supposed.^

Not  every  sentence  expresses  a proposition  but  only  those  sen-
tences which  express  what  is  either  true  or  false.  ^ For  example,
Phaedrus  having  listened  to  Socrates’  prayer  to  Pan  says : ‘ Let
me  also  share  in  this  prayer  ; for  friends  have  all  things  in  common  \
The  first  sentence  expresses  a request ; the  second  sentence,  for
friends  have  all  things  in  common  ”,  expresses  a proposition.  It
is  asserted  by  Phaedrus  as  being  true,  and,  as  the  conjunction  “ for  ”
shows,  it  is  offered  as  a ' justification  ’ for  his  making  the  request.
% order  that  a proposition  may  be  communicated,  it  must  be  ex-
pressed. The  expression  of  a proposition  involves  symbols.  These
symbols  may  be,  though  they  need  not  be,  words.  We  have  seen
that  words  are  a special  kind  of  sjmbols,  or  signs,  peculiarly  adapted
to  express  what  we  ordinarily  think  about.'  The^yhsL^^P^pssion
of^^K^pqai^pn^is  a^^eentfp  words  are  sjanboli^wei

sometimes  make  a distinction  between  propositions  expressed  in
words  and  propositions  expressed  in  symbols.  In  that  case  we
should  mean  by  a sjTnabol  a non-verbal  symbol  deliberately  devised
for  a special  purpose.  At  present  we  shall  be  mainly  concerned
with  propositions  expressed  in  sentences.  But  we  want  to  consider

^ Cf.  Aristotle,  De  Inierpretationey  17<*,  1.  ‘Yet  every  sentence  is  not  a
proposition,  only  such  propositions  as  have  in  them  truth  or  falsity.  Thus
a prayer  is  a sentence,  but  is  neither  true  nor  false.’  ^

^ It  is  clear  that  commands,  requests,  exclamatory  sentences  and  expressive
sighs  are  not  propositions.

3


33


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


U

aot  tlie  sent^ce  but  tbe  pioposition.  Thus  xoivd  ydq  rd  tmv  cpiXm
is  a Greek  sentence  wbicli  expresses  tbe  same  proposition  as  “ For
friends  kave  all  things  in  common  We  are  here  concerned  not
with  the  difference  in  the®  lingTiistic  expression  but  with  the,
proposition  that  these  ^ two  different  sentences  mean?-

A process  of  reflective  thinking,  or  an  argument,  can  be  analysed
into  its  constituent  elements,  which  are  propositions.  The  pro-#,
position  itself  can  also  be  analysed  into  its  constituents,  which
are  what  the  proposition  is  about.  For  example,  the  proposition
Oliver  Twist  asJcs  for  more  is  ahonj^Oliver  Twist,  ash  for  and  more.
The  proposition  The  baby  aries  is^bout  The  baby  and  cries.  The
constituents  of  the  proposition  were  traditionally  called  the  terms
of  the  proposition.

There  are  clearly  two  different  senses  of  about  ”,  which  xnust  j
be  distinguished.  If  we  say,  He  is  making  an  assertion  abouw
that  ship  ”,  we  may  mean  either  that  he  is  making  an  assertion
in  which  that  ship  is  a constituent,  or  we  may  mean  that  he  is  making
an  assertion  in  which  that  ship  is  the  subject.  Thus,  if  he  asserts
I see  that  ship  ”,  then  that  ship  is  a constituent  of  the  proposition^
which  is  about  it  in  the  first  sense  of  about  ”.  If  he  asserts  That
ship  is  a sloop  ”,  then  the  proposition  is  about  that  ship  in  the
second  sense  also.  The  traditional  Logicians  assumed  that  every
proposition  contained  two,  and  only  two  terms,  connected  by  the
verb  is  (or  are).  These  terms  were  called  the  subject  and  the  predicate.
The  proposition  Friends  have  all  things  in  common  asserts  a charac-
teristic of  those  who  are  friends.  The  proposition  Friends  sometimes
disagree  asserts  another,  and  a different  characteristic  of  friends.
In  both  these  propositions /ncnSs  is  what  is  traditionally  known  as
the  subject ; what  is  asserted  of  friends  is  traditionally  known  as
the  predicate.  Neither  of  these  propositions  contains  the  verb
is  Let  us  consider  the  simple  proposition  : This  noise  is  un-
pleasant, The  traditional  analysis  yields  : This  noise — subject ;
unpleasant — ^predicate;  is — ^the  copula  cormecting  the  subject  and
predicate.  But  it  is  being  unpleasant  that  is  predicated  of  this
noise,  not  unpleasant.  The  indicative  form  of  the  verb  is  ” marks
the  assertion  of  the  proposition  as  a unit ; it  is  not  a link  between
subject  and  predicate  but  is  itself  a part  of  the  predicate  as  asserted.
The  traditional  Logicians  supposed  that  every  proposition  was  analys-
able  into  subject  and  predicate,^  and  must  therefore  be  expressed

iln  ordinary  conversation  we  seldom  pay  attention  to  the  sentences
that  we  hear,  but  pass  directly  to  the  proposition  which  the  sentence  serves
to  express.

® See  Joseph,  p.  161.  Mr.  Joseph’s  discussion  of  the  copula  (in  Chap.  VII
of  his  Introduction)  may  be  recommended  to  those  who  desire  a fuller  dis-
cussion of  the  traditional  view.  ► ^


PROPOSITIONS  AKD  THEIR  CONSTITUENTS  35


witli  the  help  of  the  verb  to  he.  According  to  them  a proposition
such  as  Bagpipes  make  noise  would  have  to  be  restated  in

the  verbal  form : “ Bagpi^\flTe  thiv^s  which  make  a horrid  noise  ”,
in  order  to  bring  out  the  fd^:  subject — copula— predicate.

But  it  cannot  be  maintained^^w' every  proj)0^tion  asserts  a predica-
tion, that  is,  attributes  a c'^facteristic  oifUfeibute  to  a subject.
^ For  example.  Cats  like  fish^  Bruim  killed  Caesar,  John  gave  the  man
sixpence  assert  relations  between  subjects ; they  do  not  attribute
a characteristic  tq  a subjlct.  We  do  not  get  rid  of  the  relation  by
expressing  the  proposit^p  Bru^m^'Ul^'  Caesar,  for  example,  in  the
verbal  form  “ Brutus  a.  ldli!*bf  ffcfeesar  Such  a restatement

is  as  logically  futile  as  rfc  is  practically  absurd.  The  awkwardness
^of  the  sentence  sug^st^  its  unsuitability,  to  express  what  the  pro-
position means.  Any  one  who  roacfs  this  book  understands  the
distinction  expressed  by  the  grammatical  distinction  between  transi-
tive and  intransitive  verbs.  He  will  see  readily  enough  that  the
relation  that  holds  ^between  white  and  this  paper  in  the  proposition
d^his  paper  is  white  is  quite  difierent  from  the  relation  that  holds
between  Caesar  and  Brutus  when  Brutus  kiUs  Caesar.  Nothing  is
gained  by  the  awkward  restatement  given  above.  It  is  not  to  be
denied  that  it  is  sometimes  desirable  to  restate  a proposition  in  a
^ different  verbal  form  in  order  to  exhibit  its  logical  form.  But  in
the  case  under  discussion  the  logical  form  is  merely  obscured  by
the  restatement,  which  was  only  supposed  to  be  necessary  because
it  was  assumed  that  all  propositions  were  of  th^^same  logical  form.
This,  however,  is  a mistake.  We  shall  find  that  propositions  may
have  any  number  of  constituents  and  that  these  constituents  may
be  combined  in  various  ways.  The  traditional  limitation  to  two
constituents  (subject  and  predicate)  and  to  one  mode  of  combination
(predication)  was  an  undue  simplification.  The  mode  in  which  the
constituents  are  combined  determines  the  logical  form  of  the  pro-
position. Hence,  there  is  not  one  logical  form  which  is  the  form
of  every  proposition.  To  suppose  the  contrary  was  one  of  the
most  serious  mistakes  into  which  the  traditional  Logicians  fell  owing
to  their  too  great  reliance  upon  Aristotle’s  analysis  of  propositions.
We  shall  be  concerned  later  with  the  consequences  of  this  mistake.

§2.  KINDS  OF  PROPOSITIONS
“'/  Propositions  are  related  on  the  one  hand  to  the  thinker  who
asserts  them,  and  on  the  other  to  the  facts  which  make  these  pro-
positions true  or  false.  The  relation  in  which  the  thinker  stands  to
the  proposition  ia^the  relation  of  judging,  or  of  believing,  or  of
supposing,  or  of  fiwbtmg.  An  act  of  judging,  or  of  believing,  etc.,
is  a mental  event.;  it  is  an  occurrence  happening  at  a definite  time
in  the  life-history  of  the  thinker  who  judges,  believes,  supposes.


36


A MODEEN  mTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


doubts  that  so-and-so  is  the  case,  A fact  is  not  an  event.  It  does
not  occur  at  a time,  although  some  facts  are  facts  with  regard  to
a particular  time.  It  is  a fact  that  Cliarles  I was  defeated  at  the
battle  of  Naseby.  This  is  a fact  wilih  regard  to  Charles  I and  the
battle  of  Naseby.  If  I now  judge  that  Charles  I was  defeated  at
the  battle  of  Naseby,  there  is  another  fact,  namely,  that  I am  now
judging  that  Charles  I was  defeated  at  the  battle  of  Naseby.  If  on
some  subsequent  occasion  I again  judge  that  Charles  I was  defeated
at  the  battle  of  Naseby,  there  is  another  fact  with  regard  to  another
and  a later  time.  We  are  not  here  primarily  concerned  with  judging,
believing,  etc.,  but  with  what  is  jmged,  believed,  etc.,  i.e.  with  pro-
positions. Although  it  is  not  easy  to  define  a fact  we  see  that
it  is  not  difficult  to  understand  what  '^fact'”  means.  Nor  shall
we  attempt  to  discuss  what  precisely  is  meant  by  saying  that  a
proposition  is  true,  or  that  a proposition  is  false.  Every  one  knows
what  he  means  when  he  says  that  the  proposition  The  moon  is  smaller
than  the  earth  is  true,  and  that  the  proposition  The  sun  is  smaller
than  the  earth  is  false.  If  I judge  that  it  will  be  wet  to-morrow, ,
and  it  is  wet  the  next  day,  then  I judged  truly ; if  it  is  not  wet
the  next  day,  then  I judged  falsely.  What  I am  judging  on  each
occasion  is  that  something  is  the  case.  • A fact  is  anything  that  is
the  case.  For  example,  that  these  words  are  prmted  in  black  ink
is  the  case ; that  is,  it  is  a fact  that  these  words  are  printed  in
black  ink.  It  is  this  fact  that  makes  the  proposition  These  words'^
are  printed  in  black  ink  true,  and  that  also  makes  the  proposition
These  words  are  printed  in  red  ink  false,  »When  I judge  truly,  what
I judge  is  a fact.'' ' Facts_  simply  are ; they  are  neither  true  nor  false.
Only  propositions  can  be  true,  or  can  be  false,  and  their  truth  or
falsity  depends  upon  their  relation  to  facts.  ^

Common  sense  is  accustomed  to  distinguishing  between  things
and  the  qualities  and  relations  that  things  may  have.  For  example,
this  table  is  a thing ; it  has  the  quality  of  being  brown ; it  stands
in  a certain  position  in  a certain  room  at  a certain  time,  that  is  to
say,  it  has  spatial  and  temporal  relations  to  other  things.  Again,
Ohirles  I is  a thing ; he  has  the  quahty  of  being  an  unfortunate
man.  Regarded  as  things,  Charles  I,  this  table,  the  Tower  of  London,
my  pen,  are  simple.  That  the  Tower  of  London  is  admired  by  Ameri-
cans is  a fact.  That  Charles  I is  unfortunate  is  a fact.  These  facts
are  clearly  not  simple  in  the  sense  in  which  the  comomon-sense
things  we  have  been  considering  are  simple.  Each  of  these  facts
consists  of  two  or  more  constituents.  The  fact  that  Charles  I was
unfortunate  consists  of  two  constituents — b,  thing  {Charles  I)  ^ and

^ See  G.  E.  Moore,  Facts  and  Propositions,  and  cf.  Chap.  XIII,  § 5 below.

® “ Charles  I ” is  here  used  as  a logically  proper  name,  i.e.  as  standing
for  something  with  which  we  might  be  acquainted.  It  is  not  necessary  to


PEOPOSITIONS  AND  THEIE  CONSTITUENTS  37


a quality  (being  unfortunate).  That  Charles  I married  Henrietta
Maria  is  a fact  consisting  of  three  constituents — two  things  {Charles  I)
and  {Henrietta  Maria)  and  a relation  that  relates  them  {marriage).
Such  facts  as  these  are  si:m,ple  facts  and  the  propositions  which
express  these  facts  are  simple  propositions.

Two  or  more  simple  propositions  may  be  combined  so  that
out  of  them  a single  proposition  is  constructed.  For  example,
Charles  I married  Henrietta  Maria  and  the  Catholics  were  'pleased
is  a single  proposition  constructed  out  of  the  two  simple  propositions
Charles  I married  Henrietta  Magia  and  The  Catholics  were  pleased.
A single  proposition  constructed  out  of  simnle  pronositions  will
becSffed^  compo^  ThS  suSTacomw^m^^

position  is  a single  proposition  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  if  either
of  the  two  constituent  propositions  which  are  connected  by  and
is  false,  the  proposition  is  false,  even  though  the  other  proposition
is  true.  For  example,  Columbus  was  a great  sailor  and  he  sailed
round  the  world  is  Jalse,  if,  as  is  in  fact  the  case,  the  constituent
proposition,  He  sailed  round  the  world  is  false,  though  the  other
proposition,  Columbus  is  a great  sailor  is  true.  There  are  various
different  ways  in  which  simple  propositions  may  be  combined  so
as  to  construct  compound  propositions.  The  examples  so  far  given
are  of  the  simplest  kind.

The  first  distinction,  then,  to  be  made  between  different  kinds
of  propositions  is  between  simple  propositions  and  compound  pro-
positions. Each  of  these  kinds  can  be  further  subdivided,

(A)  Simple  Propositions

We  have  already  seen  reason  to  dissent  from  the  traditional
view  that  every  proposition  consists  of  a subject  and  a predicate
that  is  attributed  to  the  subject.  This  is  only  one  of  the  various
kinds  of  simple  propositions  that  we  must  now  distinguish.

The  most  primitive  proposition  is  the  suhjectless  'proposition,  ^
sometimes  called  the  exclamatory  proposition,
called  the  impersonal  proposition,  e.g.  it  rains,  it  thunders.  Although
it  raim  has  a grammatical  subject,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  it
has  a logical  subject.  Fire  ! may  be  thought  to  have  a subject  and
no  predicate.  But  this  would  be  a mistake.  Such  a proposition
has  neither  subject  nor  predicate.  The  analysis  of  subjectless

contend  that  Charles  I (or  any  of  the  other  examples)  is  in  any  ultimate
sense  a thing.  It  may  he  that  we  never  reach  absolutely  simple  things.  But

are  not  here  concerned  with  questions  of  ultimate  analysis.

1 Mr.  Bertrand  Bussell,  F.  P.  Bamsey  and  other  modern  logicians  us©
the  term  “ atonnc  propositions  ” for  simple  propositions  of  this  kind,  and
“molecular  propositions”  for  compound  propositions.  I have  used  the
terminology  of  Dr.  J.  N.  Keynes  and  Mr.  W.  E,  Johnson.


38


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


propositions  is  difficult  and  will  not  be  discussed  here.^  But  it  is
important  to  note  them  as  a primitive  form  of  proposition.

A proposition  that  asserts  that  a quality,  or  an  attribute^  belongs
to  something  is  of  the  subject-predicate  form.  For  example,  This
paper  is  white,  Mussolini  is  ambitious,  This  painting  you  are  now  seeing
on  the  roof  of  the  Sistine  Chapel  in  the  Vatican  is  beautiful,  Andrew
Carnegie  was  very  rich.  The  subject  is  that  of  which  an  attribute
is  predicated,  e.g.,  Mussolini  is  the  subject  of  which  being  ambitious
is  predicated.  The  verb  is  in  the  indicative  mood  expresses
the  assertion  of  the  predicate  of  the  subject.

A proposiEbn  which  asserts  a relation  between  two  or  more
constituents  will  be  called  a relational  yrovosition.  There  are  various
words  in  ordinary  use  that  express  relations,  e.g.  transitim.:gerbs
[drink,  love,  envy,  hurt,  etc.) ; words  expressing  equalities  and  in-
equalities in  any  respect  [greater  than,  smaller  than,  matches) ; words,
expressing  likeness^and  difference,  which  are  special  kinds  of  equalities
armTnequalities ; words  expressing  degees  (e.g.  of  heat),  and  so
on.  The  ways  in  which  the  various  kinds  of  relations  thus  expressed
are  to  be  distinguished  and  compared  with  regard  to  their  logical
properties  will  be  discussed  later.  ^ Here  it  is  sufficient  to  point  out
the  simplest  respects  in  which  relational  propositions  must  be  dis-
tinguished from  propositions  that  are  not  relationalv'

A transitive  verb  expresses  a relation  between  the  grammatical
subject  and  the  grammatical  object  of  the  verb,  that  is,  between
two  nouns,  or  pronouns,  or  their  equivalents.  For  example,  Brutus
killed  Caesar  ”,  The  judge  condemned  the  prisoner  ”,  The  jester
mocked  the  King  ”.  The  grammatical  distinction  between  the  siib«
ject  and  theLjohject  expresses  the  direction  of  the  relation  expressed
by  the  transitive  verb.  Thus  Brutus  killed  Caesar  ” is  not  only
a difierent  sentence  from  Caesar  killed  Brutus  ”,  it  expresses  a
different  proposition,  and  therefore  corresponds  to  a different  fact.
These  two  propositions  could  only  be  true  together  if  Brutus  and
Caesar  were  like  the  Kilkenny  cats  and  destroyed  each  other.  The
difference  between  them  is  expressed  in  English  by  the  word  order
of  th^^fifintence,  in  Latin  it  is  expressed  by  an  inflection  that  shows
which  noun  is  in  the  accusative  case  and  is,  therefore,  the  object
of  the  verb,  e.g.  Brutus  Caesarem  occidit  ”.  In  the  proposition
expressed  by  “ Brutus  killed  Caesar  ”,  or  expressed  by  ''  Brutus
Caesarem  occidit  ”,  the  relation  of  hilling  goes  from  Brutus  to
“ Caesar.  The  direction  m'"whrdbrTlcdS^^^  sense

of  the  relation.  The^toms^etween  which  the  relation  holds.-jcan

^ Bor  a fuller  discussion  see  W.  E.  J.,  Pt.  I.  Ctan.  11.  Cf.  Brentano,
Origin  of  the  Knowledge  of  Right  and  Wrong,  Sigwart,  Logic^

Chap.  II,  § 11 ; Bosanquet,  Logic,  Bk.  I,  Chap.  V,

* See  Chap.  VII,  § 5,  and  X,  § 2,


PEOPOSITIONS  AND  THEIR  CONSTITUENTS  39^

both  be„„(^Ued  The  grammatical  dis-

tincjapn  between  subject  and"  object  is  important  only  in  so  far  as
it  expresses  the  sense  of  the  relation  expressed  by  the  verb.  The
proposition  Caesar  was  hilled  by  Brutus  is  equivalent  to  the  pro-
position Brutus  hilled  Caesar  although  it  is,  not  the  same  •proposition.
The  difference  between  the  active  and  the  passive  voice  of  a transitive
verb  is  the  grammatical  form  that  corresponds  to  the  change  of  the
direction,  or  sense,  of  the  relation.  The  terms  of  any  relational
proposition  can  be  interchanged  provided  that  the  direction  of  the  ,
relation  is  reversed.

A relational  proposition  may  contain  any  number  of  terms.
Those  containing  two,  three,  or  four  terms  are  of  frequent  occurrence
in  ordinary  conversation.  Eor  example,  “ The  headmaster  teaches
the  Sixth  Latin  ”,  “ The  Queen  gave  the  King  butter  ”,  He  owes
mp  five  guineas  for  a watch  ”,  The  points  A and  C are  separated
by  the  points  B and  D ”.  The  first  two  of  these  propositions  each
contain  three  terms  ; the  third  and  fourth  each  contain  four  terms.
It  must  be  noticed  that  in  each  case  the  relation  could  not  hold
between  fewer  than  the  given  number  of  terms.  For  example,  the
relation  of  owincf  requires  a debtor,  a firsditor,  the  debt,  and  that
on  account  of  which  the  debt  is  incurred ; the  relation  of  teaching
requires  the  teacher,  the  pupil,  and  the  subject  taught ; and  so  on.
In  saying  that  the  relation  '^requkes”  a certain  number  qf^tenms
we  mean  that  the  ^nse  of .the^rcJatiDn  canncil)e~comple^e3^
this  number  of  terms,  or  subjects,  entering  into  the  ration.  For
instance,  Othello  loves  ” is  incomplete  ; another  term,  related  to
Othello  by  the  relation  of  being  loved  by  him,  is  required  if  the
relation  is  to  have  a sense.

It  has  been  foxmd  convenient  to  use  special  names  to^distinguish
relational  propositions  according  to  the  number  of  terms  involved.
Thus"Two-tSme^^  are  called  dyadic^  or  dml^  relations ;

three-termed  relations  are  called  triadic;  four-termed  are  called
tetradic ; five-termed  are  called  jper^dic ; and  so  on.  Relations
involving  more  than  five  terms  are  usually  called  'pdyadic  relations,
or  sometimes  multiple  relations.  We  shall  not  be  concerned  with
polyadic  relations  in  this  book.  They  arejQl  very:  importance

in  mathematics  and  metaphysics  but  the  logical  technique  required
foFdeaJingl^fOI^^  and  cannot  be  treated  in  an  elemen-

tary manner.  But  it  is  important  to  notice  that  there  are  relations
which  involve  many  terms  and  that  these  relations  cannot  be  redqcerl
tQ..relations  involvmg  fewer  terms.  '

Such  propositions  as  Socrates  is  a philosopher,  Mussolini  is
an  Italian,  That  dog  is  a fox-terrier,  are  Afferent  from  any  of  the
propositions  we  have  so  far  discussed.  These  propositions  assert
that  somethmg  is  a member  of  a given  class^  or,  as  we  soine-


40


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


times  put  it,  belongs  to  a class.  TKus  Socrates  is  said  to  be  a member
of  tbe  class  pbilosopbers.  That  dog  is  said  to  be  a member  of  the
class  fox-terriers.  It  is  important  to  distinguish  these  propositions
from  such  propositions  as  All  Athenians  are  Greeks,  Some  dogs  are
fox-terriers.  Although  they  are  of  fundamentally  diSerent  logical
forms,  they  have  frequently  been  confused.  ^ The  distinction  between
these  two  forms  was  first  stated  by  a German  logician,  Frege,  about
the  year  1879,  and  a little  later,  independently,  by  an  ItSEan  logician
Peano.  Propositions  of  the  form  Socrates  is  a philosopher  have  not
received  a distinctive  and  generally  accepted  name.  It  will  be
convenient  to  call  them  class-membershi'p  propositions  to  distinguish
them  from  propositions  of  the  form  All  Athenians  are  Greeks,  Some
^ dogs  are  fox-terriers.  They  must  also  be  distinguished  from  pro-
positions of  the  form  Socrates  is  wise,  i.e.  from  subject-predicate
propositions.  2 -~_

SoTfar  we  have  considered  only  affirmative  propositions.  Any
proposition  can  obviously  be  denied.  For  example,  Baldwin  is
honest  is  denied  by  Baldwin  is  not  honest.  The  notion  of  denial,
or  negation,  expressed  by  ‘‘  not  ’’  is  difficult  to  analyse,  but  it  is
perfectly  familiar.  We  aU  understand  what  is  meant  by  the  denial
of  the  proposition  Baldwin  is  honest.  The  word  not  ’’  has  been
frequently  used  in  the  preceding  pages  and  has  so  far  presented
no  difficulty  to  the  reader.  We  shall,  therefore,  take  not  ” as
^understood.®


(B)  Compound  Peopositions

There  are  two  main  divisions  of  compound  propositions.  Mr.
W.  E.  Johnson  has  introduced  a convenient  terminology  to  distin-
guish these  and  their  various  subdivisions,  which  will  be  adopted
here.^  For  the  sake  of  brevity  and  clearness  we  shall  now  use  % q,  r^
to  stand  for  propositions.  Thus  instead  of  writing  a simple  proposi-
tion, e.g.  William  married  Mary,  or  This  dog  is  affectionate,
we  shall  write  p.  That  is  to  say,  ''  p ” will  represent  any  simple
proposition  we  might  choose  to  assert ; ''  q ''  r ”,  will  represent
any  other  simple  propositions.  Then  not-p  ” wiU  stand  for  the
denial  of  “ p It  ^1  often  be  found  convenient  to  write  p ”
for  ''  not-p


^ Cf.  Chap.  Ill,  p.  29  above.

2 The  distinction  between  these  three  forms  of  propositions  will  be  further
discussed  in  Chapter  IX.

® Por  further  discussion  of  not  see  p.  191  below.

* See  W.  E.  J.,  Pt.  I,  Chap.  III.  Cf.  his  articles  on  ' The  Logical  Calculus  ’
in  Mind,  1892.  I have  not  only  adopted  Mr.  Johnson’s  terminology;
everything  of  importance  in  my  treatment  of  compound  propositions  is  due
to  his  work  on  the  subject.


PROPOSITIONS  AND  THEIR  CONSTITUENTS  41


Tlie  simplest  of  all  logical  conjimctions  is  By  means  of

and  we  combine  one  proposition  with,  another.  Thus  and
is  a compound  proposition  constructed  out  of  the  two  simple  pro-
positions p and  q.  It  is  important  to  notice  that  in  the  last  sentence
we  have  used  the  word  ‘‘and”  in  two  different  senses.  In  ^p
and  q ’ we  are  using  “ and  ” as  a logical  conjunction  ; its  function
is  to  combine  p with  q so  as  to  construct  a single  proposition.  In
the  phrase  “ constructed  out  of  the  two  simple  propositions  p and  q ”,
the  word  “ and  ” expresses  an  enumeration  of  two  propositions.
This  is  the  use  of  and  which  occurs  in  “ Tom  and  Dick  ”.  This
latter  use  is  called  by  Mr.  Johnson  the  enumerative  and.  At  present
we  shall  be  concernedTonly^^tE^  ” to  combine  two,

or  more,  propositions  into  a single  proposition.  This  is  the  con-
A compound  proposition  in  which  the  simple  pro-
positions are  combined  by  the  conjunctive  and  is  called  a conjunctive
proposition,  e.g.  ‘ p and  q \ ^ p and  q and  t ^

There  are  three  other  logical  conjunctions  which  are  of  import-
ance for  the  construction  of  compound  propositions  out  of  simple
propositions,  viz.  If  . . . then  . . .,  Either  . . . or  . . Not  both
. . . 0^.  . . . jSopositionrcombinednSy  any  oT^hese  three  cdh-
j unctions  are  called  composite  propositions.  These  different  modes
of  combination  are  important  and  have  received  distinctive  names.
They  are  set  out  in  the  following  table  in  which  the  simple  propositions
to  be  combined  are  q.


Table  I. — Composite  Pkopositioxs


Proposition
If  Pf  then  q,

Eitl  ler  p or  q.

Not  both  p and  g.


Name  of  Proposition
ImpHcative.  %/
Alternative.  1/
Disjunctive.®


The  names  of  these  forms  are  self-explanatory.  An  implicative
proposition  is  a composite  proposition  in  which  one  of  the  constituent
propositions  implies  the  other.  The  proposition  p implies  the


^ ‘ The  fundamental  mode  of  logically  combining  propositions  is  repre-
sented by  the  conjunction  “ and  . The  relation  expressed  by  “ and  ”
is  simply  the  emptiest  of  all  relations.  It  expresses  merely  the  bringing  of
two  propositions  together  into  one  system  without  subordination  or  any
definable  connexion  other  than  is  indicated  by  their  being  face  to  face  in  one
and  the  same  system.’  (W.  E.  J.,  loc.  cit.)

® The  name  “ disjunctive  proposition  ” was  formerly  used  for  proposi-
tions of  the  alternative  form.  It  is  clearly  not  applicable  to  this  form,  which
asserts  an  alternation,  not  a disjunction,  of  propositions.  Properly  disjunc-
tive propositions  were  not  recognized  by  the  traditional  Logicians.  Miss
E.  E.  0.  Jones  suggested  the  name  “ alternative  ” [Elements  of  Logic,  p,  115),
and  this  name  was  adopted  by  J.  Nt  Keynes  in  his  Formed  Logic  (see  Pt.  II,
Chap.  X).


42


A MODEEN  INTKODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


proposition  J if  follows  from  In  the  form  ' If  p,  then  q \ p
is  called  the  implicans  and  q the  Two  or  more  simple

propositions  may  Se  combined  to  form  a compound  implicans,
e.g.  If  the  fine  weather  continues  and  they  like  the  ptacef*' then
they  will  stay  longer  than  a fortnight.  The  components  of  the
alternative  proposition  are  called  the  alternants.  There  may  be“
any  number  of  alternants.  The  components  of  the  disjunctive
proposition  are  called  the  disjuncts.  There  may  be  any  number
of  disjuncts.

The  composite  forms  of  propositions  were  treated  by  the  tra^^
tional  Logicians  in  a thoroughly  confused  manner.  (They  failed
tolmSke  any  clear  distinction  between  simple  and  compound  pro-
positions.) Such  distinctions  as  they  recognized  seem  to  have  been
based  upon  grammatical  considerations  or  upon  certain  metaphysical
consideratigns]  BfuTliri^opositions  expressed  by  sentences  con-
taining only  one  verb  they  called  simple,  viz.  Socrates  is  wise

All  men  are  mortal  These  were  contrasted  with  propositions
expressed  by  sentences  containing  more  than  one  verb,  which  were
called  complex.  Only  two  kinds  of  complex  propositions  were
recognized,  since  conjunctive  propositions  and  the  disjunctive  form
c^f  what  we  have  called  composite  propositions  were  entirefylghored.
These  two  kinds  were  called  '' Jly^thetical  or  ''  Lonclltlma^^^
and  Dis-junctive  The  latter  was  the  given  by  the  tradi-
tional  Logicians  to  what  we  have  called  “ alternative  ^^  propositions  ;
the  former  were  what  we  have  called  implicative  SoSoetmes
the  word  conditionajl  was  used  for  ¥otn  ^ complex  pro-

positions but  it  was  most  often  used  as  a synonym  for  hypothetical.
Examples  of  hypothetical  propositions  are : If  A is  B,  C is  D,  If
corn  is  scarce,  it  is  dear.^  The  distinction  upon  which  the  traditional
Logicians  laid  stress  was  that  between  categorical  and  conditional
(including  hypothetical  ” and  disjunctive  ”)  propositions.  A
categorical  proposition  is  one  that  is  asserted  absolutely,  or  un-
conditidnallv.  I.~e.  without  reference  to  any  other  propositidhV^
Joseph  defines  a categorical  proposition  as  one  wtuchT  ‘ merely
affirms  or  denies  a -predicate  of  a subfe^?  ^ He  gives  as  example
*^gs  bark',  ^ dead  men  tell  no  tales  ^ 7 ^^e  defines  aTypotEemcal

^ The  word  “ implies  ” has  been  used  in  modern  logic  in  various  senses.

A discussion  of  different  interpretatiggs.  oLiaa^ZiM-^wijl^-^foundinJDhap.  XI
In  this  chapter  it  wiE  be  in  the  sense  given  above.  "

2 These  terms  are  due  to  Mr.  W.  E.  Johnsom  It  should  be  noted  that
the  plural  of  implicans  is  impli cants.

® This  example  is  given  by  Mr.  Joseph,  op.  cit.,  p.  182.

^ Since  Mr.  Joseph,  in  common  with  the  traditional  Logicians,  regarded
all  unconditional  propositions  as  attributing  a predicate  to  a subject,  he
would  include  under  this  head  all  forms  of  what  we  call  “ simple  propositions
^s  weE  as  these  we  call  “ general  propositions  ”,


PEOPOSITIONS  AND  THEIE  CONSTITUENTS  43


proposition  as  one  wMch  ^ connects  a consequent  with,  a condition
wMcli  it  does  not,  however,  imply  to  be  necessarily  fulfilled.’  ^
The  condition,  or  if-clause,  was  called  the  antecedent ; the  then-
clause  was  called  the  consequent.  These  names  are  unfortunately
chosen,  but  they  are  so  deeply  rooted  in  the  usage  of  traditional
Logicians  that  it  is  advisable  to  be  familiar  with  them.  The  word

hypothetical  ” suggests  a supposition,  or  a doubt.  This  has  led
some  logicians  to  hold  that  the  hypothetical  propositioiL-essmiMa]^
exprSses"*b-mnan  doubt  \ But  the  proposition  If  the  dry  weather
continues^  the  harvest  will  be  had  does  not  express  doubt.  It  states
an  unconditional  comijE^mM^  ttio

and  the  badness  of  the  harvest  That  is  to  say,  the  hypothetical,
or  iinplicative,"^^^'p^  asserts  a relation  of  implication  between

two  propositions  either,  or  neither,  or  both,  of  which  may  be  doubted,
supposed,  or  believed. ^

The  traditional  classification  of  propositions  into  : categorical,
hypothetical,  disjunctive,  confuses  (1)  the  distinction  between  simple
and  compound  propositions ; (2)  the  distinction  between  subject-
predicate  propositions  and  general  propositions.  This  latter  distinc-
tion must  now  be  discussed.^

(C)  General  Propositions

We  saw  in  Chapter  III  that  the  relation  of  an  individual  to  the
class  of  which  it  is  a member  is  quite  different  from  the  relation
of  one  class  to  another  that  includes  it,  e.g.  the  relation  of  Napoleo7i
to  Frenchmen,  on  the  qne  hand,  and  the  relation  of  Frenchmen  to
Europeans  on  the  other.  Propositions  of  the  former  kind,  e.g,
Napoleon  is  a Frenchman,  we  have  called  class-membership  proposi-
tions. Propositions  of  the  latter  kind,  e.g.  Frenchmen  are  Europeans,
we  shall  call  general  propositions.  We  shall  provisionally  define
general  propositions  as  propositions  which  assert  that  one  class  is
whoUy  (or  partially)  included  in  (or  excluded  from)  another  class.
A general  proposition,  therefore,  makes  an  assertion  about  all  or
about  some  of  the  members  of  a class.  If  we  use  the  symbols  X,  Y,
to  stand  for  two  different  classes,  these  two  kinds  of  proposition
can  be  expressed  in  the  forms : All  X's  are  Y's.  Some  X's  are
Y^s,  e.g.  All  squares  are  rectangles,  Some  Germans  are  poets.  It  is
not  difficult  to  see  that  neither  of  these  propositions  is  a simple
proposition..  The  proposition  All  squares  are  rectangles  asserts  that
if  anything  has  the  property  of  being  a square,  it  has  also  the  property
of  being  a rectangle.  What  is  asserted  is  a connexion  between  two

^ Loo.  cit.  2 See  Keynes,  F.L.,  § 174.  Of.  p.  107  below.

® Joseph’s  treatment  of  hypothetical  propositions  provides  a good  example
of  the  confusions  into  which  the  traditional  Logicians  fell  in  their  classifica-
tion of  forms  of  propositions.  (See  op.  cit..  Chap.  VIIL)  Of.  also  Bosanquet,
Logic,  Bk.  I,  Chap.  L


4:4


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


properties  or  characteristics.  These  characteristics  are  considered
apart  from  the  particular  things  which  have  the  characteristics.

,^In  this  respect  a general  proposition  must  be  contrasted  with  a
suy  ect‘predicate  proposition.  When  we  assert  that  Socrates  is  wise,
we  are  asserting  a characteristic,  being  wise,  of  a particular  individual,
Socrates,  The  characteristic  being  wise  does  not  exist  apart  from
some  individual  or  other  that  has  the  characteristic.  But  we  may
assert  the  proposition,  Every  one  who  is  wise  is  trustworthy  without
considering  whether  there  is  in  fact  an  individual  who  is  wise.  This
proposition  may  be  most  conveniently  expressed  in  the  form : If
any  one  is  wise  he  is  trustworthy,  A general  proposition  is,  then,
^ an  implicative  proposition.  But  the  implicans  and  the  implicate
are  not  simple  propositions.  Any  one  is  wise  is  not  a proposition
at  all ; it  is  a form  of  words  that  enables  us  to  show  that  the  general
proposition  All  who  are  wise  are  trustivorthy  asserts  a relation  be-
tween characteristics  considered  apart  from  the  individuals  that
may  have  these  characteristics.  The  proposition  All  who  are  wise
are  trustworthy  would  not  usually  be  considered  to  be  true  unless
there  were  individuals  who  were  both  wise  and  trustworthy,  that
is,  unless  some  such  proposition  as  Socrates  is  wise  were  true.  Hence,
relatively  to  general  propositions,  simple  propositions  are  elementary.
Combinations  of  simple  propositions  are  also  elementary.

We  may  accordingly  group  together  all  the  propositions  we
have  considered  in  subsections  (A)  and  (B)  as  elementary  in  contrast
to  general  propositions  which  are  non-elementary.  The  analysis  of
the  latter  is  more  diES.cult  than  the  analysis  of  elementary  proposi-
tions, and  must  be  postponed  to  Chapter  IX.  At  .present  it  is
enough  to  point  out  that  the  distinction  is  important.

§3.  THE  TRADITIONAL  SCHEDULE  OF  PROPOSITIONS

In  this  section  we  shall  be  concerned  with  the  classification  of
propositions,  due  to  Aristotle,  which  constitutes  the  traditional
schedule.  This  classification  is  thoroughly  unsatisfactory,  since  it
is  based  upon  an  incomplete  analysis.  ^ Some  kinds  of  propositions
are  completely  ignored,  others  are  confused.  It  would  be  an  ad-
vantage if  we  could  omit  the  consideration  of  these  defects.  But
this  is  not  possible.  The  traditional  theory  of  the  syllogism  is  based
upon  the  traditional  classification  of  propositions  and  cannot  be
understood  without  reference  to  it.  We  shall,  therefore,  give  some
account  of  it^  here.

We  have  seen  that  the  traditional  treatment  of  compound
propositions  was  perfunctory.  The  schedule  is  confined  to  those
propositions  which  the  traditional  Logicians  grouped  together  under

^ In  Cliapter  IX  we  shall  give  reasons  for  thinking  that  this  classification
18  absurd.


PEOPOSITIONS  AM)  THEIR  CONSTITUENTS


45


46


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


the  name  categorical  These  included  both  simple  and  general
propositions.  The  Logicians  saw  that  for  certain  purposes  proposi-
tions such  as  Socrates  is  wise^  and  such  as  Socrates  is  a Greek  must
be  distinguished  from  propositions  such  as  All  wise  men  are  trust-
worthy, They  accordingly  grouped  the  two  former  kinds  together
as  singular  propositions,  since  the  subject  is  a single  individual,
whilst  the  latter  kind  were  said  to  be  universal  propositions.  Since
All  wise  men  are  trustworthy  asserts  a relation  between  classes,
and  since  they  held  that  there  was  only  one  hind  of  proposition,
the  Logicians  concluded  that  every  proposition  could  be  regarded  as
asserting  a relation  between  classes.  They  accordingly  recognized
four,  and  only  four,  kinds  of  propositions.  These  are  the  four
propositions  that  constitute  the  traditional  schedule.

The  schedule  is  derived  as  follows  :

Taking  X,  Y,  to  illustrate  any  two  different  classes,  then  the
relation  (i)  of  inclusion  in,  (ii)  of  exclusion  from,  may  hold  between
X and  Y.  There  is  also  a ^stinction  according  as  an  assertion  is
made  about  the  whole  of  the  class,  i.e.  about  all  the  X’s,  or  about
part  of  the  class,  i.e.  about  some  of  the  X^s.  This  distinction  yields
propositions  of  the  forms:

(1)  AU  X’s— Y’s.

(2)  Some  X’s— Y’s.

These  propositions  are  said  to  differ  in  quantity.  ‘^AU”  and
Some  ” are  called  signs  of  quantity,  since  they  show  whether  we
are  making  an  assertion  about  the  whole  of  the  class  or  about  part
of  the  class.  There  is  obviously  a logical  relation  between  whole
and  all,  and  between  part  and  some.  What  exactly  this  relation  is
was  not  investigated  by  the  traditional  Logicians,  so  it  will  not  be
discussed  here.  The  proposition  All  X’s  are  Y's  makes  an  assertion
about  the  class  X generally  or  as  it  is  sometimes  put,  universally.
Hence,  propositions  of  this  form  are  called  universal  propositions.
The  proposition  Some  X^s  are  Y^s  makes  an  assertion  about  part  of
the  class  X and  is,  therefore,  called  a particular  proposition.'^

If  now  we  consider  the  relation  between  X and  Y from  the  point
of  view  of  exclusion  from  or  inclusion  in,  we  obtain  the  contrasted
pair  of  propositions :

(а)  X is  excluded  from  Y.

(б)  X is  included  in  Y.

It  is  usual  to  express  the  relation  of  excluded  from  ’’  by  not

^ This  terminology  is  most  unfortunate  since  the  words  “ universal  ” and
“ particular  are  required  in  logic  for  a quite  different  purpose.  But  these
terms  have  been  used  in  this  connexion  for  so  long  that  they  have  become
established  in  the  philosophical  vocabulary.


PROPOSITIONS  AND  THEIR  CONSTITUENTS  „ 47


included  in  and  to  write  ''  X is  Y ’’  for  X is  included  in  Y
X is  not  Y ’’  for  X is  not  included  in  Y
We  can  now  obtain  tlie  combinations  (a)  with  (1),  (a)  with  (2),
(b)  with  (1),  (6)  with  (2),  viz.  :

(а)  with  (1)  AU  X’s  are  not  Y’s.

(б)  with  (1)  All  X’s  are  Y’s.

(a)  'with  (2)  Some  X’s  are  not  Y’s.

(b)  with  (2)  Some  X’s  are  Y’s.


There  is  an  ambiguity  in  English  in  the  use  of  the  expression
“ All  X’s  are  not  Y’s  ”,  since  All  . . . not  ” is  generally  inter-
preted to  mean  not  all  ”,  which  is  equivalent  to  Some  . . . not
For  example,  ''  All  that  glisters  is  not  gold  ” is  not  understood  to
mean  that  gold  does  not  glister,  but  that  some  things  that  glister
are  not  gold.  Hence,  it  is  customary,  when  the  assertion  is  made
about  the  whole  class,  to  replace  ''  AU  . . . not  ” by  No  ”,  Thus
“ All  X’s  are  not  Y’s  ” is  expressed  as  “ No  X’s  are  Y’s

The  propositions  AU  X’s  are  Y’s  ” and  No  X’s  are  Y’s  ”
are  said  to  differ  in  quality.  There  is  no  justification  for  the  use
of  the  word  ''  quaUty  ” in  this  connexion,  although  it  has  a long
and  involved  historical  derivation.  It  will  be  useful  to  define  the
sense  in  which  the  word  quality”  is  here  used.  The  qmlity  of  a
proposition  is  dependent  upon  whether  the  proposition  is  affirmative
or  negative.  An  affirmative  proposition  is  one  which  asserts  the
relation  of  inclusion  between  classes.  A negative  proposition  is
one  which  asserts  the  relation  of  exclusion  between  classes.

The  traditional  schedule  of  propositions  is,  then,  derived  from
the  fact  that  we  can  assert  of  the  class  X that  it  is  either  whoUy,
or  partiaUy,  included  in,  or  excluded  from,  the  class  Y.  This  classi-
fication can  be  summed  up  in  the  following  table,  in  which  the
propositions  are  written  in  the  canonical  order.


Table  III. — Tbabitioxal  Schedule


A.  AH  X is  Y.

E.  No  X is  Y.

I.  Some  X is  Y.

0,  Some  X is  not  Y.


UniTersal  affirmative.
Universal  negative.
Particular  affirmative.
Particular  negative.


This  fourfold  division  is  clearly  based  upon  the  two  distinctions
of  qmntity  and  quality  in  the  sense  in  which  these  words  have  been
de&ed.

The  vowels  A,  E,  I,  0,^  prefixed  in  the  above  table,  have  been
conveniently  used  to  denote  propositions  of  the  form  given  in  each
case  on  the  same  line.  Thus,  an  A proposition  is  of  the  form :


1 The  vowels  A,  E,  I,  0 are  derived  from  the  first  two  vowels  in  aff^rmo,  ‘
and  from  the  vowels  in  nego.  They  provide  a convenient  shorthand  symbolism.


48


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


“ All  X is  Y’%  e.g.  All  wise  men  are  trustworthy  and  so  on.
The  sign  of  quantity  some  ” is  interpreted  to  mean  some  at
leasts  it  Tmy  he  all  ”,  In  ordinary  speech  we  usually,  though  not
always,  use  some  ’’  to  mean  some  only  i.e.  some  but  not

all  e.g.  ''  Some  men  are  fools  But  if  some  means  some
only  then  Some  X is  Y will  mean  ‘‘  Some  X is  Y but  some  is
not  This  proposition  is  inconsistent  with  the  universal  affirmative
All  X is  Y ”,  and  is  equivalent  to  the  conjoint  assertion  of  the
particular  affirmative  and  the  particular  negative  propositions.
Hence,  the  particular  propositions  I and  0 would  on  this  inter-
pretation of  some  ”,  always  be  asserted  together.  Such  an  inter-
pretation is  inconvenient.  We  need  some  sign  of  quantity  which
would  enable  us  to  assert  that  ''  Some  X is  Y ”,  whilst  leaving  it
an  open  question  whether  all  are ; and  to  assert  that  Some  X is
not  Y ” whilst  leaving  it  an  open  question  whether  none  are.  If
we  want  to  assert  both  that  some  are  and  some  are  not,  we  can  do
so  by  asserting  the  conjunctive  proposition  ''  Some  X is  Y and  some
X is  not  Y ”.  It  is  desirable,  therefore,  to  give  the  minimum  inter-
pretation to  “ some  ”.  For  example,  we  might  say,  Some  cases
of  cancer  are  curable  by  radium  treatment  ”,  leaving  it  undecided
whether  or  not  all  may  be  so  curable.  We  interpret  ‘‘  some  ”,
then,  so  as  to  be  consistent  with  all  but  to  exclude  none,

§ 4.  DISTEIBUTION  OF  TEEMS  IN  A,  E,  I,  0
PEOPOSITIONS

Since  in  the  traditional  schedule  the  subject,  and  predicate,  of
every  proposition  was  regarded  as  a class,  the  first  distinction  to
be  recognized  was  whether  the  reference  was,  in  each  case,  to  the
whole,  or  to  part  of  the  class.  If  the  reference  is  to  the  whole  of
the  class,  the  subject,  or  the  predicate,  is  said  to  be  distributed.
If  the  reference  is  to  part  of  the  class,  the  subject,  or  the  predicate,
is  said  to  be  undistributed.

It  is  clear  that  the  subject  of  universal  propositions  is  distributed,
since  a universal  proposition  means  one  the  subject  of  which  refers
to  the  whole  class.  In  saying  “All  scholars  are  pedantic”,  we
are  clearly  saying  something  about  every  member  of  the  class  scholars.
So,  too,  in  the  proposition  “ No  Spartans  are  poets  ”,  we  are  referring
to  every  member  of  the  class  Spartans,  It  is  no  less  obvious  that
the  subject  of  particular  propositions  is  undistributed,  since  this
again  is  what  we  mean  by  saying  that  the  particular  proposition  is
about  some  of  the  class.  Thus  “ Some  sinners  are  not  penitent  ”
refers  to  some  members  of  the  class  sinners.

The  predicate  of  negative  propositions  is  distributed.  In  ex-
cluding all  Spartans  from  the  class  poets,  we  necessarily  exclude
all  members  of  the  class  poets  from  the  class  Spartans,  In  excluding


PEOPOSITIONS  AND  THEIR  CONSTITUENTS  49

some  sinners  from  thc^class  of  those  who  are  penitent ^ we  exclude
the  latter  from  the  former.  The  ^predicate  of  affirmative  proposi-
tions is  undistributed.  In  including  all  scholars  among  those  who
are  pedantic,  we  refer  to  some  who  are  pedantic.  It  might  be  true
that  every  one  who  is  pedantic  is  a scholar,  but  the  proposition
^ All  scholars  are  pedantic  ’ does  not  assert  this,  but  is  consistent
with  the  proposition  ‘ Some  who  are  pedantic  are  not  scholars
Similarly,  ^ Some  works  of  art  are  beautiful  ’ refers  to  those  members
of  the  class  of  beautiful  things  that  are  also  works  of  art ; it  does
not  refer  to  all  beautiful  things,  even  if  it  were  in  fact  the  case  that
they  were  all  works  of  art.

We  may  sum  up  the  scheme  of  distribution  in  A,  E,  I,  0,  pro-
positions as  follows :

A.  The  subject  is  distributed,  the  predicate  undistributed,

E.  The  subject  is  distributed,  the  predicate  distributed,

I.  The  subject  is  undistributed,  the  predicate  undistributed.

0.  The  subject  is  undistributed,  the  predicate  distributed.

It  will  be  found  convenient  to  remember  the  following  rule :

Subjects  are  distributed  in  universal  propositions.

Predicates  are  distributed  in  negative  propositions.

Since  the  traditional  Logicians  assumed  that  every  proposition
was  of  the  same  logical  form,  it  follows  that  they  considered  that
the  subject  of  every  proposition  could  be  regarded  as  either  dis-
tributed or  undistributed.  Hence,  a difficulty  arose  with  regard
to  the  singular  proposition  of  the  form,  Socrates  is  wise.  It  seems
obvious  that  it  is  nonsense  to  ask,  ‘What  is  the  distribution  of
the  subject,  Socrates,  in  this  proposition  since  distribution  would
seem  to  be  applicable  only  to  classes.  However,  in  consistency  with
their  fundamental  position  these  Logicians  were  bound  to  think
otherwise.  Accordingly,  they  decided  that  the  subject  of  singular
propositions  is  to  be  regarded  as  distributed.  Mr.  Joseph  states
the  position  as  follows : ‘ A term  is  said  to  be  distributed,  when  it
is  used  in  reference  to  its  whole  extension,  or  to  all  that  it  can  denote.^
Now  the  subject  of  a singular  judgement  denotes  one  individual
only,  and  the  judgement  refers  to  that ; the  subject  of  a universal
judgement  is  general,  and  may  denote  any  number  of  individuals,

^ In  a note  to  this  statement  Mr.  Joseph  refers  to  the  distinction  he  had
previously  noticed  ‘ between  the  relation  of  a generic  concept  to  the  more
specific  concepts  included  under  it  and  the  relation  of  the  universal  to  the
in^vidual  ’.  But  he  goes  on  to  say  that  ‘ it  is  not  always  necessary  to  bear
this  distinction  in  mind  so  that  distribution  can  be  applied  both  to  singular
subjects  and  to  the  subjects  of  universal  propositions.  Hence,  he  reveals
his  complete  failure  to  grasp  the  difference  in  the  logical  form  of  these  two
propositions.  (It  must  be  noticed  that  Mr.  Joseph  uses  the  word  “ judgement
where  I have  used  “ proposition  ”.)

4


50  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

but  since  the  judgement  is  universal,  it  applies  to  them  all.  There-
fore in  both  singular  and  universal  judgements,  all  that  the  subject
can  denote  is  referred  to,  or,  in  other  words,  the  subject  is  distributed
and,  in  considering  the  distribution  of  terms  in  a judgement,  we  may
accordingly  rank  the  singular  with  the  universal.’  ^

Certainly,  if  it  once  be  granted  that  the  subject  of  a singular
proposition  falls  under  the  notion  of  distribution,  we  must  admit
that  it  cannotTe^fegarded  undSiSButedT^^  difficulty  here
shows  clearly  that  the  singular  proposition  and  the  A proposition
of  the  traditional  scheme  are  of  different  forms.  The  failure  to
recognize  this  resulted  in  the  thoroughly  muddled  notion  of  dis-
tribution, derived  from  an  msuffibieffi'TSaj^^s^^
formaJ~  ^

§5.  KINDS  OF  TERMS

Since  terms  are  the  constituents  of  propositions,  the  question
as  to  what  kinds  of  terms  there  are  is  the  question  as  to  what  kinds
of  constituents  can  constitute  a proposition.  But  the  distinctions
that  have  been  traditionally  recognized  between  kinds  of  terms —
and  which  are  repeated  in  every  textbook  of  logic — ^reveal  a double
confusion  : (1)  the  confusion  between  difierent  kinds  of  propositions  ;
(2)  the  confusion  between  terms  and  names.  The  first  confusion
we  have  already  noted.  Since  it  was  assumed  that  no  proposition
contained  more  than  two  terms,  subject  and  predicate,  and  that
these  were  always  connected  in  the  same  way,  viz.  by  the  copula,
the  distinction  between  kinds  of  terms  resolved  itself  into  the  dis-
tinction between  kinds  of  subjects  and  hinds  of  predicates.  To  this
was  sometimes  added  the  problem  whether  there  were  some  terms
which  could  only  be  subjects,  and  some  which  could  only  be  predicates.

The  second  confusion  led  to  the  grouping  together  of  distinctions
which  primarily  concerned  words  with  distinctions  that  primarily
concerned  terms.  The  " kinds  of  terms  ’ distinguished  by  the
traditional  Logicians  are  set  forth  in  the  following  list : (1)  Singular
and  General ; (2)  Cormotative  and  non-Connotative  ; (3)  Abstract
and  Concrete ; (4)  Absolute  and  Relative ; (5)  Positive7*Negative
and  Privative ; (6)  Univocal  and  Equivocal.®  Of  these  distinctions,
the  first,  second,  third 'aSd  sixth  are  concerned  with  distinctions

^ Josepli,  Inirod.^  p.  216.

® The  difference  between  the  A proposition  and  the  singular  proposition
was  to  some  extent  recognized,  as  the  quotation  from  Joseph  shows.  But
these  Logicians  did  not  realize  that  the  difference  was  of  fundamental  import-
ance ; hence  Joseph  can  say  that  ‘ it  is  not  always  necessary  to  bear  this
distinction  in..mind  It  is  clear  that  for  thSi  the  dStlScHonwi"]^^
a mdapm/sical  distinction,  viz.  that  the  ‘ singular  subject  ^ was  a substance,
whereas  the  subject  of  the  A proposition  was  not.  Hence,  they  failed  to
see  that  the  difference  is  one  of  logical  form,  (See  Chap.  IX,  p.  151  below.)

« See  Mall,  Bk.  I,  Chap.  IL


PEOPOSITIONS  AND  THEIR  CONSTITUENTS  51

between  names  ; the  fourth  and  fifth  were  at  least  intended  to  be
distinctions  between  terms,  but  as  treated  traditionally  they  are
concerned  primarily  with  distinctions  between  names.  The  sixth
distinction  is  based  on  a sheer  confusion,  which  has  already  been
dealt  with  in  Chapter  II.

It  is  not  profitable  to  expound  the  traditional  distinctions  only
for  the  sake  of  criticizing  them,  and  it  may  be  hoped  that  the  time
has  now  come  when  even  an  elementary  textbook  of  logic  can  ignore
some  of  the  futihties  of  the  traditional  treatment.  We  shall,  there-
fore, discuss  those  distinctions  that  are  important  without  further
reference  to  traditional  discussions.^

It  is  important  at  the  outset  to  be  clear  as  to  whether  we  are
concerned  with  terms  or  with  names.  Terms  are  constituents  of
propositions ; names  are  words,  i.e.  names  are  constituents  of  the
sentences  which  express  propositions.  We  must  begin  by  getting
a clearer  conception  of  what  is  meant  by  the  constituents  of  a
proposition.®

In  a proposition  we  can  distinguish  between  the  constituents
and  theform.  This  distinction  is  easy  to  see  but  difficult  to  define.
The  simplest  method  is  to  start  by  considering  some  examples  of
propositions  which  either  have  the  same  form  or  the  same  constituents.

Consider  the  set  of  propositions  ;

/(I)  Mussolini  is  ambitious.

.1(2)  Baldwin  is  mortal.

1 (3)  Voltaire  is  witty.

1(4)  Leo  XIII  is  old.

It  is  obvious  that  these  four  propositions  are  all  of  the  same
form.  But  no  two  have  the  same  constituents.  They  would
commonly  be  said  to  be  ahowt  different  subject-matter.

Now  consider  the  set  of  propositions :

'(1)  Charles  I was  unfortunate.

g (2)  Charles  I married  Henrietta  Maria.

(3)  Charles  I gave  his  plighted  word  to  Strafford.

(4)  Charles  I was  a King.

These  four  propositions  have  a common  constituent,  viz.  Charles  I,
but  they  are  of  different  forms.  We  recognized  this  when  we  dis-
tinguished subject-predicate  propositions  (example  1),  relational

' 1 Those  who  desire  to  be  acquainted  with  the  traditional  treatment  will

find  a full  discussion  of  these  distinctions  in  Mill  (loo.  cit.)  and  in  JoseTsh
Chaps.  II  and  VI.  See  also  Keynes,  Pt.  I,  Chap."!'  The  ffikncEion  Eif^n
‘Absolute  and  Kelative  termsT as  arawn  by  the  traditional  Logicians,  is
worthless.

‘ See  Bertrand  EusseU,  Our  Knowledge  of  the  Extemcd  World.  Chap.  IL


52


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


propositions  (examples  2 and  3),  class-membership  propositions
(example  4).

Now  consider  the  set  of  propositions :

((1)  Othello  loved  Desdemona.

(2)  Cassio  loved  Desdemona.

(3)  Cassio  loved  lago.

(4)  Cassio  hated  lago.

These  four  propositions  are  obtained  by  replacing  the  constitu-
ents of  the  first  proposition  one  at  a time.  The  form  of  all  is  the
same.  We  see — to  quote  Mr.  Eussell — ^that  " the  form  remains
unchanged  throughout  this  series,  but  all  the  constituents  are
altered.  Thus  form  is  not  another  constituent,  but  is  the  way  the
constituents  are  put  together

The  different  kinds  of  propositions  are,  then,  different  kinds  of
propositional  forms.  Any  examples  may  be  selected  to  illustrate
the  forms,  since  we  can  vary  the  constituents  whilst  leaving  the
form  unchanged.  As  logicians  we  do  not  want  to  know  whether
“ No  Spartans  are  poets  ’’  expresses  a belS“ehferTainod1cy*^ny^  ;
we  are  interested  only  in  the  form  of  what  is  expressed.  No  Spartans
are  poets  is  the  same  in  form  as  No  saints  are  popes,  but  their  con-
stituents differ.  This  distinction  between  form  and  constituents  has
been  traditionally  expressed  as  a distinction  between  form  and
matter.  The  Logicians  did  not,  however,  state  the  distinction  clearly
because  they  did  not  carry  the  analysis  far  enough.  They  took
the  distinction  between  All  S is  P and  No  S is  P to  be  as  funda-
mental as  the  distinction  between  All  S is  P and  Some  S is  P.  We
shall  see  later  that  this  is  a naistake.^

We  have  now  to  ask  whether  there  are  different  kinds  of  con-
stituents.  This  is  the  question  whether  there  are  teiSFlS^T^Ti
ocaar  in  one  way  only  in  a proposition.  The  way  in  which  the  terms
occur  determines  the  form  of  the  proposition.

The  most  fundamental  distinction  between  terms  is  that  between
particular  and  universal  constituents.^  Contemporary  logicians  do
nota^^  mth  regard  to  the  nature  of  this  distinction.  The  problem
is  too  difificult  to  be  discussed  here.  We  shall  state  dogmatically
a view  that  is  plausible,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  other  views
are  possible.'^

^ Op.  oit.,  p.  43.

2 See  Chap.  IX,  § 1.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Logicians  treated
these  general  •pronositions  {All  S is  P)  as  though  they  were  simple.

3 This  use  of  “particular and  distin-

guished from  the  traditional  use  in  the  A,  E,  I,  0,  schedule.

The  view  here  adopted  is  that  of  Eussell.  See  also  Chadwick,  Mind,
N.S.  141 ; for  a contrary  view  see  F.  P.  Eamsey,  ‘ Universal  in  Mind,  N.S.
136.


PROPOSITIONS  AND  THEIR  CONSTITUENTS  53

In  a proposition  there  is  always  one  element  wHcL.  combines  the
other  elements,  into  which  it  can  be  analysed,  into  a unity.  Thus
loves  in  Cassio  loves  Desdemona  combines  the  two  suMocts  ; similarly,
gave  in  Tom  gave  Jack  this  knife y combines  the  three  subjects  into
the  unity  of  the  proposition.  This  combining  ejement  is  a universal,
whereas  the  sul^cts,  or  indiyiluffi“^^iiilSlated»^,ax§^  ■

The^parScukr  and  tFe  universal  constituents  have  different  functions
to  perform  in  the  proposition.  For  example,  in  Cassio  is  sad,  the
subject  Cassio  could  be  replaced  by  any  other  individual  and  we
should  still  have  a significant,  although  a different,  proposition.
Bu^Ugg.9mr  /ago,  or  Tom.  Jach  knife,  is  not  a proposition.  In .
order  that  there  shoSdTBe  a proposition  there  must  be
wF^ch  could  not  be  replacedoy  an  individiml.  Such  a constituent
is  a'mnvSsiTr  TCheFbuitffu^^  as  in  Conmit

differs  from  vanity.,  but  even  in  such  a case  one  constituent  performs
the  function  of  combining  the  other  constituents  into  a unity.  ^
Thus  in  every  proposition  there  is  one  constituent  the  function  of
which  is  to  combine  the  other  constituents.  A particular  can  bo
combined  but  it  caigijafcjperform  the  function  of  combining.  The
two  EndsoT  constituents  may,  th^efore,  Fe^definedTFs  follows  :

A particular  is  a constituent  which  can  occur  in  a proposition
only  as  an  individual  occurs.

A universal  is  a constituent  which  can  occur  in  a proposition  in
such  a way  as  to  combine  the  other  constituents  into  a unity.

The  form  of  a proposition  is  primarily  determined  by  the  form
of  the  combining  cSasfifunntT^o  there"'^^  kinds  of

propositionaT^  there^ are  kinds  of  universal  constituents.

Uniwsals^aaFIbeFi^^  or  relatiohslnvoMng  two  or

moreTeSST^TET^RusseUT  suggested  that  a predicate,  e.g.  u'
white  may  be  regarded  as  a monadic  rdation^  i.e.  a relation  involving
only  one  term.  There  are,  however,  good  reasons  for  distinguishing
predicates  from  relations.

Of  the  traditional  distinctions  concerning  nameSy  or  wordSy  the
most  important  is  that  between  general  and  singular  names,  ^ In
attempting  to  determine  the  logical  characteristics  of  a name  it  is
important  to  pay  attention  to  the  way  in  which  it  is  being  used  in
a given  expression.  The  grammatical  distinction  between  plural
and  singular  words  is  closely  boimd  up  with  the  distinction  we  are
now  to  discuss.

A general  name  is  a word  (or  set  of  words)  so  used  that  it  could
significantly  be  applied  to  a set  of  objects  each  of  which  possesses

1 Chadwick  calls  such  a constituent  ‘ the  principal  rnTTycroal  It  is  some-
times convenient  to  use  the  word  * component  ’

® The  Logicians  used  “ name  ” very  widely  so  as  to  be  a synonym  for
“ word


54


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


certain  characteristics,  the  possession  of  which  determines  the
applicability  of  the  name,  e.g.  men  fairy  ”,  “ god

A singular  name  is  a word  (or  set  of  words)  so  used  as  to  refer  to
one  object  only,  e.g.  this  man  ”,  the  town  ”,  my  eldest  son  ”,
‘‘  Goethe  ”,  Hermes  ”.

Any  name  which  could  be  significantly  used  in  the  plural,  or
prefixed  with  a,  any,  all,  some,  or  with  any  numerical  prefix  is  general.
General  names  are  as  such  connotative,  since  they  stand  for  a set
of  characteristics  which  may,  or  may  not,  belong  to  something,  but
which,  if  they  do  belong  to  an  object,  might  belong  to  more  than
one  object.  The  general  name  “ fairy  ” applies  to  nothing,  since
no  object  possesses  the  characteristics  connoted  by  ‘‘fairy”,  but
there  might  be  many  such  objects.  “ Honest  politician  ” might
apply  to  more  than  one  object,  even  if  in  fact  it  applies  to  only  one
object  or  to  none.  But  “ this  honest  politician  ” could  apply  only
to  one  object,  indicated  demonstratively  by  “ this  ”.  The  signifi-
cance of  “ this  ” restricts  the  application  to  a single  object.

There  are  two  kinds  of  singular  names,  viz.  'mover  names  and
those  which  uniquely  describe  some  object  by  attributing  to  it  an
exclusive  characteristic,  or  set  of  characteristics,  e.g.  “ the  present
Pope  ”.  The  latter  are  called  uniquely  descripive  names.  They
resemble  general  names  in  being  cohnotaUve^^b^  them

in  that  general  names  could  be  significantly  applied  to  more  than
one  object.  Ordinary  proper  names  contain  a descriptive  element,
but  they  must  be  distinguished  from  uniquely  descnptTv^
since  these  derive  their  significance  from  their  connotation,  whereas
an  ordinary  proper  name  derives  its  significance  from  the  object
named.  It  is  because  ordinary  proper  names  contain  a descriptive
element  that  names  of  famous  persons  can  be  used  in  the  figure  of
speech  autonomasia.  e.g.~ ‘^X^ero  ”,  “a  Bismarck”^'  ‘'‘"a  D'amel
come  to  judgment”.  These  are  abbreviated  descriptive  phrases,
their  significance  bemg  due  to  the  properties  commonly  attributed
to  the  person  named.  Demonstrative  symbols  are  as  such  singular.
since  they  are  non-connotatix:^,”!!  —

CdllecSvela^  distinguished  from  non-collective.  A

name  is  collective  when  it  refers  to  a set  of  objects  regarded  as  a unity,
e.g.  “ mob  ”,  “ society  ”,  “ The  Rockies  A name  not  so  used
is  non-collective.  Collective  names  may  be  either  singular  or  general ;
for  example,  “ the  London  hbrary  ” is  a singular,  “ audience  ” is  a
general,  collective  name.  A further  distinction  may  be  made
between  the  collective  and  the  distributive  use  of  words.  In  the  use
of  such  phrases  as  “ all  together  ” there  is  a reference  to  a totality
or  a set  taken  as  a unit.  The  word  “ all  ” is  most  frequently  used
distributively  and  means  “every”.  A singular  collective  name
may  be  an  ordinary  proper  name,  e.g.  “ The  Rockies  ”,  or  a uniquely


PEOPOSITIONS  AM)  THEIR  CONSTITUENTS  55

descriptive  name,  e.g.  Tlie  congregation  here  present  . Tliese
names  are  collective  because  they  refer  to  a group  as  a xmit ; they
are  uniquely  descriptive  because  they  refer  to  that  group  through
some  characteristic  which  belongs  to  it  alone.

Every  name  must  be  either  connotative  or  non-connotative,
and  either  general  or  singular ; if  singular,  either  proper  or  uniquely
descriptive.

§6.  THE  UNIVERSE  OF  DISCOURSE  AND  EXISTENTIAL
PROPOSITIONS

It  has  been  commonly  held  that  every  connotat^e  name  mus^
denote.  No  one  supposes  that  sucETdescrlptive  names  as  ^^eus
‘'IP^onius  ”,  Utopia  ”,  “ centaur  ”,  “ fairy  ”,  apply  to  something
in  the  real,  or  actual,  world,  but  it  has  been  maintained  that  they
have  application  in  some  realm  or  " universe  to  be  distinguished
from  ^ the  actual  universe  Hence  there  arose  the  conception  of
‘ a universe  of  discourse  This  phrase  was  introduced  into  logic
Morgan  and  George  Boole.  ^ It  is  thus  explained  by  de
Morgan : ^ If  we  remembeFthat  ihlhany,  perhaps  most  propositions,
the  range  of  thought  is  much  less  extensive  than  the  whole  universe,
commonly  so  called,  we  begin  to  find  that  the  whole  range  of  a subject
of  discussion  is,  for  the  purpose  of  discussion,  what  I have  called  a
universe,  that  is  to  say,  a range  of  ideas  which  is  either  expressed
or  understood  as  containing  the  whole  matter  under  discussion.’
De  Morgan  was  concerned  only  with  the  question  of  the  range  of
significance  of  purely  negative  terms  such  as  non-black  ”,  non-
moral  ”,  and  he  intended  to  restrict  their  application  to  a range
limited  by  the  significance  of  the  corresponding  positive  names.
But  the  phrase  ^ .universe  of  discourse  ’ has  unfortunately  been  so
interpreted  as  to  suggest  that  there  are  several  different  universes
the  inhabitants  of  which  have  different  modes  of  being,  e.g.  the
■universe  of  physical  nature,  the  universe  of  Greek  mjrfchology,  the
universe  of  Shakespeare’s  plays.  On  this  assumption  it  is  main-
tained that  Zeus,  Utopia,  the  King  of  Utopia,  have  being  or  exist
in  their  respective  non-actual  imiverses.  This  assumption  is  absurd
and  unnecessary.  It  has  seemed  necessary  only  because  proposi-
tions in  which  Zeus,  for  instance,  appeared  to  be  a constituent
were  wrongly  analysed.  Here  it  is  sufficient  to  point  out  that  there
is  no  essential  connexion  between  connotation  and  denotation  such
that  a connotative  word  must  denote.  As  we  have  seen,  the  signifi-
cance of  a descriptive  phrase  is  independent  of  its  application.  If
we  recognize  that  Zeus  ” and  Achilles  ” are  descriptive  phrases,
then  we  can  significantly  say  ‘ Zeus  exists  ’ or  ‘ Achilles  sulked  in
his  tent  without  assuming  that  there  is  an  unreal  object  existing
^de  Morgan,  Formal  Logic,  pp.  41,  55;  Boole,  Laws  of  Thought,  p.  166.


56  A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

in  a universe  of  Greek  epic  poetry.  If  Zeus  ’’  were  an  ordinary
proper  name,  tken  Zeus  ” must  denote  an  individual ; but  Zeus  ’’
is  an  abbreviated  descriptive  pbrase  the  significance  of  wbicK  has
been  determined  by  tbe  Greek  poets.  If,  then,  we  say  ' Zeus  was
jealous  we  are  either  referring  elliptically  to  descriptions  given
by  Greek  poets  or  we  are  asserting  wbat  is  false,  since  there  is  no
god  named  Zeus.  When  fully  stated  the  reference  to  a context
would  be  made  explicit,  and  we  should  say  ‘ The  Greeks  believed
that  there  was  a god,  Zeus,  and  that  he  was  jealous."  This  is  an
assertion  about  the  beliefs  of  actual  men,  and  is  true  if  these  men
actually  entertained  these  beliefs.

Propositions  such  as  Zeus  exists,  There  are  blue  cats,  There  is  a
Grand  Llama,  are  propositions  asserting  existence.  They  may  be
called  aflSxmatively  existential  propositions.  Propositions  such  as
There  is  no  devil,  Homer  does  not  exist,  are  negatively  existential.
Affirmative  existential  propositions  are  true  if,  and  only  if,  the
descriptive  phrase  applies  to  an  individual  existing  in  the  actual
world.  There  is  no  other  mode  of  existence.  Negative  existential
propositions  are  true  if  there  is  no  individual  in  the  actual  world
to  which  the  descriptive  phrase  applies.  This  is  plain  common
sense.  We  need  not  at  tins  stage  pause  to  consider  why  anyone
should  have  troubled  to  invent  the  conception  of  a universe  of  dis-
course in  any  sense  other  than  that  of  a given  context,  or  range  of
significance.^


^ See  further,  Chap,  IX,  § 4.


CHAPTEE  V


THE  OOMPOUNH  PEOPOSITION*  AND  THE  EELATIONS
BETWEEN  PEOPOSITIONS

‘Zounds!  I’ve  never  been  so  betbumped  with  words.’ — King  John,

§1.  THE  SEVEN  EELATIONS  BETWEEN  PEOPOSITIONS
AND  THE  EIGUEB  OF  OPPOSITION

Let  p and  q be  any  two  propositions.  There  are  seven  pos-
sible logical  relations  that  may  hold  between  them  with
regard  to  the  inferability  of  one  from  the  other.  The
most  convenient  way  is  to  consider  them  from  the  point  of  view
of  what  is  known  with  regard  to  the  truth,  or  falsity,  of  q given  the
truth,  or  falsity,  of  p.  It  will  be  said  that  p implies  q if,  given  that
p is  true,  we  can  know  that  q is  true.  In  this  case  q follows  from  p.^
The  relation  follows  from  is  one  with  which  we  are  all  familiar.  It
is  used  not  uncommonly  in  ordinary  conversation  as  when  one
person  says  to  another,  But  don’t  you  see  that  such  and  such  a
conclusion  follows  from  what  you  have  already  admitted  to  be
true  ? ” Such  a statement  clearly  asserts  that  jj^ou  can^  accept
a given  proposition  and  yet  refuse  to  accept  what  follows  from  it.
Thus,  when  i^fdllbws  from  p,  we  can  infer  q given  that  we  know
p to  be  true.  It  may  also  be  assumed  that  we  know  what  is  meant
when  it  is  said  that  p incompatible  with  y.  One  proposition  is  in-
compa:tible  with  anoffierlftEey  cannot  be  true  together,  but  pro-
positions may  be  compatible  without  being  so  related  that  it  is
possible  either  to  infer  the  one  from  the  other,  or  to  infer  from  the
truth  or  falsity  of  the  one  that  the  other  is  true  or  false.  The
relation  of  bare  compatibility  interests  no  one  except  a logician.  The
proposition  TTie  Cornish  coast  is  rugged  is  compatible  with  the  pro-
position There  are  no  snakes  in  Icdand,  and  both  of  these  with  the
proposition  The  angle  in  a semicircle  is  a right  angle.  But  this  hare
compatibility  does  not  interest  us  because  nothing  else  follows  from
it,  since  knowledge  of  the  truth  or  falsity  of  one  of  these  propositions
does  not  enable  us  to  infer  the  truth  or  falsity  of  the  others.  Thus
the  relation  of  bare  compatibility  cannot  be  used  as  a basis  of  in-
ference. Two  propositions  related  by  the  relation  of  bare  com-
patibility are  said  to  be  logically  independent.

1 See  Chap.  IV,  p.  41,  and  cf.  Chap.  XII,  § 1.

57


58


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


(1)  Tiie  first  relation,  tlien,  that  may  hold  between  p and  q is
tbe  relation  of  independence."  Two  propositions  that  are  about
wbat  would  ordinarily  be  called  the  same  subject-matter  may  be
independent.  For  example,  Not  all  the  gods  of  the  Greehs  were  heroic
and  Some  gods  of  the  Greeks  were  both  heroic  and  benevolent  Both
these  propositions  might  be  true  together,  or  both  false,  or  one
true  and  one  false.  It  is  this  independence  of  the  truth  or  the
falsity  of  the  other  proposition  that  is  meant  when  one  proposition
is  said  to  be  logically  independent  of  another.

(2)  The  propositions  p and  q may  be  so  related  that  if  p is  true,  q is
true,  and  if  q is  true,  p is  true.  It  follows  that  if  either  is  false  the  other
is  false.  This  is  the  relation  that  holds  when  p implies  q and  q
implies  p.  In  this  case  p and  q are  said  to  be  equivalent  propositions.
Mr.  W.  E.  Johnson  has  introduced  the  useful  name  coimplicant
for  this  relation,  so  that  p is  said  to  be  coimplicant  to  q when  they
are  equivalent  in  the  sense  defined.

(3)  The  propositions  p and  q may  be  so  related  that  if  p is  true,
q is  true,  but  q may  be  true  although  p is  false.  In  this  case  p is
said  to  be  superaltern  to  q,  Mr.  Johnson  has  coined  the  more
convenient  name  superimplicant.

(4)  The  propositions  p and  q may  be  so  related  that  if  q is  true
p is  true  but  p may  be  true  although  q is  false.  In  this  case  p is
said  to  be  subaltern  to  q,  Mr.  Johnson’s  more  convenient  name  is
subimplicant  The  relation  of  subimplication  is  the  converse  of  the
relation  of  superimplication,  i.e.  if  p is  superimplicant  to  j,  then  q
is  subimplicant  to  p.

(5)  The  propositions  p and  q may  be  so  related  that  if  p is  false,
q is  true,  and  if  q is  false,  p is  true,  while  both  may  be  true.  The
excluded  case  is  that  of  the  falsity  of  both  p and  q.  In  this  case
p and  q are  said  to  be  subcontraries,  and  the  relation  holding  between
them  is  called  subcontranety,

(6)  The  propositions  p and  q may  be  so  related  that  if  p is  true,
q is  false,  and  if  q is  true,  p is  false,  while  both  may  be  false.  The
excluded  case  is  that  of  the  truth  of  both  p and  y.  In  this  case
p and  q are  said  to  be  contraries,  and  the  relation  between  them  is
called  contrariety.

(7)  The  propositions  p and  q may  be  so  related  that  if  ^ is  true,
q is  false,  and  if  p is  false,  q is  true.  They  cannot  therefore  be  true
together,  or  false  together,  one  must  be  true,  the  other  false.  In
this  case  the  propositions  p and  q are  said  to  be  contradictories,  and
the  relation  between  them  is  caUed  contradiction.

These  relations  between  p and  q can  be  conveniently  summed
up  in  the  following  table,  in  which  p is  true  ” is  represented  by
“ p ”,  p is  false  ” by  “ p ”,  similarly  with  q.


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  PROPOSITIONS  59


Table  IV.


Relation.

Given,

then  infer

Given,

then  infer

p is  independent  of  q

V

q unknown

P

q unknown

p is  eq[-uivalent  to  q

P

q

P

q

p is  snperimplicant  to  q

P

q

P

q unknown

p is  subimplicant  to  q

P

q unknown

P

q

p is  subcontrary  to  q

P

q unknown

P

q

p is  contrary  to  q

P

?

P

q unknown

p is  contradictory  to  q

P

q

P

q

Since  the  traditional  Logicians  confined  their  attention  to  the
fourfold  schedule,  they  were  content  to  recognize  only  four  relations
and  they  failed  accordingly  to  distinguish  between  superimplication
and  subimplication.  They  stated  the  four  relations  in  the  form  of
a Square  of  Opposition,  The  word  Opposition  ’’  is  here  used  in
a technical  sense  in  which  compatible  propositions  can  be  said  to
be  opposed.  ^ In  this  sense  Opposition  ’’  must  be  defined  as  follows  :
Two  propositions  are  said  to  be  opposed  if  they  differ  in  quantity,
or  in  quality,  or  in  both.  Those  differing  in  quality  but  not  in
quantity  are  ^ contraries  (if  quantity  universal),  subcontraries  (if
quantity,  particular).  Those  differing  in  quantity  but  not  in  quality
are  subaltern.  It  is  a simple  matter  to  work  out  the  square  for  the
traditional  A E I 0 propositions,  taking  the  diagonals  of  the  square
as  joining  contradictory  propositions,  viz.  A and  0,  E and  I respec-
tively. Here  we  shall  represent  the  traditional  oppositions  by  an
unsymmetrical  figure,  since  the  symmetry  of  a square  is  ill-adapted
to  represent  unsymmetrical  relations.


In  this  figure  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  traditional  A 1 1 0
schedule.  It  represents  the  relations  that  hold  between  a pro-
position of  one  of  these  forms  and  the  other  three.  If  now  we
consider  the  figure  of  opposition  from  the  point  of  view  as  to  what


60


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


can  be  inferred  witb  regard  to  tbe  trutb  or  falsity  of  these  proposi-
tions given  that  one  of  them  is  true,  we  have  the  relations  summed
up  in  the  following  table :


Given

it  can  be  inferred

A true

E false

I true

0 false

E true

A false

I false

0 true

I true

A unknown

E false

0 unknown

0 true

A false

E unknown

I unknown

A false

E unknown

I unknown

0 true

E false

A unknown

I true

0 unknown

I false

A false

E true

0 true

0 false

A true

E false

I true

Singular  propositions  of  the  form  Socrates  is  wise  cannot  properly
be  regarded  as  falling  under  the  figure  of  opposition.  We  saw  that
the  traditional  Logicians  treated  such  propositions  as  universals,
i.e.  as  A propositions.  But  it  is  impossible  to  satisfy  the  traditional
definitions  of  contrary  and  subaltern  ’’  in  finding  contrary
and  subaltern  propositions  to  Socrates  is  wise.  Clearly  the  con-
tradictory is  Socrates  is  not  wise.  Dr.  Keynes  suggests  as  a contrary
Socrates  has  not  a grain  of  sense.^  Certainly  these  two  propositions
cannot  both  be  true  and  they  might  both  be  false,  so  that  they  are
contrary  in  accordance  with  our  definition,  but  they  do  not  conform
to  the  traditional  form.  Moreover,  we  must  recognize  that  in  the
interpretation  of  these  propositions  wisdom  is  a matter  of  degree,
so  that  these  oppositions  cannot  be  formally  treated.  Nor  is  wis-
dom a characteristic  of  a simple  entity,  Socrates.  It  is  his  actions,
or  his  judgements,  that  are  wise.  It  is  a straining  of  language  to
say  that  a man  who  has  sometimes,  though  rarely,  failed  to  act
wisely,  is  unwise.  Such  considerations  suggest  that  the  technicalities
of  the  figure  of  opposition  are  unduly  artificial  and  restricted,  so
that  they  cannot  usefully  be  extended  beyond  the  forms  dealt  with
by  the  traditional  schedule.  The  traditional  doctrine  of  opposition
is,  indeed,  restricted  in  two  ways : (1)  it  is  confined  to  the  four
A,  E,  I,  0,  forms,  the  relations  being  defined  in  terms  of  quantity
and  quality ; (2)  it  is  interpreted  so  as  to  apply  only  to  propositions
having  the  same  constituents,  that  is,  the  same  subject-terms  and
the  same  predicate-terms,  but  differing  in  form  (i.e.  in  quantity,
or  in  quality,  or  in  both).  The  relations  as  we  have  defined  them

^JP.Xr.,  § 83.  Those  who  desire  a f tiller  treatment  of  the  traditional,
Square  of  Opposition  will  find  it  adequately  treated  by  Dr.  Keynes  {F.L  ,Pt.  II,
Chap.  ni).  We  shall  deal  with  the  opposition  of  compound  propositions  in
a later  section  of  this  chapter*


THE  EELATIONS  BETWEEN  PEOPOSITIONS  61

are  not  so  restricted.  In  the  further  discussion  of  these  relations
they  will  be  given  the  wider  interpretation.

Every  proposition  whether  simple  or  compound  has  con-
tradictory, namely,  that  proposition  which  cannot  be  true  if  the
given  proposition  is  true,  and  which  must  be  true  if  the  given  pro-
position is  false.  Thus,  to  contradict  a proposition  is  equivalent
to  denying  that  it  is  true.  There  are  various  ways  in  which  the
contradictory  of  a proposition  may  be  expressed,  but  these  will
all  be  equivalent  in  the  sense  in  which  equivalence  has  been  defined.
It  is  important  to  notice  that  the  assertion  of  p denies  the  assertion
of  not-p,  and  conversely.  There  is  no  mean  between  these  two
assertions.  But  the  assertion  of  the  contrary  of  a given  proposi-
tion is  not  a simple  denial  of  the  original  proposition,  since  the  two
propositions  may  both  be  false.  That  is  to  say,  contrary  propositions
admit  of  a mean.  If  we  can  establish  that  No  S is  P is  true,  we
have  certainly  shown  that  All  S is  P is  false ; but  All  S is  P might
be  false  although  No  S is  P were  not  true.  This  can  be  easily  illus-
trated by  reference  to  the  figure  of  opposition,  since  both  Some
S is  P and  Some  S is  not  P may  be  true,  in  which  case  neither  No
S is  P nor  All  S is  P is  true.  As  thus  stated  this  is,  as  a matter  of
psychological  fact,  self-evident.  Still,  it  is  not  uncommon  for
mistakes  to  be  made,  which  result  in  the  substitution  of  the  con-
trary for  the  contradictory  of  a given  proposition.  Nor  is  it  always
easy  to  express  concisely  the  contradictory  of  a complicated  proposi-
tion. So  long  as  we  keep  to  the  canonical  forms,  we  are  not  likely
to  make  mistakes.  But  there  would  be  little  utility  in  the  study
of  contradictory  propositions,  were  it  limited  to  the  figure  of  opposi-
tion. We  shall  be  concerned  later  with  the  contradiction  of  com-
pound propositions.  It  may  be  useful  here  to  give  some  examples
of  ordinary  statements  with  their  respective  contradictories  and
contraries.  It  must  be  observed  that,  whilst  the  contradictories
of  a proposition  are  always  equivalent,  there  may  be  several  non-
equivalent contraries,  since  contraries  admit  of  a mean.

Examples

(1)  Original  proposition  : That  dress  is  blue.

Contradictory : That  dress  is  not  blue.

Contrary : That  dress  is  green ; that  dress  is  grey,  etc.

(2)  Original  proposition  : Charles  I was  always  defeated  in

battle.

Contradictory  : Charles  I was  not  always  defeated  in  battle.

Contraries : Charles  I was  never  defeated  in  battle.

Charles  I was  always  overwhelmingly  successful
in  battles,  etc.

(3)  Original  proposition  : Only  ex-soldiers  are  eligible  for  the  post.


62  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

Contradictory  : Some  who  are  not  ex-soldiers  are  eligible
for  the  post.

Contraries  : No  ex-soldiers  are  eligible  for  the  post,  etc.

(4)  Original  proposition  : Ever37thing  Edith  Sitwell  writes  is  lucid.

Contradictory : Not  everything  that  Edith  Sitwell  writes  is  lucid.

Contraries  : Everything  that  Edith  Sitwell  writes  is  obscure.

Everything  that  Edith  Sitwell  writes  is  both
obscure  and  unreadable,  etc.

(5)  Original  proposition  : Galsworthy  is  a first-rate  writer.

Contradictory  : Galsworthy  is  not  a first-rate  writer.

Contraries  : Galsworthy  is  a fifth-rate  writer.

Galsworthy  is  an  able  but  not  a first-rate  writer,
etc.

In  these  examples  it  is  obvious  that  the  expressions  used  are
not  tmambiguous.  For  instance,  the  notion  of  first-rate  ” as
applied  to  a writer  is  essentially  ambiguous,  since  its  meaning
depends  upon  the  standard  used ; it  is,  moreover,  a vague  notion.
So,  too,  are  the  conceptions  of  lucidity  obscurity  success
in  battle  ”,  and  so  on.  In  ordinary  discussion  a constant  source
of  fallacy  lies  in  the  ambiguity  and  unclearness  of  the  words  we
use.  A considerable  amount  of  dispute  turns  upon  the  fact  that
our  words  have  ragged  edges.  We  cannot  always  be  sure  whether
the  proposition  we  are  concerned  to  maintain  contradicts  our
opponent’s  assertion,  or  is  merely  incompatible  with  it.  If  the
two  assertions  are  contradictory,  then  in  disproving  our  opponent’s
assertion  we  thereby  establish  our  own.  But  if  they  are  contraries,
the  disproof  of  his  assertion  leaves  our  own  still  to  be  established.
To  suppose  otherwise  would  be  to  fall  into  a fallacy  that,  when  form-
ally stated,  appears  inexcusable.  Nothing  except  original  good
sense  and  the  habit  of  attempting  to  ascertain  what  precisely  it  is
that  we  are  asserting  can  enable  us  to  avoid  this  source  of  fallacy.
To  be  precise  is,  we  saw,  to  avoid  vagueness.  But,  since  all  lan-
guage is  infected  with  vagueness,  a nice  precision  is  attainable  only
by  the  use  of  exactly  defined  non-verbal  symbols.  Nevertheless,
the  formal  doctrine  of  contradiction  is  not  wholly  unrelated  to
ordinary  discussion.  It  has  been  well  said  that  we  never  under-
stand clearly  what  it  is  we  are  asserting,  until  we  also  see  what
exactly  it  is  we  are  denying.

§ 2.  * IMMEDIATE  INFERENCES  OF  A,  E,  I,  0 PROPOSITIONS  ^

Given  any  proposition,  other  propositions  follow.  Thus,  from
any  given  proposition  other  propositions  may  be  inferred.  A

^ Sections  (in  this  chapter  and  in  Chapter  VII)  marked  with  an  asterisk  are
inserted  for  the  benefit  of  students  reading  for  University  examinations.  The
utility  of  these  sections  is  confined  to  such  readers.


THE  EELATIONS  BETWEEN  PROPOSITIONS  63


proposition  ttat  is  inferred  from  a single  proposition  is  said  to  be
immediately  inferred.  Certain  forms  of  immediate  inference  are
traditionally  recognized ; others  have  been  added  by  modern  logi-
cians (e.g.  Dr.  Keynes),  who  have  extended  the  traditional  treatment.
We  shall  give  a brief  summary  of  the  forms  now  commonly  recog-
nized.^ In  the  inference  of  one  proposition  from  another,  it  is
obvious  that  the  inferred  proposition  must  not  assert  anything
not  implied  in  the  given  proposition,  although  it  is  legitimate  to
assert  less.  This  is  a special  application  of  an  obvious  principle
of  method:  Do  not  go  beyond  the  evidence.  Hence,  if  a term  is
given  undistributed,  we  may  not  infer  a proposition  in  which  that
term  is  distributed.  But  if  a term  is  given  distributed,  we  may
infer  a proposition  in  which  that  term  is  undistributed.  In  such
cases  the  given  proposition  will  be  superimplicant  to  the  inferred
proposition.

Using  the  traditional  terminology,  this  principle  may  be  stated
as  a rule  to  be  observed  in  all  immediate  inferences  : No  term  may
be  distributed  i%  an  inferred  proposition  unless  it  is  distributed  in  the
original  proposition.

In  stating  these  immediate  inferences,  S and  P will  be  used
to  symbolize  the  subject  and  the  predicate  respectively  of  the  given
original  proposition.  In  the  inferred  proposition  either  S and  P
will  be  interchanged,  or  the  contradictory  of  S,  or  of  P will  be  sub-
stituted for  S,  or  for  P,  or  for  both ; or  both  these  changes  will  be
made.  Hence,  we  assume  that,  given  a proposition  which  makes
an  assertion  about  S and  P,  we  can  infer  a proposition  which  makes
an  assertion  about  their  contradictories.  The  contradictory  of  the
term  8 is  non-S  (e.g.  of  blue,  non-blue)  and  of  P,  the  contradictory
is  non-P.

The  following  immediate  inferences  are  recognized :

(1)  Conversion.  By  the  converse  of  a proposition  we  ordinarily
mean  another  proposition  in  which  the  terms  have  been  interchanged.
Por  example,  All  isosceles  triangles  have  their  base  angles  equals  and
All  triangles  having  their  base  angles  equal  are  isosceles.  But  the
latter  proposition  is  not  an  immediate  inference  from  the  former,
since  it  violates  the  rules  of  distribution  that  we  laid  down.  It
must,  therefore,  be  remembered  that  we  are  now  concerned  with
a narrower  sense  of  conversion  than  is  usual.

Coriversion  may  be  defined  as  a form  of  immediate  inference
m which  from  a given  proposition  another  is  inferred  having  for
its  subject  the  predicate  of  the  given  proposition.

From  No  Spartans  are  poets,  we  can  infer  No  poets  are  Spartans.

1 Every  elementary  textbook  in  logic  provides  a full  treatment  of  these
immediate  inferences.  Tbe  best  treatment  is  to  be  found  in  Dr.  Keynes’s
Formal  Logie.


64  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

In  botli  propositions  both  terms  are  distributed ; it  will  easily  be
seen  that  the  propositions  are  equivalent.

From  Some  Tories  are  free  traders  we  can  infer  Some  free  traders
are  Tories,  In  both  propositions  both  terms  are  undistributed;
it  wiU  easily  be  seen  that  the  propositions  are  equivalent.

From  All  Jingoes  are  militarists  we  can  infer  Some  militarists
are  Jingoes,  In  the  given  proposition  the  subject  is  distributed
and  the  predicate  undistributed.  In  the  inferred  proposition,  the
subject,  being  the  predicate  of  the  original  proposition,  is  midis-
tributed.  Hence,  the  propositions  are  not  equivalent.  It  will  be
easily  seen  that  the  original  is  superimplicant  to  its  converse,  i.e.  to
the  proposition  inferred  from  it  by  conversion.

From  the  proposition  Some  popes  are  not  saints  we  cannot  infer
any  proposition  having  popes  for  predicate  and  saints  for  subject,
since  the  inferred  proposition  would  be  of  the  form  0,  hence  its
predicate  would  be  distributed.  But  popes  was  given  undistributed.

In  the  first  two  examples,  the  inferred  proposition  is  equivalent
to  the  original.  In  the  third  example,  the  inferred  proposition  is
not  equivalent.  When  an  inferred  proposition  is  subimplicant  to-
the  original  proposition,  the  inference  is  said  to  be  depressed,  and
the  inferred  proposition  is  said  to  be  weakened.  This  is  always  the
case  when  a particular  proposition  is  inferred  from  a universal.^

We  can  sum  up  these  inferences  in  a convenient  form,  using
symbols.  We  shall  use  the  symbol  ‘‘  = ” between  the  two  proposi-
tions when  they  are  equivalent ; and  the  symbol  ’’  to  indicate
that  the  inferred  proposition  is  weakened.


Schema  of  Conveesion


Original  Proposition.

Converse.

A.

All  S is  P

Some  P is  S.

I.

E.

No  S is  P

-

No  P is  S.

E.

I.

Some  S is  P

Some  P is  S

I.

0.

Some  S is  P

None.

It  will  be  observed  that  in  each  case  the  converse  is  of  the  same
quality  as  the  original  proposition.  The  converse  of  E and  of  I
is  called  the  simple  converses  of  A,  the  converse  per  accidens.

^ We  stall  see  later  that  this  inference  is  always  invalid.  But  we  are
at  present  dealing  with  the  traditional  doctrine.


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  PROPOSITIONS  65


(2)  Obversion.  To  assert  that  S is  P is  equivalent  to  denying
that  S is  non-P,  For  example,  to  deny  that  any  popes  are  saints
is  equivalent  to  affirming  that  none  of  them  are  saints,  or  that  all
of  them  are  other  than  saints,  i.e.  non-saints.  Hence,  it  is  always
possible  to  obtain  a proposition  equivalent  to  the  original  by  chang-
ing its  quality  and  replacing  the  original  predicate  by  its  contradiction.

Obversion  may  be  defined  as  a form  of  immediate  inference  in
which  from  a given  proposition,  another  is  inferred  having  for  its
predicate  the  contradictory  of  the  original  predicate.


Schema  oe  Obversion  ^


Original  Proposition.

Obverse.

A.  AUSisP.

No  S is  non-P.

E.

E.  NoSisP

All  S is  non-P.

A.

I.  Some  S is  P

Some  S is  not  non-P.

0.

0,  Some  S is  not  P

Some  S is  non-P,

I.

It  will  be  observed  that  in  each  case  the  obverse  is  equivalent
to  the  original  proposition  ; the  quality  of  the  proposition  is  changed
but  the  quantity  remains  unchanged.

Conversion  and  Obversion  are  the  only  simple  forms  of  immediate
inference.  But  there  is  no  reason  why  ife  should  not  convert  a
proposition  obtained  by  obversion  from  a given  proposition ; nor
why  we  should  not  obvert  a proposition  obtained  by  conversion
from  another.  Hence,  there  are  other  forms  of  immediate  infer-
ence. Those  which  have  interested  logicians  sufficiently  to  be  given
special  namei^  are  the  two  in  which  the  contradictory  of  the  original
predicate  becomes  the  subject  of  an  inferred  proposition ; and  in
which  the  contradictory  of  the  original  subject  becomes  the  new
subject.  These  are  called  respectively  contraposition  and  inversion.

(3)  Contraposition  is  a form  of  immediate  inference  in  which
from  a given  proposition  another  is  inferred  having  for  its  subject
the  contradictory  of  the  original  predicate.

‘ Since  the  obverse  gives  a proposition  with  the  contradictory  of
the  original  predicate,  contraposition  is  obtained  by  converting  the

^ T!te  remaining  forms  of  immediate  inference  are  given  in  summary
form.  Tke  student  who  does  not  at  once  see  how  the  obverse  is  obtained,
may  find  it  helpful  to  tahe  the  significant  examples  given  for  conversion^
and  obvert  those.  *


66


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


obvert  of  tlie  original.  In  the  scheme  we  shall  omit  this  step,  which
would  merely  repeat  the  scheme  of  ohversion.

Since  nothing  is  said  in  the  definition  of  contraposition  with
regard  to  the  predicate  of  the  inferred  proposition,  it  is  permissible
that  this  should  be  the  original  subject,  or  its  contradictory.  Thus
we  have  two  contrapositives  which  are  obverts  of  each  other.


Schema  or  Conteaposition


Original  Proposition,


Contrapositive.


Obverted  Contrapositive.


A.  AUSisP


No  non-P  is  S.  E.  s All  non-P  is  non-S.  A.


1.  No  S is  P


— ^ Some  non-P  is  S.  I.  —


Some  non-P  is  not
non-S.  0.


I.  Some  S is  P


None.


None.


0.  Some  S is  not  P.  « Some  non-P  is  S.  I.


Some  non-P  is  not
non-S.  0.


(4)  Inversion  is  a form  of  immediate  inference  in  which  from
a given  proposition  another  is  inferred,  having  for  its  subject  the
contradictory  of  the  original  subject.^

Here  again  we  can  obtain  two  forms,  viz.  one  in  which  the
predicate  is  the  same  as  the  original  predicate,  and  one  in  which
the  predicate  is  the  contradictory  of  the  original  predicate.  These
will  be  obverts  of  each  other.

Since  all  that  we  can  do  to  a given  proposition  is  to  convert  it
or  to  obvert  it,  we  must  obtain  the  inverse  of  a given  proposition
by  successively  converting  and  obverting  the  derived  propositions.
It  is  required  to  obtain  from  a proposition  of  the  form  iS~P  (where
quantity  and  quality  are  not  specified)  a proposition  of  the  form
non~3— non-P,  or  non-S— P.  By  ob version  we  obtain  the  con-
tradictory of  the  predicate  term.  Hence,  if  we  can  infer  a proposi-
tion with  S as  predicate,  its  obvert  would  have  non-S  as  predicate ;
if  this  proposition  could  be  converted  we  should  have  the  required
form.  This  will  be  possible  unless  the  last  proposition  is  an  0
proposition,  which  has  no  convert.  It  will  be  found  that,  starting
with  All  S is  P,  we  can  obtain  by  successive  operations  of  obversion
and  conversion  (in  that  order)  two  propositions  of  the  form  Some

^Dr.  Keynes  inwented  the  term  inversion,  although  this  form  of  imme-
diate inference  had  been  sometimes  recognized  by  logicians.


THE  EELATIONS  BETWEEN  PROPOSITIONS  67


non-S  is  non-P  and  Some  non-S  is  not  P,  These  are  the  required
propositions,  and  are  the  inverse  and  the  obverted  inverse  of  All  S is  P.
Again,  starting  from  No  S is  P,  by  successive  operations  of  conver-
sion and  obversion  (in  that  order)  we  obtain  two  propositions  of
the  form  Some  non-S  is  P and  Some  non-S  is  not  non-P,  These  are
the  required  propositions  and  are  the  inverse  and  obverted  inverse
of  No  S is  P,

An  inverse  cannot  be  obtained  either  from  the  I or  from  the  0
proposition,  since  in  both  cases  in  attempting  to  obtain  a proposition
with  non-S  as  subject  we  obtain  an  0 proposition  (having  non-S
for  predicate),  which  cannot  be  converted.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  obverted  inverse  of  A is  Some  non-S  is
not  P,  In  this  proposition  the  predicate  term  P is  distributed,
being  the  predicate  of  a negative  proposition.  This  inference,  there-
fore, breaks  the  rule  of  distribution,  since  P was  given  undistributed
in  All  S is  P.  There  is,  therefore,  as  Dr.  Keynes  puts  it, " an  apparent
illicit  process,  which  it  is  not  quite  easy  either  to  account  for  or
explain  away  He  proceeds  to  account  for  it — or  rather  to  ex-
plain it  away — ^by  the  assertion  that  this  inference  requires  the
implicit  premiss  “ Some  things  are  not  P It  is  true  that  in  this
premiss  P is  distributed,  but  if  inversion  requires  this  additional
premiss,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  it  can  be  regarded  as  an  immediate
inference  in  the  sense  in  which  immediate  ’’  was  defined.  This
apparent  illicit  process”  suggests  rather  that  none  of  these  im-
mediate inferences  are  valid  apart  from  implicit  assumptions,  which
the  traditional  Logicians  ignored.  One  such  assumption,  which  is
relevant  here,  is  that  propositions  in  which  S,  non-S,  P,  non-P,
occur  may  all  be  significantly  asserted,  and  that  S,  non-S,  P,  non^P
exist  mthin  the  universe  of  discourse.  If  this  be  granted,  then,  if
All  S is  P,  it  follows  that  non-P  cannot  be  S,  so  that  non-P  must
be  non-S,  that  is,  some  non-S  is  non-P. ^

A surprising  amount  of  controversy  has  been  devoted  to  the
^question  of  the  validity,  or  invalidity,  of  inversion,  and  to  the  prob-
lem of  the  distribution  of  the  predicate  in  0 propositions.  But
such^  controversy  is  futile,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  doctrine  of
distribution,  and  the  traditional  theory  of  immediate  inference
which  is  ^sed  upon  it,  rests  upon  erroneous  assumptions  as  to  the
simplicity  of  the  propositional  forms  from  which  they  start.  These
propositions  thus  lend  themselves  to  mistaken  interpretations.  We
shall  not,  therefore,  pursue  this  controversy  here.


^ F.L„  § 104.

^ These  assumptions  wiU  he  discussed  below  (see  § 4).  The  reader  may
he  left  to  explain  the  apparent  absurdity  of  the  inference  hy  inversion  from
All  great  poets  have  failed  to  write  a flawless  epic  poem  ” to  Some  who
are  not  great  poets  have  not  failed  to  write  a flawless  epic  poem


A MODERK  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


By  the  adoption  of  a convenient  shorthand  symbolism/  intro-
duced by  Dr.  Keynes,  we  can  now  summarize  the  results  of  these
processes  of  immediate  inference.  Since  the  vowels,  A,  E,  I,  0,
stand  for  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  given  proposition,  we
can  insert  one  of  these  vowels  between  any  two  capital  letters  to
signify  that  these  terms  are  to  be  connected  according  to  the  pre-
scribed form.  Thus,  S aP  stands  for  All  8 is  P;  M o N stands  for
Some  M is  not  N,  and  so  on,  the  subject  always  being  written  first.
S and  P will  symbolize  non-8  and  non-P  respectively.  Thus,  All
S is  non-P  is  written  S a P.


Table  V. — Summary  of  Immediate  Inferences


Form

A

E

I

0

Original  Proposition  ....

SaP

SeP

SiP

SoP

Converse

PiS

PeS

PiS

Obverse

SeP

SaP

SoP

SiP

Obverted  Converse  ....

PoS

PaS

Po§

Contrapositive

PeS

Pis

Pis

Obverted  Contrapositive  . .

PaS

PoS

1

Po§

Inverse

SiP

SiP

Obverted  Inverse  ....

SoP

Sop

A glance  at  the  above  table  shows  that  0 has  no  converse,  and
I has  no  contrapositive ; also  that  only  A and  E have  inverses.
The  plain  man  w^  not  need  to  be  convinced  that  from  the  proposi-
tion Some  dogs  are  fox-terriers,!^  is  impossible  to  draw  any  conclusion
concerning  what  is  not  a dog  and  not  a fox-terrier.  The  process  of
inversion  reminds  us  of  Samuel  Johnson’s  comment : ‘ Sir,  a woman’s
preaching  is  like  a dog’s  walking  on  his  hind  legs.  It  is  not  well
done ; but  you  are  surprised  to  find  it  done  at  all.’

^ Tbe  term  “ sbortband  symbolism  ’’  is  due  to  Mr.  W.  E.  Johnson.  It
will  be  further  explained  and  discussed  in  Chapter  VIIL


THE  EELATIONS  BETWEEN  PROPOSITIONS  69


§ 3.  THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  COMPOUND
PROPOSITIONS

In  tlie  figure  of  opposition  and  in  the  schema  of  immediate
inferences,  we  were  concerned  only  with  A,  E,  I,  0 propositions.
We  have  now  to  consider  the  relations  that  hold  between  compound
propositions.^  In  Chapter  IV  we  divided  compound  propositions
into  two  forms,  conjunctive  and  composite.  If  we  take  any  two
propositions,  jp  and  q,  and  their  contradictories,  f and  q,  we  can
conjunctively  combine  them  in  four  ways,  viz.  (1)  jp  and  q,  (2)  p
and  q,  (3)  p and  q,  (4)  p and  q.  Any  two  of  these  conjunctive  pro-
positions are  independent.  In  stating  the  four  modes  of  combina-
tion we  have  assumed  that  the  order  in  which  the  component  simple
propositions  are  asserted  is  indifferent.  We  can  obviously  say  He
gent  his  daughter  to  Cambridge  and  he  apprenticed  his  son  to  a
solicitor  ” or  ''  He  apprenticed  his  son  to  a solicitor  and  he  sent  his
daughter  to  Cambridge  without  affecting  the  sense  of  the  compound

proposition.  2

We  have  now  to  inquire  how  compound  propositions  can  be  con-
tradicted. The  conjoint  affirmation  of  qp  and  q is  equivalent  to  the
denial  that  p and  q can  be  disjoined.  Hence  the  contradictory  of
p and  q is  not  both  p and  q,  i.e.  a disjunctive  composite  proposition.

Now,  not  both  p and  q is  equivalent  to  either  p or  It  is  clear
that  if  not  both  of  two  propositions  can  be  affirmed,  at  least  one
of  them  must  be  denied.

Ordinary  language  recognizes  these  equivalent  propositions  in
the  following  forms  ; Not  both  p and  q is  equivalent  to  either  p or  q.
For  example.  You  canH  both  eat  your  cahe  and  have  it  is  equivalent
to  Either  you  canH  eat  your  cake  or  you  canH  have  your  cake.

We  can,  therefore,  contradict  p and  q either  by  asserting  not
both  p and  q,  or  by  asserting  either  p or  q,  since  these  two  composite
propositions  are  equivalent.  It  be  found  convenient  to  re-
member that  a conjunctive  proposition  can  be  contradicted  by  a
disjunctive,  or  by  an  alternative  in  which  the  component  proposi-
tions are  separately  contradicted,  and  conversely.

As  in  the  case  of  the  conjunctive  proposition,  so  in  the  case  of
the  disjunctive  and  alternative  composites,  the  order  of  the  com-
ponent propositions  is  indifferent.  We  conjunctively  combined  the
components  p,  q,  p,  q,  in  four  different  ways.  We  shall  now  com-
bine these  components  in  four  disjunctive  and  four  alternative
composites  as  follows  :

^ See  W.  E.  J.,  Pt.  I,  Chap.  HI.

® The  principle  here  exemplified  is  known  as  the  “ Commutative  Law
which,  in  this  connexion,  may  be  stated  in  the  form : p and  q and  p.
See  further.  Chap*  XXIV,  and  cf.  W*  E.  Johnson,  loc.  cit.,  p.  29*


70


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


{i)i>org

(ii)  p orq

(iii)  ^ or

(iv)  p ot  q

(i)  Not  both  §
and  q

(ii)  Not  both  p
and  q

(iii)  Not  both  p
and  5

(iv)  Not  both  p
and  q

It  will  be  immediately  obvious  tbat  these  two  sets  are  so  arranged
that  the  disjunctive  written  below  the  alternative,  in  each  case,  is
its  equivalent.  Their  corresponding  conjunctive  contradictories  are  :
(i)  f and  ^ ; (ii)  p and  q ; (iii)  p and  q ; (iv)  p and  q.

We  have  now  to  consider  the  implicative  proposition  of  the
form  If  p,  then  q.  It  is  clear  that  the  order  of  the  implicans  and
the  implicate  is  not  indifferent.  Thus  If  p,  then  q is  a different
proposition  from  If  q,  then  p and  is  not  equivalent  to  it.  For  example,
If  he  is  not  stupid,  then  he  is  lazy  is  not  equivalent  to  If  he  is  lazy
he  is  not  stupid ; nor  can  the  one  proposition  be  inferred  from  the
other.  Unfortunately,  it  is  possible  for  him  to  be  both  lazy  and
stupid.  We  may  have  evidence  that  points  to  the  conclusion  that
he  is  one  or  the  other,  without  any  indication  as  to  whether,  or
not,  he  may  be  both.  Thus,  failure  to  pass  an  extreme^  easy
examination  may  lead  us  to  conclude  that  he  is  either  lazy  or  stupid,
and  we  may  feel  satisfied  that  one,  or  other,  alone  of  these  alternatives
would  be  sufficient  to  explain  his  failure,  although  both  are  possible.

This  example  illustrates  three  points  that  are  of  importance  in
considering  composite  propositions  and  their  equivalences :

(1)  These  forms  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  ordinary  discussion.
Sometimes  we  use  one,  sometimes  another  to  express  the  same  state
of  affairs ;

(2)  It  is  not  usual  to  interpret  the  “ or  ’’  in  an  alternative  pro-
position as  expressing  the  exclusion  of  one  alternative.  That  is,

or  ” is  consistent  with  perhaps  both  If  or  ” be  interpreted
exclusively,  then  p or  q includes  not  both  p and  q.  Some  logicians
hold  that  it  must  be  so  interpreted.^  In  that  case  we  should  have
to  use  a cumbrous  expression  to  convey  the  information  that  one
or  other  and  perhaps  both  of  two  alternatives  was  the  case.  This
consideration  is  not  in  itself  suJficient  to  rule  out  the  exclusive  inter-
pretation of  or  ^ be  precise  is  often  to  be  lengthy  in  expres-
sion,  since  ordinary  iSa^age  is  amPiguous^  But,  as  our^Sampe
nixistrates,  the  lies  on  those  who  assert  that  the  logical

interpretation  of  should  be  exclusive.^  It  cannot  be  main-

tamM  that  ihe  common  use  is  exclusive.  There  are,  however,  no
good  logical  reasons  for  interpreting  or  ’’  so  that  it  includes  not
both  On  the  contrary,  it  is  desirable  to  give  the  minimum  inter-

^ See  Bosanquet,  Logic,  Bk  I,  Chap.  VIII,  § 1.  ^

* See  Keynes,  F.L.,  § 191,  and  W.  E.  Johnson,  Pt.  I,  Chap.  Ill,  § 6.


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  PROPOSITIONS  71


pietation.^  Tlie  exclusion  of  alternatives  can  tlien  be  stated  in  the
conjunctive  affirmation  of  an  alternative  and  a disjunctive  proposi-
tion, e.g.  Either  p or  q and  not  both  p and  q.  It  is  not  to  be  denied
that  it  is  sometimes  clear  that  two  alternatives  exclude  each  other.
But  the  exclusion  is  due  to  the  nature  of  the  alternatives,  not  to
the  form  of  the  proposition.  Eor  example.  Either  he  will  be  firsts
or  second  states  an  alternation  between  possibilities,  not  both  of
which  can  be  realized.  But  this  impossibility  of  realizing  both  is
not  expressed  in  the  proposition,  but  is  due  to  the  incompatibility
of  being  ‘‘  first  ” and  second  The  or  ”,  then,  m p or  q will
be  interpreted  so  as  to  be  consisteht  with  hoih^and  y.

(3)  imphcative  propo^  smaply  converted,  that

is,  the  implicans  and  the  implicate  cannot  be  simply  interchanged.

It  is  clear  from  the  first  consideration,  viz.  that  different  com-
posite forms  can  express  the  same  state  of  affairs,  that  these  forms
can  be  used  to  express  equivalent  propositions.  These  equivalent
propositions  can  be  formulated  as  follows ;


Implicative,  Disjunctive.  Alternative.

If  p,  then  q s Not  both  p and  q ^ Either  p or  q*
Example  :

, / (Implicative.  If  he  laughs,  the  joke  is  obvious.

] Disjunctive.  It  is  not  the  case  both  that  he  laughs  and  the

1 joke  is  not  obvious.

{Alternative.  Either  he  does  not  laugh,  or  the  joke  is  obvious.

From  the  implicative  proposition  If  p,  then  g,  we  can  infer  the
proposition^  then  f.  For  example,  from  If  it  rains,  he  stays  in-
doors we  can  infer,  If  he  does  not  stay  indoors,  it  does  not  rain.  Two
propositions  of  these  forms  are  called  contrapositives,  since  the
implicans  and  the  implicate  are  interchanged  after  they  have  been
separately  denied.  The  non-equivalence  of  If  p,  then  q and  If  q,
then  p may  be  exhibited  in  a talkie  by  setfing^  £EeeqinvaJ^
dliiunctive  and  alternative  lor^cr(^^  pfbpgffioSsTlHd^


r- — —

’ ImpKcative.

Disjunctive.

Alternative.

Contradictory

Conjunctive.

If  p,  then  q
^ %

Not  both  p and  q

Either  p ov  q
* w

Both  p and  q

If  then  p
♦ \

Not  both  p and  q

* 4

Either  p ov  q

^ •

Both  p and  q

^ Of.  the  traditional  interpretation  of  “ some  Here  it  was  necessary
to  depart  from  the  usage  of  common  speech.  The  departure  is  logimUp
justified  on  the  same  gromids  as  the  agreement  with  common  speech  in  the
interpretation  ef  “ or  viz.  that  it  is  desirable  to  give  the  minimum  inter-
pretation to  ambiguous  words.


72


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


From  the  above  considerations  it  should  now  be  clear  that  whilst
the  various  forms  of  the  composite  propositions  are  equivalent,  no
composite  proposition  is  equivalent  to  a conjunctive.  This  result
accords  with  the  division,  made  in  Chapter  IV,  of  compound  pro-
positions into  the  two  kinds,  composite  and  conjunctive,  and  with
the  subsequent  division  of  the  composites  into  three  forms  A

§ 4.  THE  DIAGRAMMATIC  REPRESENTATION  OP  A,  E,  I,  0
PROPOSITIONS  AND  OF  THE  RELATIONS  OF  EXCLUSION
AND  INCLUSION  BETWEEN  ANY  TWO  CLASSES

We  have  seen  that  the  traditional  schedule  may  be  interpreted
as  expressing  relations  of  exclusion  and  inclusion  between  two
classes.  Since  the  time  of  the  Swiss  mathematician,  Euler,  ^ it
has  been  customary  to  represent  these  relations  diagrammatically
by  the  coincidence,  the  inclusion,  the  overlapping,  and  the  exclu-
sion, of  two  circles.  Between  any  two  classes,  X and  Y,  so  con-
sidered, there  are  five  possible  relations,  which  can  be  represented
as  follows :


The  circles  are  labelled  X,  Y,  to  indicate  which  circle  is  sup-
posed to  represent  which  class.  Mr.  Johnson  has  suggested  that
' the  boundary  line  of  a closed  figure  may  be  taken  as  the  proper
analogue  of  the  intension,  while  the  area  within  that  boundary
is  the  proper  analogue  of  the  extension  Thus,  the  boundary
of  the  smaller,  enclosed  circle  in  (ii)  may  be  taken  to  represent
the  connotation,  or  intension,  of  X whilst  the  enclosed  area
represents  the  objects,  or  things,  to  which  the  name  X ” applies ;
and  so  with  the  other  figures.

Let  us  represent  these  relations  by  the  particular  example  of
the  two  connotative  names  “ politician  and  honest  They
may  be  related  as  follows :

(1)  Every  politician  is  honest  and  no  one  else  is  honest.  (Fig.  i.)

(2)  Every  politician  is  honest  and  there  are  others  who  are
honest.  (Fig.  ii.)

^Cf.  W.  E.  Johnson,  loo*  oit*,  p.  33*

• Loo.  cit.,  p.  125.


* Euler  Hved  from  1707-83.


THE  EELATIONS  BETWEEN  PEOPOSITIONS  73


(3)  Every  one  who  is  honest  is  a politician  and  some  politicians
are  not  honest.  (Fig.  iii.)

(4)  Some  politicians  are  honest  and  some  politicians  are  not
honest  and  some  who  are  honest  are  not  politicians.  (Fig.  iv.)

(5)  No  politicians  are  honest.  (Fig.  v.)

It  will  be  observed  that  only  one  diagram,  viz.  Fig.  v,  corre-
sponds to  a single  proposition  of  the  traditional  schedule.  This
is  the  E proposition,  wHch  is  the  only  one  in  which  both  terms  are
distributed,  i.e.  in  which  both  terms  are  taken  in  their  whole  extent.
Since  an  undistributed  term  is  indeterminate  in  its  reference,  it  is
clear  that  a proposition  containing  an  undistributed  term  cannot  be
represented  by  a figure  in  which  the  relations  are  determinate^  repre-
sented. To  express  the  relations  represented  by  the  first  four  figures
in  terms  of  the  schedule,  there  is  needed  in  each  case  the  conjoint
affirmation  of  two  or  more  of  the  propositions  of  the  schedule.  We
may  say  that  the  A,  E,  I,  0 propositions  exclude,  in  each  case,
one  or  more  of  the  possible  relations  between  X and  Y.  Thus  :

A excludes  (iii),  (iv),  (v),  and  allows  (i),  (ii).

E excludes  (i),  (ii),  (iii),  (iv),  and  allows  (v).

I excludes  (v),  and  allows  (i),  (ii),  (iii),  (iv).

0 excludes  (i),  (ii),  and  allows  (iii),  (iv),  (v).

These  figures,  as  commonly  used,  are  extremely  misleading.
In  this  they  faithfully  represent  the  implicit  assumptions  of  the
schedule.  Thus,  it  is  assumed  that  ''politician”  and  "honest”
have  appKcation.  We  are  supposed  only  to  be  able  to  doubt  their
mutual  relations.  Or,  let  " X ” and  " Y ” stand  respectively  for
"centaurs”  and  "four-legged”.  Then,  one  or  other  of  these
five  relations  must  hold;  hence,  "centaur”  and  "four-legged”
have  application ; thus,  for  example,  the  characteristics  for  which
" centaur  ” stands  must  belong  to  something.

We  can  see  at  this  point  how  necessary  to  the  traditional
Logicians  was  the  assumption  of  a universe  of  discourse.

^ Again,  the  area  outside  the  circles,  in  each  case,  represents  every-
thing thaMs  neither  X nor  Y,  Hence,  it  is  assumed  that " X ”, " S ”,
" Y ”,  “ Y ” ^ have  application.  For  convenience,  we  will  represent
the  universe  by  a rectangle  within  which  the  various  circles  can  be
drawn.  It  will  suffice  to  take  one  example.  We  select  Fig.  (iv).


X Y


stands  for  “non-X’’  in  conformity  with  the  notation  we  have  adopted.


74


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


In  this  figure  the  compartments  are  Jabelled  with  the  four  pos-
sible combinations  : X Y,  X Y,  X Y,  X Y.  Now,  we  can  substi-
tute for  the  intersecting  ci:mles  of  Fig.  (iv),  any  of  the  other  figures.
In  each  case  the  class  XY  is  represented.  Hence,  in  every  case
Some  non-X  is  non-Y.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  each  of  the
A,  E,  I,  0 propositions  should  have  an  inverse,  and  in  each  case
the  same  inverse.  But  this  is  absurd.  We  cannot,  therefore,
assume  that  there  is  always  some  area  outside  the  circles,  repre-
senting part  of  the  universe.  Hence,  this  mode  of  representing
the  four  combinations  does  not  accord  with  the  theory  upon  which
the  immediate  inferences  is  based.  Accordingly,  Dr.  Keynes  has
elaborated  a scheme  of  seven  diagrams  in  which  are  included  those
cases  in  which  there  is  no  part  of  the  universe  outside  the  circles.^
But  it  is  scarcely  worth  while  to  follow  this  elaboration.  The
doctrine  of  distribution  and  the  assumption  that  “ X X ”,
« Y Y ” always  have  application  lead  to  the  difficulties  sug-
gested by  the  misleading  diagram  above,  so  that  it  is  advisable
to  discuss  the  assumption,  rather  than  to  attempt  to  rectify  the
diagrams.

That  X ” has  application  is  usually  stated  in  the  form  Some-
thing is  X,  or  X exists,  to  which  is  generally  added,  ^^in  the
appropriate  universe  of  discourse  ”.  We  saw  that  in  order  to
justify  the  validity  of  the  inversion  of  SaP,  we  had  to  assume
the  proposition  Something  is  not  P or  non-P  exists.  To  say  S
exists  ” is  to  say  that  S has  occurrence  in  the  universe  of  discourse.
We  saw  that  the  notion  of  universes  of  discourse  arose  from  the
assumption  that  every  connotative  (and,  therefore,  every  general)
name  has  application.  On  this  assumption  the  traditional  schedule
can  be  formulated  as  follows  :

A.  Every  S is  P and  something  is  S.

E,  Not  a single  S is  P and  something  is  S.

I.  Some  S is  P and  something  is  S.

0.  Some  S is  not  P and  something  is  S.

These  are  compound  propositions.  Thus  A,  for  example,  will  be
false  if  nothing  is  S.  From  E it  follows  that  something  is  non-P ;
hence,  E will  be  false  if  nothing  is  non-P ; and  so  on.  But  if  we
once  assume  that  S,  non-S,  P,  non-P  must  all  exist,  it  seems  diffi-
cult to  justify  the  assumption  that  it  may  be  the  case  that  nothing
is  both  non-S  and  non-P,  Yet,  without  this  latter  assumption,
every  proposition,  universal  and  particular,  will  have  an  inverse,
and  the  same  inverse,  viz.  Some  non-S  is  non-P,  This  conclusion
is  absurd.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  we  rejected  the  attempt

^ See  F,L,f  § 130.  Dr.  Keynes  gives  a thorough  discussion  of  various
diagrammatic  methods  and  of  the  assumptions  upon  which  they  rest.  Of.
also  W.  E.  Johnson,  Logic,  Pt.  I,  Chap.  IX,  § 7.


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  PROPOSITIONS  75


to  elaborate  the  diagrammatic  scheme  in  such  a way  as  to  exclude
this  possibility.

The  fundamental  difficulty  in  the  traditional  interpretation
lies  in  its  failure  to  distinguish  between  propositions  of  the  form.
This  is  an  X and  propositions  of  the  form  Every  Y is  X,  The
proposition  This  is  an  X implies  the  proposition  An  X exists,  or
Something  is  X.  But  to  assert  that  Every  Y is  X does  not  imply
that  something  is  Y or  that  something  is  X.  This  distinction
is  recognized  by  common  sense.  It  is  significant  to  say  Every
competent  statesman  could  solve  the  unemployment  problem
even  if  one  does  not  believe  that  there  is  some  one  who  is  a
competent  statesman.^  The  discussion  of  this  distinction  would
take  us  beyond  the  consideration  of  the  traditional  schedule  and
must  therefore  be  postponed  to  a later  chapter.

It  is  possible  to  interpret  the  schedule  so  as  to  avoid  the  con-
fusions we  have  just  noted.  Thus  we  may  express  it  as  follows :

A.  Nothing  is  both  S and  non-P,

E.  Nothing  is  both  S and  P.

I.  Something  is  both  S and  P.

0.  Something  is  both  S and  non-P.

But,  as  thus  formulated,  it  is  clear  that  A and  E are  of  the  same
form ; that  I and  0 are  of  the  same  form ; that  these  forms  are
different.  The  universal  propositions  deny  existence ; the  par-
ticular propositions  affirm  existence.  This  distinction  of  form  is
not  in  conformity  with  the  traditional  interpretation  nor  with  the
assumptions  upon  which  the  Eulerian  scheme  and  the  immediate
inferences  rest.  It  is  obvious  that  the  existential  interpretation
of  A as  negative  and  of  I as  affirmative  would  render  invalid  the
conversion  per  aceidens  of  A.  For  the  same  reason  the  contra-
position of  I would  be  invalid,  and  the  inversion  of  A and  of  E.
Nor  does  the  Eulerian  scheme  allow  any  compartment  to  be  empty,
for  it  rests  upon  the  assumption  that  S,  non-S,  P,  non-P  all  exist.

Dr.  Venn  ^ elaborated  a diagrammatic  scheme  which  allows  a
compartment  to  be  empty.  In  this  scheme  each  diagram  repre-
sents an  empty  framework  into  which  the  information  supplied
by  any  one  of  the  four  propositions  can  be  fitted.  Given  the  two
classes,  S and  P,  we  have


(0


^ Cf.  Chap.  IX,  §§  I,  3.


* Symlolic  Loyic,  Chap.  V.


76


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Here  tte  two  circles  represent  two  compartments  wHch  may
or  may  not  be  empty.  If  we  assert  S a P,  we  deny  that  any  S
is  non-P.  Accordingly  we  block  out  tbe  compartment  wbicb,  if
it  were  fdled,  would  represent  S’s  that  were  non-P.  Tbe  diagram
then  becomes


(!')


Similarly,  E would  be  represented  by

(iii)

■(X>-

On  this  scheme  it  is  less  easy  to  represent  the  two  particular
propositions.  Dr.  Verm  puts  a bar  across  the  compartment  that
is  occupied.  Thus  I would  be  represented  by


That  this  diagram  is  less  satisfactory  than  those  representing
A and  E is  obvious.  It  suggests  that  the  universal  and  the  par-
ticular propositions  cannot  be  satisfactorily  treated  by  the  same
diagrammatic  method.  This  is  not  surprising  if  the  significance
of  a universal  proposition  is  different  from  the  significance  of  a
particular  proposition.  It  also  brings  out  clearly  that  the  dis-
tinction between  A and  I,  or  between  E and  0,  is  more  fundamental
than  the  distinction  between  affirmative  and  negative  propositions
in  this  schedule.  In  Chapter  IX  we  shall  see  that  this  is  the  case.

By  the  same  method  as  before  we  can  represent  the  universe
by  a rectangle  within  which  are  the  two  circles.  Thus,


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  PROPOSITIONS  77


represents  that  the  compartment  S P is  empty,  so  that  all  P is  S ;
and  that  S P,  S P,  S P are  not  empty.

It  is  clear  that,  if  we  admit  that  a compartment  may  be  empty
(i.e.  that  a given  combination  does  not  exii^),  we  have  not  only
four  possibilities  but  eight,  namely,  SP,  SP,  SP,  SP,  any  one
of  which  may  exist  or  not  exist.  There  are  accordingly  eight
independent  propositions  connecting  any  two  classes  S and  P.
These  have  been  formulated  in  convenient  expressions,  in  com-
mon use,  by  Dr.  Christine  Ladd-Franklin.^  We  give  below  her
formulations  on  the  left-hand  side,  and  corresponding  expressions
in  A,  E,  I,  0 forms  on  the  other  side.

Ta3le  VI. — Propositions  connecting  any  two  Classes  S and  P and  their

Contradictories


All  S is  P

SaP  = A

Not  all  S is  P

SoP  s PoS  0

No  S is  P

SeP  ^ PaS  E

Some  S is  P

SiP  = PoS  I

None  but  S is  P

§aP  = PaS  A'

Some  besides  S is  P

§oP  = PoS  O'

All  but  S is  P

§eP  = PaS  E'

Not  all  but  S is  P

§iP  s PoS  T

There  can  be  little ‘doubt  that  the  formulations  suggested  by
Mrs.  Ladd-Eranklin  bring  out  these  relations  with  the  nearest  approxi-
mation to  the  expressions  of  ordinary  conversation.  They  also  show
how  defective,  even  from  this  point  of  view,  the  traditional  schedule
is.  But  it  may  be  questioned  whether  it  is  advisable  thus  to  tinker
with  the  traditional  forms.  It  would  be  better  to  neglect  these
transformations  and  to  develop  a system  in  which  the  analysis
of  the  propositional  forms  is  carried  further.

It  must  be  observed  that  in  any  diagrammatic  representation
of  propositions  and  of  the  class  relations  expressed  in  propositions,
any  point  which  falls  outside  any  given  circle  represents  an  indi-
vidual that  is  not  identical  with  any  individual  represented  by
the  points  that  fall  within  the  circle.  Thus,  in  the  diagram


^Art.  on  “Propositions”  in  Baldwin,  Dictionary  of  Philosophy  and
Psychology ; also  American  Journal  of  Psychology,  Vol.  II,  pp.  543-567,  “ On
Some  Cliaracteristics  of  Symbolic  Logic  ” ; and  Mind,  1890,  “ Some  Proposed
Beforms  in  Common  Logic  Cf.  also  Keynes,  JF’.L.,  §§  106-07  : W.  E.  J
Pt.  I,  Chap.  IX,  § 6.


78  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

any  point  in  the  rectangle  but  outside  the  circles  represents  indi-
viduals that  are  not  identical  with.  (i.e.  are  other  than)  any  indi-
viduals that  are  S’s  or  are  P’s.  Again,  any  point  in  that  part  of
the  circle  S which  is  outside  the  circle  P represents  an  individual
which  is  other  than  P.  In  the  traditional  logic  the  latter  case
would  be  expressed  by  “ This  S is  not  P ” or  ''  This  S is  excluded
from  P”,  There  is  thus  considerable  danger  of  confusing  the
relation  of  non-identity  between  individuals  with  the  relation  of
negation.  The  relation  of  exclusion  is,  however,  fundamentally
different  from  the  relation  of  negation.  This  being  so,  it  may  be
questioned  whether  the  diagrammatic  representation  of  propositions
has  any  utility,  or  whether  it  is  not  likely  to  suggest  misleading
ideas.  On  this  point  there  is  divergence  of  opinion  among  con-
temporary logicians.  On  the  one  hand,  Mr.  Bertrand  Russell
asserts :

‘ Philosopliers  have  been  slaves  of  space  and  time  in  the  imaginative
application  of  their  logic.  This  is  partly  due  to  Euler’s  diagrams  and  the
notion  that  the  traditional  A,  E,  I,  0,  were  elementary  forms  of  propositions
and  the  confounding  of  “ iK  is  a ” with  “ all  a’s  are  /9’s  All  this  led  to
a confusion  between  classes  and  individuals,  and  to  the  inference  that  indi-
viduals can  interpenetrate  because  classes  can  overlap.  I do  not  suggest
explicit  confusions  of  this  sort,  but  only  that  traditional  elementary  logic,
taught  in  youth,  is  an  almost  fatal  barrier  to  clear  thinking  in  later  years,
unless  much  time  is  spent  in  acquiring  a new  technique.’  ^

Mr.  Johnson,  on  the  other  hand,  maintains :

‘ Such  a representation  is  in  fact  valid,  although  the  relation  of  inclusion
and  exclusion  of  classes  is  not  identical  with  the  logical  relations  expressed
in  affirmative  and  negative  propositions  respectively ; for,  there  is  a true
analogy  between  the  relations  between  classes  and  the  relations  between
closed  figures ; in  that  the  relations  between  the  relations  of  classes  are
identical  with  the  corresponding  relations  between  the  relations  of  closed
figures.’  *

It  seems,  however,  that  Mr.  Johnson  overlooks  one  of  the  most
important  objections  to  this  representation,  namely,  that  it  encour-
ages the  confusion  between  class-membership  propositions  and
general  propositions.  On  these  grounds,  it  would  seem  that  the
diagrammatic  representation  of  propositions  is  more  misleading
than  useful.

^ Analysis  of  Matter,  p.  387.

2 Logic,  Pt.  II,  p.  87.  Cf.  also  Pt.  I,  pp.  124,  147,  149.  In  saying  that
the  relations  are  ‘ identical  ’ it  would  seem  that  Mr.  Johnson  means  that
the  relations  between  classes  have  the  same  formal  pi^operties  as  the  relations
between  closed  figures.  This  does  not,  however,  afford  a sufificient  justifica-
tion for  the  representation.  It  may  be  noted  that  Mr.  Johnson,  in  his  treat-
ment of  diagrams,  emphasizes  the  dangers  of  confusion,  and  is  thus  not  likely
to  create  ‘a  fatal  barrier  to  clear  thinking’.  Nevertheless  the  utility  of
the  representation  is  not  very  great.


THE  EELATIONS  BETWEEN  PROPOSITIONS  79


§5.  LOGICALLY  INAPPROPRIATE  EXPRESSIONS

, The  traditional  view  that  there  are  a limited  number  of  propo-
sitional forms  departure  from  which  constitutes  irregularity  is
absurd.  Every  jgroposition  has  a determinate  form  which  is  its
logical  form.  The  linguistic  expression  of  a proposition  may,  how-
ever, be  more  or  less  iaappropriate  to  its  logical  form.  An  expression
is  logically  inappropriate  if  its  linguistic  form  misleads  us  with
regard  to  the  logical  form  of  the  proposition  so  expressed.  No
expression  is  exactly  appropriate,  but  some  are  excessively  inappro-
priate  since  their  linguistic  Torm  at  once  suggests  an  erroneous
analysis  of  the  proposition  so  e:^ressed.  For  example,  All  men  are
mortal  is  not  a simple  proposition,  yet  the  sentence  expressing  it  is
grammatically  similar  to  ''  Socrates  is  wise which  does  express  a
simple  proposition.  A more  appropriate  expression  is  obtained  if
we  transform  the  sentence  into  If  anyone  is  human,  he  is  mortaj.’"
The  latter  expression  shows,  what  the  former  conceals,  that  the
I;  proposition  expressed  by  both  these  expressions  is  not  elementary.

A compound  proposition  is  sometimes  expressed  by  a gram-
matically simple  sentence,  e.g.  Few  people  are  rich  ” expresses
the  compound  proposition  Most  people  are  not  rich  hut  some  are,
A compound  proposition  expressed  by  a simple  sentence  is  called
by  some  Logicians  an  exponible  proposition  But  it  is  not  the
proposition  but  the  sentence  which  is  exponible.^

Two  sets  of  expressions  are  especially  liable  to  mislead  us  when
we  begin  to  think  about  logical  form,  (i)  The  indefinite  article
differs  in  significance  according  to  its  usage.  Compare,  (1)  An
English  poet  was  stabbed  ; (2)  ''  A porter  was  in  sight  ’’ ; (3)  ''  A
cat  is  fond  of  millr.”  What  each  of  these  asserts  could  be  difierently,
though  equivalently,  expressed  as  follows  : (1)  One  individual  was
both  an  English  poet  and  was  stabled  ’’ ; (2)  There  is  at  least  one
individual  who  is  a porter  and  is  in  sight  ” ; (3)  Every  cat  is  fond
of  milk.’'  These  alternative  expressions  show  that  {3}  is  different
in  form  from  (1)  and  (2),  since  (3)  expresses  an  A proposition,  whereas
(^)  55-^  within  the  traditional  schedule.  Accordingly,

expressions  beginning  with  ''a  so-and-so'’  must  not  be  taken  to
e:^ress  propositions  of  the  same  form.  The  definite  article  like-
wise varies  in  significance  according  to  its  usage  in  the  sentence.
Thus  (1)  The  wh§le  is  a mammal  expresses  a xmiversal  pxoposi-
(^)  ^^^JkJ^Ql.ot/Gandide  is  cynical”  does  not;  itjs  '
singular,  but  not  siipple.  '

^ Some  familiar  exponible  sentences  have  received  special  nam^,  but  in
so  haphazard  a fashion  and  with  so  much  confusion  between  the  expression
and  the  proposition  that  it  is  not  worth  while  to  consider  them.  For  a full
discussion,  see  F.L.,  §§  68-71.


80


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


(ii)  Expressions  containing  such,  words  as  exists  ”,  ''  is  a non-
entity  ”,  ^'is  not  real  ”,  and  then  opposites,  are  also  misleading.
They  express  affixmative  or  negative  existential  propositions.  Zeus
does  not  exist  ” is  of  the  same  grammatical  form  as  Gandhi  floes
not  speak  ” ; hence,  the  propositions  so  expressed  have  been  mis-
^ takenly  supposed  to  be  of  the  same  form.  We  can  see  the  difference
if  we  consider  what  the  speaker  who  uses  the  sentence  is  in  each
case  asserting.  Gardhi  does  not  speak  denies  that  an  individual^as
I a certain  property ; Zeus  does  not  exist  denies  that  certain  properties
belong  to  any  individual.  These  denials  are  quite  different  in  foiim.
^ It  should  be  clear  that  an  assertion  of  existence  is  always  equivalent
to  the  assertion  that  a certain  property  belongs  to  something ; a
, ^denial  of  existence  is  always  equivalent  to  the  assertion  that  a
Certain  property  does  not  belong  to  anything.  Such  expressions  as
God  is  an  existent  ”,  Zeus  is  a non-entity  ”,  Unicorns  are  not
real  ”,  are  logically  inappropriate,  since  they  suggest  similarity  of
form  with  propositions  expressed  by  Dante  is  a poet  “ Jack  is
a non-combatant  ”,  Daffodils  are  not  blue  ”.  This  suggestion
misleads  us  concerning  the  analysis  of  existential  propositions,  which
constitute  a distinct  kind  of  propositional  form,  not  reducibl^_to
subject-predicate  form.

We  cannot,  then,  rely  upon  similarity  of  linguistic  form.  The
syntax  of  one  ordinary  language  differs  from  that  of  another.  This
is  why  translation  from  one  language  to  another  is  sometimes  diffi-
cult ; it  is  also  sometimes  enlightening,  since  the  attempt  to  translate
accurately  may  show  us  what  exactly  we  sought  to  express.  Trans-
lation from  one  sentence  to  another  sentence  in  the  same  language
may  likewise  be  helpful  in  leading  us  to  find  a linguistic  form  more
appropriate  to  what  is  to  be  expressed.  Such  translation  may  jbe
"caUed /transformation  of  sentences’.  Transfomation  of  one  ex-
pression into  another  to  express  the  same  matter  of  fact  is  useful
when  it  shows  unsuspected  logical  forms.  In  traditional  textbooks
; much  'il.se  is  made  of  transformation,  but  under  the  misapprehension
^ that  what  is  thus  transformed  is  the  proposition^  whereas  it  is  the
: sentence|/and  in  the  that  the  proposition  expressed  is  A,  35^  I,

I or  jQ.  No  rules  can  be  laid  down  to  guide  us  in  determining  whether
a given  expression  is  logically  inappropriate,  nor  as  to  how  inappro-
priate expressions  should  be  transformed.  In  each  case  we  must
. attempt  to  determine  what  exactly  the  expression  is  used  to  express.
To  know  what  is  expressed  is  to  know  what  the  proposition  asserts ;
to  know  what  a proposition  asserts  is  to  know  what  would  have  to
be  the  case  if  the  proposition  were  true.


CHAPTER  VT

THE  TRADITIONAL  CATEGORICAL  SYLLOGISM


‘ I hold  that  the  invention  of  the  form  of  syllogisms  is  one  of  the  most
beautiful  which  the  human  mind  has  made,  and  even  one  of  the  most  con-
siderable. It  is  a kind  of  universal  maihematics  whose  importance  is  not
sufficiently  known,’ — Leibniz.

§ 1.  DEFINITION  OF  SYLLOGISM

AEISTOTLE,  who  formulated  thetlieory  of  the  syllogism,
gave  the  following  definition:  syllogism  is  discourse

(koyog)  in  which,  certain  things  heing  stated,  something
other  than  what  is  stated  follows  of  necessity  from  their  being
so  ^ He  adds : ^ I mean  by  the  last  phrase  that  they  produce
the  consequence,  and  by  this,  that  no  further  term  is  required  from
without  to  make  the  consequence  necessary  ^ In  accordance  with
this  definition  we  might  say  that  a syllogism  is  a form  of  implica*
tion  in  which  two  propositions  jointly  imply  a third.  The  two
premisses  constitute  a compotmd  implicans  and  the  conclusion  forms
the  implicate.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Aristotle,  in  working  out
his  theory  of  the  syllogism,  interpreted  his  definition  much  more
narrowly,  so  that  he  excluded  all  propositions  not  of  the  subject-
predicate  form.  In  this  he  has  been  followed  by  the  traditional
Logicians.  It  has  been  further  assumed  that  the  propositions  must
be  categorical.  As  in  this  chapter  we  shall  be  concerned  with  the
traditional  doctrine,  we  shall  define  the  syllogism  as  follows : A
categorical  syllogism  is  a form  of  reasoning  consisting  of  three  pro-
positions having  between  them  three  and  only  three  terms,  which
are  so  related  that  the  first  two  propositions  jointly  imply  the  third
The  categorical  syllogism  may  be  illustrated  by  the  following
examples :

(1)  If  All  credulous  people  are  easily  deceived
and  All  sailors  are  credulous,
then,  AU  sailors  are  easily  deceived.

(2)  If  No  one  who  is  invariably  truthful  is  a successful  politician
and  All  Cabinet  Ministers  are  successful  politicians,
then.  No  Cabinet  Ministers  are  invariably  truthful.

^ Anal.  Frioraf  246,  18*

81


82  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

(3)  If  All  librarians  are  underpaid
and  All  librarians  are  well  educated,
then,  Some  wbo  are  well  educated  are  underpaid.

In  each  of  these  examples  there  are  three  propositions  and  three
terms.  Each  term  occurs  twice.  The  term  which  occurs  in  both
the  premisses  is  connected  in  one  premiss  with  the  predicate  of  the
conclusion,  and  in  the  other  premiss  with  the  subject  of  the  con-
clusion. For  this  reason  Aristotle  called  the  subject  and  predicate
of  the  conclusion  the  “ extreme  terms  ”.  The  term  which  connects
the  extremes  has  been  traditionally  called  the  middle  term  since  it
is  through  it  that  the  predication  of  one  extreme  of  the  other  is
rendered  possible.^  Aristotle  named  the  predicate  of  the  conclusion
the  major  term,  and  the  subject  of  the  conclusion  the  minor  term.
The  premiss  containing  the  major  term  is  called  the  major  premiss ; the
premiss  containing  the  minor  term  is  called  the  minor  premiss.  It
is  clear  from  these  definitions  that  it  is  impossible  to  determine
which  is  the  major  premiss  and  which  the  minor  without  referring
to  the  conclusion.  In  the  examples  given,  the  major  premiss  is
written  first.  This  is  customary  among  logicians  but  is  not  logically
necessary.  In  the  first  example  credulous  people  is  the  middle  term
connecting  sailors  (the  minor  term)  with  easily  deceived  people  (the
major  term).  The  reader  will  easily  determine  the  major,  minor
and  middle  terms  in  the  other  examples.

In  discussing  the  traditional  syllogism  it  must  be  borne  in  mind
that  the  categorical  proposition  is  traditionally  analysed  into  the
terms  connected  by  the  copula  is  (or  are)  or  is  not  (or  are  not).
Since  there  are  to  be  only  three  terms,  we  must  exclude  certain
forms  of  reasoning  which  would  fall  under  Aristotle’s  definition
although  he  did  not  include  them  in  his  treatment  of  the  syllogism.
Thus  the  example,  “ Tom  is  as  tall  as  Mary,  Mary  is  as  tall  as  Jane,
therefore,  Tom  is  as  tail  as  Jane  ” is  not  a syllogism  in  the  sense
defined,  since,  either  the  copula  is  not  is  ” or  there  are  four  terms.
We  shall  be  concerned  with  arguments  of  this  form  later.  ^

Traditionally  the  syllogism  has  been  treated  as  a form  of  argu-
ment,  that  is,  as  an  attempt  to  demonstrate  that  a certain  propo-
sition (the  conclusion)  is  true  because  some  other  propositions  (the
premisses)  are  true.  This  mode  of  treatment  has  the  defect  of

^ It  is  often  said  that  the  “ middle  term  ” is  so  called  because  it  is  mid-
way in  extent  between  the  predicate  and  the  subject  of  the  conclusion.  This
is  by  no  means  always  the  case,  so  that  “ middle  term  ” ought  not  to  be  so
interpreted.  Nevertheless,  the  names  are  convenient  as  enabling  us  to  refer
shortly  to  the  three  different  terms.  It  may  be  admitted  also  that  “ middle  ”
is  not  an  inappropriate  name  for  the  term  which  connects  the  extremes.  (Gf*
Joseph,  Introd,^  pp.  259-62.)

* See  Chap.  VII,  § 5.


THE  TEADITIONAL  CATEGORICAL  SYLLOGISM  83


obscuring  tbe  essential  nature  of  syllogism,  wbicli  is  a form  of  im-
plication. As  such.,  it  is  not  concerned  with  the  truth,  or  falsity,
of  the  conclusion,  or  of  the  premisses,  but  only  with  the  validity
of  the  reasoning,  which  depends  upon  the  form  alone.  ^ Neverthe-
less, the  traditional  treatment,  which  here  follows  Aristotle  very
closely,  has  the  merit  of  emphasising  that  whenever  we  do  want  to
demonstrate  that  a certain  proposition  is  true,  the  simplest  method
is  to  exhibit  it  as  following  syUogistically  from  two  premisses  that
have  been  granted  to  be  true.  In  ordinary  conversation  we  fre-
quently argue  syUogistically.  We  rarely,  if  ever,  set  out  an  explicit
syUogism,  but  on  reflection  we  should  be  ready  to  admit  that  the
validity  of  our  argument  depended  upon  an  assumed  premiss  ‘which
constitutes  the  argument  a syUogism.  The  foUowing  examples  of
abbreviated  syUogisms  are  easUy  recognizable  as  taken  from  ordinary
conversation,

(1)  “ You  can’t  expect  Baldwin  to  keep  his  promises,  for,  after
all,  he  is  in  the  difficult  position  of  Prime  Minister.”

(2)  “ He  pays  the  piper,  so  he  caUs  the  tune.”

(3)  “ No  spoilt  children  are  attractive,  for  no  selfish  child  is.”

(4)  Some  tyrants  benefit  their  countrymen,  for  Mussolmi  has
certainly  benefited  his.”

In  each  of  these  cases  there  is  one,  and  only  one  proposition
that  would  render  the  argument  conclusive.  * When  it  is  supplied,
it  wiU  be  found  that  the  argument  is  a regular  syUogism.  It  will
be  sufficient  to  show  this  in  the  case  of  the  first  example.  The
conclusion  asserted  is : Baldwin  cannot  be  expected  to  keep  his
promises."’  The  premiss  explicitly  offered  as  a reason  is : Baldwin
is  in  the  difficult  position  of  Prune  Minister.”  The  premiss  assumed
is  : No  one  in  the  difficult  position  of  Prime  Minister  can  be  ex-
pected to  keep  his  promises.”  The  phrase  You  can’t  expect  ” is
an  emphatic  way  of  introducing  the  asserted  conclusion.  The  words
after  aU  ” emphasize  the  fact  that  the  premiss  that  foUows  wUl
be  granted  by  the  opponent.  In  that  case,  the  opponent  has  no
other  course  than  to  deny  the  truth  of  the  assumed  premiss,  or  to
accept  the  conclusion.

SyUogisms  in  which  one  premiss  is  omitted  are  caUed  enthymemes.
Sometimes  the  conclusion  is  omitted,  as  in : No  Scotchman  can
see  a joke,  and  he  is  a Scotchman.”  This  mode  of  speech  is  familiar
under  the  form  of  innuendo,  2

Sometimes  we  may  be  led  to  formulate  a syUogism  in  the  attempt

^ See  p.  164  below.

» An  entbymeme  is  caUed  of  the  First  Order,  if  the  maior  premiss  be
omitted ; of  the  Second  Order,  if  the  minor  premiss  be  omitted ; of  the  Third
Order,  if  the  conclusion  be  omitted.  There  is  no  importance  to  be  attached
to  these  names*


84  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

to  answer  a question.  Thus  we  might  ask  : Is  the  income  tax  , a
just  tax  ? ” Then  we  might  reason  as  follows  : Well,  I suppose
a just  tax  is  one  which  is  proportioned  to  the  ability  to  pay.  But
that  is  the  characteristic  of  the  income  tax.’’  Hence,  we  answer
our  question  in  the  affirmative,  because  we  see  that  the  conclusion
The  income  tax  is  a just  tax  ” follows  from  the  two  propositions
which  we  have  just  admitted.  The  premisses  are  not  always  ‘ given  ’
in  the  sense  that  they  are  what  we  set  out  from ; but  they  are
' given  ’ in  the  sense  that  they  are  " granted  ’.  The  premisses  stated
above  are  not  in  the  simple  logical  form  required  by  the  definition
of  the  syllogism,  but  it  is  clear  that  it  is  this  form  which  justifies
our  acceptance  of  the  conclusion  The  income  tax  is  a just  tax
Obviously  it  is  not  necessary  that,  in  order  that  a man  should  per-
ceive the  force  of  his  reasoning,  he  should  be  aware  that  he  is
formulating  a syllogism.  Our  contention  is  that  we  frequently
reason  syllogistically  but  very  few  people  know  what  a syllogism
is.  In  the  same  way,  most  of  us  can  add  numbers  together,  but
very  few  of  us  know  how  it  is  that  this  operation  of  addition  can
be  successfully  performed.  ^ It  is  enough  if  it  be  granted  that  we
sometimes  attempt  to  resolve  a doubt  in  our  own  minds,  or  to
induce  others  to  agree  with  us,  by  showing  that  a certain  proposi-
tion that  is  doubtful,  or  is  contested,  follows  from  other  propositions
whose  truth  is  not  in  dispute.

§2.  FIGURE  AND  MOOD

Not  every  combination  of  three  propositions  containing  between
them  only  three  terms  constitutes  a syllogism.  For  example,  in
the  combination  All  musicians  are  sensitive,  All  poets  are  sensitive  ;
All  poets  are  musicians,  the  third  proposition  does  not  follow  from
the  first  two,  although  it  is  consistent  with  them.  In  the  combina-
tion, No  popes  are  saintly,  Hildebrand  was  a pope ; Hildebrand
was  saintly,  the  third  proposition  is  inconsistent  with  the  com-
bination of  the  first  two.  To  obtain  a syllogism  certain  conditions
must  be  observed.  Before  we  attempt  to  determine  what  these
conditions  are,  we  will  consider  the  three  examples  given  on  page  81.
It  wiU  be  seen  that  the  middle  term  does  not  occupy  the  same  posi-
tion in  the  different  examples.  In  the  first,  the  middle  term  is
subject  in  the  major,  and  predicate  in  the  minor  premiss ; in  the
second,  it  is  predicate  in  both ; in  the  third,  it  is  subject  in  both.
These  syllogisms  are  said  to  be  of  different  figures.  The  figure  is
determined  by  the  position  of  the  terms.  Smce,  given  the  position
of  the  middle  term  in  both  premisses,  the  position  of  the  other  term
is  fixed,  we  may  define  the  figure  of  the  syllogism  as  follows : The

1 See  p.  123,  and  cl  Locke,  Bk.  IV,  Chap.  XVII,  § 4.


THE  TEADITIOHAL  CATEGOEICAL  SYLLOGISM  85


figure  of  the  syllogism  is  determined  hy  the  positions  of  the  middle
term.  It  is  customary  to  symbolize  the  terms  hy  S for  the  minor,
M for  the  middle,  P for  the  major.  If  we  do  tMs  we  can  take  in
at  a glance  the  difference  of  the  three  figures.  Neglecting  the  sign
of  quantity  and  the  copula,  we  can  symbolize  the  three  figures  as
follows :

I II  III

M — P P — M M— P

S — M S — M M— S

s — P S — P S— P

The  shape  of  these  three  figures  is  different.  Aristotle  used  the
Greek  word  GxgiJLa  which  means  “ shape  ” or  “ figure  ” or  “ form
If  we  fill  in  the  blank  between  the  terms  by  “ is  ” or  “ is  not  ” and
prefix  signs  of  quantity,  we  shall  get  premisses  of  the  forms  given
in  the  traditional  schedule  of  propositions.  In  our  examples  (1)
consisted  of  three  A propositions ; (2)  consisted  of  E,  A,  E,  propo-
sitions in  that  order ; (3)  consisted  of  A,  A,  I,  propositions  in  that
order.

The  syllogism.

If  No  men  are  infallible
and  All  priests  are  men,
then  No  priests  are  infallible,

is  in  Figure  I.  But  it  differs  in  form  from  our  first  example,  since
the  propositions  are  E,  A,  E.  This  difference  is  called  a difference
in  mood.  We  may  define  “ mood  ” as  follows  : The  mood  of  a syllo-
gism is  determined  hy  the  quantity  and  quality  of  its  constituent  pro-
positions. Comparing  the  last  example  with  example  (2)  above,  it
will  be  seen  that  we  can  have  the  same  mood  in  different  figures.
But  not  aU  moods,  i.e.  combinations  of  A,  E,  I,  O propositions,
are  possible  in  all  figures.

We  might  have  obtained  the  conclusion  “No  priests  are  infallible  ”
from  the  two  premisses  : “ No  mfaUible  bemgs  are  men.  All  priests
are  men,”  which  would  have  given  us  a syllogism  in  Figure  II.  We
can  construct  a syllogism  in  which  M is  predicate  in  the  major  pre-
miss and  subject  in  the  minor  premiss.  Its  shape  will  be

P — M
M — S
S — P

This  is  known  as  the  fourth  figure.  It  is  said  to  have  been
mtroduced  into  the  traditional  doctrine  by  the  famous  physician
Galen.  Most  arguments  ejqjressed  in  Figure  IV  would  be  more
naturally  expressed  in  one  of  the  other  figures.  But  it  is  not  diflff-


86


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


cult  to  construct  examples  falling  into  tMs  figure,^  provided  that
certain  conditions,  to  be  discussed  later,  are  observed.  The  difier-
ence  between  Figures  I and  IV  depends  upon  observing  the  dis-
tinction between  the  major  and  minor  premisses.  If  these  were
transposed,  the  shape  would  be

M — S
P — M
P — S.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  this  case  the  major  term  is  S and  the
minor  P.

§3.  RULES  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM
We  have  now  to  determine  the  conditions  upon  which  the  validity
of  an  argument  in  any  of  these  figures  depends.  It  may  be  assumed
that  the  validity  of  the  examples  so  far  given  will  be  immediately
apprehended.  That  is  to  say,  having  admitted,  for  example,  that
being  easily  deceived  ” can  be  predicated  of  all  credulous  people
and  having  also  admitted  that  all  sailors  ” are  included  among
those  who  are  credulous,  we  see  that  they  must  also  be  included
among  those  who  are  easily  deceived  It  is  possible  to  formu-
late a principle  which  generalizes  the  grounds  of  this  assent.  This
principle  was  first  formulated  by  Aristotle.  ^ It  is  now  known  as
the  dictum  de  omni  et  nullo  ” because  it  is  an  axiom  concerning
all  or  none  of  a class.  There  have  been  many  statements  of  it,  for
it  is  seldom  given  in  Aristotle’s  original  form.  It  may  be  stated
as  follows  : If  every  member  of  a class  (M)  has  (or  does  not  have)
a certain  property  (P)  and  if  certain  individuals  (S)  are  included  in
that  class  (M),  then  these  individuals  (S)  have  (or  do  not  have)  the
property  (P)  It  is  clear  that  whatever  can  be  asserted  of  every
member  of  a class  can  also  be  asserted  of  every  member  of  a class
contained  in  the  first  class.  When  we  apply  a general  rule  (e.g.
"‘All  neap  tides  are  low  tides  ”)  to  a particular  case  (e.g.  “ This  is
a neap  tide  ”)  to  deduce  a result  (e.g.  “ This  is  a low  tide  ”)  we  are

^ Mr.  W.  E.  Jolinson  gives  an  amusing  example  of  an  argument  in  Figure  IV,
* Any  argument  wortliy  of  logical  recognition  must  be  such  as  -would  occur  in
ordinary  discourse.  Now  it  will  be  found  that  no  argument  occurring  in
ordinary  discourse  is  in  the  fourth  figure.  Hence,  no  argument  in  the  fourth
figure  is  worthy  of  logical  recognition.’  (Logic^  Pt.  II,  p.  89.)

* Anal,  Priora,  24.b,  26-30.  Td  8e  iv  SXco  elvai  iregov  iregcp  xal  to  Koxa
navrdg  Hatriyogeiadat  Baiiegov  Qaxegov  ravrov  icrciv,  Myofxsv  6^  x6  Kara
jiavTog  xarrjyoQStadaL,  dtav  fitjdiv  fj  Xa^ilv  rcbv  rov  ^noxeiixivov
ddrsQov  o'b  KexQ'^aexai,  Kal rd  Kara  iJL7]devo  g wadvrco  g.  ( ‘ That  one  term  should
be  included  in  another  as  in  a whole  is  the  same  as  for  the  other  to  be  predi-
cated of  all  of  the  first.  And  we  say  that  one  term  is  predicated  of  all  of
another,  whenever  no  instance  of  the  subject  can  be  found  of  which  the  other
cannot  be  asserted : “ to  be  predicated  of  none  ” must  be  understood  in  the
same  way.’)


THE  TEADITIONAL  CATEGOEICAL  SYLLOGISM  87


reasoning  in  accordance  witL  tMs  dictum.  Our  rule  can  be  equally
well  expressed  negatively,  e.g.  ‘^Ho  one  wlio  is  carrying  a liglited
cigar  is  admitted  to  the  British.  Museum ; He  is  carrying  a lighted
cigar ; therefore,  he  is  not  admitted  to  the  British  Museum
There  is,  of  course,  nothing  in  the  rule  which  prevents  him  from
being  admitted,  if  he  extinguishes  the  cigar,  but  in  that  case,  he
does  not  fall  under  the  rule.  It  is,  of  course,  essential  to  ascertain
whether  a proposed  case  is  really  a case  before  the  rule  can  be  applied.^

This  dictum  applies  directly  only  to  Figure  I.  This  can  be
shown  clearly,  if  it  is  restated  in  the  form :

If  Every  M is  P (or  not)
and  All  (or  some)  S is  M,
then  All  (or  some)  S is  P (or  not).

Prom  this  we  can  directly  deduce  rules  which  apply  to  Figure  L
These  rules  are :

(1)  The  major  'premiss  must  he  universal.  This  is  given  in  the
assertion  that  P is  predicated  of  every  M.

(2)  The  minor  premiss  must  be  affirmative.  This  is  given  in  the
assertion  that  S (either  wholly  or  partly)  falls  under  M.

These  are  the  only  conditions  implied  by  the  dictum.  Hence
the  major  premiss  may  be  affirmative  or  negative,  provided  that  it
is  universal;  the  minor  premiss  may  be  universal  or  particular,
provided  that  it  be  affirmative.  It  follows  that,  of  the  A,  E,  I,  0
propositions,  the  combinations  A A,  E A,  A I,  E I,  will  yield  valid
conclusions ; but  that  neither  0 nor  I can  be  a major  premiss,  nor
E nor  0 a minor  premiss.

It  will  be  found  that  not  all  these  combinations  are  valid  in  the
other  figures,  whereas  some  of  the  excluded  combinations  are  valid.
This  result  is  not  surprising,  since  the  combinations  have  been
deduced  from  a dictum  that  applies  directly  only  to  this  figure.
Equally  self-evident  dicta  can  be  formulated  for  the  other  figures,
from  which  the  combinations  valid  in  each  of  them  can  be  deduced.
We  shall  not,  however,  adopt  this  method  now,  but  shall  proceed
at  once  to  state  the  traditional  rules  of  the  syllogism  which  apply
to  aU  the  figures.  2

The  rules  are  usually  stated  as  follows  :

(1)  A syllogism  contains  three  and  only  three  terms.

(2)  A syllogism  consists  of  three  and  only  three  propositions.

These  so-called  rules  are  not  rules  to  secure  the  validity  of  a

syllogistic  argument ; they  serve  to  define  what  hind  of  argument
is  to  be  considered  syllogistic.  They,  therefore,  constitute  part  of

^ See  p.  8.

® These  rules  are  here  stated  very  shortly.  For  a fuller  discussion  see
Keynes,  Pt.  Ill,  Chaps.  I-III,


88  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

tlie  definition  of  syllogism  ” and  need  not  be  considered  furtlier.

(3)  The  middle  term  must  he  distributed  in  one  at  least  of  the  pre-
misses. Since  it  is  tbrougb  the  middle  term  that  the  connexion
between  the  extreme  terms  is  secured,  it  is  essential  that  the  same
part  of  the  middle  term  should  be  related  to  both  the  extreme  terms.
Yiolation  of  this  rule  is  known  as  the  fallacy  of  undistributed  middle.
The  importance  of  this  rule  can  be  illustrated  by  the  following
examples.

If  All  musicians  are  sensitive
and  All  poets  are  sensitive,
then  All  poets  are  musicians,

is  an  invahd  argument,  since  it  does  not  follow  from  the  premisses
that  the  sensitive  people  who  are  musicians  are  the  same  as  the
sensitive  people  who  are  poets,  or  are  the  same  as  any  of  those
who  are  poets.  It  may  be  the  case,  but  the  premisses  do  not  justify
us  in  concluding  that  it  is  so.

(4)  No  term  may  he  distributed  in  the  conclusion  unless  it  was
distributed  in  its  own  premiss.  Since  to  distribute  a term  is  to  take
it  in  its  whole  extent,  a distributed  term  refers  to  every  member
contained  under  the  term.^  Then,  if  a term,  given  undistributed
in  its  premiss,  were  distributed  in  the  conclusion,  it  follows  that
the  conclusion  would  go  beyond  the  data.  This  rule  rests  upon  the
fundamental  principle  that  if  the  data  refer  to  some  only  of  a class,
no  conclusion  referring  to  every  member  of  the  class  can  be  deduced.
Violation  of  this  rule  is  known  as  the  fallacy  of  illicit  major ^ or  of
illicit  minor.

(5)  From  two  negative  premisses  no  conclusion  follows.  This  rule
follows  from  the  same  consideration  as  rule  3,  viz.  that  both  prenoisses
must  refer  to  the  same  part  of  the  middle  term,  either  by  inclusion
in  both  cases,  or  by  inclusion  in  one  case  and  exclusion  in  the  other.
If  all  that  were  given  were  the  exclusion  of  both  extremes  from  the
middle,  no  connexion  between  the  extremes  would  be  established.
Thus,  if  the  premisses  were : ‘‘  No  popes  are  infallible  ” and  No
Scotchmen  are  popes  ”,  no  connexion  between  those  who  are  in-
fallible ” and  Scotchmen  could  be  deduced.

(6)  (a)  If  one  premiss  is  negative,  the  conclusion  must  be  negative,
(b)  If  the  conclusion  is  negative,  one  premiss  must  he  negative.  These
rules  follow  from  the  same  consideration  as  rule  5.

From  these  rules  three  corollaries  can  be  deduced.

Corollaries,  (i)  From  two  particular  premisses  no  conclusion  follows.
There  are  three  cases :

1 It  must  be  remembered  that  there  is  no  meaning  in  speaMng  of  the
“distribution”  of  a term,  unless  the  term  be  a class.  See  p.  49  above.
(Chap.  IV).


THE  TEADITIONAL  CATEGORICAL  SYLLOGISM  89

{a)  Both  premisses  affiTmative,  Since  these  premisses  ^ are  ex
hypothesi  particular  and  affirmative,  no  term  is  distributed  in  either
premiss.  Hence,  the  middle  term  cannot  be  distributed.

(b)  One  affirmative^  one  negative  premiss.  Since  both  premisses
are  particular  and  only  one  is  negative,  they  distribute  between
them  only  one  term  (viz.  the  predicate  of  the  negative  premiss).
But  since  one  is  negative,  the  conclusion  must  be  negative  by  rule
6 (a).  Hence,  by  rule  4,  the  major  term  must  be  distributed.  Also,
by  rule  3,  the  middle  term  must  be  distributed.  Thus  two  terms
must  be  distributed  in  these  premisses.  But  only  one  term  is  given
distributed.  Hence,  no  conclusion  follows.

(c)  Both  premisses  negative.  This  case  is  excluded  by  rule  5.

(ii)  If  one  premiss  is  particular,  the  conclusion  must  he  particular .
There  are  again  three  cases.

{a)  Both  premisses  affirmative.  Since  one  is  particular  and  both
are  affirmative,  they  distribute  between  them  only  one  term.  This
must  be  the  middle  term  (by  rule  3).  Hence,  no  other  term  can
be  distributed  (by  rule  4).  But  a conclusion  with  an  undistributed
subject  must  be  particular.

(6)  One  premiss  negative,  one  affirmative.  Since  one  is  particular
and  one  negative,  they  can  distribute  between  them  only  two  terms.
Of  these,  one  must  be  the  middle  term  (by  rule  3)  and  one  the  major
term  (by  rule  4)  since  the  conclusion  must  be  negative  (by  rule  6 {a).
Hence,  the  minor  term  cannot  be  distributed,  i.e.  the  conclusion
must  be  particular.

(c)  The  same  applies  to  this  case  as  to  (c)  under  (i).

(iii)  If  the  major  premiss  is  particular,  the  minor  premiss  cannot
he  negative.

If  the  minor  premiss  were  negative,  the  major  premiss  must  be
affirmative.  But  it  is  given  as  particular.  It  would,  therefore,  be
particular  affirmative,  and  neither  of  its  terms  would  be  distributed.
But  since  the  minor  is  negative,  the  conclusion  must  be  negative.
Hence,  by  rule  4,  the  major  term  must  be  distributed.  But  it  has
just  been  shown  that  it  cannot  be.  Hence,  the  major  premiss  cannot
be  particular  if  the  minor  is  negative.

The  rules  of  the  syllogism  can  be  summed  up  conveniently  as
follows :

I.  Rules  concerning  quantity,  i.e.  distribution.

The  middle  term  must  be  distributed  once  at  least,  and  no  term
may  be  distributed  in  the  conclusion  unless  it  was  distributed  in  its
premiss.

II.  Rules  concerning  quality.

From  two  negative  premisses  no  conclusion  follows.  If  one  pre-
miss is  negative,  so  must  the  conclusion  be ; if  the  conclusion  is
negative,  so  must  one  premiss  be.  These  are  general  rules  of  the


90


A MODEEN  IMEODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


syllogism  applying  to  all  four  figures.  Tlie  rules  of  quality  are
unafiected  by  the  position  of  the  terms  in  the  premisses.  Hence,
from  these  rules  and  from  the  corollaries  we  can  deduce  that  certain
combinations  of  premisses  are  not  permissible  in  any  figure.  The
rules  of  quality  exclude:  EE,  E 0,  OE,  0 0.^  The  corollaries
exclude:  II,  10,  0 0,  01,  IE,  OE,  E 0.

Since  the  distribution  of  a term  in  any  proposition  depends  upon
whether  it  is  subject  or  predicate,  combinations  not  excluded  by
the  rules  of  distribution  may  nevertheless  not  be  permissible  in  any
given  figure.  But  special  rules  for  each  figure  can  be  deduced  from
the  rules  of  distribution.  It  will  be  found  convenient  to  remember
that  a term  is  distributed  if  it  is  the  subject  of  a universal  proposi-
tion or  the  predicate  of  a negative  proposition ; it  will  be  undis-
tributed if  it  is  the  subject  of  a particular  proposition  or  the  predicate
of  an  affirmative  proposition.

Sjpecial  Rules  of  Figure  /.  Schema.  M — P

S — M
S — P.

(i)  The  minor  'premiss  must  be  affirmative.  If  it  were  negative,
the  major  premiss  must  be  affirmative  and  the  conclusion  negative.
Hence,  the  major  term  would  be  distributed  in  the  conclusion  but
not  in  its  premiss,  of  which  it  is  the  predicate.  Hence,  the  minor
premiss  cannot  be  negative.

(ii)  The  major  premiss  must  he  universal.  Since  the  minor  pre-
miss must  be  affirmative,  the  middle  term  cannot  be  distributed  in
the  minor  premiss,  of  which  it  is  predicate.  It  must,  therefore,  be
distributed  in  the  major  premiss  of  which  it  is  subject.  Hence,
the  major  premiss  must  be  universal.

These  are  the  two  rules  which  we  deduced  directly  from  the
dictum  de  omni.  They  are  now  seen  to  follow  from  rules  applying
to  all  the  figures.

Prom  the  special  rules  we  can  determine  directly  what  moods
are  valid  in  Figure  I.  It  must  be  remembered  that  any  combina-
tion of  premisses  from  which  a universal  conclusion  follows  would
also  justify  a particular  conclusion,  for  in  that  case  the  particular
proposition  would  be  the  subimplicant  of  the  universal  conclusion.
Such  a conclusion  is  called  weakened.  The  unweakened  moods  of
the  syllogism  have  been  given  special  names,  which  are  convenient
for  reference,  and  will  be  added  in  brackets  after  each  valid  mood.

Valid  Moods  of  Figure  I.  The  possible  combinations  of  pre-
misses allowed  by  the  rules  of  distribution  and  not  excluded  by  the

1 The  major  premiss  is  in  each  case  written  first.  It  will  be  noted  that
0 0 is  excluded  both  by  the  rules  of  quality  and  by  corollary  (i),  and  0 B is
excluded  both  by  the  rules  of  quality  and  by  corollary  (iii).


THE  TEADITIONAL  CATEGORICAL  SYLLOGISM  91

rules  of  quality  are  : A A,  A E,  A I,  A 0,  E A,  E I,  I A,
combinations  excluded  by  tbe  special  rules  are  A E,  A 0,  I A,  0 A.
The  remaining  combinations  are  valid  in  this  figure.  Hence,  the
valid  moods  of  Figure  I are :

AAA  (Barbara)  and  AAI  (weakened  conclusion)

All  (Darii)

EAE  (Celarent)  and  E AO  (weakened  conclusion)

El  0 (Ferio).

Special  Rules  of  Figure  Schema.  P — M

S — M
S — P.

(i)  One  premiss  must  he  negative.  This  is  necessary  in  order  to
secure  the  distribution  of  the  middle  term.

(ii)  The  major  premiss  must  he  universal,,  This  is  necessary  in
order  to  secure  the  distribution  of  the  major  term,  since  the  con-
clusion must  always  be  negative.

Valid  Moods  of  Figure  II,

EAE  (Cesare)  E A 0 (weakened  conclusion)

A E E (Camestres)  A E 0 (weakened  conclusion)

A 0 0 (Baroco)

El  0 (Festino).

Special  Rules  of  Figure  III,  Schema.  M — P

M — S

S — P.

(i)  The  minor  premiss  must  he  affirmative.  This  is  for  the  same
reason  as  in  Figure  I.

(ii)  The  conclusion  must  he  particular.  This  follows  from  rule  (i).

Valid  Moods  of  Figure  IIL^

AAI  (Darapti)

All  (Datisi)

I A I (Disamis)

EAO  (Felapton)

E I 0 (Ferison)

OAO  (Bocardo).

Special  Rules  of  Figure  IV.  Schema.  P — M

M — S
S — P.

^ The  deduction  of  the  special  rules  is  very  easy.  The  proofs  have  been
given  fuhy  in  the  case  of  Figure  I.  For  the  remaining  figures,  the  proofs  will
only  be  indicated,  and  the  valid  moods  will  be  simply  stated.

® Since  the  conclusion  must  be  particular,  there  are  no  weakened  con-
clusions in  this  figure.


92


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


(i)  Tlie  major  premiss  cannot  be  particular,  if  either  premiss  is
negative.  (Violation  of  this  rale  would  involve  illicit  major.)

(ii)  The  minor  premiss  cannot  be  particular,  if  the  major  premiss
is  affirmative.  (Violation  of  this  rule  would  involve  undistributed
middle.)

(iii)  The  conclusion  cannot  be  universal,  if  the  minor  premiss  is
affirmative.  (Violation  of  this  rule  would  involve  illicit  minor.)

Valid  Moods  of  Figure  77.

A A I (Bramantip)

A E E (Camenes)  A E 0 (weakened  conclusion)

EAO  (Fesapo)

El  0 (Fresison)

I,  A I (Dimaris).

§ 4.  REDUCTION  AND  THE  ANTILOGISM

Since  in  Aristotle’s  view  the  principle  now  called  the  dictum  de
Omni  is  the  sole  principle  of  syllogistic  reasoning,  and  since  it  applies
directly  only  to  Figure  I,  he  regarded  syllogisms  expressed  in  the  other
figures  as  indirect  moods  of  the  first.  He,  therefore,  devised  a method
of  reducing  syllogisms  in  Figures  II  and  III  to  Figure  I,  either  by
conversion  of  the  premisses,  or  by  reductio  ad  impossible.'^  It  is  no
longer  supposed  that  the  other  figures  are  less  self-evident  than  the
first,  so  that  reduction  to  Figure  I has  a merely  historical  interest.
But  the  method  of  reduction  can  be  extended  so  that  an  argument
stated  in  a given  mood  or  figure  can  be  expressed  in  some  other
mood  or  some  other  figure.  Any  mood  can  be  reduced  to  any  other
provided  that  neither  mood  contaius  a weakened  conclusion  or  a
strengthened  premiss.  ^ By  this  method  the  interrelation  of  the
various  moods  can  be  clearly  exhibited.  We  have  already  given
an  example  of  the  reduction  of  a syllogism  in  Celarent  to  Cesare.^
The  reduction  of  syllogisms  provides  a useful  logical  exercise,  which
the  beginner  in  logic  often  finds  amusing.  But  the  doctrine  of
reduction  has  not  the  importance  that  was  formerly  ascribed  to  it
and  it  will  be  treated  only  very  briefly  here.^  It  will  be  convenient

^ Aristotle^s  term  is  dnaycoyrj  slg  to  ddvvaTov.  He  puts  the  matter  shortly
thus : ‘ It  is  clear  also  that  all  the  imperfect  syllogisms  are  made  perfect  by
means  of  the  first  figure.  For  all  are  brought  to  a conclusion  either  ostensively
or  per  impossible  ’ (Anal.  Priora,  29a,  30).]

* A premiss  is  said  to  be  strengthened  when  the  same  conclusion  could  be
obtained  were  its  subimplicant  substituted  for  it.  If  we  accept  the  modern
view  that  universal  propositions  are  existentially  negative  whilst  particular
propositions  are  existentially  affirmative,  it  follows  that  syllogisms  containing
either  a strengthened  premiss  or  a weakened  conclusion  are  always  invah'd.

^ See  p.  85.

* The  best  treatment  of  Meduction  will  be  found  in  Keynes,  F.L.,  Pt.  Ill,
Chap.  III.


THE  TEADITIONAL  CATEGOEICAL  SYLLOGISM  93

to  treat  our  syllogisms  as  arguments,  that  is,  as  syllogisms  in  whioli
the  premisses  are  asserted  to  be  true  and,  since  the  conclusion  follows
from  them,  the  conclusion  is  also  asserted  to  be  true.^  Consequently,
it  is  best  to  take  a trite  example.  Suppose,  then,  we  assert,

AU  Marxians  are  Socialists,

No  supporters  of  Mussolini  are  Socialists,

No  supporters  of  Mussolini  are  Marxians,

we  have  a syllogism  in  Camestres,  (Figure  II.)

If  we  transpose  the  premisses,  i.e.  reverse  the  major  and  minor
premisses,  and  convert  the  new  major  premiss,  we  have

No  Socialists  are  supporters  of  Mussolini,

All  Marxians  are  Socialists,

No  Marxians  are  supporters  of  Mussolini.

This  is  an  example  of  Celarent  in  Figure  I.  Its  conclusion  is
the  converse  of  our  original  conclusion.  Hence,  if  it  be  simply
converted  the  original  conclusion  is  obtained.

In  this  example  we  have  shown  the  equivalence  of  the  moods
Celarent  and  Camestres,  It  is  not  contended  that  the  mood  in
Figure  I is  superior  in  self-evidence  to  the  mood  in  Figure  II.  Self-
evidence is  a psychological  notion,  and  what  is  self-evident  to  one
man  will  not  necessarily  be  self-evident  to  another.  But  it  is  un-
likely that  any  one  who  failed  to  see  the  cogency  of  the  reasoning
in  Camestres  would  be  more  likely  to  see  it  in  the  case  of  Celarent.
The  traditional  theory  of  reduction,  however,  is  that  it  is  a process
of  proof  Its  purpose  is  to  show  that  a syllogism  in  a figure  other
than  the  first  is  valid  because  the  same  (or  an  equivalent)  conclusion
can  be  obtained  from  equivalent  premisses  in  Figure  I.  A syllogism
in  Figure  I is  supposed  to  be  directly  tested  by  reference  to  the
dictum  de  omni.  The  traditional  theory  does  not,  therefore,  regard
the  matter  as  a question  of  psychological  self-evidence.  It  must
be  granted  that  the  traditional  method  of  deducing  the  valid
moods  of  the  figures  only  suffices  to  show  that  these  moods  do
not  violate  any  of  the  syllogistic  rules.  In  the  case  of  Figure  I,
the  dictum  de  omni  assures  us  that  those  moods  which  do  not  violate
the  syllogistic  rules  are  valid.  So  far  we  have  not  formulated  any
dicta  that  would  give  us  the  same  assurance  in  the  case  of  the  other
figures.  The  traditional  doctrine  of  reduction  results  from  the  lack
of  such  dicta.  Before  supplying  this  deficiency,  we  shall  state  the
traditional  theory  of  indirect  reduction.  We  shall  here  adopt  the
convenient  symbolism  used  in  Chapter  V in  the  treatment  of
immediate  inferences.

^ See  Chap.  XII  for  further  discussion  of  the  distinction  between  an
argument  and  a form  of  implication*


94  A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

Suppose  tEat  we  were  in  fact  doubtful  wbetber  the  syllogism

M o P {Boeardo)

MaS
/•  SoP,

were  valid,  but  felt  no  doubt  about  the  validity  of  a syllogism  in
Barbara.  We  could  then  reason  as  follows : If  /S  o P is  not  true,
then  its  contradictory,  S a P,  must  be  true.  Combining  SaP  with
the  minor  premiss,  MaS,  we  obtain  the  syllogism,

SaP
MaS
/.  MaP

which  is  in  Barbara.  But  its  conclusion,  M a Pis  the  contradictory
of  ilf  0 P,  which  is  one  of  the  premisses  of  our  original  syllogism  and
which  was  thus  given  as  true.  Hence,  MaP  must  be  false.  But
it  is  the  conclusion  of  a valid  syllogism  in  Figure  I.  Therefore,  one
of  its  premisses  must  be  false.  But  not  M a 8^  since  that  was  given
as  true.  Therefore, S aP  false.  Hence,  its  contradictory  SoP
is  true.  S o Pis  established  indirectly,  since  its  contradictory,  SaP,
has  been  proved  to  be  false.

The  reasoning  upon  which  indirect  reduction  is  based  rests  upon
the  principle  that,  if  the  conclusion  of  a valid  syllogism  is  false,
one  or  other  (and  perhaps  both)  of  its  premisses  must  be  false.  This
can  be  shown  clearly  2 we  state  the  syllogism  in  the  impHcative
form.  Let  p stand  for  the  major  premiss,  q for  the  minor  premiss,
and  r for  the  conclusion  of  a valid  syllogism.  Then  we  have : If
p and  q,  then  r.  Contrapositing  this  implicative  proposition  we  have :
If  not-r,  then  either  not-p  or  not-q,  i.e.  if  the  conclusion  is  false,  one
of  the  premisses  is  false.

It  has  been  usual  to  confine  indirect  reduction  to  the  moods
Baroco  and  Boeardo  which  cannot  be  reduced  directly  by  using  con-
version alone.  ^ But  any  mood  in  Figures  II  and  III  can  be  indirectly
reduced  to  Figure  I.

Using  the  principle  upon  which  indirect  reduction  is  based,  2 we
can  exhibit  a set  of  syllogisms  as  equivalent  to  what  Mrs.  Ladd-

^ Aristotle  himself  used  indirect  reduction 'for  other  moods.  Thus,  he
gives  an  example  applied  to  Darapti,  in  the  passage  part  of  which  has  already
been  quoted  ; ‘ In  both  ways  [i.e.  directly,  or  ostensively,  and  indirectly]  the
first  figure  is  formed  ...  if  they  are  proved  per  impossible,  because  on  the
assumption  of  the  false  statement  the  syllogism  comes  about  by  means  of  the
first  figure,  e.g.  in  the  last  figure  [Figure  III],  if  A and  B belong  to  all  C,  it
follows  that  A belongs  to  some  B : for  if  A belonged  to  no  B,  and  B belongs
to  all  C,  A would  belong  to  no  C;  but  (as  we  stated)  it  belongs  to  all  C.
Similarly  also  with  the  rest’  {Anal.  Priora,  29a,  35).

* Cf . de  Morgan,  Formal  Logic,  p.  14,


THE  TRADITIONAL  CATEGORICAL  SYLLOGISM  95

Eraiiklin  has  called  the  ‘ inconsistent  triad  This  naay  be  stated
in  the  form : ‘ The  three  propositions,  q,  and  f cannot  be  true
together ^ When  the  three  propositions  contain  three  and  only
three  terms,  they  are  said  by  Mrs.  Ladd-Eranklin  to  constitute  an
Antilogism.^

Given  that  p,  q and  ? form  an  inconsistent  triad,  we  have  the
following  set  of  implications :

(1)  If  p and  q,  then  r.

(2)  If  p and  r,  then  q.

(3)  If  f and  q,  then  p.

As  an  example  of  an  inconsistent  triad  in  the  form  of  an  antilogism,
we  may  take  :

p,  No  popes  are  saintly.

q,  Hildebrand  is  a pope.

f,  Hildebrand  is  saintly.

We  then  have  the  following  set  of  syllogisms :

1 If  No  popes  are  saintly  p
and  Hildebrand  is  a pope,  q
then  Hildebrand  is  not  saintly,  r

2.  If  No  popes  are  saintly  p
and  Hildebrand  is  saintly,  f
then  Hildebrand  is  not  a pope,  q

3.  If  Hildebrand  is  saintly  f
and  Hildebrand  is  a pope,  q
then  Some  popes  are  saintly.  p

It  will  be  seen  (1)  that  these  three  syllogisms  are  equivalent  to
the  set  of  impKcations  given  above ; (2)  that  the  first  is  in  Figure  I,
the  second  in  Figure  II,  and  the  third  in  Figure  III.  Thus  we  see
that,  given  a valid  syllogism  in  Figure  I,  the  contradiction  of  its
conclusion  combined  with  the  major  premiss  yields  a syllogism  in
Figure  II,  having  for  its  conclusion  the  contradictory  of  the  original
minor ; combined  with  the  original  minor  premiss,  the  contradictory
of  the  original  conclusion  yields  a syllogism  in  Figure  III  having
for  its  conclusion  the  contradictory  of  the  original  major  premiss.
We  have  thus  shown  the  interdependence  of  the  three  figures.

We  saw  above  that  the  first  figure  could  be  regarded  as  the  applica-

1 Here,  as  throughout,  r,  §,  etc.,  stand  for  “ not-r”,  “ not-p  ”,  ‘‘  not-q  ”,
etc. ; i.e.  for  the  contradiction  of  g,  r,  etc.,  respectively.

* See  Baldwin,  Diet  of  Philosophy ^ art.  ” Symbolic  ILogic  ”.


96


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


tion  of  a general  rule  to  a particular  case.^  Let  p stand  for  a proposi-
tion asserting  a general  rule,  either  affirmatively  or  negatively.  Let  q
stand  for  a proposition  asserting  that  a certain  case  falls  under  the
rule.  Then  r stands  for  a proposition  asserting  the  result  of  the
application  of  the  rule  to  the  case.

For  example :

If  All  successful  authors  are  conceited.  (Rule)
and  Bernard  Shaw  is  a successful  author.  (Case)
then  Bernard  Shaw  is  conceited.  (Result)

If,  now,  we  deny  that  Bernard  Shaw  is  conceited  but  admit
the  rule,  we  must  deny  that  Bernard  Shaw  is  a successful  author.
Then  we  get,  Denial  of  Result,  combined  with  Rule,  yields  Denial
of  Case.  This  will  be  a syllogism  in  Figure  II.

If,  however,  we  deny  that  Bernard  Shaw  is  conceited  but  contend
that  he  is  a successful  author,  we  must  deny  the  rule.  Then  we  get.
Denial  of  Result,  combined  with  Case,  yields  Denial  of  Rule.  This
will  be  a syllogism  in  Figure  III.^

Generalizing  from  these  examples  we  may  formulate  dicta  for
Figures  II  and  III.

Dictum  for  Figure  II.  If  every  member  of  a class  has  (or  does
not  have)  a certain  property,  then  any  individual  or  individuals
which  do  not  have  (or  have)  that  property  must  be  excluded  from
that  class.

Dictum  for  Figure  III.  If  certain  individuals  have  (or  do  not
have)  a certain  property,  and  these  individuals  are  included  in  a
certain  class,  then  not  every  member  of  that  class  does  not  have
(or  has)  that  property.  ^

Thess  dicta  are  self-evident  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the  dictum
de  Omni  is  self-evident.  In  the  case  of  each  of  these  dicta  it  is  prob-
able that  they  would  be  most  easily  apprehended  in  the  first  instance
by  means  of  an  example  stated  in  explicit  terms.  But  once  the
principle  is  seen  to  be  exemplified  in  a particular  .case,  it  can  be
immeffiately  generalized  to  cover  other  cases.  Thus  we  may  be

^Cf.  Sigwart,  Logic,  I,  p.  354,  and  Keynes,  F.L.,  loc.  cit.

® The  student  is  advised  to  work  these  out  after  the  model  given  in  the
Antilogism  on  p.  95.

®Froin  these  dicta  the  special  rules  and  valid  moods  may  be  directly
deduced  as  follows :

Fig.  II.  (i)  The  major  premiss  must  he  universal.  This  rule  excludes
O,  I,  as  major  premisses,  (ii)  One  premiss  must  be  negative  (since  have  and
have  not  alternate).  This  rule  excludes  the  combinations  A A,  I A,  A 1.
Hence  the  valid  moods  are  A E E,  A 0 O,  E A E,  E I 0.

Fig.  III.  (i)  The  minor  premiss  must  he  affirmative  ; (ii)  The  conclusion
must  he  particular.  Hence,  no  restriction  is  placed  upon  the  major  premiss,
but  neither  E nor  0 can  be  a minor  premiss.  Accordingly  the  valid  combin-
ations are  A A I,  I A I,  All,  0 A 0,  E A 0,  E I 0.


THE  TRADITIONAL  CATEGORICAL  SYLLOGISM  9?

said  to  see  the  general  principle  in  apprehending  the  particular

case.^

Tlie  fourtli  figure  can  be  similarly  dealt  with.  In  tbis  case  tbe
equivalent  triads  will  yield  syllogisms  all  of  wMcli  are  in  Figure  IV.
Mt.  W.  B.  Johnson  has  shown  how  it  is  possible  to  construct  the
valid  moods  of  this  figure  from  the  following  antilogism :

^ Taking  any  three  classes,  it  is  impossible  that
The  first  should  be  wholly  included  in  the  second
while  The  second  is  wholly  excluded  from  the  third
and  The  third  is  partly  included  in  the  first.’  2

The  reader  who  is  interested  in  pursuing  this  development  may  be
referred  to  Mr.  Johnson’s  treatment.

The  formulation  of  the  dicta  for  the  first  three  figures  enables
us  to  see  clearly  that  each  figure  has  a special  appropriateness  to
a special  form  of  reasoning.  The  first  figure  is  appropriate  to  an
argument  in  which,  having  granted  that  a certain  property  belongs
to  every  member  of  a certain  class,  we  recognize  an  individual  as
belonging  to  that  class,  and  hence  conclude  that  it  possesses  that
property.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  minor  term  should  be  singular  ;
it  may  be  a subclass  falling  within  the  wider  class,  ^ as  we  saw  in
the  syllogism : ''  If  no  men  are  infallible  and  all  popes  are  men,
then  no  popes  are  infallible.”  Aristotle  called  this  figure  the  scien-
tific figure  ” {axfj/Lta  imarrjjuovcxdv),  that  is,  the  figure  which  gives
us  knowledge,  for  knowledge,  according  to  Aristotle,  is  always  of  the
essence.  From  this  point  of  view  the  middle  term  is  regarded  as
giving  the  reason  why  the  major  belongs  to  the  minor  (or  does  not
belong).  The  syllogism  is  here  supposed  to  be  asserting  an  essential
connexion.  Aristotle  puts  the  matter  thus : ‘ Of  all  figures  the
most  scientific  is  the  first.  Thus,  it  is  the  vehicle  of  the  demon-
strations of  all  the  mathematical  sciences,  such  as  arithmetic,  geo-
metry, and  optics,  and  practically  of  all  sciences  that  investigate
causes : for  the  syllogism  of  the  reasoned  fact  is  either  exclusively
or  generally  speaking  and  in  most  cases  in  this  figure — a second
proof  that  this  figure  is  most  scientific ; for  grasp  of  a reasoned
conclusion  is  the  primary  condition  of  knowledge.  Thirdly,  the
first  is  the  only  figure  which  enables  us  to  pursue  knowledge  of  the

1 This  is  an  example  of  what  Mr.  W.  E.  Johnson  calls  ‘ intuitive  induc-
tion See  Logic,  II,  p.  29,  and  cf.  p.  243  below.

2 Logic,  II,  p.  87.  Cf.  Keynes,  F.L.,  §§  266,  272,  Mr.  Johnson’s  treat-
ment of  the  categorical  syllogism  is  much  the  best  treatment  from  this  point
of  view.  It  is,  however,  so  compressed,  that  it  can  be  profitably  studied  only
by  those  who  have  some  acquaintance  with  the  traditional  doctrine.

® It  will  be  remembered  that  the  traditional  Logicians  did  not  distinguish
between  these  two  cases,

7


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOOIC


essence  of  a thing.’  ^ In  onx  interpretation  of  the  dictum  we  have
emphasized  the  class  element  and  have  thus  departed  from  Aristotle’s
view.  Later  we  shall  be  concerned  with  the  nature  of  the  distinc-
tion between  these  two  views.

The  second  figure,  which  admits  only  of  negative  conclusions,  is
specially  adapted  to  show  that  a certain  individual,  or  individuals,
do  not  belong  to  a class.  Hence,  it  has  sometimes  been  called  the
Figure  of  Exclusion.  The  third  figure,  which  admits  only  of  particular
conclusions,  is  specially  adapted  to  show  that  not  every  member  of
a class  has  a certain  property,  or  that  two  properties  are  compatible,
since  they  are  both  possessed  by  a certain  individual,  or  individuals.
Thus  we  may  argue  that,  ''  If  Spenser  is  a poet  and  Spenser  is  a
scholar,  then  to  be  a poet  is  not  incompatible  with  being  a scholar.”
This  figure  has  sometimes  been  called  the  Inductive  Figure,  since
the  production  of  examples  having  the  character  c and  also  c'  suggests
that  perhaps  c and  c'  are  essentially  connected.

§5.  AMBIGUITY  OF  TERMS

It  is  customary  to  include  among  the  general  rules  of  the  syllogism
one  to  the  effect  that  the  middle  term  must  not  be  ambiguous
Dr.  Keynes  makes  a slight  improvement  by  stating  this  rule  as
follows : No  one  of  the  three  terms  of  a syllogism  may  be  used  am-
biguously ”.  Clearly,  if  a rule  to  avoid  ambiguity  is  to  be  included,  it
must  apply  to  the  major  and  minor,  as  well  as  to  the  middle,  term.
But  this  rule  is  secured  by  the  rule  that  there  must  be  only  three
terms,  for  an  ambiguous  term  ” is,  in  fact,  not  one  term  but  two.
Hence,  ambiguity  involves  what  is  known  as  the  fallacy  of  quaternio
terminorum,  that  is  the  fallacy  of  four  terms.  2 Bor  example,  the
syllogism  All  politicians  put  the  interests  of  their  party  above  the
interests  of  the  State  ; Baldwin  is  a politician ; therefore,  Baldwin
puts  the  interest  of  his  party  above  the  interests  of  the  State”,
will  involve  the  fallacy  of  four  terms  if  politicians  ” in  the  major
premiss  is  used  in  a sense  other  than  that  in  which  it  is  used  in  the
minor  premiss.  For  instance,  in  the  major  “ politicians  ” may
mean  “ keen  party  politicians  ” ; in  the  minor  it  may  mean  men
in  official  positions  in  the  government”.  In  that  case  we  have
four  terms,  and  it  may  be  that  the  difference  between  the  two  inter-
pretations of  politician  ” is  relevant  to  the  characteristic  predicated
of  keen  party  politicians  ”,  i.e.  ""  politicians  ” in  the  major  premiss.
The  difficulty  arises  from  the  vagueness  of  the  word  “ pohtician  ”,
which  may  lead  to  ambiguity.  In  the  application  of  any  rule  to

^ Ami.  Pnora,  79a,  17.  Cf.  426,  30.

^ See  Keynes,  F.L,,  § 199.  Br.  Keynes  recognizes  that  “ ambiguous  terms  ”
involve  the  fallacy  of  four  terms.  Nevertheless  he  thinks  it  neoessaiy  to  add
this  rule.


THE  TRADITIONAL  CATEGORICAL  SYLLOGISM  99


a particular  case,  it  is  obviously  necessary  to  be  certain  that  the

case  ” stated  in  the  minor  premiss  really  is  a case.  In  representing
the  syllogism  by  symbols,  no  ambiguity  can  arise,  because  symbols
are  as  such  jirecise,  and,  therefore,  unambiguous.  In  this  consists
the  value  of  symbols.  But  in  the  traditional  treatment  of  the
syllogism  the  emphasis  has  been  mainly  upon  the  non-formal  elements
of  reasoning,  hence  the  difficulties  arising  from  the  nature  of  verbal
symbols  cannot  be  neglected.  Indeed,  the  inclusion  of  the  rule  about
ambiguous  middle  shows  that  the  traditional  Logicians  were  aware
that  what  seems  to  be  a middle  term  may  fail  to  connect.  It  was
pointed  out  in  Chapter  II,  that  the  distinction  between  equivocal  ”
and  univocal  ” terms  was  absurdly  drawn.  The  ease  with  which
the  different  meanings  of  vice  ''  spirits  ""  fair  light  and
so  on,  can  be  detected  shows  that  these  words  are  not  equivocal.
The  fallacy  of  begging  the  question  may  afford  a good  example  of
ambiguous  terms.  To  beg  the  question  is  to  assume  the  point  in
dispute.  This  is  frequently  achieved  by  means  of  dyslogistic  or
eulogistic  terms.  Eor  example,  a certain  historical  event  is  called
the^^  Reformation  from  which  it  may  be  supposed  that  there  was  a
change  for  the  better,  an  improvement,  owing  to  the  common  use
of  reform  ’’  as  meaning  improve  ”,  Fallacies  of  ambiguity  are
extremely  common  in  political  and  religious  discussions.  The  Port
Royal  Logic  abounds  in  examples  of  this  fallacy,  e.g.  ' If  God  is  just,
sinners  will  be  punished ' ; 'No  one  is  able  to  abandon  himself ;
every  man  is  an  enemy  to  himself ; Therefore  there  are  some  enemies
whom  we  cannot  abandon.’

Familiar  proverbs  afford  examples  of  ambiguity  which  would
involve  fallacies  if  taken  literally.  For  example : " Two  many  cooks
spoil  the  broth.”  For  this  reason,  there  is  usually  to  be  found  a
counter  proverb,  e.g.  " Many  hands  make  light  work.”  To  draw
the  line  between  those  cases  where  the  first  proverb  applies  and
those  to  which  the  second  applies  requires  good  sense.  This  is
obvious  in  such  examples.  But  these  are  only  especially  glaring
examples  of  the  danger  of  ambiguous  terms.  It  is  almost  impos-
sible to  give  a short  and  convincing  example  of  a really  serious,
because  not  obviously  transparent,  ambiguity.  Many  of  the  sophisms
of  the  Greeks  were  based  upon  ambiguities  of  this  kind.  Much
of  what  passes  for  reasoning  in  political  debate  contains  fallacies
no  less  absurd  but  less  obvious  than  the  examples  we  have  given.

It  may  be  supposed  that  logic  is  not  concerned  with  fallacies
due  to  ambiguous  words,  since  it  is  the  study  of  form,  and  aH  reason-
ing IS  conclusive  solely  in  virtue  of  its  form.  Yet,  we  reason  concern-
ing the  affairs  of  everyday  Hfe.  We  do  apply  rules  to  cases,  and
argue  that^  so  and  so  is  the  case  ” because  " something  else  is  such
and  such  . If  the  syllogism  has  any  significance  in  the  actual


100  A MODERK  mTRODtJCTION  TO  LOGIC

procedtixe  of  reflective  tMnking,  tLen  fallacies  of  ambiguity  must
be  taken  into  account.  But  ambiguity  is  not  a matter  of  form.
No  one  would  be  taken  in  by  tbe  following  argument : "'All  bishops
move  only  diagonally ; Winnington  Ingram  is  a bishop  ; therefore,  he
moves  only  diagonally.”  Yet,  according  to  the  traditional  treat-
ment, this  is  a formally  correct  syllogism.  There  is  an  unfortimate
practice  common  to  the  writers  of  textbooks  in  logic  of  using  ob-
viously false  premisses  from  which  to  “ deduce  ” a conclusion  that
is  true.  Thus  Welton  gives  the  example :

Lions  are  herbivorous
Cows  are  lions
/.  Cows  are  herbivorous.^

Of  this,  it  can  only  be  said,  either  the  premisses  are  intended  to
be  significant,  and  in  that  case  the  conclusion  does  not  follow :
or  the  words  used  in  the  premisses  are  used  merely  as  symbols,
mere  M’s  and  S’s  and  P’s,  and  then  the  conclusion  is  not  true,  nor
false,  but  is  the  implied  conclusion.  This  consideration  leads  us  to
the  distinction  of  validity  and  truth,  with  which  we  shall  be  concerned
in  a later  chapter.  Here  it  is  sufficient  to  point  out  that,  in  so  far
as  the  syllogism  is  treated  as  a form  of  implication,  ambiguity  cannot
arise ; in  so  far  as  it  is  treated  as  a means  of  establishing  a true
conclusion,  which  is  asserted  to  be  true,  it  is  liable  to  fallacies  of
ambiguity  which  cannot  be  provided  against  by  formal  rules.

§ 6.  THE  USB  OF  SYMBOLS  IN  THE  TRADITIONAL
SYLLOGISM

The  rapid  development  of  the  science  of  logic  during  the  last
thirty  or  forty  years  is  undoubtedly  mainly  due  to  the  systematic
employment  of  symbols  and  to  the  consequent  invention  of  a more
and  more  adequate  symbohsm.  With  the  precise  nature  of  this
symbolism  and  its  importance  in  the  development  of  logic,  we  shall
be  concerned  in  Chapters  VIII — X.  Here  we  shall  only  attempt  to
determine  to  what  extent  the  traditional  treatment  of  the  syllogism
has  been  symbolic.

What,  it  may  be  asked,  constitutes  a symbolic  treatment  of  a
subject  ? We  saw  in  Chapter  II  that  all  language  is  symbolic  in
the  sense  that,  with  the  exception  of  purely  demonstrative  signs,
it  is  a system  of  arbitrary  signs  used  to  signify  certain  features  of
a situation  that  have  been  abstracted  from  their  context.  Thus,
the  employment  of  language  enables  us  to  abbreviate  our  references,
to  indicate  more  or  less  unambiguously  and  precisely,  and  to  refer
to  what  is  not  sensibly  presented.  “ The  sun  setting  into  a bank
of  clouds  signifies  a wet  day  to-morrow.”  In  this  sentence  the  words
^ Welton  and  Monahan,  An  Intermediate  Logic,  p.  214.


THE  TKADITIONili  CATEGOEICAL  SYLLOGISM  101

written  before  signifies  are  a set  of  symbols  wbicb  abbreviate  and
abstract  from  a complex  situation  in  order  to  connect  it  with  an-
other situation,  abbreviated  and  abstracted  hy  means  of  the  words
which  follow  signifies.  Suppose  that  we  now  carry  the  process  of
abbreviation  further  and  represent  the  first  set  of  words  by  M and
the  second  set  by  P.  Then  we  get  ‘‘  M signifies  P This  is  an
abstract  symbolism  of  a rule  generalized  hy  means  of  the  symbols
employed.  The  generality  is  not  so  obvious  in  the  case  of  the  verbal
symbols,  but  apart  from  some  degree  of  generalization  there  could
be  no  rule.

Language  has  constantly  to  abbreviate.  If  we  attempted  to
employ  a phrase  that  would  convey  the  same  meaning  as  the  word
"'civilization’’  conveys  to  the  ordinary  educated  Enghshman,  the
sentences  in  which  it  occurs  would  soon  become  unmanageable,  so
that  we  should  be  rmable  to  apprehend  the  sense  of  what  was  said-
Hence,  it  is  obvious,  that  in  attempting  to  make  explicit  the  fonn
of  our  reflective  thinking,  we  are  forced  to  employ  symbols.  Thus,
Aristotle  in  explaining  the  form  of  the  syllogism  found  it  necessary
to  use  literal  symbols.  He  felt  more  sure  of  the  validity  of  his
reasoning  when  he  said,  " If  R belongs  to  some  8 and  P to  all  8,
P must  belong  to  some  P than  would  have  been  the  case  had
he  used  only  concrete  examples,  such  as ' motion  ' awake  ’, ' animal  ^
He  employed  symbols  to  test  the  validity  of  his  reasoning  by  exhibiting
its  form.  It  is  this  that  constitutes  a symbolic  treatment  of  the
syllogism.  As  Boole  has  pointed  out,  ' The  canonical  forms  of  the
Aristotelian  syllogism  are  really  symbolical ; only  the  symbols  are
less  perfect  of  their  kind  than  those  of  mathematics.  If  they  are
employed  to  test  the  validity  of  an  argument,  they  as  truly  super-
sede the  exercise  of  reason,  as  does  a reference  to  a formula  of
analysis.’ 3 The  use  of  symbols  involves  abbreviation,  abstraction,
emphasis  upon  form.  This  is  the  first  essential  of  symbolism — to
reveal  form.  To  the  extent  to  which  the  traditional  treatment  of
the  syllogism  is  formal,  to  that  extent  it  is  symbolic.  Hence  we
shall  find  that  the  increasing  generality  in  the  treatment  of  logic,
characteristic  of  modem  times,  is  the  development  of  the  treat-
ment begun  by  Aristotle.

The  purpose  of  the  Aristotelian  treatment  of  logic  is  to  reduce
the  multiform  expressions  of  ordinary  reflective  thinking  into  one
standard  form  of  expression  for  the  sole  purpose  of  testing  their
validity.  This  emphasis  upon  form  constitutes  the  value  of  the
theory  of  the  syllogism.  The  further  attempt  to  reduce  these  various,
and  in  fact  irreducible,  forms  of  expression  to  one  form  is  the  cause
of  the  comparative  sterility  of  Aristotelian  logic.  In  this  lies  its

^ Anal,  Priora,  286,  12.  ®loc.  cit.,  386,  1.


102


A MODEBN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


main  weakness.  TMs  defect  is  largely  the  result  of  the  imperfect
development  of  the  symbols,  since  Aristotle,  relying  too  much  upon
accidental  linguistic  forms,  saw  no  necessity  to  sjnnbolize  the  relations
holding  between  the  terms  of  the  syllogism.  But  we  cannot  argue
from  sameness  of  grammatical  form  to  sameness  of  logical  form ;
hence,  we  cannot  assume  that  sentences  in  which  the  connecting
verb  is  the  same  express  the  same  logical  relation,  Couturat  has  said
that  ‘ the  invention  of  the  verb  to  be  is  one  of  the  conquests  of  the
logical  spirit  Mr.  Bussell,  on  the  contrary,  has  asserted  that  the
use  of  is  ” to  express  both  predication  and  identity  ^ is  a disgrace
to  the  human  race  There  is  some  truth  in  both  these  statements,
as  we  shall  see  later.  Here  we  are  concerned  only  to  point  out  that
both  lay  stress  upon  the  importance  of  a symbol  as  expressing  form
by  reason  of  its  abstractness.  Aristotle’s  employment  of  symbols
is  the  earliest  attempt  to  formulate  the  conditions  of  validity  in
reasoning.

We  conclude  this  chapter  on  the  syllogism  with  the  reflection
that,  absurd  as  are  some  of  the  traditional  technicalities,  and  lament-
able as  its  defective  analysis  is,  yet  the  traditional  syllogism  is  one
important  form  of  reasoning.  Mr.  Johnson  has  summed  up  admir-
ably the  value  of  the  study  of  the  traditional  syllogism.  He  says  :

‘ Syllogism  is  practically  important  because  it  represents  the  form
in  which  persons  unschooled  in  logical  technique  are  continually
arguing.  It  is  theoretically  important  because  it  exhibits  in  their
simplest  guise  the  fundamental  principles  which  underlie  all  demon-
stration whether  deductive  or  inductive.  It  is  educationally  import-
ant because  the  establishment  of  its  valid  moods  and  the  systematiza-
tion and  co-ordination  of  its  rules  afford  an  exercise  of  thought
not  inferior  and  in  some  respects  superior  to  that  afforded  by
elementary  mathematics.’  ^

On  all  three  counts,  the  traditional  syllogism  retains  its  value.
But  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  regard  it  as  constituting  the  whole
subject  of  deduction.^

^ Principles  of  Logic  ”,  Ency,  Philos,  Sciences,  I,  p.  196.

^ Introd,  Math,  Philos.,  p.  172.

3 W.  E.  J.,  Pt.  II,  p.  102.

^ Otter  deductive  forms  will  be  dealt  with  in  Chaps.  VII  and  X.  The
general  principles  of  deduction  will  be  discussed  in  Chaps.  XII  and  XXIV.


CHAPTEE  VII

COMPOUND  AEGUMENTS  AND  lEEEGULAE  SYLLOGISMS


‘ I have  found  you  an  argument : but  I am  not  obliged  to  find  you  an
understanding.’ — Samuel  Johnson.

§ 1.  THE  MODI

IN  this  section  we  shall  he  concerned  with  a form  of  inference
— of  common  occurrence  in  everyday  life — ^in  which  from  the
conjunction  of  a composite  premiss  with  a simple  premiss  a simple
conclusion  is  inferred.  We  may  begin  by  giving  illustrations  taken
from  ordinary  experience  in  which  this  mode  of  reasoning  is  employed.

Example  /.  Two  people  on  the  seashore  may  both  be  observing
a small  black  object  bobbing  up  and  down  on  the  water.  One  says :

That  must  be  a seal  ’’ ; the  other  replies  : No,  I am  sure  it  is
the  cork  attached  to  a lobster-pot  line.”  After  some  time  has  passed,
they  notice  the  object  again,  and  the  second  one  says : It  can’t
be  a seal,  for  it  has  kept  in  the  same  place  for  a long  time.”  The
first  replies : ‘‘  Well,  then,  it  must  be  a lobster-pot  cork.”

This  argument  can  be  analysed  as  follows :

(1)  If  that  object  remains  in  the  same  place  for  some  time,
it  cannot  be  a*  seal ;

But,  it  has  remained  in  the  same  place  for  some  time  \
Therefore,  it  cannot  be  a seal.”

(2)  '‘  Either  it  is  a seal  or  the  cork  of  a lobster-pot  line ;

But  it  is  not  a seal ;

Therefore,  it  is  the  cork  of  a lobster-pot  line.”

In  (1)  the  fib:st  premiss  is  a composite  premiss  of  the  implicative
form  ; the  second  premiss  is  a simple  proposition  which  aflSrms  the
implicans  of  the  implicative  premiss ; the  conclusion  is  a simple  premiss
which  affirms  the  implicate.  It  is  obvious  that  this  inference  is  valid.

In  (2)  the  first  premiss  is  a composite  proposition  of  the  alternative
form ; the  second  premiss  is  a simple  proposition  in  which  one  of
the  alternants  is  denied  j the  conclusion  is  a simple  proposition  in
which  the  other  alternant  is  affirmed.  It  is  obvious  that  this
inference  is  valid.

Example  II.  “You  cannot  maintain  that  capital  pxmishment
is  an  effective  deterrent  to  would-be  murderers,  and  yet  also  admit
that  most  murders  are  committed  imder  circumstances  which  prevent

103


104  , A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

an  adequate  consideration  of  consequences.^  But  you  do  admit  the
latter ; hence  you  must  admit  that  capital  punishment  is  not  an
effective  deterrent.  Moreover,  if  capital  punishment  were  an  effective
deterrent,  there  would  have  been  an  increase  in  the  number  of
murders,  over  a period  of  years,  in  those  countries  which  have
abolished  the  death  penalty.  But  this  has  been  shown  to  be  not
the  case.  Hence,  capital  punishment  is  not  an  effective  deterrent.’’

In  this  discussion  two  different  sets  of  circumstances  are  said
to  involve  the  conclusion  that  capital  punishment  is  not  an  effective
deterrent  ”.  The  argument  can  be  analysed  as  follows  :

(A)  Not  both  : capital  punishment  is  an  effective  deterrent  and
also,  most  murders  are  committed  in  circumstances  in  which  adequate
consideration  of  consequences  is  prevented ;

But,  Most  murders  are  committed  in  such  circumstances ;

Therefore,  Capital  punishment  is  not  an  effective  deterrent.

(B)  If  capital  punishment  were  an  effective  deterrent,  its  abolition
would  have  been  followed  by  an  increase  in  the  number  of  murders ;

But,  Its  abolition  has  not  been  followed  by  such  an  increase  ;

Therefore,  Capital  punishment  is  not  an  effective  deterrent.

It  is  obvious  that  the  inference  both  in  (A)  and  in  (B)  is  valid.

Example  HI.  ''  If  you  hate  your  father,  you  will  dream  that
you  tried  to  murder  him.  But  you  did  dream  that  you  tried  to
murder  him,  so  that  you  must  hate  him.'’

Example  IV.  I knew  that  if  I looked  at  the  new  moon  through
glass,  I should  be  xinlucky ; but  I didn’t,  so  I shall  not  be  unlucky.”

Example  F.  To  get  a good  position  in  the  Civil  Service,  one
must  either  be  very  clever  or  else  have  influential  .friends.  But  as
he  has  influential  friends,  it  follows  that  he  is  not  very  clever.”

The  last  three  examples  are  obviously  invalid  inferences.

We  can  now  state  formally  the  nature  of  the  reasoning  that  is
intended  in  arguments  of  these  kinds.  In  each  case  we  shall  add
the  traditional  Latin  name  of  the  form.

CoMPOuOT  Modes.

1.  Modus  ponendo  ponens.^

If  p,  then  q.  Implicative  premiss,

p.  Simple  premiss  aflSrming  implicans.

q.  Simple  conclusion  affirming  implicate.

^ See  R.  Calvert,  Capital  Punishment,  p.  59.  In  these  examples  we  are
not,  of  course,  concerned  to  maintain  that  the  premisses  are  tme,  since  we
are  investigating  the  relation  between  premisses  and  conclusion.  We  are,
however,  considering  these  inferences  as  forms  of  argument  in  which  the
premisses  are  supposed  to  have  been  granted.

^ These  barbarous  names  are  derived  from  the  Latin  verbs : pmme  = to
assert;  ixillere  = to  deny.  Hence,  they  can  be  interpreted  as  foflows : (1)  The
mood  which  by  affirming,  affirms ; (2)  The  mood  which  by  denying,  denies ;
(3)  The  mood  which  by  denying,  affirms ; (4)  The  mood  which  by  affirming,  denies.


COMPOUKD  AEGUMINTS


105


2.  Modus  tollendo  tollens.

If  p,  then  q.  Implicative  premiss.

not  q.  Simple  premiss  denying  implicate,
not  Simple  conclusion  denying  implicans.

3.  Modus  tollendo  jponens.

Either  jp  or  q.  Alternative  premiss.

not  Simple  premiss  denying  one  alternative.

q.  Simple  conclusion  affirming  other  alter-
native.

4.  Modus  ponendo  tollens.

Not  both  p and  q.  Disjunctive  premiss.

q.  Simple  premiss  afiirming  one  disjunct.
/.  not;p.  Simple  conclusion  denying  other  dis-
junct.

There  are  two  forms  with  an  implicative  premiss  but  only  one
form  with  an  alternative  premiss  and  only  one  with  a disjunctive
premiss.  This  difference  is  due  to  the  fact  that,  as  we  saw  in
Chapter  V,  the  order  in  which  the  simple  premisses  occur  in  the
alternative  and  in  the  disjunctive  proposition  is  indifferent,  but
this  is  not  the  case  with  the  implicative  premiss.^  Hence,  there
are  two  forms  according  to  whether  the  simple  premiss  is  the  ajBS.rma-
tion  of  the  implicans,  or  the  denial  of  the  impHcate.  If  the  implicans
were  denied,  it  could  not  be  inferred  that  the  implicate  could  be
denied ; if  the  implicate  were  afl&rmed,  it  could  not  be  inferred
that  the  implicans  could  be  affirmed.  ^ For,  if  we  could  treat  the
implicans  and  the  implicate  in  the  same  way,  it  would  follow  that
they  could  be  simply  interchanged.

The  rules  for  these  modes  of  inference  can  be  stated  as  follows :

1.  Ponendo  ponens.  From  the  affirmation  of  the  implicans,  the
affirmation  of  the  implicate  follows.

2.  Tollendo  tollens.  From  the  denial  of  the  implicate,  the  denial
of  the  implicans  follows.

3.  Tollendo  ponens.  From  the  denial  of  one  alternant,  the
affirmation  of  the  other  alternant  follows.

4.  Ponendo  tollens.  From  the  affirmation  of  one  disjunct,  the
denial  of  the  other  disjunct  follows.

It  will  be  seen  that  in  Example  III,  the  inference  is  invalid  since
the  implicate  has  been  affirmed.  This  conclusion  could  be  drawn
only  if  the  implicate  could  follow  from  no  other  premiss  than  the
imphcans.  In  that  case,  the  composite  premiss  could  be  stated  in

^ See  Chap.  V,  § 3.

* Since  the  traditional  name  for  the  implicans  is  antecedent  and  for
the  implicate  ‘‘  consequent  this  fallacy  is  known  as  the  fallacy  of  affirming
the  consequent.


106  A MODEKN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

tlie  form : If  yon  dream  tliat  yon  tried  to  murder  yonr  father,
then  you  hate  yonr  father.”  This,  however,  is  the  simple  converse
of  the  implicative  premiss,  and  is  not  equivalent  to  it,  although  it
is  not  incompatible  with  it.  In  Example  IV  the  invalidity  is  due
to  the  fact  that  the  implicans  has  been  denied.  It  is  obvious  that
there  are  other  conditions  of  ill-luck  besides  looking  at  the  new  moon
through  glass,  even  if  that  be  admitted  to  he  a condition,  which  is
assumed  by  the  statement  of  the  implicative  premiss.

The  inference  in  Example  V is  invalid,  since,  from  the  affirmation
of  one  alternant,  it  is  inferred  that  the  other  alternant  can  be  denied.
This  would  be  the  case  only  if  the  alternatives  were  exclusive.  But
we  saw  in  Chapter  V that  this  cannot  be  assumed.

If  in  a disjunctive  inference  one  of  the  disjuncts  is  denied,  it
does  not  follow  that  the  other  can  be  affirmed.  This  fallacy  is  of
less  common  occurrence  in  everyday  reasoning  than  the  other  three.
It  will  be  observed  that  the  fallacy  of  affirming  one  altertiative  and
of  denying  one  disjunct  is,  in  each  case,  equivalent  to  treating  the
composite  premiss  as  if  it  were  equivalent  to  the  conjunction  of
both  the  alternative  premiss  and  the  corresponding  disjunctive
premiss.  From  not  both  jp  and  q,  and  either  f oi  q ”,  we  can  infer
that,  if  ^ is  affibrmed,  q can  be  denied ; and  if  g is  denied,  p can  be
affirmed.

The  invalid  modes  of  inferences  can  be  summarized  as  follows

1.  Implicative  : If  j?,  then  q ; but  q ; /.  p.

2.  Implicative : If  p^  then  q ; but  p ; /.  q.

3.  Alternative  : Either  p oi  q;  but  q ; p.

4.  Disjunctive : Not  both  p and  q ; but  q ; p.

An  argument  in  everyday  life  is  often  employed  simply  to  resolve
a state  of  doubt.  The  questioner  thinks  of  various  possibilities  and
reasons  as  to  what  would  follow  if  a given  assumption  were  correct.
This  is  the  attitude  of  the  man  who  thinks  merely  in  order  to  solve
a practical  problem.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  mental  state
of  the  thinker,  the  attitude  is  quite  different  according  as  we  enter-
tain an  implicate  in  order  to  see  what  follows  from  it  so  that
we  may  reach  a conclusion  that  is  to  be  asserted  as  true ; or  accord-
ing as  we  consider  what  follows  from  the  implicate  as  such.  This
difference  corresponds  to  the  difference  between  what  we  have  called
an  implication  and  an  argument.  The  appropriate  form  of  an  im-
plication is  If  , . . then  . . and  there  may  be  several  proposi-
tions conjunctively  affirmed  in  the  implicate.  The  appropriate  form
of  an  argument  is  So-and-so,  and  so-and-so  . . . and,  therefore,
so-and-so  ”.

Now,  if  we  are  anxious  to  assert  the  conclusion  as  true,  we  are

^ Of.  Keynes,  F.L*,  § 317.  There  is  a full  treatment  of  the  four  modes  m
Chaps.  V and  VI  of  Pt.  Ill  of  Dr.  Keynes’s  work.


COMPOUND  AEGUMENTS


107


concerned  to  ascertain  the  truth  of  the  premisses.  The  conjunction
if  ” frequently  expresses  a state  of  mental  suspense,  hesitation,  or
doubt.  Moreover,  these  mental  states  can  ordy  be  appropriately
expressed  by  an  ''  if  Hence,  some  logicians  have  assumed  that
a proposition  of  the  form  ''  If  p,  then  q ” essentially  expresses  doubt.
But  it  is  clear  that  this  is  not  the  case.  There  may  be  doubt  as
to  whether  the  premiss  p is  true ; but  the  composite  proposition
asserts  the  connexion  of  impHcation  between  p and  q ; that  is  to  say,
it  asserts  that  ''  p implies  q

The  implicative  proposition  is  sometimes  known  as  the  hypo--
thetical  ” proposition,  sometimes  as  the  conditional  proposition.
An  hypothesis  is  a supposition,  and  a supposition  is  usually  enter-
tained merely  in  order  to  see  what  follows  from  it.  The  question
whether  propositions  of  the  form  If  then  q ” should  be  called
''  hypothetical  ” or  ''  implicative  ’’  is  no  doubt  mainly  a question
of  words.  But  it  seems  desirable  to  use  the  name  impHcative  ”
since  its  verbal  form  does  not  suggest  doubt,  and,  further,  in  the
discussion  of  scientific  method,  it  is  desirable  to  use  the  term
hypothesis  ” in  a wider  sense  than  hypothetical  ’’  would  suggest.^

§2.  THE  DILEMMA

A dilemma — as  the  popular  use  of  the  phrase : I am  in  a
dilemma”,  suggests — is  essentially  a form  of  argument,  the  purpose
of  which  is  to  show  that  from  either  of  two  alternatives  an  unwelcome
conclusion  follows.  If  skilfully  employed,  it  can  be  made  effective
by  an  orator  and  amusing  to  an  audience.  Its  logical  form  consists
in  the  combination  of  impHcative  and  disjunctive  premisses.  It
may  be  defined  as  follows : A dilemma  is  a compound  argument
consisting  of  a premiss  in  which  two  implicative  propositions  are
conjunctively  affirmed,  and  of  a premiss  in  which  either  the  im-
plicants  are  alternatively  affirmed  or  the  implicates  alternatively
denied.  2

Various  forms  of  the  dilemma  have  been  distinguished.  It  will
be  sufficient  to  add  their  appropriate  names.

^ There  is  considerable  difference  of  terminology  among  Logicians  with
regard  to  composite  propositions.  The  implicative  is  sometimes  called
hy^oihetical,  sometimes  conditional;  these  again  are  sometimes  regarded  as
synonyms,  sometimes  they  are  distinguished.  (See  Keynes,  F,L,,  Chap.  IX  of  Pt.
I.)  The  alternative  is  usually  called  disjunctive  (as  was  pointed  out  in  Chap.  IV),
and  sometimes  both  “ hypothetical  ” and  “ disjunctive  ” propositions  are
grouped  together  as  “ conditional  ” propositions.  This  confusion  of  terminology
is  unfortunate.  It  is  not  necessary  for  the  student  to  remember  these  different
names,  since  “ implicative  ”,  “ alternative  ” and  “ disjunctive  ” as  used  in
this  book  win  by  now  be  familiar  to  every  one.

® If  there  are  three  implicative  premisses  the  argument  is  called  a trilemma,
if  four,  a quadrilemma,  if  more  than  four,  a ^olylemma.  These  are  of  rare
occurrence,  and  the  name  “ dilemma  ” is  sometimes  used  to  cover  them  all.


108


A MODEEN  IFTKODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


I.  CONSTRTJCTIVE  DlLEMMA.

(A)  Simple.

If  j),  tLen  q ; and  if  r,  then
But  either  p or  r,

• • ?•

(B)  Complex.

If  j7,  then  q ; and  if  f , then  n,

But  either  p or  r,
either  q or  n,

IL  Destructive  Dilemma.

(A)  Simple.

If  p,  then  q ; and  if  p,  then  r,

But  either  not-g^  or  not-r,
not  p.

(B)  Complex.

If  p,  then  q ; and  if  r,  then
But  either  not-q  or  not-^,

/.  either  not  p or  not  r.

It  is  obvious  that  the  rules  for  the  three  inodes  of  implicative
and  alternative  arguments  apply  to  the  dilemma,  and  they  need
not  be  restated.

The  dilemma  is  sometimes  regarded  as  a peculiarly  fallacious
mode  of  argument.  This,  hov^ever,  is  not  due  to  its  form,  but  to
the  difficulty  of  finding  premisses  which  are  true  and  yet  fulfil  the
conditions  of  the  form.  It  is  obvious  that,  regarded  as  an  argument
to  establish  the  truth  of  the  conclusion,  the  force  of  the  dilemmatic
situation  presented  in  the  alternative  premiss  depends  upon  the
condition  that  the  alternants  must  Ioq  exhaustive.  If  there  is  a third
alternative,  then  we  can  escape  between  the  horns  of  the  dilemma

Thus,  an  elderly  pessimist,  hurrying  along  a slippery  road  to  catch
a train  at  a country  station,  might  formulate  the  situation  to  himself
in  the  form  of  the  following  dilemma :

‘‘  If  I run  and  slip,  then  I can’t  get  to  the  station  in  time ;
and  If  I don’t  run,  I can’t  get  to  the  station  in  time ;

But  either  I must  run  and  slip  or  I must  not  run;

Hence,  I cannot  get  to  the  station  in  time.

Granted  the  truth  of  his  premisses,  he  may  still  have  overlooked
the  fact  that  the  tram  may  be  late.

A dilemma  is  said  to  be  rehutted  if  another  dilemma  is  constructed
which  leads  to  a conclusion  contradictory  of  the  fost.  A dilemma
is  said  to  be  taken  hy  the  horns  when  the  alternatives  are  accepted,
but  the  implications  drawn  from  them  are  denied.  These  picturesque
modes  of  argument  have  no  logical  significance.^

^ Those  who  desire  to  be  supplied  with  concrete  illustrations  of  all  these
various  forms  and  devices,  are  referred  to  Joseph,  op.  cit.,  Chap.  XVI.


COMPOUKD  AEGUMENTS


109


*§3.  POLYSYLLOGISMS

A polysyllogism  is  a series  of  syllogisms  in  whicli  tlie  conclusion
of  one  is  a premiss  of  the  next.  In  such  a series,  the  syllogism  whose
conclusion  becomes  a premiss  in  the  next  syllogism  is  called  a fro-
syllogism ; a syllogism  one  of  whose  premisses  is  the  conclusion^  of
a preceding  syllogism  is  called  an  episyllogism.  If  the  series  contains
more  than  one  syllogism,  then  every  syllogism  except  the  first  and
the  last,  will  be  both  an  episyllogism  and  a prosyUogism.

The  Sorites,  A sorites  is  a polysyllogism  in  which  only  the  final
conclusion  is  stated,  and  which  is  so  arranged  that  any  two  successive
premisses  contain  a common  term.

Two  forms  are  commonly  recognized :

(1)  The  Aristotelian  Sorites,  The  minor  premiss  is  stated  first,
and  the  term  common  to  two  successive  premisses  occurs  first  as
predicate  and  then  as  subject.

All  A is  B
All  B is  C
All  C is  D
All  D is  B
All  A is  E.

The  special  rules  of  the  Aristotelian  Sorites  are : ^

(1)  Only  one  premiss,  namely  the  last,  can  be  negative.  (Violation
of  this  rule  would  involve  two  negative  premisses  in  one  of  the
constituent  syllogisms.)

(ii)  Only  one  premiss,  namely  the  first,  can  be  particular.  (Viola-
tion of  this  rule  would  involve  undistributed  middle.)

(2)  The  Godenian  Sorites,^  The  major  premiss  is  stated  first,
and  the  term  common  to  the  two  successive  premisses  occurs  first
as  subject  and  then  as  predicate.

All  D is  E
All  C is  D
AU  B is  C
All  A is  B
All  A is  E.

The  special  rules  of  the  Godenian  Sorites,

(i)  Only  one  premiss — namely  the  first — can  be  negative.

(ii  Only  one  premiss — namely  the  last — can  be  particular.

^ The  student  can  easily  prove  these  rules  for  himself.  He  may  find  it
advisable  to  set  out  the  series  of  syllogisms  as  a whole,  supplying  the  missing
conclusion  in  each  case.  There  is  a full  discussion  of  the  various  forms  in
which  Sorites  can  be  stated,  in  Keynes,  F,L.,  §§  325-6.

2 So  called  after  Goclenius,  who  is  said  to  have  introduced  this  form.


no


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


*^§4.  EPICHEIREMA  AND  ABBREVIATED  ARGUMENTS

An  epicLeirema  is  not  a special  form  of  argnment  but  is  an
abbreviated  mode  of  stating  an  argument.  We  saw  in  Chapter  VI
that  a syllogism  with  one  proposition  omitted  is  called  an  enthymeme.
An  epicheirema  is  a syllogism  in  which  one,  or  both  of  the  premisses,
is  stated  as  the  conclusion  of  an  enthymematic  prosyUogism.  For
example :

All  measures  proposed  by  Tory  Ministers  for  the  safeguarding
of  industries  should  be  regarded  with  suspicion,  because  they  are
first  steps  towards  Protection ;

These  proposals  are  measures  proposed  by  Tory  Ministers  for  the
safeguarding  of  industries ;

/.  They  should  be  regarded  with  suspicion.

The  form  is : Every  M is  P •/  it  is  N,

Every  S is  M
Every  S is  P.

This  is  a single  epicheirema.  When  both  premisses  are  stated
as  the  conclusion  of  an  enthymematic  prosyllogism,  the  epicheirema
is  said  to  be  double.

In  a reasoned  argument  it  is  usual  to  omit  not  only  single  premisses,
but  also  a whole  syllogism,  which  could  be  easily  supplied  by  the
hearer.  Or  an  argument  may  be  merely  hinted.  In  this  case
it  is  often  not  difficult  to  supply  the  missing  linhs.  But  the
omission  of  a connecting  premiss  may  lead  to  a fallacy  that  would
be  detected  were  the  argument  fully  stated.  It  is  for  this  reason
that  the  brief  examples  given  in  logical  textbooks  appear  so  obvious,
and  yet  elementary  mistakes  in  reasoning  are  of  common  occurrence.
The  following  is  an  example  of  a reasoned  argument,  the  missing
premisses  of  which  can  be  easily  supplied  by  the  reader,  who  may
be  left  to  test  its  validity :

‘ If  we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  independent  existence  of  objects,  we  cannot
be  sure  of  the  independent  existence  of  other  people’s  bodies,  and  therefore
still  less  of  other  people’s  minds,  since  we  have  no  grounds  for  believing  in
their  minds  except  such  as  are  derived  from  observing  their  bodies.  Thus  if
we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  independent  existence  of  objects,  we  shall  be  left
alone  in  a desert — ^it  may  be  that  the  whole  outer  world  is  nothing  but  a
dream,  and  that  we  alone  exist.’

(Bertrand  Bussell,  Problems  of  Philosophy,  p.  267.)

Sometimes  an  argument  may  be  stated  as  a single  premiss,  it
being  supposed  obvious  that  the  hearer  will  supply  the  missing
premiss  and  thus  deduce  the  conclusion.  For  example  :

(1)  If  that  boy  comes  back,  I’ll  eat  my  head.”  {Oliver  Tmst)


EELATIONAL  AEGUMENTS


111


(2)  If  we  are  marked  to  die  we  are  enow  to  do  our  country
loss ; and  if  to  live,  tke  fewer  men,  tke  greater  stare  of  tonoux.’’

(3)  I’m  hanged  if  I know  what  you  mean.”  ^

None  of  these  modes  of  expression  present  any  logical  difficulties.

§5.  EELATIONS  AND  EBLATIONAL  AEGUMENTS
In  this  section  we  shall  he  concerned  with  arguments  that  were
very  awkwardly  dealt  with  by  the  traditional  Logicians,  owing  to
their  restriction  of  premisses  to  the  subject-predicate  form.  We
saw  in  Chapter  VI  that  such  arguments  as  “ Tom  is  as  tall  as  Mary,
Mary  is  as  tall  as  Jane,  therefore,  Tom  is  as  tall  as  Jane”  could
not  be  included  in  the  syllogism.  The  traditional  Logicians  made
various  attempts  to  express  such  arguments  in  syllogistic  form.  But
these  attempts  were  as  futile  as  they  are  ridiculous.  ^

The  validity  of  inferences  in  which  the  premisses  are  relational
depends  upon  the  logical  properties  of  the  relations  involved.
We  shall  accordingly  begin  by  discussing  those  properties  of  relations
that  are  involved  in  the  analysis  of  such  relational  arguments  as  are
likely  to  occur  in  ordinary  discussion.  In  Chapter  XII  we  shall  show
that  all  deduction  depends  upon  the  logical  properties  of  relations.
Important  though  the  properties  of  relations  are,  it  is  only  q.uite|
recently  thatthese  properties  have  been  carefully  studied  and  defined/
Eela-fionsmay  be  classified  in  three  different  ways,  which  are
independent  of  each  other,  according  as  they  do,  or  do  not  possess
certain  properties.  In  what  follows  we  shall  be  concerned  only  with
dyadic  relations,  and  only  with  two  of  these  classifications.

It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  relations  have  a direction,
or  sense.  That  is  to  say,  a relation  between  two  terms  proceeds
from  one  to  the  other.  Thus,  in  ^ Brutus  killed  Caesar  ’ the  relation
expressed  by  ‘ killed  ’ goes  from  Brutus  to  Caesar.  In  ^ Caesar
killed  Brutus  ’ it  goes  from  Caesar  to  Brutus.  Hence,  these  two
propositions  are  different  although  the  terms  and  the  relation  are
the  same ; the  difference  is  that  the  relation  kills  ” orders  the
terms  in  the  direction  Brutus  —^Caesar  in  the  one  proposition,  and
in  the  direction  Caesar  --^Brutus  in  the  other.  The  fact  that  Brutus
hilled  Caesar  can  be  expressed  by  the  proposition  Caesar  was  killed
by  Brutus  ” just  as  well  as  by  the  proposition,  Brutus  killed  Caesar
These  two  propositions  are  equivalent  converses.  Every  relational
proposition  has  a converse,  which  consists  in  interchanging  the  terms
with,  or  without,  a change  in  the  relation  asserted  to  hold  between
them.  The  term  from  which  the  relation  proceeds  is  called  the
referent ; the  term  to  which  it  proceeds  is  called  the  relatumJ  Thus

iSee  W.  E.  J.,  Pt.  I,  Chap.  Ill,  § 8.

^ For  a discussion  of  these  attempts  see  Keynes,  F.L.,  § 330.

* These  terms  are  due  to  Mr.  Bertrand  Russell.


112  A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

the  interchange  of  relatum  and  referent  gives  the  converse  of  the
original  relation.  It  is  convenient  to  symbolize  a relational  pro-
position involving  two  terms  by  x'R,y^\  Here  x stands  for  the
referent,  y for  the  relatum,  E for  the  relation.  We  can  sum  up
what  we  have  just  been  saying  as  follows  : If  x and  y are  any  two
terms  between  which  the  relation  R holds,  in  the  direction  x — ^ y,
then  there  is  some  relation  (call  it  R')  which  holds  between  y and  jr,
in  the  direction  y x.  Thus  R'  will  be  the  converse  of  R.

Classification  of  relations.  L Symmetrical  and  non-symmetrical
relations.  Some  relations  are  such  that  if  they  hold  between  x and  y,
they  also  hold  between  y and  x.  For  example,  married  to,  equals,
different  from,  spouse  of,  cousin  of,  brother  or  sister  of.  Such  relations
are  called  symmetrical.  The  interchanging  of  the  terms  does  not
involve  any  change  in  the  relation.  Thus,  ''  This  colour  is  different
from  that  colour  ’’  has  for  its  converse,  That  colour  is  different
from  this  colour  ” ; A equals  B ’’  has  for  its  converse  B equals
A ” ; Tom  is  as  tall  as  Jane  has  for  its  converse  ’’  Jane  is  as  tall
as  Tom”.

Some  relations  are  such  that  if  they  hold  between  x and  y,  they
either  never,  or  sometimes  do  not,  hold  between  y and  x.  Such
relations  are  called  non-symmetrical.  The  more  important  set  of
non-symmetrical  relations  are  those  which  are  such  that  they  cannot
hold  between  y and  x if  they  hold  between  x and  y.  These  relations
have  been  named  by  Mr.  RusseU  asymmetrical  relations.  For  ex-
ample, greater  than,  father  of,  wife  of,  precedes,  older  by  one  year  than,
darker  than.  The  converse  of  This  patch  of  colour  is  darker  than
that  ” is  That  patch  of  colour  is  lighter  than  this  ” ; the  converse
of  A is  the  wife  of  B ” is  B is  the  husband  of  A ” ; the  converse
of  The  battle  of  Marengo  preceded  the  peace  of  Villafranca  ” is
The  peace  of  Villafranca  succeeded  the  battle  of  Marengo  ”,  The
distinction  between  symmetrical  and  asymmetrical  relations  is  very
important.  These  relations  may  be  formally  defined  as  follows  :

A relation  R is  symmetrical  when  it  is  such  that,  ii  x'Ry,  then
also  y'Rx.

A relation  R is  asymmetrical  when  it  is  such  that,  ii  x'Ry,  then
never  y^x.

There  are  some  relations  which  hold  between  x and  y,  and  some-
times hold  between  y and  x,  but  sometimes  do  not.  These  relations
are  often  called  non-symmetrical.  For  example,  implies,  friend  of,
benefactor  of,  hates.  These  relations  will  not  be  further  discussed  here.  ^

II.  Transitive  and  non-transitive  relations.  This  classification  is
based  upon  the  consideration  of  pairs  of  objects  with  reference  to
some  given  relation  R.

Some  relations  are  such  that,  if  they  hold  between  x and  y,  and
^ For  a furtlier  discussion  of  Edations,  see  Chap.  X,  § 2.


BELATIONAL  AEGUMENTS


113


between  y and  z,  then  they  hold  between  x and  z.  Such  relations
are  called  transitive.  For  example,  equals,  greater  than,  contemjiorary
with,  richer  than,  matching  in  colour.

Some  relations  are  such  that  if  they  hold  between  x and  y,  and
between  y and  z,  they  either  never,  or  sometimes  do  not  hold  between
X and  z.  In  the  former  case  they  are  called  intransitive  relations,
in  the  latter  case,  non-transitive.  Examples  of  intransitive  relations
are,  father  of,  older  by  one  year,  twin  of,  married  to.  Examples  of
non-transitive  relations  are,  different  from,  friend  of.

These  relations  may  be  formally  defined  as  follows :

A relation  R is  transitive  when  it  is  such  that  ]ix'Ry  and  yTdz,
then  x'Rz,

A relation  R is  intransitive  when  it  is  such  that  if  xRy  and
yB>z,  then  never  x’Rz,

A relation  R is  non-transitive  when  it  is  such  that  if  a?  R and
yRz,  then  sometimes  xRz,  and  sometimes  not  xRz,

On  the  basis  of  these  classifications  relations  may  be  divided
into  four  classes  according  as  they  do,  or  do  not,  possess  the
properties  of  symmetry  and  transitiveness.  It  is  important  to
remember  that  these  properties  are  independent,  so  that  relations
can  be  symmetrical  and  either  transitive  or  intransitive ; asym-
metrical and  either  transitive  or  intransitive.  These  will  be  summed
up  with  examples  as  follows  :

1.  Symmetrical  transitive  relations:  identical  with;  exactly
matching  in  colour ; exactly  matching  in  shape ; exactly  the  same
in  age ; simultaneous  with.

It  will  be  noticed  that  relations  of  this  class  have  the  character-
istics of  equality.  That  is  to  say,  transitive,  symmetrical  relations
have  the  formal  properties  of  equality,

2.  Symmetrical  intransitive  relations : spouse  of ; twin  of.

3.  Asymmetrical  transitive  relations  : greater  than ; ancestor  of ;
hotter  than ; above ; before.

4.  Asymmetrical  intransitive  relations  : father  of ; grandchild  of.

In  defining  a transitive  relation  we  said  that  it  is  such  that  given

that  the  relation  holds  between  two  terms  and  between  one  of  these
and  a third  term,  then  that  relation  holds  between  the  other  term
and  the  third  term.  We  see,  then,  that  transitivity  is  sufificient  to
secure  a valid  inference.  Consider  the  following  examples :

I.  If  A is  greater  than  B,

and  B is  greater  than  C,

then  A is  greater  than  C.

II.  If  A equals  B,

and  B equals  C,

then  A equals  C.

B


114


A MODEEK  INTEODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


III.  If  A is  a contemporary  of  B,
and  B is  a contemporary  cf  C,
then  A is  a contemporary  of  0.

These  are  obviously  valid.  Now  consider  the  following  examples :

(A)  If  A is  different  from  B,
and  B is  different  from  C,
then  A is  different  from  C.

(B)  If  A owes  money  to  B,
and  B owes  money  to  C,
then  A owes  money  to  C.

(C)  If  A is  next  to  B,
and  B is  next  to  C,
then  A is  next  to  C.

These  are  obviously  invalid.  Comparing  the  first  set  with  the
second,  we  see  that  I contains  an  asymmetrical  relation,  II,  III,  A,
C contain  symmetrical  relations,  and  that  B contains  a non-sym-
metrical  relation.  Hence,  both  in  the  valid  and  invalid  examples
we  have  sjunmetrical  relations.  But  the  examples  in  the  first  set
all  contain  transitive  relations,  those  in  the  second  set  contain  in-
transitive, or  non-transitive  relations.  It  is  upon  the  property  of
transitivity  that  the  validity  of  the  inference  depends.  It  is  important
to  observe  that  symmetry  is  not  sufficient.  The  student  of  element-
ary geometry  who  happens  to  have  met  the  axiom  Two  things
which  are  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  equal  to  one  another  ”,  may
be  inclined  to  suppose  that  it  is  to  the  symmetry  of  the  relation
equals  ” that  the  equality  of  the  extremes  is  due.  The  symmetry
is  obvious.  But  the  connexion  depends  upon  the  property  of
transitivity.

Eelational  arguments  in  which  the  relation  is  transitive  and
asymmetrical  are  sometimes  known  as  a fortiori  arguments,  since
the  example  “ A is  greater  than  B,  B is  greater  thafi  C,  therefore
A is  greater  than  C ” affords  a typical  example.  This  particular
example  is  the  one  most  discussed  by  the  traditional  Logicians,  since
they  were  convinced  of  its  validity,  yet  could  not  bring  it  within
their  scheme.

Eelational  arguments  in  which  the  relation  is  symmetrical,  are
aU  of  the  nature  of : A = B,  B = C,  /.  A = C.  Both  in  these  cases
and  in  a fortiori  arguments  the  validity  of  the  arguments  depends
upon  the  fact  that  the  relating  relation  is  transitive.


CHAPTEE  Vin
SYMBOLS  AND  FORM


* It  is  a profoundly  erroneous  truism,  repeated  by  all  copy-books  and  by
eminent  people  when  they  are  making  speeches,  that  we  should  cultivate  the
habit  of  thinking  of  what  we  are  doing.  The  precise  opposite  is  the  case.
Civilization  advances  by  extending  the  number  of  important  operations  which
we  can  perform  without  thinking  about  them.’ — A,  N,  Whitehead,

§ L THE  UTILITY  OF  SYMBOLS

IN  Chapter  II  we  distinguished  between  signs  and  symbols  and
between  verbal  and  non-verbal  symbols.  We  saw  that  some
verbal  symbols  are  imitative  and  some  representative.  In  this
chapter  we  shall  be  mainly  concerned  with  non-verbal  symbols.
The  S,  M,  P,  used  to  stand  for  the  terms  of  the  syllogism,  the  p,
used  to  stand  for  propositions  are  examples  of  non-verbal  symbols.

We  may  begin  by  considering  some  of  the  different  ways  in  which
we  may  use  symbols,  verbal  and  otherwise.  Professor  Stout  has
made  a threefold  classification  of  symbols,  or  signs,  based  upon  the
way  in  which  the  thinker  uses  the  symbol  to  refer  to  something.^
Thus  he  distinguishes  : expressive  signs,  suggestive  signs  and  sub-
stitute  signs.  (1)  Expressive  signs,  e.g.  words.  An  expressive  sign
is  the  means  by  which  we  pay  attention  to  its  referend.  In  hearing
the  word  cabbage  ”,  for  example,  we  do  not  usually  pay  attention
to  the  sound  as  such,  or  in  reading  it  to  the  shape  of  the  printed
letters  " cabbage  ’ ; we  refer  at  once  to  what  it  stands  for.  Hence,
apart  from  the  historical  accident  of  our  knowledge  of  a given  lan-
guage, we  could  equally  well  use  the  word  “^hou  Similarly,  a
, sentence  expresses  a proposition.  We  do  not  attend  to  the  sentence,

! but,  as  we  pointed  out  in  Chapter  JV,  we  pass  directly  to  the  proposi-
tion conveyed  by  the  sentence.

(2)  Suggestive  signs,  e.g.  the  shape  of  the  knight  in  chess,  the
picture  of  theljueen  of  Spades  in  a pack  of  pla^ng-cards.  A sug-
gestive sign  calls  to  mind  a certain  idea,  and  this  idea  is  attended
to  independently  of  the  sign.  Thus,  in  chess,  the  shap^.  of  the  faiight
suggest  the  moves  that  it  can_:i^ke.  We  do  not  attend  to  the
shape  but  fix  "dm:  attention  on  the  moves  that  the  shape  suggests.
(3)  Substitute  signs,  e.g.  symbols  used  in  logic  and  mathematics.
^Analytic  Psychology,  VoL  IL  P-  above.  ■

115


116


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


A substitute  sign  takes  tke  place  of  wbat  it  stands  for.  It  is  merely
representative.  Sucb  signs  can  only  occur  when  there  are  fixed  rules
of  manipulation,  or  operation,  derived  from  the  nature  of  their
referends.  Professor  Stout  uses  the  word  meariipg  ’’  for  what  a
sign  signifies.  In  his  language  we  can  say  that  an  expressive  sign
expresses  a meaning;  a suggestive  sign  suggests  a meaning  which
it  does  not  express ; a substitute  sign  is  a substitute  for  meaning.
He  thus  sums  up  the  distinction : ‘ A word  is  an  instrument  for
thinking  about  the  meaning  it  expresses ; a substitute  sign  is  a
means  of  not  thinking  about  the  meaning  which  it  symbolizes.’  ^
In  accordance  with  the  distinction  we  made  between  sign  and  symbol,
it  is  clear  that  ordy  nomyerbal  synabds  can  be  substitutCLsigns.  It
might  be  supposed  that  we  should  never  want  to  use  symbols  so  as
not  to  think  about  their  referends.  But  that  would  be  a mistake.
We  shall  see  that  long  and  complicated  trains  of  reasoning,  such
as  those  involved  in  mathematics,  would  be  impossible  without  the
aid  afforded  by  a symbolism  which  can  be  manipulated  in  accord-
ance with  rules  of  operation  so  as  to  reduce  intelligent  thinking  to
a minimum.

In  Chapter  II  we  saw  that  language  is  not  only  ambiguous  but
also  necessarily  vague.  Its  usefulness,  for  ordinary  purposes,  depends
upon  this  fact,  that  it  is  necessarily  vague.  It  is  consequently  in-
susceptible of  precise  analysis.  It  confuses  those  distinctions  upon
which  exact  reasoning  is  based,  and  is  often  simple  where  the  ideas
expressed  are  complex.  Since  language  ^ is  developed  under  the
pressure  of  man’s  practical  needs,  and  is  primarily  the  means  of
expressing  the  emotionaLside  of  his  nature,  it  is  clear,  first,  Jhat
language  must  be  employed  to  express  an  immense  variety  of  different
experiences secondly,  that  the  same  language-forms  must  sometimes
be  used  to  express  what  is  in  fact  different ; thirdly,  that  langu^e
is  ill-adapted  to  express  what  is  relatively  abstract  and  logically
simple.  It“  follows  that  language  would  be  hindered  in  its  normal
functidnT  were  its  analysis  carried  further  than  is  required  by  the
ordinary  usages  of  everyday  life.,  _For  example,  we  want  to  indicate
to  a thirsty  man  : Here  is  water ; drink  this  ” ; to  a man  over-
whelmed by  some  tragic  happening  : There  is  something  good  in
life  ; hold  on  to  the  good  bits.”  We  are  not  only  not  concerned  to
know  whether,  or  not,  the  word  ‘‘  is  ” expresses  the  same  in  these
two  cases ; we  should  be  hindered  in  our  practical  expression  were
we  unable  to  use  the  same  word.  Consider,  for  example,  the  sen-
tences Hildebrand  is  a man  ”,  ‘‘  All  popes  are  men  ”,  “ Some
soldiers  are  patriotic  ”,  Shakespeare  is  the  author  of  Hamlet  ”*

^loe.  cit.,  p.  194.

* Thiougliout  the  rest  of  this  chapter,  we  shall  use  “ language  to  mean
“ ordinary  language  ”,  i.e.  non-symbolic  language.


SYMBOLS  AMD  FOEM


117


These  sentences  have  the  same  grammatical  fonn,  but,  as  we  have
already  indicated,  their  logical  analysis  reveals  that  they  express
propositions  that  are  of  fundamentally  different  forms.  The  verb
to  be  expresses  indifferently  existence^  j^redication^  identity,  eq^lity,
e.g.  “God  is”,  “Socrates  is  wisT^^  “Two  and  two  are  four”,
“ There  were  giants  in  those  days  ”,  “ Men  are  fallible  ”.

It  would  seem,  then,  that  language  is  misleading  and  that  gram-
matical analysis  is  an  unreliable  guide  to  logical  form.  Owing  to
the  practical  function  of  language  the  ordinary  languages  of  civilized
people  are  well-suited  to  express  complicated  facts  briefly,  but  are
ill-adapted  to  express  simply  what  is  logically  simple.  For  example,
“ That  table-cloth  is  dirty  ” expresses  briefly  and  clearly  an  ex-
tremely complicated  state  of  affairs.  Again,  “ That  is  a clock  ”,
“ One  is  a number  ” express  briefly  what,  on  analysis,  is  discovered
to  be  extremely  complicated.  Moreover,  they  are  of  the  same
grammatical  form.  But  the  slightest  reflection  reveals  that  the
relation  of  the  referend  of  “ that  ” to  the  referend  of  “ a clock  ”
is  totally  different  from  the  relation  of  the  referend  of  “ one  ” to
the  referend  of  “ a number  ”.  To  bring  out  this  difference  using
ordinary  language  involves  considerable  prolixity,  as  the  preceding
sentence — which  merely  states  the  need  for  analysis — suggests.  If
we  were  to  try  to  be  logically  precise  and  yet  to  employ  ordinary
language,  we  should  soon  be  lost  in  a maze  of  words.  This  can  be
more  briefly  illustrated  by  a very  simple  example.  Compare  the
following  two  expressions :

(1)  ^^x  + y = y + xr

(2)  “ If  a second  number  be  added  to  any  given  number  the  result  is
the  same  as  if  the  first  given  number  had  been  added  to  the  second.”  ^

Any  one  who  understands  the  algebraic  signs  ‘ ’ and  ^

will  have  no  diflSlculty  in  understanding  the  first  expression.  Indeed,
as  thus  expressed,  it  seems  so  simple  that  the  ordinary  man  would
regard  the  statement  as  unimportant  and  obvious.  But  the  second
expression  is  prolix.  It  requires  a greater  effort  of  attention  to
grasp  what  it  means  than  was  the  case  with  the  first  expression.
It  is  the  logical  simplicity  of  the  notions  involved  that  makes  their
expression  in  language  so  cumbersome.  For  the  purposes  of  logic
language  is  insufiiciently  analytic.  Moreover,  language  only  abstracts
to  the  degree  in  which  what  is  abstract  interests  the  plain  man.
Abstraction  presupposes  analysis.  The  analysis  of  a complex  situa-
tion involves  its  resolution  into  simple  elements.  An  element  is
simple  either  when  it  is  not  susceptible  of  further  analysis— in  which
case  it  will  be  ultimately  simple — or  when  it  is  not  necessary  for  the

^ TMs  fornmlatiou  is  taken  from  A.  K WMtekead,  Introduction  to  Mathe-
matics, p.  61.  Tke  whole  of  Chap.  V in  this  book,  from  which  this  statement  is
taken,  may  be  read  with  great  advantage  by  the  elementary  student.


118


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTIOiT  TO  LOGIC


given  purpose  to  carry  the  analysis  further — ^in  which  case  it  is
relatively  simple.  Hence,  a simple  element  is  one  which  is  not
required  to  be,  and  which  may  be  incapable  of  being,  further  analysed.
Practical  purposes  can  be  satisfied  with  a degree  of  analysis  wholly
inadequate  to  the  needs  of  exact  thinhing.^  To  abstract  is  to  select
from  a complex  situation  elements  that  are  not  given  in  isolation.
Language  as  such  involves  some  degree  of  abstraction  but  it  may
be  only  the  minimum  required  for  the  purposes  of  communication
and  expression.  Compare,  for  instance,  the  following  expressions :

(1)  I cut  my  hand  with  a knife.

(2)  I cut  my  hand  with  a piece  of  glass.

(3)  I cut  my  enemy’s  arm.

(4)  I cut  the  tree.

(5)  I cut  the  pages  of  my  book.

(6)  They  cut  the  wood  in  half.

In  each  of  these  sentences  “ cut  ” occurs,  but  in  each  case  in
a different  context.  Cut  ” expresses  a notion  that  is  relatively
abstract.  In  some  primitive  languages  this  notion  has  not  been
sufficiently  abstracted  to  be  expressed  by  a single  word.  Instead,
there  are  many  different  words  expressing  different  modes  of  cutting
but  no  word  to  express  cut.^  Civilized  languages  differ  in  the  extent
to  which  abstract  words  are  employed.  Eor  example,  Latin  uses
few  abstract  words ; English  uses  many.

The  invention  of  new  words  is  required  for  two  different  purposes
relevant  to  the  consideration  of  the  utility  of  symbolism.  First,  the
new  word  is  required,  as  we  have  just  seen,  because  the  analysis  of
the  situation  has  been  carried  further.  This  point  can  be  illustrated
by  a comparison  of  Latin  and  Greek  on  the  one  hand  with  English
on  the  other.  Since  Latin  and  Greek  are  inflected  languages  they
represent  an  incomplete  analysis  of  the  ideas  they  express.  By
changing  the  stem  or  the  termination  of  a word  Latin  and  Greek
express  a situation  which  in  English  requires  the  use  of  auxiliary
verbs  and  prepositions.  These  auxiliary  verbs  and  prepositions
represent  an  explicit  analysis  of  complex  situations.  In  this  way
language  grows  in  expressiveness  and  an  instrument  is  developed
more  and  more  fitted  to  express  what  exactly  we  want  to  express.
Thus  we  acquire  greater  ease  and  precision  of  expression.  Where
our  poverty  of  thought  is  great,  our  vocabulary  will  be  correspond-
ingly meagre  ; where  our  thought  is  vague  we  shall  not  be  aware
that  our  language  is  defective ; consequently,  we  shall  see  no  ad-
vantage in  precision.  The  technical  language  of  science  provides
numerous  illustrations  of  the  invention  of  new  words  to  express
new  distinctions.  For  example,'  energy  has  to  be  distinguished  into
Mnetic  energy  and  potential  energy.  Secondly,  new  words  must  be
Chap.  XV.  *See  B.  B.  Marrett,  Anthropology^  Chap,  V*


SYMBOLS  AND  FORM


119


invented  to  enable  ns  to  economize  thonglit.  For  example,  we  often
want  to  consider  those  rectangles  only  wMcIi  have  equal  sides;
hence,  we  have  the  word  square  The  word  square  enables
us  to  economize  thought.  A complex  situation,  or  a complex  set
of  characteristics  will  be  represented  in  ordinary  language  by  a single
word  only  when  we  need  to  think  about  it  and  to  refer  to  it  fre-
quently. For  example,  suppose  that  the  situation  in  which  some
person,  or  group  of  persons,  in  a given  place  were  both  seeing  a
rainbow  and  hearing  a lark  sing,  were  of  frequent  occurrence  and
were  also  considered  to  be  of  some  ritual  significance,  then,  doubtless,
a single  word  would  be  invented  to  express  this  complex  occurrence.
But  as  this  particular  concomitance  of  circumstances  has  not  been
thought  important,  we  leave  the  poet  to  note  it  and  do  not  feel
that  our  language  is  defective.  We  should,  in  any  case,  still  need
the  separate  words  to  express  the  separate  constituents  of  the  com-
plex occurrence  suggested  above,  since  these  constituents  also  occur
in  other  contexts  ; just  as  we  need  the  separate  words  that  express
those  properties  of  rectangles  that  are  squares.

It  is  not  otherwise  with  logic.  The  invention  and  development
of  the  special  symbolism  found  necessary  for  the  purposes  of  logical
technique  is  merely  carrying  to  the  utmost  degree  of  analysis  of
thought  and  precision  of  expression  that  recognition  of  distinctions
which  is  present  to  some  extent  in  all  language.  Thus  logical  symbols
have  a double  purpose  to  fulfil — ^to  abbreviate  and  to  abstract.  In
achieving  these  purposes  logical  s3rmbolism  is  seen  to  have  a further
fimction,  viz.  the  revelation  of  form.

At  the  outset  we  must  distinguish  between  two  different  hinds
of  symbols,  for  which  Mr.  Johnson  uses  the  convenient  names  short-
hand  symlols  and  illustrative  symbols  Shorthand  symbols  are  merely
abbreviations  for  words,  or  are  concise  marks  substituted  for  words,
directly  representing  what  they  symbolize.  Familiar  examples,  some
of  which  we  have  already  used,  are : = for  is  equivalent  to,  SaP
for  All  S is  Pj  Fig,  for  Figure,  Q.E.D,  for  quod  erat  demonstrandum,
Barbara  for  the  mood  A A A in  Fig,  /,  + for  flus.  Later  we  shall
use  Prof.  Gr.  E.  Moore’s  shorthand  symbol  ent.  for  entails,  Mr.  Russell
uses  the  arbitrary  mark  3 for  implies  defined  in  a special  way.
Mathematicians  use  > for  greater  than  or  equal  to.  The  purpose  of
a shorthand  symbol  is  mainly  to  shorten  an  expression.  An  illus-
trative symbol  is  of  quite  a different  kind  ; it  is  a variable  symbol.
When  we  express  the  first  figure  of  the  syllogism  as

If  M — P
and  S — M,
then  S — P,

^ See  W.  E.  J.,  Pt,  L,  Chap.  Ill,


120  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

the  symbols  M,  P,  S,  are  illustrative  S3mibols.  They  can  be  replaced
by  any  terms  that  would  make  sense  so  as  to  give  a particular  example
of  a syllogism  in  Fig.  I.  An  illustrative  symbol  is  thus  an  arbitrarily
chosen  letter  of  the  alphabet  standing,  not  for  some  one  definite
object,  but  for  any  of  a set  of  objects  indicated  by  the  context.  We
used  such  symbols  in  explaining  immediate  inferences ; thus  All
S is  P was  taken  as  standing  for  am/  universal  aiffirmative  proposi-
tion. Sa  P”  combines  both  illustrative  and  shorthand  symbols,
since  “ a ” is  shorthand  for  universal  afiirmative  proposition
whilst S ” and  ''  P ” are  illustrative  symbols.  We  saw  in  Chapter
VI  that  Aristotle  used  such  symbols  in  order  to  bring  out  the
dependence  of  the  validity  of  a syllogism  upon  its  form.

In  Chapter  IV  we  saw  that  the  distinction  between  different
kinds  of  propositions  is  a distinction  between  different  propositional
forms.  We  pointed  out  that /orw  is  a generalized  conception  that
it  is  not  easy  to  express  simply.  The  use  of  symbols  enables  us  to
exhibit  form.  For  this  reason,  following  the  example  of  Aristotle,
we  used  symbols  when  we  were  considering  the  syllogism,  since  we
wanted  to  consider,  not  'po'pes,  saints^  etc.,  nor  particular  men  such
as  Hildebrandf  etc.,  but  only  the  form  of  imflication.  Again,  in
considering  the  relations  between  propositions  we  were  concerned
not  with  determinate  examples  of  propositions  but  with  their  form.
Thus  we  used  p,  q,  r,  for  simple  propositions,  constructing  compound
propositions  out  of  these,  e.g.  If  p,  then  q.  Here  p,  q stand  for  any
simple  propositions.  These  are,  then,  illustrative  symbols.  The
verbal  form  . . . then  . . expresses  the  form  of  the  pro-
position ; it  will  remain  unchanged  whatever  simple  propositions
we  substitute  for  p and  q.  Symbols  which  express  form  will  be
called  logical  constants  A Some  shorthand  symbols  are  used  for
logical  constants,  e.g.  Z)  ? ^^t.  An  arbitrary  mark  such  as  D or  +
is  an  ideographic  symbol.  The  advantage  of  the  ideograms  is
evident.  They  are  compact  so  that  by  means  of  ideograms  it  is
often  possible  to  present  at  a glance  a formula  that  would  other-
wise be  lengthy  in  expression.  We  saw  the  advantage  of  such  com-
pactness in  the  case  of  the  simple  expression  cc  + y = y + lu
dealing  with  propositions  of  considerable  complexity  some  device
to  economize  mental  effort  is  necessary  in  order  that  we  should  be
able  to  grasp  complicated  trains  of  reasoning.  Any  one  who  has
reflected  upon  the  processes  of  thought  involved  in  working  out  a
complicated  mathematical  theorem  will  admit  that  some  economy
of  thought  is  indispensable  in  practice.  We  shall  see  later  how  the

^ The  expression  “ logical  constant  is  often  used  by  symbolic  logicians  to
mean  what  is  symbolized,  not  the  symbol.  This  seems  to  me  to  be  a mistake
and  to  lead  to  confusion.  Hence,  by  “ logical  constant  ” I mean  the  symbol
through  which  the  form  is  symbolized»


SYMBOLS  AND  FOEM


121


use  of  such  symbols  enables  us  to  formulate  precise  rules  of  trans-
formation which  simplify  the  process  of  reasoning.  As  Prof.  White-
head  puts  it : ‘ Operations  of  thought  are  like  cavalry  charges  in
a battle — ^they  are  strictly  limited  in  number,  they  require  fresh
horses,  and  must  only  be  made  at  decisive  moments.’  ^

Logical  symbolism  has,  then,  two  important  functions  to  perform.
It  economizes  thought,  and  thus  makes  possible  the  development  of
complicated  inferences.  Secondly,  by  means  of  appropriate  symbols
form  can  be  adequately  revealed  ; hence,  generality  can  be  attained.
For  this  purpose  two  different  kinds  of  sjmabols  are  required  : short-
hand symbols  and  illustrative  symbols.  There  are  three  important
characteristics  that  every  satisfactory  logical  symbolism  must  possess  :
(1)  conciseness  ; (2)  precision  ; (3)  systematization.  The  nature  and
importance  of  these  characteristics  will  become  clearer  as  we  pro-
ceed. It  may  be  said  that,  while  the  first  characteristic  is  rendered
necessary  by  the  limitations  of  human  thinking,  the  latter  two  are
dependent  upon  the  nature  of  logic.

§2.  ILLUSTEATIONS  FEOM  THE  SYMBOLISM  OF
MATHEMATICS  ^

Every  one  will  admit  that,  as  a matter  of  practical  experi-
ence, it  is  much  easier  to  work  out  a sum  in  addition  if  the  Arabic
notation  be  used  instead  of  the  clumsy  Eoman  numerals.  Any  one
not  convinced  of  this  has  only  to  make  the  trial  with,  say,  three
rows  each  representing  numbers  of  a million  odd.  Eoman  numerals
are  clumsy  to  write ; they  cannot  easily  be  taken  in  at  a glance ;
they  represent  an  incomplete  analysis  of  the  notions  they  express.
The  Arabic  notation,  on  the  other  hand,  is  concise ; hence,  it  can
be  easily  comprehended ; its  form  represents  precisely  the  notions
to  be  expressed.  The  notation  0,  1,  2,  ...  10,  11,  ..  . 100,  101
. . , 1,000,  1,001  ..  . and  so  on,  is  immediately  significant.  By
means  of  ten  differently  shaped  sjmibols  and  a system  of  placing
them  which  makes  their  value  dependent  upon  their  positions,  even
very  large  numbers  can  be  easily  comprehended.  It  will  not  be
necessary  here  to  explain  the  system,  acquaintance  with  which ’may
be  taken  for  granted.  But  two  points  are  worthy  of  notice.  First,
by  means  of  the  ten  symbols,  0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  and  the  device
of  placing  them  in  juxtaposition,  any  number  can  be  symbolized.

^ WMtehead,  op.  cit.,  p.  61.

^ ® TMs  section  is  inserted  as  the  student  will  be  familiar  with  the  practical

use  of  symbols  in  mathematics,  and  may  thus  be  aided  in  understanding  the
importance  of  a satisfactory  symbolism.  The  student  may  be  referred  to
A.  N.  Whitehead,  Science  and  the  Modern  World,  Giap.  II ; An  Introduction  to
Mathematics ; and  to  G.  H.  Hardy,  Pure  Mathematics.  Erom  these  writers
everything  of  importance  in  this  section  has  been  derived.  See  also  M.  Cantor,
Geschichtc  der  Mathematih,  Vol.  I.


122


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Secondly,  tMs  device  is  the  most  concise  possible.  For  example,
to  symbolize  a hundred  and  twenty-four,  we  write  124.  Here  the
position  of  4 indicates  4 units ; the  position  of  2 preceding  the  4
indicates  20  units ; the  position  of  1 preceding  the  2 and  the  4
indicates  100  units.  Now  nothing  is  easier  to  write  than  nothing ;
hence  24  represents  an  economy  of  effort  as  compared  with  XXIV.
Secondly,  since  the  value  of  the  numeral  is  defined  by  its  position,
so  that  the  position  of  4 requires  us  to  write  2 in  front  of  it  to  sym-
bolize 24,  the  symbol  24  is  significant.  But  when  there  are  no  units
to  follow  2,  a symbol  is  needed  to  give  the  position  to  2 which  will
symbolize  twenty  units.  Hence  the  invention  of  the  symbol  0,
whose  first  service  is  to  put  the  other  numerals  in  their  right  places.
The  notion  of  a zero  number  is  a much  later  development.  Never-
theless, the  symbol  is  essential  to  the  practical  use  of  the  Arabic
notation.  Hence,  to  the  practical  man  it  appears  to  be  more  ob-
viously just  a symbol.  As  Professor  Whitehead  puts  it : ' The  point
about  zero  is  that  we  do  not  need  to  use  it  in  the  operations  of
daily  life.  No  one  goes  out  to  buy  zero  fish.  It  is  in  a way  the
most  civilized  of  all  the  cardinals,  and  its  use  is  only  forced  on  us
by  the  needs  of  cultivated  modes  of  thought.’^

A consideration  of  the  Arabic  system  of  numerals  reveals  then
the  importance  of  a concise  notation,  and  the  advantage  of  the
indefinite  extensibility  of  the  system.  For  example,  if  the  largest
number  we  had  ever  met  were  63,489,701,627,  we  should  never-
theless know  at  once  that  the  next  numeral  was  53,489,701,628.
It  is  important  to  remember  that  the  earliest  conceptions  of  arith-
metic are  dependent  upon  the  notion  of  counting.  To  count  is  to
mark  off  one  set  of  objects  against  another  set  in  a particular  way.
We  are  so  familiar  with  this  process  that  we  seldom  reflect  upon
what  the  process  of  counting  involves.  Suppose  we  have  a set  of
five  apples.  We  can  arrange  the  apples  in  a row,  remove  one  at
a time  and  simultaneously  close  a finger  of  the  other  hand.  In
writing  this  we  have  used  the  symbol  “ five  ” to  avoid  prolixity.
But  in  the  primitive  operation  we  are  considering,  we  are  not  sup-
posed to  be  familiar  with  the  shape  5,  nor  with  the  sound  represented
by  the  written  word  ‘‘  five  If  we  have  a set  twice  as  large  we
can  repeat  the  operation,  using  the  other  hand.  Then,  if  necessary,
we  can  use  our  toes  in  a similar  manner.  But  it  is  difficult  to  carry
this  primitive  method  of  counting  very  far.^  If,  now,  we  represent

^ Introduction  to  Mathematics,  p.  63.  Here  we  see  that  a symbol  introduced
for  practical  convenience  led  later  to  the  discovery  of  an  important  mathematical
notion.

^ But  it  has  been  stated  that  primitive  peoples  using  a system  of  numerals
expressed  by  finger  signs  have  succeeded  in  counting  up  to  10^000.  The
fingers,  when  so  used,  beconie  numerals.


SYMBOLS  AND  FOEM


123


the  five  fingers  of  the  hand  by  arbitrary  shapes,  say,  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,
letting  A stand  for  the  thumb  and  E for  the  little  finger,  then  we
can  state  shortly  what  exactly  was  being  done  in  our  primitive
method  of  counting.  We  first  set  A against  one  apple,  B against
another,  C against  another,  and  so  on.  Thus  the  number  of  apples
was  found  to  be  the  same  as  the  number  of  fingers.  If  we  wanted
to  discover  the  number  of  our  neighbour’s  apples,  we  could  repeat
the  process  using  his  apples.  But  it  would  be  much  simpler  if  we
had  a recognized  set  of  symbols,  which  either  of  us  could  use  and
which  we  could  carry  in  our  heads.  Such  a set  of  symbols  is  pro-
vided by  the  numerals.  ^ Thus,  letting  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  stand  for  the
set  of  objects,  whether  fingers,  or  our  apples,  or  our  neighbour’s
apples,  we  could  establish  a relation  represented  as  follows : ^

A,  B,  C,  D,  E.

1,  2,  3,  4,  5.

Here  one  numeral  corresponds  to  one,  and  only  one,  letter.
This  is  called  a one-to-one  correspondence.  It  is  the  relation  that
relates  the  number-series  and  any  set  of  objects  counted  by  means
of  it.  By  establishing  this  one-to-one  correspondence,  first  between
the  numerals  and  our  apples,  and  then  between  the  numerals  and
our  neighbour’s  apples,  we  can  discover  that  we  have  the  same
number  of  apples  without  needing  to  set  them  in  relation  to  each
other,  or  to  our  fingers.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  last  numeral
of  the  set  represents  the  number  of  the  set  of  objects  counted.  Hence,
it  is  not  necessary  to  say,  the  number  of  the  set  is,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5 ” ;
it  is  sufficient  to  say  5 ”,  If  we  were  dependent  for  our  counting  upon
our  fingers  and  toes  we  should  need  some  convention  about  the  order
in  which  we  are  to  take  them,  in  order  to  secure  a similar  advantage.

Again,  consider  a set  of  two  apples  and  another  set  of  three
apples.  If  we  adopt  our  previous  method  (representing  the  first
set  by  A,  B,  and  the  second  set  by  0,  D,  E),  we  find  that  we  get

A,  B ; C,  D,  E.

1,  2;  1,  2,  3.

Now,  if  we  put  1,  2,  1,  2,  3
againstf  1,  2,  3,  4,  5

we  find  that  the  number  2 of  the  first  set  can  be  combined  with
the  number  3 of  the  second  set  so  as  to  give  5,  when  counted  against
the  numerals.  That  is  to  say,  when  we  add,  we  combine  one  set,
the  number  of  which  is  known,  with  another  set,  the  number  of
which  is  known.

It  is  obvious  that  in  this  last  operation  it  was  indifferent  whether

^ It  must  be  noted  that  “ numeral  ” stands  for  the  sywbd^  whatever  it  loay
be,  which  stands  for  a number,

2 It  will  be  noti^d  that  0 is  not  used.


124  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

we  started  with  the  set  A,  B,  or  with  the  set  C,  D,  E.  It  is  im-
portant to  emphasize  this.  We  are  so  familiar  with  these  operations
that  we  do  not  realize  how  dfficnlt  it  must  have  been  for  primitive
men  to  discover  these  characteristics.  The  symbolism  has  made  the
operation  easy.  Further,  a considerable  degree  of  abstraction  is
required  before  it  is  possible  to  grasp  that  we  can  compare  not  only
two  sets  of  apples  with  regard  to  their  number  but  any  set  of  objects
with  any  other  set.  As  Professor  Whitehead  puts  it : ' During  a long
period,  groups  of  fishes  will  have  been  compared  to  each  other  in
respect  to  their  multiplicity ; and  groups  of  days  to  each  other.
But  the  first  man  who  noticed  the  analogy  between  a group  of  seven
fishes  and  a group  of  seven  days  made  a notable  advance  in  the
history  of  thought.  He  was  the  first  man  who  entertained  a con-
cept belonging  to  the  science  of  pure  mathematics.’  ^

Multiplication  is  repeated  addition.  We  want  to  find,  say,  the
number  of  a set  of  apples  taken  three  times  over.  Suppose  the
set  consists  of  A and  B.  Then  we  put  A,  B,  against  1,2;  we  repeat
and  put  A,  B,  against  3,  4 ; we  repeat  and  put  A,  B,  against  5,  6.
The  result  is  the  same  as  the  product  of  3 and  2.  It  is  not  necessary
to  pursue  this  method  further.  It  will  easily  be  seen  that  subtrac-
tion is  the  inverse  operation  to  addition,  and  division  the  inverse
operation  to  multiplication.  But  it  is  important  to  note  that  we
have  throughout  made  certain  assumptions  about  the  order  in  which
we  have  taken  the  objects.  We  can  now  formulate  these.  Let  us
take  any  three  numbers  at  random,  say,  2,  5,  8.  We  assume  that
we  have  reached  the  stage  at  which  the  symbol  + is  used  for  addition,
and  X for  multiplication.  Then  we  have :

(1)  2 + 5 = 5 + 2.

(2)  2 X 5 = 5 X 2.

(3)  2 + (5  + 8)  - (2  + 5)  + 8.

(4)  2 X (5  X 8)  = (2  X 5)  X 8.

(5)  (2  + 5)  X 8 ==  (2  X 8)  + (5  X 8).

We  took  these  numbers,  2,  5,  8,  at  random.  That  is  to  say,  it
did  not  matter  what  number  we  took.  That  is,  we  can  take  any
number.  But  2, 5, 8 are  symbols  for  three  different  definite  numbers.
It  will  obviously  be  more  convenient  if  we  invent  a symbolism  that
can  stand  for  any  number.  The  letters  of  the  alphabet  provide  a
convenient  set  of  sjnnbols  ready  to  hand.  Instead,  therefore,  of
saying  2 + 5 ==  5 + 2,  and  this  will  be  true  if  we  take  other  num-
bers than  2 and  6 ”,  we  say  let  x and  y be  any  two  numbers,  then
Q0-\-y  = y + Here  x and  y stand,  not  for  any  definite  number,
but  for  any  one  of  a certain  set,  namely,  the  set  of  numbers.  We
make  a siinilar  use  of  symbols  when  we  say,  If  M is  P and  S is  M,
1 Science  and  the  Modern  World,  p.  29  (1st  impression).


SYMBOLS  AND  FORM


125


then  S is  P since  S,  M,  P,  stand  respectively  for  any  terms  occur-
ring as  middle,  major,  and  minor  terms  in  a syllogism.  The  con-
ception represented  by  such  symbols  is  perfectly  familiar,  and  it  is
of  great  importance.  Such  a symbol  is  called  a variable.  The
definite  objects  that  can  be  substituted  for  the  variable,  so  as  to
make  sense  in  a given  expression,  are  called  the  values  of  the  variable.
The  importance  of  this  notion  will  he  discussed  in  the  next  section.
It  cannot  be  understood  apart  from  the  notion  of  a function.

The  importance  of  a good  notation,  i.e.  of  a systematic  set  of
symbols,  can  be  illustrated  from  the  history  of  the  s3mibols  em-
ployed in  the  differential  calculus.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the
calculus  was  discovered  at  approximately  the  same  time,  but  in-
dependently, by  Newton  and  by  Leibniz.  A controversy  arose  as
to  which  had  the  priority.  Their  fellow-countrymen  took  sides  and
had  an  unprofitable  quarrel.  Now,  although  Leibniz  and  Newton
were  concerned  with  the  same  notions,  they  invented  different  nota-
tions. The  superiority  of  Leibniz’s  notation  to  Newton’s  is  now
admitted  by  every  one.  But  at  first  the  English  mathematicians
refused  to  adopt  Leibniz’s  notation.  They  w'-ere  consequently
hindered  in  their  work  by  having  to  employ  a cumbersome  notation
which  concealed  the  important  concepts.  During  the  following
century  no  important  mathematical  discovery  is  to  be  attributed
to  an  English  mathematician,  whereas  on  the  Continent,  where
Leibniz’s  notation  was  used,  rapid  progress  was  made.  It  seems
not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  English  mathematicians
suffered  from  their  use  of  a less  satisfactory  notation.  It  may  indeed
be  said  that  an  adequate  symbolism  is  indispensable  for  the  develop-
ment of  mathematics,  for  an  adequate  set  of  symbols  both  pre-
supposes analysis  of  the  fundamental  ideas  and  is  an  aid  to  further
analysis.  By  the  employment  of  sjnnbols  used  systematically
expressions  that  appear  to  be  of  different  forms  can  be  so  expressed
that  they  are  easily  seen  to  be  of  the  same  form.  For  example :

(1)  a?  + 2/  = 1,

(2)  a;  -b  2w  = 2aj  -f-  — ■ 1,

(3)  4 ==  2a;2  + 3a;  -b  2,

(4)  2 - 3a;  ==  2x\

appear  to  be  four  expressions  all  of  different  forms.  If,  however,
they  are  re-expressed  so  that  the  variable  symbols  and  the  numerical
symbols  are  all  put  on  one  side  of  “ = ” and  the  whole  expression
is  equated  to  0,  we  have :

(1)  a;  + 2/  - 1 = 0.

(2)  a;  + 2/  — 1 = 0.

(3)  2a;2  + 3a;  - 2 ==  0.

(4)  2a;2  + 3a;  - 2 = 0.


126  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

Here  it  is  obvious  at  once  that  (1)  and  (2),  (3)  and  (4)  are  of  the
same  form  A

Such  a symbolism  as  that  of  mathematics  obviously  develops
slowly  to  its  perfect  form.  Any  erroneous  ideas  involved  in  the
origination  of  a set  of  symbols  will  hinder  further  analysis.  Thus
the  Arabic  numeral  notation  was,  as  we  saw,  perfectly  adapted  to
the  process  of  counting  a set  of  objects  taken  in  a certain  order.
This  connexion  with  counting  obscured  the  fundamental  nature  of
number.  This  point  will  be  discussed  further  in  Chapter  XI.

Mr.  Russell  has  said,  ' Symbolism  is  useful  because  it  makes
things  difficult  whereas  Professor  Whitehead  says  that  symbols
‘ have  invariably  been  introduced  to  make  things  easy  Both  these
statements  are  true.  The  deliberate  invention  of  a complicated
symbolism  makes  what  seemed  obvious  difficult  to  grasp,  since  it
makes  explicit  the  distinctions  that  the  vagueness  of  language
enables  us  to  ignore,  for  these  distinctions  have  no  practical  utility.
But  on  the  other  hand  it  is  through  the  symbolism  that  we  come
to  apprehend  what  are  the  important  ideas.  In  this  way  different
notions  are  disentangled  and  their  relations  made  evident.  Thus
in  the  end  there  is  an  immense  gain  in  simplification,  so  that,  as  Mr.
Russell  also  points  out,  the  fmther  development  of  a symbolism
reduces  our  difficrdties.  The  invention  of  any  set  of  technical
terms,  for  example,  the  terminology  of  chemistry,  illustrates  the
same  point — ^the  apparent  increase  of  obscurity  and  complexity,  the
real  increase  of  clearness  and  simplicity.  Doubtless  the  technical
terms  used  by  stockbrokers  and  by  bookmakers  are  a case  in  point.
Certainly  a science  such  as  psychology,  or  as  sociology,  which  is
still  in  its  infancy,  is  hampered  by  lack  of  an  adequate  symbolism.
It  makes  what  progress  it  does  by  developing  a symbolism  suggested
by  the  present  stage  of  its  analysis.

§ 3.  FORM  AND  FUNCTION

We  have  seen  that  the  form  of  a proposition  is  what  remains
unchanged  although  all  the  constituents  of  the  proposition  are  altered.
Thus  form  is  the  way  in  which  the  constituents  are  put  together.
Any  determinate  proposition  exhibits  a certain  propositional  ^form.

Consider  the  three  sets  of  propositions :

(A)  i.  Socrates  is  wise.

ii.  Charles  I is  unfortxmate.

iii.  Mussolini  is  ambitious.

iv.  Athens  is  famous.

V.  You  are  rich.

^ The  student  should  consider  the  nature  of  the  symbolic  devices  involved
in  representing,  say,  any  variable  linear  correlation  by  ckc  + — c «=  0,  and

any  conic  section  by  aa:®  + 2hxy  + 2fy  + c = 0.


SYMBOLS  AND  FORM


127


(B)  i.  Either  Charles  I ought  to  have  been  executed  or  Cromwell

was  mistaken.

ii.  Either  Mussolini  is  tyrannical  or  Salvemini  is  deceived.

iii.  Either  Baldwin  is  honest  or  Conservatives  are  stupid.

iv.  Either  Francis  Bacon  is  a poet  or  Shakespeare  wrote

Antony  and  Cleo'patra.

(C)  i.  4 = V2
ii.  5 ==  10/2
hi  6 = 12/2
iv.  7 = 1V2
V.  9 = 18/2

In  set  (A)  wise  is  related  to  Socrates  as  unfortunate  is  related  to
Charles  I,  and  as  ambitious  is  related  to  Mussolini,  and  so  on.

In  set  (B)  Cromwell  was  mistaken  is  related  to  Charles  1 ought
to  ham  been  executed  as  Salvemini  is  deceived  is  related  to  Mussolini  is
tyrannical,  and  so  on.

In  set  (0)  8/2  is  related  to  4 as  is  related  to  5,  and  so  on.

In  set  (A)  there  are  five  propositions  each  of  which  exhibits  the
subject-vredicate  form.  In  set  (B)  there  are  four  compoimd  proposi-
tions each  of  which  exhibits  the  alternative  form.  In  set  (C)  there  are
five  propositions  each  of  which  exhibits  the  relational  form  being  half  of.

By  using  illustrative  symbols  we  can  symboli^ie  the  form  of  the
propositions  in  set  (A).  Thus  if  '"a;”  symbolizes  any  one  of  the
set  of  subjects,  p ’’  any  one  of  the  set  of  predicates,  we  get  x
is  p We  cannot  represent  the  form  of  subject-predicate  propositions
by  a determinate  proposition  such  as  “ Socrates  is  wise  ’’ ; this
propositione^Ai6i^5  the  subject-predicate  form  but  does  not  symbolize
it,  since  form  is  an  abstraction.  By  the  subject-predicate  form  ’’
we  mean  "that  form  which  any  subject-predicate  proposition  must
exhibit  In  the  same  way  by  using  the  illustrative  symbols
and  “ q ” we  can  symbolize  the  form  of  the  propositions  in  set  (B)
by  "^"either  f ot  q It  is  to  be  observed  that  x ” and  in
the  first  case,  ''  p ’’  and  ” in  the  second  case  are  illustrative
symbols,  whilst  “ is  ” and  either  ...  or  are  logical  constants.  '
Any  constituent  that  can  appropriately  be  fitted  into  a given  pro-
positional  form  can  be  represented  by  illustrative  symbols  ; the  form
can  be  represented  by  logical  constants.  If  we  substitute  any  one
of  the  determinate  constituents  which  are  values  of  the  illustrative
symbols,  the  result  is  a determinate  proposition.  We  might  have
obtained  set  (A),  for  instance,  by  starting  with  the  form  a?  is  p ”,
and  then  finding  appropriate  constituents  for  ‘‘  x ” and  for  “ p
Again,  suppose  we  were  to  start  with  the  form  If  x is  y,  then  m
is  By  substitution  we  could  obtain  the  proposition,  “ If  this
woman  is  musical,  then  her  husband  is  deal”


128


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


The  examples  in  set  (C)  could  be  regarded  as  having  been  obtained
from  the  consideration  of  any  number  that  is  half  some  other  number.
Thus  (1)  can  be  expressed  4 = | (8) ; (2)  can  be  expressed  5 = | (10),
and  so  on.  If  we  S5nnbolize  the  &st  number  by  y ’’  we  can  express
the  number  to  which  y is  said  to  be  equal  as  half  some  other
number  Then  some  other  number  can  be  symbolized  by  ''  x ’’
and  the  expression  becomes  y Accordingly,  if  we  sub-

stitute for  X some  one  definite  number  we  know  what  number  y is,
namely,  half  that  number.  Here  “ x ” and  y ” are  variables  ;

I ’’  is  a logical  constant.  Now,  if  we  think  of  the  expression

y = ’’  as  merely  symbolizing  the  form  of  the  five  propositions

in  set  (C),  then  x ” and  y are  illustrative  sjunbols  related  in
the  specific  way  expressed  by  the  logical  constant  If,

however,  we  regard  the  expression  y ’’  as  expressing  a deter-
minate correspondence  between  the  variables  x ’’  and  y ’’  such
that  when  the  value  of  x is  given  the  value  of  y is  thereby  determined,
then  ^ ’’  expresses  a functional  relation.  The  variable  y is

said  to  be  in  functional  dependence  upon  the  variable  x;  hence
y is  called  the  dependent  variable,  x is  called  the  independent  variable.
This  notion  of  functional  dependence  is  of  the  greatest  importance
in  mathematics.  ^ The  general  notion  of  a function  may  be  symbolized
by  ‘‘  y =f(x)  or  y ==  g{x)  etc.,  where/,  g,  or  any  letter  written
outside  the  bracket  signifies  an  imdetermined,  i.e.  a variable,  function
of  X,  Sometimes  x is  called  the  argument  of  the  function ; y is  called
the  value  of  the  function,^  Thus  in  y =f{x),  y is  the  value  of  some
imdetermined  function  of  the  argument  x.  Familiar  examples  of
functions  are  y = y = 2x^  + 3^?  1,  2/  = sin  a?,  ^ = log  x.

It  is  often  possible  to  represent  a functional  relation  by  a
graph.

We  have  so  far  illustrated  the  notion  of  a variable  by  a func-
tional relation  between  numbers.  But  there  is  no  need  thus  to
restrict  the  notion.  It  is  accordingly  desirable  so  to  define  variable
and  function  as  to  avoid  this  restriction.  It  is  to  be  observed  that
the  variable  represents  any  one  of  a set,  or  class.  We  may  use
the  word  ‘‘  element  ’’  for  a member  of  a class,  which  enables  us  to
use  the  latter  notion  as  widely  as  possible.  A variable  can,  then,
be  defined  as  follows : A variable  is  a symbol  which  denotes  any  one
of  a class  of  elements.  The  notion  of  functional  relation  in  its  most
general  form  is  the  notion  of  determinate  correspondence  in  abstrac-
tion from  the  specific  mode  of  such  correspondence.  The  specifica-

^ The  student  who  is  quite  unfamiliar  with  the  notion  of  a functional  rdation
should  refer  to  Chap.  XVIII,  § 2 below.

^ It  must  be  noticed  that  we  speak  both  of  substituting  mines  for  the  variables
(e.g.  substituting  10  for  a;  in  y = ^),  and  of  the  value  of  the  value  of  the
function  (e.g.  5 in  the  given  example).


SYMBOLS  AND  FOEM


129


tion  of  tlie  mode  of  correspondence  is  given  by  a rule  (or  a set  of
rules)  such  that  tbe  value  of  tbe  dependent  variable  corresponding
to  each  value  of  the  independent  variable  is  thereby  determined.
The  class  represented  by  the  variable  y may  be  called  the  referents,
the  class  represented  by  the  variable  x may  be  called  the  relate,  of
the  functional  relation.  A dependent  variable  may  be  determined
by  two  independent  variables.  For  example,  the  temperature  of  a
gas  is  a function  of  its  pressure  and  volume.  It  is  not  essential  to
the  functional  relation  that  y,  the  dependent  variable,  should  be
determined  for  every  value  of  x,  the  independent  variable ; nor
that  to  each  value  of  x for  which  y is  given  there  should  correspond
one  and  only  one  value  of  y,  for  x may  determine  a set  of  values  of  y.
It  is  necessary,  then,  to  distinguish  between  one-valued  and  mcmy-
valued  functions.  These  may  be  defined  as  follows :

A variable  y is  a one-valued  function  of  a variable  x when  there
is  a relation  of  correspondence  between  the  class  represented  by  x
and  the  class  represented  by  y such  that  every  value  of  x uniquely
determines  a value  of  y.

A variable  2/  is  a rmny-valued  function  of  a variable  x when  there
is  a relation  of  correspondence  between  the  class  represented  by  x
and  the  class  represented  by  y such  that  every  value  of  x determines
a set  of  values  of  y.

It  is  not  necessary  for  our  purpose  to  discuss  the  different  kinds
of  functions,  but  it  is  important  to  observe  that  these  definitions
do  not  restrict  the  classes  represented  by  the  variables  to  classes  of
numbers.  What  is  most  important  is  to  be  clear  with  regard  to
the  use  of  the  variable.  A satisfactory  definition  of  the  variable
presupposes  the  notion  of  any.  It  is  not  possible  to  discuss  this
here.i  Frege  suggested  that  the  variable  keeps  an  empty  place
which  must  be  filled  in  by  an  element  of  the  class  represented  by
the  variable  in  order  that  the  expression  in  which  the  variable  occurs
may  be  completed.^  This  statement  does  not,  however  secure  the
condition  that  wherever  the  same  letter  occurs  the  same  value  shall
be  substituted.  Thus  we  should  not  be  able  to  distinguish  between
''  Zx^  + x’^  and  ''  3x^  + y What  is  required  is  the  notion  of
any  one  of  a certain  class  defined  by  the  function.  That  is  to  say,
a variable  represents  any  one,  hut  not  a determinate  one,  of  a set  of
elements,  the  set  being  defined  by  the  specific  functional  relation.

In  the  most  general  sense,  every  expression  which  contains  two
or  more  variables  may  be  called  function.  We  must  now  consider
the  specific  form  of  function  called  by  Mr.  Eussell  a propositional
fwnction.  It  is  advisable  to  begin  by  attempting  to  understand  what
exactly  Mr.  Eussell  means  by  a propositional  function,  and  then

^ See  Bussell,  Principles  of  Mathematics,  Chap.  Vin.

* Frege,  UeJer  Begriff  und  Gegemtand,  Cf.  Couturat.  Op.  cit.,  p.  148.

9


130


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


consider  the  relation  of  propositional  function  to  the  mathematical
concept  of  function  as  we  have  defined  it.

Mr.  Russell  seems  to  have  been  led  to  introduce  the  notion  of
a propositional  function  in  order  to  facilitate  the  analysis  of  general
propositions  such  as  All  men  are  mortal,  Some  men  are  wise.  It
seems  clear  that  what  is  asserted  in  the  proposition  All  men  are
mortal  is  that  any  man,  no  matter  how  he  may  he  selected  from
the  class  men,  is  a mortal.  This  might  be  expressed  in  the  form :
If  A represents  any  man,  then  A is  mortal.  Now  “ A ’’  in  this
expression  is  clearly  a variable.  It  is  impossible  to  regard  “A”
as  a proper  name  of  an  individual  arbitrarily  chosen  ; it  represents
any  one  of  the  set  of  members  that  constitute  the  class  men.  If,
therefore,  we  symbolize  the  variable  by  the  letter  x in  accord-
ance with  the  usual  custom,  we  get  the  assertion : If  a?  is  a man,
then  X is  mortal,  for  all  values  of  x.  The  expression  ''  If  a;  is  a
man,  then  a;  is  a mortal  ’’  is  a propositional  function.  By  using  this
expression  we  can  make  clear  the  analysis  of  the  general  proposition
All  men  are  mortal.  This  point  has  been  stated  by  Mr.  Russell  in
a way  that  brings  out  the  use  of  propositional  functions  very  clearly.
He  says:

‘ Now  when  you  come  to  ask  what  really  is  asserted  in  a general  proposition,
such  as  “ All  Greeks  are  men  ’’  for  instance,  you  find  that  what  is  asserted  is  the
truth  of  all  values  of  what  I call  a propositional  function.  A ^propositional
function  is  simply  any  expression  containing  an  undetermined  constituent,  or
several  undetermined  constituents,  and  becoming  a proposition  as  soon  as  the
undetermined  constituents  are  determined.  If  I say  “ a;  is  a man  ” or  “ is  a
number  ”,  that^,is  a propositional  function.’  ^

It  is  clear  that  is  a man  ’’  does  not  express  a proposition
for  it  does  not  express  anything  that  is  either  true  or  false,  since
X represents  an  undetermined  element.  If  we  substitute  Bernard
Shaw  (which  may  be  regarded  as  a proper  name)  for  in
X is  man  then  Bernard  Shaw  is  a man  ” expresses  a true
^/proposition.  Thus  propositions  are  obtained  from  propositional
functions  by  substituting  determinate  values  for  the  variables  occurr-
ing in^the  propositional  function.  We  can  also  obtain  a proposition
by  asserting  that  aj)ropositional  function  is  true  (or  false)  for  all,
or  for  some,  of  the  values  for  the  variables.  Thus  For  all  values
of  if  £cj.s  a man,  thgn  cc  is  mortal  ’’  expresses  a proposition,  namely,
the  proposition  which  can  also  be  expressed  by ''  Aljljnen  are  mortal

It  is  means  easj  determine  precisely  the  nature  of  a

^ The  Monisf,  1919,  p.  192.  It  should  he  noticed  that  Mr.  Bussell  uses
inverted  commas  to  mark  a proposition  occurring  in  another  statement,  so  that
he  writes  “ AU  Greeks  are  men”  where  we  should  have  written  All  Greeks  are
men,  |!x,  RusseH  does  not  always  succeed  in  making  clear  the  distinction
between  tlie  expression  and  what  is  expressed.


SYMBOLS  AND  FORM


131


propositional  function.  In  Pnnci'pm  Mathematica  Mr.  Russell  gives
the  following  explanation :

‘ By  a “ propositional  function  we  mean  something  which  contains  a
variable  x,  and  expresses  a 'proposition  as  soon  as  a value  is  assigned  to  x.  That
is  to  say,  it  differs  from  a proposition  solely  by  the  fact  that  it  is  ambiguous :
it  contains  a variable  of  which  the  value  is  unassigned.  It  agrees  with  the
ordinary  functions  of  mathematics  in  the  fact  of  containing  an  unassigned
variable ; where  it  differs  is  in  the  fact  that  the  values  of  the  function  are
propositions.’  ^

In  this  statement  Mr.  Russell  lays  stress  upon  the  ambiguity  of
a propositional  function,  and  asserts  that  this  ambiguity  constitutes
the  sole  difference  between  a propositional  function  and  a proposi-
tion. This  seems  to  be  an  unfortunate  way  of  expressing  the  matter.
By  ambiguity  ’’  Mr.  Russell  seems  to  mean  indeterminateness ^ which
is  the  characteristic  of  the  variable.  To  say  that  an  expression
containing  a variable  is  an  ambiguous  expression  involves  a mis-
leading use  of  language.  What  is  important  is  that  there  is  a deter-
minate correspondence  specified  by  the  functional  relation  holding
between  the  variables.  This,  we  have  seen,  is  the  characteristic  of
a mathematical  function.  Mr.  RusseE  further  distinguishes  between
^j)ropositional  function  and  an  undetermined  (or,  as  he  says,  am-
biguous) value  of  the  function.  To  mark  this  distinction  he  writes
“ X is  hurt  ’’  to  express  the  propositional  function,  and  x is  hurt
to  express  the  undetermined  value  of  the  function.^  To  this  dis-
tinction we  shall  return  later.

We  have  now  to  consider  in  what  respects  a propositional  func-
tion resembles,  and  in  what  respects  it  differs  from,  an  ordinary
mathematical  function.  In  the  above  statement  Mr.  Russell  points
out  that  they  agree  in  containing  unassigned  variables  and  differ
in  that  the  values  of  a propositional  function  are  propositions.  This,
however,  does  npt  seem  a suj0S.ciently  precise  account  of  the  matter.
Mr.  Russell  also  says  that  ^ propositional  functions  are  the  funda-
mental kind  from  which  the  more  usual  kinds  of  function,  such  as
"‘sin  or  ''log  x^’  or  "the  fathep  of  x^'  are  derived Such
functions  are  called  descriptive  functions ; they  mean  “ the  term
having  such  and  such  a relation  to  x so  that  the  function  describes
the  value  of  x which  satisfies  the  function.  Thus  log  x means
"the  logarithm^ of  x'\  If  we  substitute  the  determinate  value  ,3
for  X in  the  expression  " log  x ” we  get  " the  logarithm  of  3 Now
"the  logarithm  of  3’’  describes  the  number  4771  . . . , "the
logarithm  of  2 ” tocrfe  the  number  *3010  . . . , just  as  " the  father
of  George  V describes  Edward  VII.  It  is  important  to  distinguish
ih  number  described  from  the  description  of  it,  since  the  same  number
^op  cit.,  Vol.  I,  p.  38.

® The  expression  “ I is  hurt  ” may  be  read  “ x-cap  is  hurt  ”,

*op.  cit.,  p.  15.  - *


132


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


may  Lave  many  dxfierent  descriptions,  just  as  the  same  man  may
have  many  different  descriptions  applicable  to  him.  For  example,
the  number  2 may  be  described  by  the  only  even  prime
‘^1;he  square  root  of  4”,  ""the  sum  of  1 and  1 ’’ ; Edward  VII
may  be  described  by  ""  the  successor  of  Queen  Victoria  ""  the
King  of  England  in  1905  ”,  and  so  on.  In  the  mathematical  function
y = log  Xi  y is,  we  have  seen,  the  value  of  the  function^  and  if  3
be  substituted  for  jr,  then  the  value  of  the  value  of  the  function  is
•4771  ...

Vy'e  must  now  consider  a propositional  function,  e.g.  ""  x is  hurt
If  we  substitute  a determinate  value,  e.g.  ""  this  boy  ” for  ""  x ”,
we  get  the  proposition  This  boy  is  hurt.  In  this  case,  then,  we  have
a proposition,  not  a description,  for  it  is  clear  that  This  boy  is  hurt
is  either  true,  or  false,  and  does  not  describe  an}rfching.  Hence,
in  the  case  of  a propositional  function  there  is  nothing  analogous
to  the  term  described  in  the  case  of  the  mathematical  function.
Frege,  however,  supposed  that  there  was.  A brief  consideration  of
his  view  may  enable  us  to  see  exactly  in  what  respect  the  two  kinds
of  functions  we  have  been  discussing  differ.  He  thought  that  every
proposition  was  a description  which  described  either  the  true  or  the
false.  Thus  he  held  that  ""2^  = 4”  and  ""3^2”  both  describe
the  true,  just  as  ""  2^  ” describes  4.^  Hence,  the  functional  expression
= 4 ” would  have  in  Frege’s  view  only  two  values,  namely,
the  true  for  one  argument,  viz.  2,  the  false  for  all  other  arguments,
viz.  12,  32,  42,  etc.  This  view  certainly  seems  to  be  mistaken.  It
is  bound  up  with  a theory  With  regard  to ""  meaning  ” and ""  denoting  ”
that  cannot  be  discussed  here.  2 But  it  is  worth  while  to  notice  Frege’s
view  because,  if  it  were  correct,  then  propositional  functions  would
be  exactly  analogous  to  mathematical  functions.  If  Frege’s  view
were  correct,  we  could  write  '''  y — x is  hurt  ”,  and  then  y would
be  the  dependent  variable,  just  as  in  ""  ^ = log  x ”.  In  the  case
of  the  propositional  function,  ""  y ” could  have  only  two  values,
namely,  the  true,  and  the  false.  These  values  were  called  by  Frege
the  ""  truth-values  ”,  namely,  truth  when  the  proposition  obtained
by  substituting  determinate  values  is  true,  falsehood  when  it  is  false.
Thus,  if  in  the  expression  ""  j/  = ai  is  hurt  ” we  were  to  substitute
""  this  boy  ”,  and  if  it  were  true  that  this  boy  is  hurt,  then  y^x
is  hurt  ” would  have  the  truth-value  truth  with  the  argument  this  boy  ;
if  it  were  not  the  case  that  this  boy  is  hurt,  then  “ ^ = x is  hurt  ”
would  have  the  truth- value  falsehood  with  the  argument  this  boy.
According  to  Frege’s  view,  then,  the  truth-values  of  ""  x is  hurt  ”

^ See  Frege,  Function  und  Begriff^  p.  13;  TJeber  Sinn  und  Bedeutung,  p.  32.

® For  a discussion  of  Frege’s  theory  see  Russell,  Principles  of  Mathematics,
Appendix  A.  Frege  held  that  descriptions  were  proper  names  for  the  true  and
the  false.


SYMBOLS  AND  FOEM


183


would  be  related  to  is  liurt  ” as  tbe  values  of  log  so  are  to  the  func-
tion log.  But  this  is  not  the  case.  We  conclude,  therefore,  that  there
is  nothing  in  the  propositional  function  standing  to  x is  hurt  ” as
y stands  to  “ log  x ” in  the  mathematical  function  ^ = log  x
Thus  the  two  kinds  of  function  are  not  exactly  analogous.

In  the  case  of  a propositional  function,  then,  there  seems  to  be
nothing  corresponding  to  the  value  of  the  function,  since  there  is
nothing  corresponding  to  the  term  described  by  the  mathematical,
descriptive  function.  But  there  is  something  that  may  be  said,  in
a sense,  to  take  its  place.  To  see  this  we  must  return  to  the  dis-
tinction between  the  propositional  function  “ 5 is  hurt  ” and  the
undetermined  value  of  the  function  ""  x is  hurt  It  will  be  con-
venient to  write  ” for  is  hurt  ”,  so  that  the  two  expressions
become  <l>x  ” and  ''  ^x  ^x  may  be  said  to  be  a variable  pro-
position ; it  is  that  which  the  function  0x  denotes  indeterminately,
whereas  ^x  is  that  which  denotes  €>x  indeterminately.  Mr.  Eussell
would  say  that  0x  makes  an  indeterminate  statement  about  any
value  of  0x,  whereas  0X  makes  a statement  about  an  indetermina-
tion. ^ Now,  the  indeterminate,  or  variable,  proposition  (Pa;  is  in  a
sense  dependent  upon  the  variable  x.  It  expresses  something  that
has  the  'property  0.  0'jo  expresses  the  property  that  something  has.
Hence,  0x  corresponds  in  a sense  to  the  hg,  i.e.  the  function ; 0x
corresponds  to  the  number  of  which  something  is  the  log,  i.e.  the
indeterminate  value.  The  variable  proposition  0x  is,  however,
really  analogous  to  the  variable  description  the  log  of  a?  ” ; it  is
not  analogous  to  the  variable  number  y which  the  log  of  x ” des-
cribes. We  cannot,  then,  regard  the  propositional  function  as  having
anything  exactly  corresponding  to  the  dependent  variable  in  the
expression  y = log  x

§4.  ILLUSTEATIONS  FKOM  THE  SYMBOLISM  OF
PRINCIPIA  MATEBMATICA

We  have  seen  that  a satisfactory  symbolism  must  be  precise,
systematic  and  concise.  The  use  of  precise,  i.e.  well-defined  and
therefore  unambiguous  symbols,  is  an  aid  to  the  analysis  of  the
notions  which  the  symbols  express.  A concise  symbolism  enables
us  to  express  briefly  and  clearly  statements  that  would  be  cumber-
some and  unnecessarily  proKx  if  expressed  in  ordinary  language.
In  Principia  Mathematica  Russell  and  Whitehead  have  devised  a
symbolism  which  fulfils  these  requirements.  ^ In  this  section  we

^See  Principia  Mathematica,  Vol.  I,  pp.  Mr.  Russell  uses  “am-

biguous ” where  I have  used  “ indeterminate  If  we  were  to  give  x a value,
represented  by  the  constant  a (i.e.  a value  of  the  argument  x),  then  0a  is  a value
of  0x,  and  is  a value  for  0^.

* The  symbolism  of  Principia  Mathematica  is  based  upon  that  of  Peano.
(See  Chap.  X,  § 6,  and  cl  Chap.  XXV,  § 3 below.)


134


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


stall  explain  this  sjTiibolism  so  far  as  is  required  for  its  use  in  the
analysis  of  descriptions  and  classes.

We  haye  already  used  small  latin  italic  letters  to  express  variables
occurring  in  propositional  forms,  e.g.  ^ x is  p\  We  have  also  used
capital  latin  letters  to  express  relations,  e.g.  R,  S.  We  also  used,
in  Chapter  IV,  the  small  letters  q,  r to  express  undetermined  pro-
positions, i.e.  variable  propositions.  We  shall  now  systematize  this
use  as  follows :

YariaUes.  (i)  Small  latin  letters  taken  from  the  end  of  the
alphabet  are  used  to  express  variable  individuals : x,  y,  z;  (ii)  the
small  letters  p,  q,  express  variable  propositions.

Propositional  functions.  The  large  Greek  letters,  0,  W,  X,  are
used  to  express  variable  functions  involving  one  variable,  e.g.  0{x)  ”,
“ W{x)  It  is  usually  found  convenient  to  omit  the  brackets  round
the  variable,  and  thus  we  write  0{x)  ” as  “ 0x  Propositional
functions  involving  two,  or  more,  variables  may  be  written  0{Xy  yy\
0(Xy  2/,  . But  it  is  usuaRy  more  convenient  to  express  a function

involving  two  variables  by  the  symbols  for  relations,  as  follows :

x'Ry  We  are  akeady  fannliar  with  the  symbolic  expression  of
the  propositional  form  exhibited  in  any  dyadic  relational  proposition.

Class-membership.  The  relation  is  a,  which  denotes  membership
of  a class,  is  symbolized  by  the  small  Greek  letter  s.  This  was
chosen  by  Peano  as  being  the  first  letter  of  the  Greek  word  iari
meaning  is  Thus  s expresses  the  is  ” that  denotes  membership
of  a class,  not  the  ‘‘is”  expressing  predication.

Variable  classes.  Small  Greek  letters,  a,  /S,  y,  are  used  to  express
a variable  class.  Thus,  if  we  want  to  talk  about  any  class  and  not
about  a given  particular  class,  we  use  a ; if  we  want  to  talk  about
any  other  class,  but  not  a given  class,  we  use  and  so  on.  If  we
want  to  talk  about  a variable  member  of  a class,  /?,  we  express  “ x
is  a member  of  the  class  a ” by  “ ic  £ a Thus  “ re  £ a ” is  the
propositional  form  of  class-membership  propositions.

Compound  Elementary  Propositions.  We  have  akeady  distin-
guished four  kinds  of  compound  propositions  so  related  that  any
proposition  expressed  in  the  one  form  could,  with  suitable  modifica-
tions, be  expressed  in  the  other  forms.  We  shall  now  symbolize
these  forms,  using  the  terminology  of  Principia  Maihematica.  It
win  be  remembered  that  each  of  the  composite  forms  can  be  con-
tradicted by  a conjunctive  proposition.  We  require  a symbol  to
express  negation.  The  symbol  used  is  Thus  the  negation  of
“ p ” is  expressed  by  “ ”•  Thus  “ ^ ” may  be  read  “ not-p

Composite  Propositions.

(i)  “ If  p,  then  q ” wiU  be  symbolized  by  “p  D q

The  symbol  “ 3 ” expresses  “ impRes  ”,  so  that  “ p 3 g ” may
be  read  : “ p impRes  q


SYMBOLS  AND  FOEM


135


(ii)  Either  p or  g ” will  be  symbolized  by  “ 2?  v ^

The  symbol v expresses  “ or  so  that  y v g ’’  maybe  read
f OT  q We  have  hitherto  used  the  name  alternative  ’’  to
express  composite  propositions  of  this  form.  But  the  mathematical
logicians  use  the  name  ‘‘  disjunctive  ” instead  of  alternative  and
we  shall  find  it  convenient  to  adopt  their  terminology.^

Comfound  Proposihons,  The  conjunctive  proposition  p and  q ”
will  be  symbolized  by  “ p •q  The  dot  • expresses  that  both
propositions  are  asserted  together.  ^ Hence  p •q"’  may  be  read  :
''  Both  p and  q

The  disjunctive  proposition  p^  q”  can  be  regarded  as  the  denial
of  a conjunctive  proposition,  so  that,  using  the  symbolism  just
explained,  we  can  express  either  p or  ^ ” by  ''  r^{r^p  . r^q)  We
do  not,  therefore,  require  an  additional  symbol  to  express  ‘'not
both  We  could  start  either  with  disjimction,  or  with  conjunc-
tion, and  define  the  one  in  terms  of  the  other.  Thus  we  can
dejme  the  conjunctive  proposition  p •q”  as  the  denial  of  the  dis-
junctive proposition  " either  not-p  or  not-^  Expressed  in  this
symbolism  this  definition  is :

p 9 q (r-^S/r^q)  Df,

The  symbol  D/’’  stands  for  "is  the  defined

equivalent  of  The  symbol  " ==  ” must  be  taken  in  conjunction
with  " Df  ’’  which  is  written  at  the  end  of  the  expression  on  the
right-hand  side  of  " ==  It  should  be  noticed  that  in  this  expres-
sion dots  are  used  in  two  ways : first,  to  symbolize  a conjunction
of  propositions ; secondly,  to  serve  the  purpose  of  brackets,  showing
that  a complex  expression  is  to  be  treated  as  a single  expression.
Thus  dots  are  used  to  serve  the  purpose  of  brackets  in  algebraic
expressions.  The  correct  use  of  brackets  is  very  important.  A
simple  illustration  from  elementary  algebra  will  show  this  clearly.

Compare  'Va  + x

with  ^/a  + X

The  first  expression  means  that  x is  to  be  added  to  the  square  root
of  a ; the  second  expression  means  that  x is  to  be  added  to  a and
the  square  root  of  the  whole  is  to  be  derived.  In  a logical  symbolism
a similar  device  is  required.  In  speaking  the  distribution  of  brackets
is  indicated  by  tone  of  voice  or  by  pauses.  For  logical  purposes
we  require  a systematic  mode  of  indicating  what  is  to  be  taken  as

^ This  terminology  is  unfortunate  since  “ or  ” eapresses  “ one  or  other  ”
without  excluding  the  possibility  of  both;  hence  or  does  not  disjoin  the
propositions  connected  by  means  of  it.

^ The  conjunction  of  f and  q is  called  their  logical  product^  since  it  is  analogous
to  an  algebraical  product.  Some  logicians  accordingly  write  the  conjunctive
proposition,  given  above  as  pg


136


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


a single  expression.  Outside  brackets  are  indicated  by  a greater
number  of  dots.  This  use  of  dots  will  be  explained  when  we  come
to  expressions  in  which  they  are  so  used.

We  often  want  to  say  that  two  propositions  are  equivalent  in
the  sense  that,  although  they  are  different  propositions,  if  the  one
is  true,  the  other  is,  and  conversely.  This  is  the  sense  we  gave  to
equivalence^  or  “ coimplication  — ^to  use  Mr.  Johnson’s  term — ^in
Chapter  VII.  Equivalence  ” is  symbolized  by  ^ Thus  we
get  the  expression

= .pD  q.qD  p Df.

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  dot  on  the  left-hand  side  of  = shows
that  the  whole  of  what  precedes  it  is  defined  by  the  whole  of  what
follows  the  dot  on  the  right-hand  side  of  “ = ” ; whereas  the  dot
between  q and  q is  the  symbol  of  logical  conjunction.  This  expres-
sion may  be  read  : ^ p is  equivalent  to  ’ is  the  defined  equivalent

of  ‘ p implies  q ’ and  ^ q implies  p ’

N on-elementary  Propositions,  A propositional  function  can  be
asserted  to  be  true  for  aU  of  its  values,  or  for  some  of  its  values ;
or,  in  the  same  way,  it  can  be  asserted  to  be  false.  We  require,
therefore,  symbols  to  express  true  for  all  values  of  the  variable  ”,
true  for  some  values  of  the  variable  These  are  expressed  as
follows  :

is  always  true  ” is  expressed  by  {%)  . ”,

“ 0x  is  sometimes  true  ” is  expressed  by  (ao;) . 0x
Thus  (a?)  ”,  in  “ (x)  . 0x  ”,  may  be  read,  for  all  values  of  x
The  mverted  capital  in  ''  (aa?)  . 0x  ” may  be  read,  There  is  an  x
such  that  . . .”  ^ The  whole  expression  may  be  read,  There  is
an  X such  that  0x  is  true  ”,  and  this  expression  is  equivalent  to  :
0x  is  sometimes  true

To  deny  that  0x  is  always  true  is  equivalent  to  asserting  that
the  negation  of  0x  is  sometimes  true.  In  our  symboHsm  this  can
be  expressed  by  “ which  may  be  read : There  is  an  x

such  that ' r^x  ’ is  sometimes  true  ”,  or  r^x  is  sometimes  true  ”,
Similarly  0x  is  always  false  ” can  be  expressed  by  r^x  is  always
true  ”,  i.e.  by

{x)  .

The  expressions  (x) . 0x  ” and  (Ha;) . 0x  ” contain  propositional
functions  involving  apparent  variables.  There  is  no  difference  in
meaning  between  (x)  • 0x  ” and  (y)  . 0y  In  each  case  the
small  latin  letter  stands  for  an  apparent  variable.

Sometimes  we  want  to  say  that  one,  and  only  one,  value  satisfies
a given  propositional  function.  This  is  expressed  as  follows :

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  relation  expressed  by  (!H>;)  is  the  logical  inverse
of  the  relation  expressed  by  e,  which  probably  accounts  for  the  choice  of  an
inverted  e,  as  being  the  graphical  inverse  of  e*


SYMBOLS  AND  FORM


137


(tx){0x)  wMcli  may  be  read : the  term  satisfying  0x
When  we  want  to  speak  of  all  the  terms  which  satisfy  a function
we  use  the  expression  “ x{<Px)  which  may  be  read ; the  terms
satisfying  or  '"the  aj’s  such  that  ^x  is  true”.^

" The  ” in  the  singular  is  often  used  to  express  a description
which  applies  to  one  object  only,  e.g. ""  the  richest  man  in  the  world
Such  expressions  are  frequently  used,  so  that  it  is  useful  to  have
a concise  symbolic  expression  such  as  the  above  symbol  " {tx)[^x)

If  we  want  to  say  that  the  term  satisfying  “ 0x’^  exists,  we  use  the
symbol

""  El{tx)(0x)

which  may  be  read : ""The  term  satisfying  0x  exists

Since  " (Ex)  . 0x  ” means  ""  There  is  an  x such  that  0x  is  true  ”,
it  is  convenient  to  write

''  (3[o)  . 0x  ” to  express  " There  is  an  object  c such  that  0x  is
true  when  c is  substituted  for  x

Here  c expresses  an  unknown  constant,  viz.  a value  of  x,  which
satisfies  " 0x  This  expression  does  not  mean  that  there  is  only  one
object  c such  that  0x  is  true  when  c is  substituted  for  a?,  but  that
there  is  at  least  one  such  object.

With  the  help  of  this  expression  we  can  define  the  expression
" E!(2a?)(CPa;)  ”,  as  follows  :

El(tx)(0x) . = : (3[c) : 0x  . Sg,  .x  = c,  Df.

This  whole  expression  is  to  be  read :

" " The  term  satisfying  0x  ’ exists  ” is  the  defined  equivalent  of
""  There  is  an  object  c such  that  0x  is  true  when  xisc  and  not  otherwise
With  regard  to  the  symbols  used  in  the  left-hand  side  expression,
it  should  be  noticed  that ' = ’ in  " a?  = c ’ means  ""  is  identical  with
This  symbol  must  not  be  confused  with  Df  ” which

means  ""  is  equivalent  by  definition  ”,  i.e.  ""  is  the  defined  equivalent
of”.  It  should  also  be  noticed  that  the  subscript  x after  ""  = ”
means  "for  aU  values  of  a?”.  Thus  if  we  wanted  to  say  that  two
different  propositional  functions  were  equivalent,  we  could  express
it  as  follows :

^^0x.^^.Wx”,

which  may  be  read : ""  0x  is  equivalent,  for  all  values  of  a;,  to  Wx”,
This  may  also  be  expressed  by  the  symbol  used  before,  viz.

" (x).0x.^.Wx”.

Since  we  already  have  the  symbol  D for  " implies  ”,  we  can  see
that  0x  implies  Wx”  will  be  expressed  by

^ Thus  “ i{0x)  ” expresses  “ the  class  defined  by  0x  ”,  where  would  be

the  function  and  0x  an  indeterminate  value  of  the  function.


138


A MODEEN  INTKODUCTIOF  TO  LOOIC


WP  implication  iolds,

we  can  express  this  by  r ^ uviuo,

or  by

“ (x)  :0x.^Wx  ”.

symbolic  expressions  we  have
given  will  show  how  dots  are  used  to  bracket  off  expressions  Thus
for  example,  m the  expression  F^^^sions.  inus,

El(tx){0x) . = : (ac) : 0a: . a,  = c Df
to'fM  '"t  “ *'  /»«»““  w<»ig«

to  Oc).  As  another  example  we  may  contrast  ^

-O  -qvp  (i)

with  p V g-  . 3 . ^ ; V : p.  (ii)

Here  (i)  means  ‘“p  ot  q’  implies  ‘q  ot  p’”,

(u)  means  “either  ‘poi  q’  implies  q,  or  p is  true”.i

RnJlJr®  ^ introduction  to  this  subject  in  Prof  I T

RusseUsarticle on^AnEIementarySymbolismfor Logic”


CHAPTER  IX


GENERAL  PROPOSITIONS,  DESCRIPTIONS,  AND
EXISTENCE

‘ Who  did  you  pass  on  the  road  ? ’ the  King  went  on,  holding  out  his  hand
to  the  Messenger  for  some  more  hay.

‘ Nobody,’  said  the  Messenger.

‘ Quite  right,’  said  the  King : ‘ this  young  lady  saw  him  too.  So  of  course
Nobody  walks  slower  than  you.’

‘ I do  my  best,’  said  the  Messenger  in  a sullen  tone.  ‘ I’m  sure  nobody
walks  much  faster  than  I do.’

* He  can’t  do  that,’  said  the  King,  ‘ or  else  he’d  have  been  here  first.’

— Lewis  Carroll.


§ 1.  CLASSES  AND  GENERAL  PROPOSITIONS

IF  we  fail  to  apprehend  the  significance  of  logically  inappropriate
expressions,  we  are  sure  to  naake  naistakes  concerning  logical
form.^  An  expression  which  is  logically  inappropriate  need  not
be  in  the  least  inappropriate  for  the  purposes  of  ordinary  discussion.
An  expression  is  inappropriate  only  if  it  misleads ; if  we  are  not
interested  in  logical  problems,  then  we  may  not  be,  and  usually  are
not,  misled  by  the  use  of  logically  inappropriate  expressions.  When
an  expression  is  familiar  it  can  be  so  used  that  we  imderstand  what
is  said.  For  ordinary  purposes  it  is  not  necessary  to  know  what
exactly  is  asserted ; it  suffices  if  we  understand  what  the  speaker
wants  to  convey.  At  the  level  of  ordinary  thinking  we  can  say  what
is  both  true  and  important  without  troubling  about  questions  of
analysis.  When  we  do  not  seek  to  be  precise,  familiarity  is  a useful
substitute  for  clarity.  The  degree  of  precision  required  is  dependent
iipon  the  purpose  of  the  thiiier.

The  notion  of  a class  is  extremely  fannliar ; accordingly  we
understand  class-propositions.  The  notion  of  an  individual  is
equally  familiar ; accordingly  we  imderstand  singular  propositions.
No  one  supposes  that  a class  is  an  object  of  the  same  kind,  or  type,
as  an  individual.  We  can  all  see  the  absurdity  of  a mistake  attributed


* See  Chap.  V,  § 5,  and  of.  Chap.  IV,  § 6*
139


MO  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

to  a Chinese  philosopher,  who  is  reported  ^ to  have  said  that  if  there
is  a dun  cow  and  a bay  horse,  then  there  are  three  things  ; for  the
dun  cow  is  one  thing,  and  the  bay  horse  is  another  thing,  and  the
two  together  are  a third  thing.  We  must  now  inquire  wherein
precisely  lies  the  absurdity  of  this  statement.  That  is  to  say,  we
must  ask  what  a class  is.  We  shall  begin  by  considering  how  we
come  to  recognize  a given  class,  and  how  we  use  class-sjunbols,  i.e.
symbols  (including  words)  which  are  used  to  refer  to  classes.

Consider,  for  example,  the  people  who  are  learned.  These  con-
stitute a class.  There  is  in  common  use  the  word  ‘‘  scholars  ’’  which
may  be  regarded  as  a synonym  for  the  people  who  are  learned
Whether  we  have  a single  word,  or  whether  we  have  to  use  a phrase,
is  an  accident  of  language,  depending  mainly  upon  how  often  we
want  to  refer  to  a class.  Scholars  are  all  the  individuals  who  are
learned,  viz.  a set  of  individuals  distinguished  from  other  sets  of
individuals  in  that  each  individual  of  the  set  possesses  the  property
of  being  learned.  There  are  two  ways  of  selecting  the  individuals
who  form  a class.  One  way  is  to  enumerate  the  individuals  one
after  the  other,  the  order  of  enumeration  being  indifferent.  Eor
example,  we  might  enumerate  the  individuals  Melchior,  Balthazar,
Oaspar,  and  thus  form  the  set  consisting  of  Melchior  and  Balthazar
and  Gaspar.  The  second  way  is  to  select  a certain  property  whiqh
may  belong  to  many  individuals.  For  example,  the  properties  of
being  a wise  man  from  the  East  and  having  followed  the  Star  to  Bethle-
hem are  attributed  to  each  of  three  individuals,  known  as  The  Magi,
'whose  proper  names  were  Melchior,  Balthazar,  Gaspar.  The  Magi
is  not  derived  by  an  enumeration  of  these  three ; it  is  a set  deter-
mined by  a conjunction  of  properties  belonging  to  each  individual
in  the  set  and  to  no  other  individual.  Such  a set  is  a class.  There
is  an  important  difference  between  an  enumerative  set  and  a class,
since  the  latter  is  "determined  by  a property,  or  conjunction  of  prop-
erties, whereas  the  former  is  selected  by  an  enumeration.  The
individuals  constituting  the  enumerative  set  do,  however,  possess  a
common  property,  viz.  the  property  of  being  one  or  other  of  the
individuals  enumerated.  In  the  example  given  above  the  three
individuals  enumerated  possess  in  common  the  property  of  being
either  Melchior  or  Balthazar  or  Gaspar,  and  no  other  set  possesses
this  property.  The  enumerative  selection  of  a class  is  possible  only
in  the  case  of  finite  classes,  i.e.  classes  consisting  of  a j^te  number
of  members.  An  infinite  class  is  not  denumerable,  so  that  such
a class  must  be  determined  by  a property,  or  by  a conjunction  of
properties,  by  means  of  which  the  class  is  selected ; a finite  class
may  be,  and  usually  is,  so  determined.  The  conjunction  of  prop-

^See  Our  Knowledge  of  the  External  World,  p.  206;  The  Monist,  1919,
p.  353.


GENERAL  PROPOSITIONS , 141

erties  determining  a class  is  its  intension,  or  connotation.  Tie  set
of  individuals  to  whicli  the  properties  belong  is  the  extension,  or
denotation.  The  intension  constitutes  the  defining  property  of  the
class.  A plass  thus  combines  an  intension  and  an  extension ; it  is
an  Q'x.imBvon‘'deteTmined  hy  a given  intension.  For  example,  the
conjunction  of  properties  being  English  and  being  a pope  determines
the  class  English  popes.  The  conjunction  of  properties  being  Indian
and  being  a pope  determines  the  class  Indian  popes.  Up  to  the
present,  the  former  class  has  only  one  member,  the  latter  none.
But  in  each  case  the  intension  determines  an  extension,  for  to  speak\
qf^a  class  is  to  speak  of  a property  as  determining  a set  of  members.  ^
If  there  is~  no  member  to  be  thus  determined,  the  extension  is
nuU,  and  the  class  is  said  to  be  the  null-class.^  If  there  is  only  one
member,  the  class  is  said  to  be  a unit  class.  The  class  is  not
identical  with  its  members ; hence,  a class  with  only  one  member
is  not  identical  with  that  member,  nor  could  a class  be  a member  of
itself.

We  could  be  acquainted  with  the  individual  named  Melchior  ”,
and  with  each  of  the  other  individuals  of  the  class  The  Magi.  But
we  could  not  be  acquainted  with  them  as  being  all  the  set ; we  cannot
be  acquainted  with  an  all.  There  is  not,  in  addition  to  the  set  of
individuals  and  the  property  defining  them  as  a class,  another  indi-
vidual which  is  the  class.  When  we  recognize  this  we  are  able  to
avoid  the  mistake  into  which  the  Chinese  philosopher  fell.  Sincq
the  intensional  aspect  is  fundamental  it  might  be  supposed  that  the
class  could  be  identified  with  the  defining  property.  That,  however,
would  be  a mistake.  Two,  or  more,  different  defining  properties
may  determinelffie" same  extension.  But  two  different  classes  cannot
have  the  same  membership.  The  class  men  is  determine^i  both  by
the  defining  property  rational  animal  and  by  the  defining  property
being  two-legged  and  featherless.  It  is,  as  Mr.  Russell  points  out,

‘ this  fact  that  a defining  characteristic  is  never  unique  which  makes
classes  useful’.^  Defining  properties  which  determine  the  same
extension  are  said  to  be  equivalent.

Since  we  cannot  be  acquainted  with  the  class,  the  way  in  which .
we  refer  to  an  individual  when  we  use  a class-symbol  is  quite  different  ^
from  the  way  in  which  we  refer  to  it  when  we  use  a proper  name.
In  the  former  case  we  refer  to  the  given  individual  descriptively ;
in  the  latter,  demonstratively.  We  cannot  refer  demonstratively
unless  the  individual  is  presented,  but  we  can  refer  descriptively  to
an  individual  which  is  not  presented,  and  without  even  knowing
that  there  is  such  an  individual.  It  is  because  class-svmbqls  are
descriptive  that  they  can  be  significantly  prefixed  by  suclTwords

^ When  we  speak  of  men

1 See  further,  p.  184.  » Int.  Math,  Phil.,  p.  14.


142


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


we  mean  to  refer  to  everyone  who  is  human.  Thus  we  can  express

men  ” by  the  propositional  function  x is  human  If  for  x in

X is  human  ’’  we  substitute  the  name  of  an  individual  who  is
human  we  have  a sentence  expressing  a true  proposition.  For
example,  the  substitution  of  Socrates  ” for  x yields  the  true  propo-
sition Socrates  is  hurmn.  Thus  the  class  men  is  the  set  of  individuals  <
whose  names  could  be  substituted  for  a;  in  x is  human  ” so  as  to  f
give  a sentence  expressing  a true  proposition.  This  set  of  individuals  ^
satisfies  the  propositional  function  vb  is  human”.  This  way  of
expressing  classes  provides  a useful  method  for  expressing  the
analysis  of  propositions  in  whose  verbal  expression  class-symbols
occur.^  What  is  important  in  the  propositional  function  x is
human  ”,  which  defines  the  class  men,  is  not  the  function  but  the
meaning,  or  intension.  That  is  to  say,  if  0x  determines  the  class
.defined  by  0,  what  is  important  is  the  meaning  of  '‘0  ”,  and  the
^meaning  of  ^ ” is  a certain  property.  The  set  of  individuals  which
satisfy  0^  is  the  extension  of  the  class  defined  by^.  If  0x  is  formally
equivalent  to  Wx,  then  0x  and  Wx  determine  the  same  extension,
and  either  0 or  W could  be  used  to  define  the  class.  Every  property
determines  a class,  namely,  the  class  consisting  of  the  objects  which
possess  the  property.  We  know  the  class  through  the  defining
property,  not  through  acquamtance  with  its  members,  even  when
the  members  are  of  such  a sort  that  we  could  be,  or  actually  are,
acqu^

" jOSIowrirom  what  we  have  been  saying  that  we  can  assert!
All  men  are  mortal  although  we  are  certainly  not  acquainted  with!
each  individual  man.  Moreover,  no  actual  man  enters  into  theS
assertion  since  the  proposition  is  significant  whether  any  given  man  1
is  known  or  not.  On  the  other  hand,  This  is  yellow  ” fails  of  ‘
significance  unless  This  ” refers  demonstratively  to  what  is  actually
presented.  In  Chapter  IV  we  distinguished  general  propositions
from  simple  propositions ; we  can  now  see  that  the  fundamental
diSerence  between  them  is  that  in  general  propositions  the  reference
is  descriptive  and  not  demonstrative^^  That  is  to  say,  a general
proposiSonT^  rhe  use  of  apparent  variables.  The  use  of  the
apparent  variable  shows  that  a property,  or  characteristic,  is  being
considered  in  abstraction  from  the  individual  on  indmdxiAls.J^
'vrfEiAlF"may”'B  The  proposition  All  who  are  wise  are  trust-

woHh^^^  m expressed  in  the  form  If  x is  wise,  x

is  trustworthy,  no  matter  what  x may  be  ”.

Using  the  symbolism  explained  in  the  last  chapter  the  traditional
schedule  of  propositions  can  be  expressed  in  a way  which  shows
clearly  their  differences  of  form.

^ The  use  of  propositional  functions  is  a symbolic  device ; it  does  not  throw
light  upon  what  a class  is.  See  § 3 below.


GENERAL  PROPOSITIONS  MS

Let  S stand  for  tte  terms  which  satisfy  0x,  and  let  P stand  for
the  terms  which  satisfy  Wx.  Then  we  have,

S a P ’’  means  (x).  0x  D (1)

S e P ” means  ^:  ¥x  D ^ WxJ^  (2)

“ S i P ” means  (Hx).  0x  . (3)

S 0 P ’’  means  “ {^x).  0x . ^ Wx^  (4)

It  will  be  remembered  that  to  say-  for  all  values  of  x,  ' 0x
implied  Wx  ’ ” means  the  same  as  " 0x  implies  Wx  ’ is  always  true
or  more  shortly  0x  always  implies  Wx  To  say  ''  for  some
values  of  x,  0x  and  Wx  ’’  means  the  same  as  ^0x  and  Wx  ’ is  some-
times true  ”,  where  sometimes  true  ” means  “ true  for  at  least  one
value  of  a;  This  is  consistent  with  the  traditional  interpretation

of  ''  some  The  use  of  these  expressions  shows  clearly  the  dif-

ference in  form  between  (1)  and  (3),  and  between  (2)  and  (4),  as  well
as  the  resemblance  in  form  between  (1)  and  (2),  and  between  (3)
and  (4).

In  {x) . 0x  3 Wx,^  X can  take  any  value  which  makes  the  function
significant^  i.e.  which  makes  sense.  It  is  clear  that  there  must  be
values  that  render  the  function  significant  although  they  do  not
satisfy  the  function  ; otherwise,  there  would  be  no  false  propositions
but  only  non-sensical  collections  of  words.  For  example,  if  for  x
in  ^ is  sentimental  ” we  substitute  Bernard  Shaw,  then  the  resulting
proposition  is  significant,  though  it  may  be  false ; but  if  we  substi-
tuted red,  then  we  should  get  the  non-sensical  statement  Red  is
sentimental.  It  is  significant  to  say  ‘ For  aU  values  of  x,  if  x is  red,
X is  extended  so  that  it  is  significant  to  say  ‘ If  this  is  red,  then
this  is  extended  but  if  “ this  ” were  intended  to  refer  to  the  colour
of  the  covers  of  this  book,  then  This  is  red  would  be  false.  The
point  is  that  general  propositions  are  not  directly  about  the  indi-
viduals which  may  have  the  properties  expressed  by  0 ” and
] they  are  about  the  properties  0 and  W,  Hence,  in  asserting
that  All  S is  P we  are  concerned  not  only  with  what  is  S but  also
with  what  is  not  S,  so  long  as  we  do  not  include  any  term  which
would  render  the  proposition  non-significant.  It  is  for  this  reason
that  we  can  understand  All  S is  P ” even  though  we  cannot  enu-'
merate  all  the  objects  that  are  S,  provided  that  we  understand
what  is  meant  by  being  an  S and  being  a P,  Hence,  it  is  convenient
to  interpret  (1)  and  (2)  as  not  implying  the  existence  of  S.  But
propositions  (3)  and  (4)  do  imply  existence.  To  say  " 0x  is  some-
times true  ’ is  to  say  that  there  are  arguments  (at  least  one)  which
satisfy  0x,  Consequently,  (a[ir)  .0x.Wx  asserts  that  there  are

^ Such  a proposition  is  called  by  Mr.  Bussell  a formal  implication,  but  Ms
conception  of  a formal  implication  depends  upon  assigning  a special  meaning
to  3 , wMch  is  not  the  usual  meaning  of  ‘ implies  See  Chap.  XII,  § 4.


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


IM

arguments  satisfying  both  0x  and  or,  as  we  may  also  say,  that
the  properties  0 and  W both  belorig  to  something.  We  do  not  specify
which  that  something  is,  but  we  do  assert  that  there  is  something
to  which®  and  ^ both  belong.  This  proposition  is  clearly  existen-
tial. The  only  difference  between  (3)  and  (4)  is  that  in  (4)  ^ Wx
replaces  Wx\  similarly  with  (1)  and  (2).  But  (1)  and  (2)  are  not
existential,  whereas  (3)  and  (4)  are.  Hence  (1)  and  (4)  are  contra-
dictories, and  so  are  (2)  and  (3).  This  result  accords  with  the  tradi-
tional square  of  opposition.  But  on  our  interpretation  of  these
four  propositions,  the  universal  does  not  imply  the  particular  of  the
same  quahty.  It  follows  that  the  inference  of  a particular  from
a universal  proposition  is  invalid,  e.g.  the  conversion  per  acddens
of  A,  and  the  contraposition  of  E.^  It  follows  also  that
Dampti,  Felapton,  Brarmntip  and  Fesapo  are  invalid  moods  of  the
syllogism.

Since  general  propositions  are  different  in  form  from  simple
propositions,  it  follows  that  a syllogism  in  which  both  premisses  are
general  differs  in  form  from  one  in  which  one  premiss  is  general  and
one  simple.  The  simple  proposition,  e.g.  Mussolini  is  fallible  is  of
the  form  0x.  The  two  forms  of  syllogism  can  be  symbolized  as
follows :

I.  (x) . 0x  Z)  Wx . (x)  .Wx  D Xx  : D . {x) . 0x  D Xx,

II.  (z)  .0z  dWz:0x:  D.Wx.

Using  class  symbols  and  <;  for  “ is  included  in  the  expressions
are ;

I.  a<y9.^<7;  D .a<y.

II.  a<^^.xea:D*xe^,

§2.  THE  ANALYSIS  OF  DESCEIPTIONS  V/

In  the  last  section  we  saw  that  general  propositions  are  directly
about  properties  which  individual  objects  may  possess ; they  are
not  directly  about  the  objects  (if  any)  which  possess  these  properties.
Such  propositions  do  not  contain  a particular  as  a constituent;
their  constituents  are  universals.  All,  some,  any,  a,  the  are  used  to
select  the  range  of  objects  possessing  a certain  property,  and  can
significantly  be  used  only  in  combination  with  universals.  So  far
we  have  considered  eases  (falling  within  the  traditional  schedule)  in
which  it  is  asserted  that  some  (i.e.  at  least  one),  or  that  all  objects
possessing  0 possess  (or  do  not  possess)  W,  We  have  now  to  con-
sider certain  propositions  whose  ordinary  linguistic  expressions  are
so  logically  inappropriate  as  to  render  difficult  the  determination  of

^ Cf.  F.L.,  Part  IJ,  Chap,  viii


DESCRIPTIONS


145


tteir  logical  form.  It  is  to  Mr.  Russell  that  logicians  are  indebted
for  the  first  clear  indication  as  to  what  exactly  these  logically  inap-
propriate expressions  are  used  to  express.^

We  will  begin  by  considering  three  propositions,  discussed  by
Mr.  Russell,  which  appear  to  be  simple,  elementary  propositions,  but
which  are  in  fact  non-elementary.

(1)  Scott  is  the  author  of  Waverley.  We  may  ask  what  exactly
this  proposition  asserts.  Clearly  it  asserts  that  some  one  wrote
Waverleyi  and  that  not  more  than  one  person  wrote  Waverley,  since

the  ” indicates  uniqueness  of  reference ; it  also  asserts  that  no
other  person  than  Scott  wrote  Waverley.  Hence,  Scott  is  the  author
of  Waverley  is  equivalent  to  the  conjoint  assertion  of

(i)  at  least  one  person  wrote  Waverley^

(ii)  at  most  one  person  wrote  Waverley^

(iii)  there  is  nobody  who  both  wrote  Waverley  and  is  not  identical

with  Scott.

The  proposition  would,  then,  be  false,  if  no  one  had  written
Waverley,  or  if  more  than  one  person  had  written  Waverley,  or  if
one  person  had  written  Waverley  but  Scott  had  not.  Thus  expressed,
it  is  easy  to  siee  that  Scott  is  the  author  0/ Waverley  is  not  an  elemen-
tary proposition,  although  its  verbal  expression  may  mislead  us  into
thinking  that  it  is  a simple  proposition.

(2)  The  author  of  Waverley  was  Scotch,  This  proposition  is
equivalent  to  the  conjoint  assertion  of

(i)  at  least  one  person  wrote  Waverley,

(ii)  at  most  one  person  wrote  Waverley,

(iii)  there  is  nobody  who  both  wrote  Waverley  and  was  not

Scotch.

(3)  The  author  of  Waverley  exists.  This  proposition  is  equiva-
lent to  the  conjoint  assertion  of

(i)  at  least  one  person  wrote  Waverley,

(ii)  at  most  one  person  wrote  Waverley,

It  will  be  false  if  no  one  wrote  Waverley  or  if  more  than  one  person
wrote  Waverley,

A consideration  of  these  assertions  which  are,  in  each  case,
equivalent  to  the  given  proposition  brings  out  clearly  certain  impor-
tant points.  We  see  from  (1)  that  the  author  of  Waverley  ’’  is  not
a name.  We  may  regard  ''  Scott  ” as  a name  standing  for  an

^ See  Int,  Math,  Fhil,,  Chap.  XVI ; Principia  Mathematica,  Vol.  I,  p.  30
seq,,  p.  67  seq,,  and  Pt.  I (Section  B) ; MM  (1905),  pp.  479-83 ; Mysticism
and  Logic,  Chap.  X;  The  Problems  0/  Philosophy,  Chap.  V.

In  this  section  I am  mainly  concerned  to  expound  Russell’s  theory  of
descriptions,  and  I have  departed  from  his  exposition  only  in  order  to  avoid
certain  mistakes  into  which  he  has  fallen.  These  mistakes  (some  of  which  I
repeated  in  the  first  Edition  of  this  book)  have,  in  every  case,  been  pointed
out  to  me  by  Prof.  Moore.

10


146  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

individual  ^ ; tLen,  Scott  is  the  author  of  Waverley  asserts  an  identity
between  an  object  named  and  an  object  described ; it  does  not  assert
an  identity  between  two  names  applying  to  the  same  individual.^

From  a comparison  of  (2)  and  (3)  we  can  see  that  in  asserting
The  author  of  Waveklby  was  Scotch  we  assert  that  the  author  of
Waverley  exists,  since  the  two  propositions  in  (3)  are  the  same  as
(i)  and  (ii)  in  (2).  Hence,  unless  the  author  of  Waverley  exists,  any
proposition  attributing  a property  to  the  author  of  Waverley  will
be  false.  We  saw  in  Chapter  V that  an  existential  proposition
asserts  that  a certain  property  belongs  to  something.  We  now  see
that  The  author  of  Waverley  exists  asserts  that  the  property  of
having  written  Waverley  belongs  to  only  one  thing ; Scott/is  the
author  of  Waverley  further  indicates  the  one  thing  to  whi'ch  this
property  is  said  to  belong ; The  author  of  Waverley  was  Scotch
asserts  that  the  property  of  having  written  Waverley  belongs  to
only  one  thing  to  which  the  property  of  being  Scotch  also  belongs.

If  we  use  the  symbolism  explained  in  the  last  chapter  we  can  show
clearly  how  general  propositions  are  involved  in  |hese  assertions.

(1)  Scott  is  the  author  of  Waverley.

Using  ' 0'  for  " wrote  Waverley  we  get,

(He) : 0c:  X ^ c r>^0x:  c ^ Scott.

This  may  be  read  : ‘ There  is  an  object  c such  that  c wrote  Waverley
and  no  other  than  c wrote  Waverley,  and  o is  Scott  \

This  might  also  be  expressed  m the  form,

(He) : 0a? . • a?  = c : c = Scott.

This  may  be  read : ^ There  is  an  object  c such  that  0x  is  always
equivalent  to  ''  cc  is  c ’’  and  ''  c is  Scott

(2)  The  author  of  Waverley  was  Scotch,

Using  ^ 0 ’ as  before,  and  ^ f ’ for  ^ was  Scotch  ’,  we  get,
{^c):0c\x^c.^,,  0x  :fc.

This  may  be  read : ‘ There  is  an  object  c such  that  c wrote
Waverley  and  no  other  than  c wrote  Waverley^  and  c was  Scotch/

The  alternative  expression  is,

(Ho) : 0a? . . a;  = c :/c,

^ Throughout  this  chapter  I shall  follow  Russell’s  procedure  and  assume
that  ordinary  proper  names,  e.g.  ‘‘  Scott  ”,  “ Marlowe  ”,  are  used  demonstra-
tively, i.e.  as  logically  proper  names,  ft  follows  that  a proposition  in  whose
verbal  expression  “ Scott  ” occurs  must  contain  Scott  as  a constituent.  Both
these  assumptions  seem  to  be  false.  We  do  not  so  use  ordinary  proper  names,
for  these  contain  a descriptive  element  (see  p.  26) ; and  there  are  good  grounds
for  supposing  that  Scott  is  a logical  construction.  But  in  an  elementary  exposi-
tion it  is  desirable  to  follow  Russell’s  procedure  in  order  to  avoid  qualifications
which  would  only  confuse  the  student.  Bor  a discussion  of  these  assumptions,
and  of  the  grounds  upon  which  they  are  to  be  rejected,  see  Appendix  B.

® See  below,  pp.  166-7.


DESCRIPTIONS


147


whicli  may  be  read  : * There  is  an  object  c such  that  0x  ” is  always
equivalent  to  “ x is  c ’’  and  ^‘fc  ” ^ or  ‘ There  is  an  object  c such
that  X has  the  property  0 ” is  always  equivalent  to  a;  is  c ” and
‘‘ 0 has  the  property/”/

(3)  The  author  of  Waverley  exists.

Using  ' ’ as  before,  we  get,

(a[c)  :0c  :x  ^ c .3  X*

The  alternative  expression  is,

:0x.^^.x=^c.

A proposition  apparently  about  the  author  of  Waverley  is  a propo-
sition apparently  about  the  term  which  satisfies  the  propositional
function  ' x wrote  Waverley  \ We  saw  in  the  last  chapter  that  ^ the
term  which  satisfies  0x  ’ can  be  represented  by  {ix){0x).  We  now
see  that  any  proposition  apparently  about  {%x){0x)  requires  hoth
(i)  that  at  least  one  object  satisfies  0x  and  (ii)  that  at  most  one  object
satisfies  0x,  That  is,  it  requires  both

(i)  (Sc) . 0x  and  (ii)  0x  ,0y  .3  y .x  = y.

These  are  conjointly  equivalent  to  (3[c) : 0x.  ^^.x  = e,  which  is
the  defined  equivalent  of  E!(zx)(0x)j  i.e.  ^ the  term  satisfying  0x
exists  This  means  that  the  property  0 belongs  to  one  thing  and
to  one  thing  only.  The  assertion  that  the  one  and  only  thing  to
which  0 belongs  has  also  another  property  (e.g.  bei92y  Scotch)  may
be  symbolized  by  ^Y[(^^)(^^)]  Accordingly  the  proposition
E\{%x){0x)  is  directly  about  the  property  ^ ; it  is  not  directly  about
the  object  which  has^  ; it  will  be  significant,  though  false,  if  there
is  no  object  which  has  0,  Similarly,  f[(^x)(0x)]  is  directly  about  the
property  /.  We  see,  then,  that  neither  The  author  of  Waverley
exists,  nor  Scott  is  the  author  of  Waverley,  nor  The  author  of
Waverley  is  Scotch  is  directly  about  the  individual  Scott  who  in
fact  wrote  Waverley ; they  are  directly  about  the  property  which
Scott  in  fact  has.  These  propositions  thus  resemble  general  propo-
sitions in  being  directly  about  properties  and  not  directly  about  the
objects  (if  any)  possessing  those  properties.  They  are  thus  funda-
mentally different  from  the  simple  proposition  Scott  is  lame,  which
is  directly  about  Scott  Thus  Scott  is  lame  could  not  even  be  asserted
unless  Scott  ” named  an  object ; in  other  words,  Scott  is  a con-
stituent of  the  proposition  Scott  is  lame,^  which  is  a proposition
of  the  form  0a,  where  a stands  for  a given  individual ; whereas
none  of  the  three  contrasted  propositions  contains  any  individual,
or  particular  as  a constituent.

^ In  saying  here  that  Scott  is  a constituent  of  the  proposition  Scott  is  Iwtm
we  are  saying  that  “ Scott  ” names  a particular,  or  individual.  The  way  in
which  Russell  has  used  ‘ is  a constituent  of  a proposition  ’ is  discussed  in  the
next  section.


148


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOCIO


It  is  tlie  grammatical  similarity  of  tlie  linguistic  expressions  of
tEese  propositions  wHcli  leads  us  mistakenly  to  suppose  that  ''  tke
autkor  of  Waverley  ’’  resembles  Scott  ’’  in  being  a name.  Accord-
ingly “tbe  author  of  Waverley  must  be  regarded  as  a logically
inappropriate  expression.  Owing  to  this  logical  iuappropriateness
it  is  desirable  to  transform  any  sentence  in  which  ''  the  author  of
Waverley  ’’  occurs  into  another  sentence  in  which  it  does  not  occur
but  which  expresses  the  same  assertion.

We  have  so  far  considered  propositions  to  the  effect  that  the
property  0 belongs  to  one  thing  only.  We  must  now  consider
propositions  in  which  there  is  not  this  limitation.  We  seldom  wish
to  assert  that  everything  has  0 which  would  be  a proposition  of
the  form  ^ (x)  .0x\  A possible  illustration  would  be  ^ Everything
is  mental  or  ^ Nothing  is  material  \ More  often  we  wish  to  assert
that  everything  which  has0  has  which  would  be  a proposition  of
the  form  ' {x)  • 0x  3 Wx  \ i.e.  an  A proposition-  Sometimes  we
wish  to  assert  that  sornething  has  0,  or  that  something  which
has  0 has  W,  Such  propositions  as  these  must  now  be  further
discussed.

Consider  the  proposition  A poet  was  stabbed.  This  proposition
would  be  true  if  Marlowe  had  been  stabbed,  or  if  Dante  had  been
stabbed,  or  if  any  one  specifiable  poet  had  been  stabbed.  But  it
does  not  assert  that  Marlowe  was  stabbed,  nor  that  Dante  was.
The  assertion  is  directly  about  the  property  of  being  stabbed  and
is  an  assertion  to  the  effect  that  this  property  belongs  to  some
unspecified  individual  who  has  also  the  property  of  having  com-
posed poems. If  ^ 0^  represents  the  property  of  having  composed
poems,  and  ‘ W ’ the  property  of  being  stabbed,  then  A poet  was
stabbed  may  be  expressed  by  ‘ The  property  0^  and  the  property  "0
both  belong  to  something  ’ ; it  could  also  be  expressed  by  ' The
joint  assertion  of  0x  and  Wx  is  sometimes  true  ’.  These  are  equiva-
lent to  a proposition  of  the  form  (Ha?)  • 0x  . Wx,‘^

The  assertion  that  the  properties  0 and  W both  belong  to  some-
thing will  be  false  if  nothing  has  0,  or  if  something  has  0 but  nothing
which  has  0 has  W.  Hence,  A poet  was  stabbed  implies  that  a poet
exists.  In  asserting  (Ha?)  • 0x  • Wx,  we  are  asserting  (Ha?) . 0x,  i.e.
that  0 belongs  to  something.  Neither  of  these  propositions  contains
a particular  as  a constituent.  Thus  we  can  see  that  A unicorn  exists
is  significant,  though  false.  Similarly,  I saw  a unicorn  is  significant,
but,  since  there  are  no  unicorns,  it  is  false.  I saw  a unicorn  could
be  expressed  by  ‘ I saw  x\^ x is  a unicorn  ’ is  sometimes  true.  If
there  is  no  value  of  x which  would  make  ‘ a?  is  a unicorn  ’ true,  then
clearly,  I saw  a unicorn  is  false.  All  these  propositions  are  funda-
mentally different  in  form  from  a simple  proposition,  e.g.  Marlowe
^ See  Int,  Math,  PhU,,  pp.  171-2.


DESCRIPTIONS


149


was  stabbed,  since  none  of  them  contains  a constituent,  which  is  a
particular  with  which  we  could  be  acquainted.  It  is  for  this  reason
that  we  could  significantly  ask  whether  any  objects  having  the
given  property  exist,  and  could  significantly  assert  the  proposition
in  question  even  though  there  were  no  such  objects.  But  it  is  not
significant  to  ask  whether  Marlowe  exists,  if  ‘‘  Marlowe  demon-
stratively indicates  a particular.^  There  is  thus  a close  resemblance
between  such  propositions  as  The  author  of  Waverley  was  .Scotch
and  A poet  was  stabbed,

Mr.  Russell  calls  an  expression  such  as  the  author  of  Waverley
a ^ definite  description  He  says,  ' a definite  description  is  a
phrase  of  the  form  “ the  so-and-so  ” (in  the  singular)  This,  how- 1
ever,  is  a mistake.  Whether  or  not  the  so-and-so  ’’  is  a definite!
description  depends  upon  how  the  phrase  is  being  used.  We  saw
in  Chapter  V that  The  whale  is  a mammal  expresses  a universal
proposition,  which  could  be  equivalently  expressed  by  All  whales
are  mammals  Hence,  in  this  usage,  ‘‘  the  whale  ’’  is  not  a definite
description.  The  point  about  a definite  description  is  that  it  is  an
expression  containing  a descriptive  phrase,  and  this  descriptive
phrase  is  so  used  that  it  could  describe  only  one  thing,  if  it  describes
any.  Very  frequently  we  do  use  phrases  of  the  form  ''  the  so-and-so  ’’
in  such  a way  that  the  phrase  which  contains  the  description  could
describe  only  one  thing.  Mr.  Russell  also  says  that  a phrase  of  the
form  a so-and-so  ’’  is  an  indefinite  description.  But  by  an  indefinite
description  he  clearly  means  an  expression  containing  a descriptive
phrase  which  is  so  used  as  to  express  an  assertion  to  the  effect  that
a certain  property  belongs  to  at  least  one  thing.  Thai;  is,  in  ‘ I saw
a unicorn  \ a unicorn  ” is  an  indefinite  description ; in  ‘ A poet
was  stabbed  “ a poet  ’’  is  an  indefinite  description.  But  a so-
and-so  ’’  used  at  the  beginning  of  an  expression  is  sometimes  used
ambiguously ; it  may  be  used  as  an  indefinite  description,  but
frequently  it  is  not  so  used.  Thus,  for  example,  ‘ A Gothic  Church
has  been  built  in  Amsterdam  Avenue,  New  York  ’,  would  probably
be  understood  to  mean  that  only  one  such  church  had  been  built
in  that  place  ; but  it  might  be  used  to  mean  that  at  least  one  had.
Hence,  it  cannot  be  assumed  that  all  expressions  beginning  with
a so-and-so  express  propositions  of  the  same  form.^

We  have  now  to  consider  two  different  ways  in  which  definite
descriptions  may  occur.  We  saw  that  if  the  so-and-so  has  any
property,  then  the  so-and-so  must  exist.  But  the  so-and-so  may
exist  and  yet  not  have  a given  property.  Since  to  assert  that
the  so-and-so  does  not  have  a given  property  implies  that  the  so-and-so

^ See  p.  26  above.

* Int  Math.  Phil.,  p.  172,  and  The  Monlst,  1919,  p.  209,

? See  Chap.  V,  § 5,


150


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


exists,  we  must  be  careful  to  distinguisL.  between  denying  that  the
so-and-so  exists  and  asserting  that  the  so-and-so  exists  whilst  deny-
ing that  the  so-and-so  has  a given  property.  For  example,  The
King  of  Utopia  is  hind  implies  that  there  is  a King  of  Utopia  ; The
King  of  TJtojpia  is  not  hind  also  implies  that  there  is  a King  of  Utopia
but  denies  that  he  is  kind.  Using  ^ 0^  for  the  property  of  being
the  King  of  Utopia,  and  property  of  being  hind,  we  can

express  The  K%ng  of  Utopia  is  hind  by

(i)  (a[c)  :0x.^^.x  = c :fc,

and  The  King  of  Utopia  is  not  hind  by

(ii)  (He)  \ 0x  c \ r>^fc.

If,  however,  we  wish,  on  the  ground  that  there  is  no  King  of  Utopia,
to  deny  that  he  is  kind,  we  can  express  the  denial  by

(iii)  ^[(Hc)  \0x.^j,.x^c  :/e].

Here  the  outside  brackets  show  that  the  denial  applies  to  the
whole  of  what  is  contained  within  them.  It  clearly  denies  that
there  is  a King  of  Utopia,  since  means  the  same  as

^[(Hc  .)\0x  c].  When  ‘ {tx){0x)  ’ occurs  as  it  occurs  in

* 'E\{ix){0x)  \ or  in  [f{tx){0xy],  then  ‘ {'ix){0x)  ’ is  said  to  have  primary
occurrence  ; when  " {tx){0x)  ’ occurs  as  it  occurs  in
or  in  ^[f{^x){0oi)],  then  ‘ {^x){0x)  * is  said  to  have  secondary  occur-
rence.^ It  is  clear  that  all  propositions  in  which  ^ The  King  of
Utopia  ’ has  primary  occurrence  are  false,  since  there  is  no  King
of  Utopia.  The  denials  of  these  propositions  are  true,  but  in  them
^ The  King  of  Utopia  ’ has  secondary  occurrence.

This  discussion  of  propositions  in  whose  verbal  expression  definite
or  indefinite  descriptions  occur  should  enable  us  to  see  how  such
propositions  can  be  significantly  asserted  even  though  there  is  no
object  which  is  described.  Their  analysis  shows  that  the  descrip-
tion in  no  case  names  a constituent  of  the  proposition  with  which
we  are  acquainted,  and  in  the  analysed  form  of  the  expression  the
description  disappears.  Hence,  we  can  assert  that  the  man  in  the
moon  is  green,  even  though  there  is  no  man  in  the  moon ; we  can
assert  that  the  round  square  does  not  exist  without  having  first
to  assume  that  there  is  an  object  which  is  both  round  and  square
and  then  denying  that  there  is  such  an  object.  The  analysis  of
propositions  in  whose  verbal  expression  descriptions  occur  is  pre-
cisely the  same  whether  these  descriptions  do  in  fact  describe  an
object,  or  not.

In  Chapter  III  we  distinguished  two  ways  in  which  we  may
know  things,  namely  (i)  by  being  acquainted  with  the  thing,  (ii)  by
knowing  it  through  its  characteristics.  Obviously  the  analysis  of

^ See  Principia  Mathematica,  pp,  68-9 ; and  cf.  Mind,  1905,  pp.  489-90.


DESCEIPTIONS  191

(ii)  is  closely  related  to  tlie  analysis  of  descriptions.  Mr.  Enssell
calls  (ii)  ' knowledge  by  description  He  says  :

‘I  shall  say  an  object  is  ‘‘known  by  description”  when  we  know  that
it  is  “ the  so-and-so  ”,  i.e.  when  we  know  that  there  is  one  object,  and  no
more,  having  a certain  property : and  it  will  generally  be  implied  that  we
do  not  have  knowledge  of  the  same  object  by  acquaintance.  We  know  that
the  man  with  the  iron  mask  existed,  and  many  propositions  are  known
about  him ; but  we  do  not  know  who  he  was.  ...  We  shall  say  that  we
have  “ merely  descriptive  knowledge  ” of  the  so-and-so  when,  although  we
know  that  the  so-and-so  exists,  and  although  we  may  possibly  be  acquainted
with  the  object  which  is,  in  fact,  the  so-and-so,  yet  we  do  not  know  any
proposition  “ a is  the  so-and-so  ”,  where  a is  something  with  which  we  are
acquainted.’  ^

Here  Mr.  Eussell  suggests  that  "knowing  hy  description  and  knowing
by  description  only  are  to  be  distinguished;  the  former  does  not
exclude  acquaintance  with  the  object  described.  If  we  use  S ’’
for  the  knowing  subject  and  ''  A ” for  the  object  described,  we  may
define  these  two  forms  of  knowing  as  follows :

(1)  8 knows  A hy  description  ’’  means  There  is  some  property
0 of  which  it  is  true  (i)  that  0 belongs  to  A,  and  (ii)  that  S Imows
with  regard  to  0 that  0 belongs  to  one  thing  and  to  one  thing  only

(2)  ^^8  knows  A hy  description  only  ’’  means  There  is  some
property  0 of  which  it  is  true  (i)  that  0 belongs  to  A,  and  (ii)  that
S Imows  with  regard  to  0 that  0 belongs  to  one  thing  only,  and

(iii)  S is  not  acquainted  with  A

It  is  clear  that  we  can  know  A by  description  if,  and  only  if,
we  know,  with  regard  to  some  property  which  does  in  fact  belong
to  A,  that  it  belongs  to  only  one  thing.  Hence,  we  do  not  know
the  man  in  the  moon  by  description,  because,  even  if  there  is  one
and  only  one  man  in  the  moon,  we  do  not  know  with  regard  to
any  property  which  in  fact  belongs  to  him,  that  it  belongs  only  to
one  thing.  We  can  assert  propositions  in  whose  verbal  expression
“the  man  in  the  moon’’  occurs,  but,  unless  there  is  in  fact  one
and  only  one  man  in  the  moon,  all  such  propositions,  if  the  occur-
rence of  “ the  man  in  the  moon  ” in  their  verbal  expression  is  not
secondary,  will  be  false.  ^

It  should  be  noticed  that  to  know  A by  description  is  not  equiva-
lent to  knowing  a fact  in  which  A is  a constituent.

§3.  MR.  RUSSELL’S  THEORY  OE  USTCOMPLETE  SYMBOLS

We  have  seen  that  sentences  containing  definite  or  indefinite
descriptions  are  logically  inappropriate  expressions.  When  a
proposition  whose  verbal  expression  contains  a definite  or  indefinite
^ Mysticism  and  Logic,  pp.  214-15.

* I owe  the  restatement  of  this  paragraph  to  Prof.  Moore,


152


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


description  is  analysed  in  order  to  ascertain  wliat  exactly  the  given
proposition  asserts  we  find  that  in  the  expression  which  shows  the
analysis  no  description  occurs.  It  is  no  doubt  for  this  reason  that
Mr.  Russell  calls  symbols  such  as  descriptions  ^ incomplete  symbols
He  also  uses  the  phrases  ^ logical  fictions  ’ and  ' logical  construc-
tions and  he  sometimes  speaks  as  though  these  three  phrases
were  synonymous.  There  is  undoubtedly  some  obscurity  in
Mr.  RusselFs  account  of  incomplete  symbols  and  of  logical  con-
structions, nevertheless  his  theory  of  incomplete  symbols  is  of  great
importance.  It  is  worth  while  to  make  some  attempt  to  see  what
he  means.

The  origin  of  the  distinction  between  incomplete  symbols  and
those  which  are  not  incomplete  is  clearly  to  be  found  in  the  dis-
tinction, first  made  by  Mr.  Russell,  between  acqvxiiThtance  and  hnoW'-
ledge  hy  description.  It  is  clear  that  the  way  in  which  a demon-
strative symbol  is  used  is  different  from  the  way  in  which  a descriptive
s3nnbol  is  used.  The  referend  of  a demonstrative  symbol  is  the
object  directly  presented  which  the  demonstrative  symbol  indicates.
Thus  a symbol  cannot  be  demonstrative  unless  the  speaker  using
the  symbol  is  acquainted  with  its  denotation.  But  a descriptive
phrase  may  be  used  to  refer  to  what  is  not  presented,  and  a de-
scription not  only  contains  a descriptive  phrase  but  is  such  that
what  it  describes  (if  it  describes  anything)  could  not  be  directly
presented.  An  object  cannot,  for  instance,  be  directly  presented
as  the  one  and  only  object  of  a certain  sort.  When,  therefore,  we
say  that  Scott  ” (regarded  as  a demonstrative  symbol)  means  the
actual  man  Scott,  and  that  the  author  of  Waverley  ’’  means  one
and  only  one  man  wrote  Waverley  ”,  we  are  clearly  using  means  ”
in  two  different  senses.  It  was  in  his  efforts  to  make  clear  what
precisely  is  this  difference  that  Mr.  Russell  was  first  led  to  dis-
tinguish acquaintance  from  knowing  by  description,  and  hence  was
led  to  his  theory  of  incomplete  symbols.  In  his  detailed  discussion
of  descriptions  and  incomplete  symbols  in  Principia  Mathematica,
Mr.  Russell  does  not  refer  to  this  distinction,  since  he  was  not  there
concerned  with  ways  of  knowing,  but  such  a reference  might  have
made  his  account  clearer.  It  is  desirable  to  quote  his  statement
in  full ;


‘ By  an  incomplete  ” symbol  we  mean  a symbol  which,  is  not  supposed
to  have  any  meaning  in  isolation,  but  is  only  defined  in  certain  contexts.  In


ordinary  mathematics,  for  example,  ~ and


are  incomplete  symbols  ; some-
thing has  to  be  supplied  before  we  have  anything  significant.  Such  symbols
have  what  may  be  called  a "definition  in  use’’.  . . , This  distinguishes
such  symbols  from  what  (in  a generalized  sense)  we  may  call  proper  names :
"Socrates  ”,  for  example,  stands  for  a certain  man,  and  therefore  has  a mean-
ing  by  itself,  without  the  ueed  of  any  context.  If  we  supply  a context,  as


DESCRIPTIONS


163


in  “ Socrates  is  mortal  ”,  these  words  express  a fact  of  which  Socrates  himself
is  a constituent : there  is  a certain  object,  namely  Socrates,  which  does  have
the  property  of  mortality,  and  this  object  is  a constituent  of  the  complex  fact
which  we  assert  when  we  say  “ Socrates  is  mortal  But  in  other  cases,  this
simple  analysis  fails  us.  Suppose  we  say : “ The  round  square  does  not
exist.”  It  seems  plain  that  this  is  a true  proposition,  yet  we  cannot  regard
it  as  denying  the  existence  of  a certain  object  called  the  round  square
For  if  there  were  such  an  object  it  would  exist : we  cannot  first  assume  that
there  is  a certain  object,  and  then  proceed  to  deny  that  there  is  such  an  object.
Whenever  the  grammatical  subject  of  a proposition  can  be  supposed  not  to
exist  without  rendering  the  proposition  meaningless,  it  is  plain  that  the  gram-
matical subject  is  not  a proper  name,  i.e.  is  not  a name  directly  representing
some  object.  Thus  in  all  such  cases,  the  proposition  must  be  capable  of  being
so  analysed  that  what  was  the  grammatical  subject  shall  have  disappeared.
Thus  when  we  say  that  ‘‘  the  round  square  does  not  exist  ”,  we  may,  as  a first
attempt  at  such  analysis,  substitute  “ it  is  false  that  there  is  an  object  x which
is  both  round  and  square  Generally,  when  “ the  so-and-so  ” is  said  not  to
exist,  we  have  a proposition  of  the  form

E ! (7z)(0x)  ”,

i.e.  ^ { (EEc)  :0x*  . a;  = c. } ,

or  some  equivalent.  Here  the  apparent  grammatical  subject  {ix){0x)  has  com-
pletely disappeared  j thus  in  “ E ! {‘}x){0x)  ”,  {tx){0x)  is  an  incomplete
symbol.’  ^ ^

In  order  to  understand  this  statement  we  need  to  know  what
is  meant  by  the  grammatical  subject  by  the  ‘ disappearance  ' of
the  grammatical  subject,  and  by  ^ the  constituent  of  a proposition
Only  sentences  can  have  grammatical  subjects  ^ ; we  may  here  take
for  granted  that  we  can  determine  the  grammatical  subject  of  any
given  sentence.  The  point  that  is  of  importance  is  to  distinguish
the  grammatical  subject  of  a sentence  from  the  logical  subject  of
the  proposition  expressed  by  the  sentence.  In  the  sentence  “ Socrates
is  mortal  ” (on  the  assumption,  here  made  by  Mr.  Russell,  that
Socrates  ” is  a logically  proper  name)  the  grammatical  subject
Socrates  directly  represents  a particular,  which  is  a constituent
of  the  proposition  expressed ; mortal  directly  represents  the
attribute  predicated  of  Socrates  ; which  is  a universal,^  The  gram-
matical subject  here  represents  the  logical  subject.  But  in  “ The
author  of  Waverley  was  Scotch  ”,  the  author  of  Waverley  ” does

not  stand  for  a logical  subject ; it  appears  to  stand  for  a logical
subject  of  which  something  (viz.  being  Scotch)  is  predicated,  but  in
fact  having  written  Waverley  is  predicated  of  Scotch.  Thus  this
proposition  may  be  said  to  be  about  Scotch.  But  we  have  seen
that  about  ” is  used  in  two  different  senses,^  These  are  : (1)  the
sense  in  which  to  say  ^ I am  asserting  a proposition  about  A ’ means

^ Principia  Mathematical  Jntroduotion,  Chap.  Ill,  p.  6§,

2 See  p.  33.

® See  p.  53.

♦See  p.  34


154


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


‘ I am  asserting  a proposition  in  wMcIl  A is  a constituent ; (2)  tlie
sense  in  which  to  say  ^ I am  asserting  something  about  A ’ means
^ I am  predicating  something  of  A In  the  latter  case  A is  the
logical  subject  of  the  predication.^  The  first  sense  of  about
cannot  be  defined.  We  can  only  say  that  the  constituents  of  a
proposition  maTce  up  the  proposition,  so  that  if  A is  a constituent
of  the  proposition  p,  then  A cannot  ^ disappear  ’ and  p remain.  It
is  in  the  first  sense  of  “ about  ” that  The  author  of  Waverley  is  Scotch
is  about  Scotch ; in  neither  sense  of  about  is  it  about  The  author
of  Waverley,

Mr.  Russell  uses  constituent  ” in  such  a sense  that  a given
object,  A,  cannot  be  said  to  be  a constituent  of  a given  proposition

unless  it  would  be  logically  impossible  that  p should  be  asserted,
or  believed,  or  considered  at  all,  if  there  were  no  such  object  as  A.^
It  is  in  this  sense  that  Socrates  (on  RusselFs  assumption  that
Socrates  ’’  is  a proper  name)  is  a constituent  of  Socrates  is  mortal.
The  fact  that  Socrates  ’’  is  an  ordinary  proper  name — ^which  we
are  not  likely  to  forget — ^makes  this  exposition  difficult  to  follow.
The  best  we  can  do  is  to  lay  stress  upon  Mr.  RusselFs-  expression
“ directly  represents  ”,  which  means  “ demonstratively  indicates
It  is  clear  that,  ii  there  is  no  such  object  as  A,  then  A could  not  be
demonstratively  indicated.

From  this  point  of  view  we  may  be  able  to  see  why  Mr.  Russell
attaches  so  much  importance  to  the  disappearance  of  Hhe  gram-
matical subject’.  The  expression  ” expresses  the

same  proposition  as  : 0x . x = c}'' ; in  the  second

expression,  however,  Hhe  grammatical  subject  {tx){0x)  has  com-
pletely disappeared  The  point  to  stress,  however,  is  not  this
disappearance  but  the  fact-— which  the  second  expression  reveals
but  the  first  conceals — ^that  the  proposition  does  not  contain  a con-
stituent which  could  be  directly  represented  by  {%x)[0x)  ” ; hence,
{%x){0x)  ” is  not  a proper  name,  so  that  it  is  significant  to  say
^ It  seems  that  Mr.  Russell  here  wishes  to  contrast

an  incomplete  symbol  with  a mme,  and  it  is  no^  doubt  for  this  reason
that  he  takes  the  example  ^ r^'Ei\{%x){0x)  \ But  he  immediately
goes  on  to  say : By  an  extension  of  the  above  argument,  it  can
easily  be  shown  that  {%x){0x)  is  always  an  incomplete  symbol’.
He  now  takes  as  an  example  Scott  is  the  author  of  Waverley  ”,
where  the  author  of  Waverley  ” is  {%x){x  wrote  Waverley).  He

^ To  determine  the  logical  subject,  in  this  sense,  it  is  necessary  to  know  the
context  in  which  the  proposition  is  asserted.  As  Cook  Wilson  has  pointed  out.
Glass  is  elastic  may  be  asserted  in  answer  to  the  question  what  is  elastic,  or  to
the  question,  what  property  glass  has.  In  the  former  case  glass,  in  the  latter,
dastic,  is  the  logical  subject.  (See  Statement  and  Inference,  pp.  117-26,  and
cf.  Joseph,  Introd,,  pp.  166-9.)

* I owe  this  statement  to  Professor  Q,  E,  Moore,


DESCEIPTIOISrS


155


tlien  considers  Tlie  anttor  of  Waverley  was  a poet  ”,  for  wkich
we  can  substitute  Tbus  he  uses  {ix){0x)  in  two

ways.  These  two  uses  are  :

(1)  W,{%x){0x)

{2)mx){0x)l

He  evidently  supposes  that  whatever  is  true  of  {%x){0x)  as  it  occurs
in  (1)  is  also  true  of  (zx)(0x)  as  it  occurs  in  (2).  But  he  makes
assertions  about  {ix){0x)  which  are  true  when  {ix){0x)  occurs  as  it
occurs  in  (1),  but  which  are  not  true  of  {ix){0x)  as  it  occurs  in  (2).
Two  of  these  assertions  are : (i)  that  an  incomplete  symbol  has
^ no  meaning  in  isolation  ’ but  only  ‘ a definition  in  use  ’ ; (ii)  that
in  the  analysed  statement  the  incomplete  symbol  disappears.  But
the  definition  Mr.  Eussell  gives  of  (1)  is

'El\{%x){0x)  . = : (dc)  :0x.^^.x  = c.  Df.

Here  both  E!  and  {%x){0x)  have  disappeared  in  the  analysis,  so  that,
according  to  Mr.  EusselFs  account,  both  E!  and  {%x){0x),  or  the
set  of  symbols  M{ix){0x)  are  incomplete  symbols  having  only  a
definition  in  use.  Together  they  mean  what  is  given  in  the  right-hand
side  expression.  But  his  definition  of  (2)  is

f[{%x){0x)'] . = : (He) : 0x . . X ==  c :fc  Df,

But  the  first  part  of  the  right-hand  side  expression  is  the  analysis
of  'El{tx){0x) ; hence,  it  is  not  true  in  this  case,  to  say  that  {tx){0x)
has  no  meaning  in  isolation.  Nor  has  disappeared.  Conse-
quently, Mr.  Eussell  does  not  seem  to  have  been  clear  in  what  sense
emctly  he  can  assert  that  ^ {ix){0x)  is  always  an  incomplete  S3mbol
It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  distinguish  between  the  two
ways  in  which  {ix){0x)  may  occur.  The  important  sense  of  incom-
plete symbol  is  the  sense  in  which  {%x){0x)  as  it  occurs  in  'M[ix){0x)
is  an  incomplete  symbol,  and  we  need  to  define  incomplete  S3mbol  ’’
in  such  a way  that  {%x){0x)2i.B  it  occurs  in  'E\{%x){0x)  will  always  be
an  incomplete  symbol,  but  will  not  necessarily  be  an  incomplete
symbol  when  it  occurs  as  it  occurs  in  t{ix){0x).  Professor  G.  B.
Moore  has  suggested,  the  following  definition  ^ :

S,  in  this  usage  is  an  incomplete  symbol  ’’  = S,  in  this  usage
does  occur  in  expressions  which  express  propositions,  and,  in  the

^ This  definition  is  quoted  from  a letter  written  to  me  by  Professor  Moore.
I have  made  considerable  use  of  this  letter  in  my  discussion.  What  I have  said
with  regard  to  incomplete  symbols  and  logical  constructions  is,  in  so  far  as  it
is  correct,  due  to  Professor  Moore.  Nothing  in  this  section  is  original,  except
the  mistakes.  Professor  Moore  has  kindly  allowed  me  to  make  use  of  his  letter.
Perhaps  I should  not  venture  to  put  his  opinions  into  print  as  I cannot  hope
to  report  them  quite  accurately,  but  it  is  not  possible  for  me  to  write  on  this
subject  without  saying  what  I believe  myself  to  have  learnt  from  him.  (For
a criticism  of  this  definition  see  J.  Wisdom,  in  Mind,  H.S.,  158,  p.  193.)


156  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

case  of  every  such,  expression,  S never  stands  for  any  constituent
of  the  proposition  expressed.’’  D/.

Professor  Moore  points  out  that  what  we  require  to  define  is
S in  this  usage  is  an  incomplete  symbol  ” and  not  S is  an  in-
complete S3niibol  ”,  since  S ” might  in  one  usage  be  an  incom-
plete symbol  but  in  another  usage  S ” might  not  be  incomplete.
Thus  whether  a symbol  is  incomplete  or  not  depends  upon  the  way
in  which  the  symbol  is  being  used.  Mr.  Russell  is  mistaken  in
saying  that  ^‘the  author  of  Waverley^^  (or,  more  generally,  ^"the
so-and-so  ”,  i.e.  “ {ix){^x)  ”)  is  always  an  incomplete  symbol.  Pro-
fessor Moore  has  pointed  out  that  if  S ” is  an  incomplete  symbol
forming  part  of  an  expression  which  expresses  a proposition,  then
the  remainder  of  the  expression,  taken  as  a whole,  is  an  incomplete
symbol.^  Thus  {%x)[<I>x)  ” as  used  in  'Ei\{ix){0x)  ” will  always  be
an  incomplete  symbol,  but  as  used  in  f[{ix){0xy\  it  will  not  be  an
incomplete  symbol  unless  is  also  an  incomplete  symbol.

We  may  perhaps  say  that  ‘‘  S ” in  a given  usage  is  an  incomplete
symbol  when  S ” occurs  in  an  expression  expressing  a proposition
and  S ” is  neither  a name  nor  a descriptive  phrase  referring  to  a
particular  which  is  a constituent  of  the  proposition  through  some
property  belonging  to  a particular.  In  this  sense  of  incomplete
symbol  '' (^^r)(0a;)  ” as  it  occurs  in  E!(^a:;)(0a?)  ” is  always  an  in-
complete symbol ; but  it  is  only  in  the  sense  that  ''  {ix){0x)  ” is
never  a name  that  it  is  always  an  incomplete  symbol  as  it  occurs
in  ^y[('ix){0x)]  ”,  Mr.  Russell’s  account  of  incomplete  symbols
suggests  that  he  simply  meant  to  distinguish  incomplete  symbols
from  names,  but,  as  Professor  Moore  has  pointed  out,  this  account
does  not  fit  in  with  Mr.  Russell’s  practice  ; it  is  in  the  sense  dis-
tinguished by  Professor  Moore  that  the  notion  of  an  incomplete
symbol  is  required  in  order  to  define  what  is  meant  by  a logical
construction

Mr.  Russell  has  himself  pointed  out  the  importance  of  distinguish-
ing between  talldng  about  a symbol  and  ' using  it  as  a symbol,
as  a means  of  talking  about  something  else  ’.  He  adds  : ^ Normally,
if  you  talk  about  your  dinner,  you  are  not  talking  about  the  word
“ dinner  ” but  about  what  you  are  going  to  eat,  and  that  is  a difierent
thing  altogether.  The  ordinary  use  of  words  is  as  a means  of  getting
through  to  things,  and  when  you  are  using  words  in  that  way  the
statement  “ Scott  is  Sir  Walter  ” is  a pure  tautology,  exactly  on  the
same  level  as  “ Scott  is  Scott  2 The  point  is  that  in  using  a

^ See  J.  Wisdom,  loc.  cit.  Mr.  Wisdom  makes  use  of  lecture  notes  of
Moore’s  lectures,  since  Moore  has,  unfortunately,  not  himself  published  his
criticisms  and  developments  of  Russell’s  theory.

» The  Monist,  1919,  p.  213.


DESCRIPTIONS


157


symbol  as  a name,  tbe  name  does  not  enter  into  wbat  is  asserted.
Accordingly,  Mr.  Russell  says,  " If  I say  “ Scott  is  Sir  Walter
using  these  two  names  as  names,  neither  Scott  ’’  nor  “ Sir  Walter  ”
occurs  in  what  I am  asserting  but  only  the  person  who  has  these
names,  and  thus  what  I am  asserting  is  a pure  tautology

Now,  in  assertions  concerning  logical  constructions  we  are  saying
something  about  the  way  in  which  an  expression  is  used  to  refer  to
what  it  expresses,  but  we  are  not  'primarily  saying  something  about
the  symbols  but  about  that  'which  (he  symbols  refer  to.  Thus,  if  X is
what  is  referred  to  and  S ” is  the  symbolic  expression  used  to  refer
to  X,  then  we  may  say  that  X is  a logical  construction  if  ''  S ’’  is
an  incomplete  sjnnboL  For  example,  the  assertion  Tables  are  logical
constructions  is  primarily  about  tables,  but  what  the  assertion  says
about  tables  is  that  in  any  expression  which  would  commonly  be
said  to  express  a proposition  about  tables  the  symbol  tables  ”
must  be  so  used  that  tables  ” is  an  incomplete  symbol.  It  follows,
as  Professor  Moore  points  out,  that  the  symbols  constituting  the  rest
of  the  expression  in  which  “ tables  ” occurs  must  also  be  incomplete.
Hence,  the  whole  expression  can  be  transformed  into  another  ex-
pression equivalent  to  the  original  yet  not  containing  the  word
tables  ”,  nor  any  other  word  occurring  in  the  original  expression
and  used  in  the  same  sense. ^

If  we  could  find  a sentence,  expressing  a proposition,  which  was
so  used  that  each  symbol  in  the  sentence  demonstratively  indicated
a constituent  of  the  fact  referred  to  by  the  sentence,  and  if,*further,
the  syntactical  form  of  the  sentence  showed  the  form  of  this  fact,
then  we  could  say  that  such  a sentence  pictured  the  fact  to  which  it
refers.  Such  a sentence  may  be  called  a ‘ pictorial  sentence  We
cannot  so  use  sentences,  both  because  our  languages  are  not  adapted!
to  picturing  and  because  we  do  not  usually  know  what  precisely!
are  the  constituents  of  the  facts  to  which  we  refer.  But  the  notion!
of  a pictorial  sentence  helps  us  to  give  a brief  definition  of  what  is^
meant  by  a logical  construction  The  definition  is  as  follows  c
‘‘  Any  X is  a logical  construction  ” means  The  S3unbol  ‘ S ’ occurs
in  expressions  expressing  propositions  which  would  commonly  be
said  to  be  about  X,  and  in  the  case  of  every  such  expression  ' S ’ is
so  used  that  ' S ’ is  an  incomplete  symbol ; and  if  the  expression  in
which  ' S ’ is  so  used  were  transformed  into  a set  of  pictorial  sentences
jointly  equivalent  to  the  original  expression,  then  ^ S ’ would  not

^ The  Monist,  1919,  p.  213.

®For  a discussion  of  this  point  see  J.  Wisdom,  loc.  cit.,  pp.  188-94.

® I used  this  phrase  in  a paper  on  ‘ Logical  Constructions  and  Knowledge
through  Descriptions  ’ (publish^  in  the  ProceediTigs  of  the  Vllth  International
Confess  of  Philosophy,  1930).  The  phrase  is  taken  from  Wittgenstein,  but
whether  I use  it  as  he  would  is  doubtful


158


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


occur  in  any  of  these  pictorial  sentences,  nor  would  any  symbol  in
them  represent  A.”

Mr.  Russell,  who  pointed  out  that  classes  are  logical  construc-
tions, has  unfortunately  said  that  classes  are  incomplete  symbols.
His  statement  is  extremely  confused.  He  says : ‘ We  must  seek
a definition  [of  class]  on  the  same  lines  as  the  definition  of  descrip-
tions, i.e.  a definition  which  will  assign  a meaning  to  propositions
in  whose  verbal  or  symbolic  expression  words  or  symbols  apparently
representing  classes  occur,  but  which  will  assign  a meaning  that
altogether  eliminates  all  mention  of  classes  from  a right  analysis  of
such  propositions.  We  shall  then  be  able  to  say  that  the  sjnnbols
for  classes  are  mere  conveniences,  not  representing  objects  ”
called  “ classes  ”,  and  that  classes  are,  in  fact,  like  descriptions,
logical  fictions,  or  (as  we  say)  incomplete  symbols  ^ Mr.
Russell  cannot  mean  that  classes  are  incomplete  symbols,  but  that
classes  are  referred  to  only  by  means  of  expressions  containing  in-
complete symbols,  and  thus  classes  are  logical  constructions.  His
phrase  logical  fictions  ” may  be  taken  to  be  an  unfortunate  synonym
for  “ logical  constructions  There  is  nothing  fictitious  about  a
logical  construction.  To  say  that  tables  are  logical  constructions  is
not  to  say  that  tables  are  fictitious,  or  imaginary,  or  in  any  way
unreal.  It  is,  as  we  have  seen,  to  say  something  about  the  way  in
which  we  must  use  the  word  tables  ” in  any  expression  expressing
a proposition  about  tobies.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  there  are  different  hinds  of  logical
constructions  and  thus  different  hinds  of  incomplete  symbols.  But
the  problem  of  distinguishing  these  different  kinds  is  dfficult,  and
caimot  be  discussed  here.^

§4.  THE  SYSTEMATIC  AMBIGUITY  OE  EXISTS”

V We  have  already  had  occasion  to  notice  certain  difficulties  arising
mainly  from  the  fact  that  our  ordinal  expressions  are  logically
inappropriate  in  a high  degree.^  Mr.  Russell’s  theory  of  descriptions
not  only  shows  us  how  these  logically  inappropriate  expressions  lead
us  to  hold  erroneous  views,  it  also  shows  precisely  how  it  is  that  these
views  couM  be  false.  Once  we  have  recognized  that  we  can  signi-
ficantly  use  descnptions  which  describe  nothing^  because  these
descriptions  do  not  refer  to  any  particular  which  is  a constituent
of  the  proposition  expressed,  we  should  have  no  difficulty  in  seeing
the  error  in  Mill’s  view  that  a significant  proposition  implies
re^  existence  of  the  subject,  because  in  the  case  of  a non-existent
subject  there  is  nothing  for  the  proposition  to  assert’.'^  He  gives

^ Int.  Math.  Phil.,  pp.  181-3.  ^ See  Appendix  B.  ® See  Ghap.  V,  § 5.

* Logic,  Bk.  I,  Ckap.  VI,  § 2,  and  cf.  Chap.  VIII,  § 5.  By  a “ significant
proposition  ” MiU  means  one  that  is  not  ahont  the  meaning  of  words^


EXISTENCE


159


as  an  example.  The  ghost  of  a murdered,  person  haunts  the  couch  of  the
murderer.  His  view  seems  to  be  that  the  assertion  of  this  proposi-
tion implies  a belief  in  ghosts,  and  certainly  no  one  could  believe
it  to  be  true  who  did  not  believe  in  ghosts ; for  the  proposition
could  not  be  true  unless  ghosts  exists  no  matter  what  men  believe.
Mill’s  discussion  is  confused  owing  to  the  fact  that  he  saw  certain
difficulties  but  did  not  know  how  to  deal  with  them.  He  failed  to
realize  that  the  proposition  is  directly  about  the  properties  con-
noted '^by^ghost  ”,  not  directly  about  the  object,  if  any,  which  has
these  properties,  nor  about  the  ' ideas  ’ or  ^ beliefs  ’ of  the  speaker
who  asserts  the  proposition.  Our  preceding  discussions  should  have
made  this  point  clear.

Nevertheless,  a certain  difficulty  may  remain  as  to  how  it  is  that
we  can  think  of  that  which  in  no  sense  is.  It  is  this  difficulty  that
has  tempted  many  philosophers  into  holding  that  there  are  ' different
modes  of  being  ’,  so  that  men  exist,  or  have  being,  in  one  sense,  and
have^being  in  another  sense,  for  which  the  word  " subsists  ”
is  sometimes  used.  Mr.  Bussell,  who  has_now,shQjoi^us  how  to
avoid  these  difficultiesTaFonFtmBTiimse^  maintained  that  ' what-
ev^^  may  be,  it  certainly  is

That  whateveF^canHbe^^^^  of  must  in  some  sense  he  seems

plausible  at  ffist  sight.  Professor  Moore  has  formulated  a possible
argument  in  favour  of  this  view  in  order,  it  seems,  to  bring  out
clearly  the  errors  involved.  He  suggests  that  it  might  be  argued :

* A thing  cannot  have  a property  unless  it  is  there  to  have  it,  and,  since
unicorns  ...  do  have  the  property  of  being  thought  of,  there  certainly  must
be  such  things.  When  I think  of  a unicorn,  what  I am  thinking  of  is  certainly
not  nothing ; if  it  were  nothing,  then,  when  I think  of  a griffin,  I should
also  be  thinking  of  nothing  and  there  would  be  no  difference  between  think-
ing of  a griffin  and  thinking  of  a unicorn.  But  there  certainly  is  a differ-
ence ; and  what  can  the  difference  be  except  that  in  the  one  case  what  I
am  thinking  of  is  a unicorn,  and  in  the  other  a griffin  ? And  if  the  unicorn
is  what  I am  thinking  of,  then  there  certainly  must  be  a unicorn,  in  spite
of  the  fact  that  unicorns  are  unreal.  In  other  words,  though  in  one  sense
of  the  words  there  certainly  are  no  unicorns — that  sense,  namely,  in  which
to  assert  that  there  are  would  be  equivalent  to  asserting  that  unicorns  are
real — yet  there  must  be  some  other  sense  in  which  there  are  such  things ;
since,  if  there  were  not,  we  could  not  think  of  them.’  *

This  passage  states  clearly  the  view  that  there  must  be  some
sense  of  " there  are  ” in  which  it  would  be  true  to  say  ' There  are
unicorns  and  another  sense  in  which  it  would  be  true  to  say  ' There
are  no  unicorns  The  second  statement  is  equivalent  to  ' Unicorns
are  unreal  so  that  this  other  sense  of  " are  ” would  have  to  be
such  that  we  could  say  that  jeing  unreal,  (or  heiri^  real),  is  a property


^ Principles  of  Mathematics,  p.  449.
® Philosophical  Studies,  p.  215.


160


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


wMci.  could  belong  to  sometliing  in  tbe  same  sort  of  way  as  tlie
property  of  being  yellow  can.  We  have  already  seen  this  not  to  be
the  case.  As  Professor  Moore  points  out,  ''  unreal  ” does  not  stand
for  any  conception  at  all.  We  use  the  expression  are  unreal  ’’  tc|
express  the  denial  of  existence,  not  to  assert  a special  mode  of  existence
In  an  analogous  manner  we  use  the  expression  are  real  to  assert
an  affirmation  of  existence.  With  this  affirmation  of  existence  we
shall  be  concerned  in  a moment.  We  must  first  consider  what  is
involved  in  our  thinhing  of  unicorns.  '

Professor  Moore  contrasts  three  pairs  of  propositions,  viz. :
(a)  Umcorns  are  thought  of ; Lions  are  hunted ; (6)  I am  thinking
of  a unicorn ; I am  hunting  a lion ; (c)  Unicorns  are  objects  of
thought ; Lions  are  objects  of  the  chase.  The  second  proposition
in  each  pair  could  not  be  true  unless  there  were  lions  ; but,  Professor
Moore  urges,  ^ it  is  obvious  enough  to  common  sense  that  the  same
is  by  no  means  true  of  the  first  proposition  in  each  pair,  in  spite  of
the  fact  that  their  grammatical  expression  shows  no  trace  of  the
difference  We  have  already  seen  that  such  a proposition  as
Lions  are  hunted  means  that  the  property  of  being  a lion  and  being
hunted  both  belong  to  something.  But  the  first  proposition  in
each  of  the  three  pairs  cannot  be  similarly  analysed.  The  second
set  could  not  be  true  unless  there  were  lions  ; the  first  set  may  well  ’
be  true  although  there  are  no  unicorns.  I am  thinhing  of  a unicorn\
asserts  that  the  property  of  being  a unicorn  is  present  to  the  mind'
of  someone,  not  in  the  sense  that  someone  is  conceiving  the  property
of  being  a unicorn,  but  in  the  sense  that  the  complex  of  properties
connoted  by  unicorn”  is  present  to  mind.  There  is  no  doubt
that  properties  may  be  present  to  mind  in  a way  analogous  to,  but
different  in  important  respects  from,  the  way  in  which  an  individual
object  may  be  present  to  mind.  But  properties  are  not  individual!
objects,  and  can  be  thought  of  even  irthere  are  no  objects  wluch|
possess"  these  properties.

This  distinctioni|b^tween  the  way  in  which  properties  and  the
way  in  which  individuals  may  be  presented  leads  us  back  to  the
question  as  to  what  is  involved  in  the  affirmation  of  existence.
With  regard  to  an  individual  which  is  presented  and  which  could
be  named,  or  demonstratively  indicated,  it  is  meaningless  to  assert
that  it  exists,  and  equally  meaningless  to  assert  that  it  does  not
exist,  if  “ exist  ” be  used  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  significant  to
say  ‘ lions  exist  * or  ^ ghosts  exist  ^ For,  Lions  exist  ” means  the

*

^ Philosophical  Studies,  p.  216.  Professor  Moore  adds  i ‘ Why  we  should  use
the  same  form  of  verbal  expression  to  convey  such  different  meanings  is  more
than  I can  say.  It  seems  to  me  very  curious  that  language  . . . should  have
grown  up  as  if  it  were  expressly  designed  to  mislead  philosophers ; and  I do
not  know  why  it  should  have.’


EXISTENCE


161


property  of  being  a lion  belongs  to  sometbing  but  we  cannot
significantly  say  of  an  individual  object^  or  particular,  that  tHs  m-
dividual  object  belongs  to  sometbing.  Individuals  do  not  belong  inj
this  fundamental  sense  of  belonging  to  wbicb  is  involved  in  the
analysis  of  general  propositions.  Only  properties  belong  to  some-  .

Mr.  Russell  puts  this  pomt  by  saying  that  "^it  is  of
propositional  functions  that  you  can  assert  or  deny  existence  ’ ^ ;
be  says  that  lions  exist  means  “ ' a;  is  a lion  ’ is  sometimes  true
and  we  bave  seen  that  it  is  quite  possible  so  to  express  sucb
propositions.  But  tbe  language  of  propositional  functions,  tbougb
convenient,  is  not  essential.  Wbat  is  fundamental,  it  must  be
repeated,  is  tbe  notion  of  belonging  to  sometbing.

Mr.  Russell  points  out  ^ that  if  we  say  ^ Men  exist,  and  Socrates
is  a man,  therefore  Socrates  exists  ^ we  are  committing  tbe  same
sort  of  mistake  as  we  should  be  if  we  said,  ‘Men  are  numerous,
Socrates  is  a man,  therefore  Socrates  is  numerous’.  Tbe  mistake. >
is  to  suppose  ‘that  it  is  significant  to  say  tbe  same  sort  of  thing  about ,
an  individual  as  is  said  about  a class.  In  tbe  case  of  tbe  word
“ numefobs  ” we  can  see  at  once  ^E^t^i;bere  is  an  absxirdity,  but  we
often  fail  to  recognize  that  what  is  said  in  tbe  one  case  is  not  exactly
tbe  same  as  whai  is  said  in  tbe  other,  because  we  can  use  tbe  same
word  with  the  proper  sort  of  difEerence  in  significance.  Thus  we
might  say  ‘ Oxford  dons  are  cultured,  and  A is  an  Oxford  don,  so  A is
cultured  ’ ; all  these  statements  make  sense,  and  tbe  inference  is
valid.  But  “ are  cultured  ” has  not  tbe  same  meaning  here  as  “ is
cultured  ”,  not  only  because  tbe  one  is  plural  and  tbe  other  singular!
but  because  “ are  cultured  ” helps  to  express  a proposition  of  a!
different  form  from  tbe  one  wbicb  “ is  cultured  ” helps  to  express.l
Tbir^differ&cfe  in  form  accounts  for  tbe  fact  that  in  one  case  tbe
plural,  in  tbe  other  tbe  singular,  verb  is  used.  But  tbe  syntactical
similarity  of  tbe  two  sentences  misleads  us  into  supposing  that  both
are  subject-predicate  propositions,  whereas-  the  former  is  a non-
elementary general  proposition,  tbe  latter  arjffelementary  simple
proposition.  ^

When  tbe  same  words  are  used  in  sentences  wbicb  express  different  |
kinds  of  propositions,  yet  in  each  case  tbe  usage  is  significant,  tbenf
these  words  are  said  to  bave  ‘ systematic  ambiguity  They  are!
ambiguous  because  tbe  words  are  used  in  different  senses ; but  tbi^
ambigmty  is  systematic  because  it  can  be  formulated  according  to
a rule.  It  is  not  a harmful  kind  of  ambiguity ; on  tbe  contrary,
it  is  inevitable,  since  without  it  gener^ty  would  be  impossible  ;
further,  systematic  ambiguity  is  often  useful  in  enabling  us  to  avoid

^ The.  Monist,  1919,  p.  196.

® Ibid,  Here  “ Socrates  ” is  taken  to  be  a name,  not  an  abbreTiated  descrip-
tion,

n


162  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

prolixity.  But  if  we  fail  to  see  that  such  ambiguity  is  present,  we
may  be  misled  with  regard  to  the  form  of  what  is  expressed.  This
is  very  clearly  the  case  with  regard  to  words  used  to  express  existence.

The  recognition  of  systematic  ambiguity  has  an  important
bearing  on  the  question  in  what  sense  exactly  we  must  hold  that
There  are  0'b  ” is  identical  in  meaning  with  exist  ” and  with
^’s  are  real  It  might  be  objected  that  it  is  easy  to  find  an
instance  of  ''  There  are  ^’s  ”,  in  which  the  meaning  of  ‘‘  are  ” is  not
the  same  as  in  There  are  unicorns  ”,  and  hence,  that  we  could  not
conclude  that  exist.  Examples  would  be  There  are  numbers  ”,
There  are  relations  ”,  There  are  classes  These  uses  are  not
the  same  as  in  There  are  imicoms  ” ; hence,  it  does  not  follow
that  numbers  exist.  Now,  it  is  true  that  ^ a;  is  a number  ’ is  some-
times true,  hence  in  one  sense  of  exists  ”,  numbers  do  exist.  But
numbers  are  of  a different  logical  type  from  unicorns ; anything
significantly  said  of  the  former  cannot  be  significantly  said  of  the
latter.  This  difference  in  significance  is  what  is  meant  by  difference
in  logical  t3pe.  Mr.  Russell  suggests  that  a logical  type  may  be
defined  as  follows  : ‘ A and  B are  of  the  same  logical  type  if,  and
only  if,  given  any  fact  of  which  A is  a constituent,  there  is  a corre-
sponding fact  which  has  B as  a constituent,  which  either  results  from
substituting  B for  A,  or  is  the  negation  of  what  so  results.’  ^ Thus
Socrates  and  Aristotle  are  of  the  same  logical  type,  because  Aristotle
can  be  substituted  for  Socrates  in  any  significant  proposition  about
Socrates  and  the  result  will  not  be  nonsense,  though  it  may  be  false.
But  I cannot  significantly  substitute  a number  for  a unicorn.  I can
say  ^ I fed  a unicorn  ’,  but  not  ' I fed  a number  To  see  that  this
is  so  it  is  sufficient  to  know  what  ‘‘  number  ” and  “ unicorn  ” re-
spectively mean  ; we  do  not  further  need  to  know  whether  there  are
any  unicorns.  The  point  is  that  no  one  can  use  There  are  unicorns  ”
with  the  sense  of  are  ” appropriate  to  “ numbers  ” or  relations  ”.
Hence,  there  is  no  justification  for  saying  that  unicorns  subsist.  If
there  were  any  unicorns,  they  would  be  individual  objects  of  precisely
the  same  type  as  horses.  Now,  it  is  clear  that  it  does  not  follow
from  I am  thinking  of  a unicorn  that  there  is  an  individual  object
with  regard  to  which  it  can  be  said  " This  is  a unicorn  ’ ; hence,  we
can  think  of  unicorns  although  there  are  none.

It  is  important  to  observe  that  however  many  different  senses
''  There  are  Ws  ” may  have,  corresponding  to  different  logical  types
expressed  by  0 ”,  alloi  them  are  such  that  ' (Hcc) . 0x  ’ cannot  be
true  unless  0 belongs  to  something.^

^ Contemporary  British  Philosophy,  Series  J,  p.  370.

® I should  myself  stiE  be  holding  the  erroneous  views  criticized  in  this  sec-
tion. had  not  Professor  Moore  shown  me,  in  some  letters  written  in  1918,  the
mistakes  I was  making.


CHAPTER  X

THE  GENERALIZATION  OP  LOGIC


* Every  science  that  has  thriven  has  thriven  upon  its  own  symbols ; logic,  the
only  science  which  is  admitted  to  have  made  no  improvements  in  century  after
century,  is  the  only  one  which  has  grovm  no  symbols.^ — Augustus  de  Morgan,

§ 1.  THE  IDEAL  OF  LODIC

Every  logician  lias  recognized  that  logic  is  concerned  with
form  but  only  recently  has  it  been  recognized  that  there  is
a science  of  pure  logic  which  is  concerned  with  nothing  but
form.  [There  is  a wide  divergence  of  opinion  among  those  who
call  themselves  logicians  with  regard  to  the  topics  properly jDelong-
ing  to  logic  and  with  regard  to  their  mode  of  treatment7  Many
books  purporting  to  be  on  logic  have  been  written  solely  6om  the
point  of  view  of  everyday  argument,  with  the  professed  intention
of  showing  how  certain  propositions  important  to  mankind  can  be
'proved  to  ie  true  and  how  the  assertions  of  those  who  dispute  these
propositions  can  be  disproved.  Thus  conceived,  logic  is  regarded
as  the  art  of  thmkmq.  Consequently,  much  stress  has  been  laid
upon  the  fallacies  incident  to  language  and  upon  the  causes  of
erroneous  beliefs.  No  doubt  such  a study  is  useful  but  it  must
be  distinguished  from  logic.  Owing  to  the  limitation  of  their
interest  to  the  criticism  of  reflective  thinking  as  it  occurs  in  practical
problems,  in  scientific  discovery,  and  in  theological  disputation,
earlier  logicians  made  but  a slight  attempt  to  discover  the  formal
principles  of  proof.  ^ Such  a discovery  presupposes  the  attempt  to
ahaTysT'ffievarious  types  of  argument  in  order  to  detach  their  formal
vahdity  from  any  given  subject-matter.  The  use  of  the  significant
language  of  everyday  speech  tends  to  conceal  form  and  to  encourage
the  collusion  of  logic  with  the  art  of  disputation.  The  Port  Eoyal
Logic,  for  instance,  affords  a good  example  of  a work  belonging
rather  to  the  art  of  disputation  than  to  logic  A It  elaborates  tech-
nical trivialities  which  do  not  lead  towards  an  apprehension  of  the
formal  principles  involved  in  correct  reasoning.  The  Port  Boyal
Logicians  regarded  themselves  as  carrying  on  the  tradition  of

^ The  Port  Boyal  Logic  was  first  published  in  Paris  in  1662,  under  the  title :
La  Logique  ou  VArt  de  Penser,  contenant  optre  les  Regies  communes,  plusieurA
observations  nouvell^s,  propres  d forrner  le  jugement


164


A MODEEJT  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Aristotle  but  there  is  good  ground  for  believing  that  Aristotle  himself
was  the  first  logician  to  be  primarily  interested  in  form.  Certainly
the  earliest  attempt  to  exhibit  the  formal  principles  of  deduction
may  be  attributed  to  him.^  He  saw  clearly  that  propositions  have
form  and  that  it  is  their  form  that  is  essential  to  deduction.  As
Professor  Whitehead  puts  it : ‘ Aristotle  founded  the  science  by
^conceiving  the  idea  of  the  form  of  a proposition,  and  by  conceiving
‘deduction  as  taking  place  in  virtue  of  the  forms.  . . . Again,  in
their  theory  of  form,  both  Aristotle  and  subsequent  logicians
came  very  near  to  the  theory  of  the  logical  variable.  But  to  come
very  near  to  a true  theory,  and  to  grasp  its  precise  application,
^re  two  very  different  things,  as  the  history  of  science  teaches  us.
^Everything  of  importance  has  been  said  before  by  somebody  who
did^t  discover  it.^  ^

W^e  have  alrea"dy  laid  stress  upon  the  importance  of  form  and
have  seen  that  the  syllogism  is  a form  of  implication,  deductive
solely  in  virtue  of  its  form.  Consider,  for  instance,  the  syllogism  :
If  all  politicians  are  inconsistent  and  Baldwin  is  a politician,  then
Baldwin  is  inconsistent  Here  we  assert  that  the  compound  premiss
implies  the  conclusion.  We  do  not  assert  that  Baldwin  is  inconsistent,
nor  that  he  is  a politician,  nor  that  all  politicians  are  inconsistent.
These  propositions  jony  be  true.  If  we  believe  that  the  premisses
are  true,  we  shall ""a^ept  the  conclusion  as  true.  But  the  pure
logician  is  not  interested  in  their  truth,  or  falsity  ; he  is  concerned
only  with  the  implication,  that  is,  the  form.  If  for  Baldwin
we  substitute  Bernard  Shaw  or  ’’  my  dog  or  this  desk
or  any  other  given  individual,  the  implication  holds.,  Similarly,
for  inconsistent  ” we  could  substitute  rich  ” or  hopeful  ’’  or
fat  ” or  “ trivial  ” ; for  politicians  ’’  we  could  substitute  sharks  ”
or  telegrams  ’’  or  ” mice  and  the  form  would  be  unaltered.  But
the  pure  logician  does  not  want  to  consider  any  given  substitution
that  could  be  made  ; he  is  not  concerned  to  make  assertions  about
the  Indmdual  which  may  happen  to  be  in  the  actual  world

and  which  are  of  interest  to  our  daily  life  and  to  the  scientist.  Since
my  oi  these^bstitutions  leaves  the  validity  of  the  form  unaffected,
we  s"Eoi5d  refuse^ to  select  any  one.  Consequently,  w¥r^y
take^"FTnstead  of  Baldwin^  instead  of  inconsistent,  a instead  of
politicians,  provided  that  a and  g are  vaiH  symBdlsTbr  clasjel^
X a^  vinabl^  symbol  Jpr  an  indi^  Thus  we  obtain : If  dll
c?5  dfe'pTmd x is^ %n  a,  then  x is^a  the  form  of  every  syllogism
which  consists  of  a premiss  relating  two  classes  (of  which  one  is

^ See  Chap.  VI,  § 6 above,  and  cf . Chap.  XXV,  § 2 below.  Even  a superficial
reading  of  Aristotle’s  Analytics  will  show  that  he  was  striving  to  exhibit  form.
The  contrast  between  the  nature  of  his  inquiry  and  that,  for  instance,  of  the
Port  Royal  Logicians  is  striking.  * Proc.  Arist  Soc.,  N.S,,  XVII,  p.  72*


THE  GENERALIZATION  OF  LOGIC


165


included  in  the  otter)  and  a premiss  relating  an  individual  to  a
class  of  wtict  it  is  a member  (that  class  being  tbe  included  class).
Syllogisms  about  'politicians,  sharks,  etc.,  are  particular  instances
exemplifying  this  form.  /In  the  pure  propositional  form  of  im-
phcationjliejiaterial^  are  repEceT^  variables,  the

form  is  expressed  by  logical  constants.  Smce  iF'is^cbmpietely
formalTEere  is  no  reiSence  to~  any^ jiveh  instance ; the  implication
can  be  asserted  concerning  anjrthing  that  can  be  fitted  into  the  form..
//Hence,  it  is  completely  general,//  The  ideal  of^STlogiciSls^^-
nlete  g^eraliiv  attaiStnis  ideal  by  making  his  assertions

The  a^refeiion  of  form  depends  upon  the  apprehension  of  the
logical  constant  and  the  logi^Sanable.  But  comes  first  in
logic  IS  apt^to^  c’dme  last  in  knowledge.  The  historical  develop-
ment oFa  science  reflects  the  mental  development  of  man.  Just
as  the  child  first  apprehends  that  this  given  set  of  two  blocks  with
that  other  given  set  of  two  blocks  is  equal  to  this  other  set  of  four
blocks,  and  only  gradually  comes  to  see  that  a'ny  set  of  two  objects
added  to  any  other  set  of  two  objects  is  equal  to  any  set  of  four
objects ; so  a science  begins  by  establishing  a connexion  between
one  particular  fact  and  another,  and  only  gradually  disentangles
those  properties  upon  which  the  connexion  depends.  It  is  not
otherwise  with  logic.  First  it  is  seen  that  this  proposition  is  so
related  to  that  proposition  that  the  latter  can  be  deduced  from  the
former.  Afterwards  the  properties  upon  which  the  deduction
depends  are  apprehended  as  such.  Only  as  the  result  of  a long
process  of  development  has  it  been  possible  to  realize  that  all  deduc-
tion depends  upon  tlaoi  ’yormal,  i.e.  the  logimL  propSties  of  the
terms  Fnaf^e^Fintd^the  reasoning.

SmcFthe  propositional  form  determines  what  material  constants
can  be  fitted  into  the  form,  the  difierent  kmds  of  logical  constants
represent  the  different  types  of  deduction  that  are^ssible.
maip^defect  of^^  Logicians  consists  in  theiinailuxe  to

apprehend  more  than  one  form  of  d^uction.^ Aristotle  limited
EimsSf  to  the  consideration  of  that  form  of  deduction  that  is  most
obvious  to  common  sense,  namely,  the  subsumptive  syllogism.  The
recent  development  of  logic  has  shown  that  the  subsumptive  syllogism
is  a special  case  of  the  formal  property  of  transitivity,  which  belongs
to  the  relation  of  inclusion,  or  subsumption.  Upon  this  property
the  validity  of  the  syllogism  depends.  Moreover,  Aristotle  failed
to  distinguish  the  two  different  forms  of  syllogism  which  have  been
traditionally  called  subsumptive.  ^ Whilst  he  used  literal  symbols
to  express  the  terms  of  the  svllomsm,  he  used  ordinarv  language
to  express  tkeT^tions  between  the  terms.  In  this  he  was  followed
By  the  traditional  Logicians.  Consequently,  they  did  not  reaEze


166


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIO


that  R precedes  S R loves  S ”,  “ All  R is  S ” express  different
forms.  They  did" not  attempt  to  anal;^‘eTEese  relations  in  order
to  ascertain  their  logical  properties,  but  were  content  to  take  same-
ness of  grammatical  form  as  a guide  to  sameness  of  logical  form.
Thus  Aristotle’s  successors  rigidly  confined  deduction  to  the  form
of  the  subsumptive  syllogism,  thereby,  not  only  wasting  their  time
in  the  elaboration  of  technical  trivialties  but,  what  was  more  im-
portant, hindering  the  development  of  logic.  The  failure  to  analyse
the  relations  involved  in  different  types  of  deductive  reasoning

prevented  logic  from  growing  symbols  ” to  exhibit  form.

'

§2.  RELATIONS

^1  deduction  depends  upon  the  logical  properties  of  relations.
Hence,"  the  concept  of  relation  is  of  fundamental  importance.  It
does  not  seem  possible  to  define  relation  without  presupposing
notions  no  less  in  need  of  definition.  All  that  we  can  do  is  to  make
some  observations  that  will  help  us  to  grasp  what  exactly  a relation
is.  Any  object  of  which  we  can  think  possesses  characteristics  that
enable  us  to  distinguish  it  from  other  objects.  These  characteristics
are  of  two  kinds  : qualities  and  relations.  The  difference  between
these  cannot  be  defined  since  both  quality  and  relation  are  indefin-
able.^ By  a quality  we  mean  what  is  sometimes  called  a swijple
i^ality,  such  as  would  ordinarily  be  expressed  by  an  adjective,
e.g.  red,  sweet,  loud.  From  the  common-sense  point  of  view  we  may
say  that  if  it  is  true  that  A is  red,  then  A can  be  regarded  as  possess-
ing the  quality  of  heing  red  independently  of  any  reference  to  any
otW  object. 2 By  a relation  we  mean  a characteristic  that  belongs
to  A considered  with  reference  to  some  other  object  B.  This  state-
ment cannot  be  regarded  as  a definition  of  relation”,  since  the
phrase  considered  with  reference  to  ” repeats  the  concept  of  relation.
But  the  statement  may  nevertheless  be  useful  since  it  suggests  that
A cannot  have  a relation  unless  there  is  some  other  object  to  which
it  has  the  relation.  For  example,  if  A has  a father,  then  there  must
be  some  term,  of  the  same  sort  as  A,  which  is  A’s  father.  Thus
having  a father  is  a relational  characteristic  that  belongs  to  A.  Sup-
pose this  term  is  X ; then  the  relation  father  of  holds  between  X
and  A.  Again,  to  assert  equality  of  some  term  K is  to  assert  that
K can  be  considered  with  reference  to  some  other  term,  of  the  same

^ Mr.  W.  E.  Johnson  says : * A relation  is  properly  defined  as  a “ transitive
adjective  ”,  the  ordinary  adjective  being  distinguished  as  intransitive.^  {Logic,
I,  p.  204  n.)  This  definition  rests  upon  a conception  of  relation  and  adjective
that  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  enlightening.  Moreover,  “ transitive  ” contains
the  notion  of  relation.  Mr.  Johnson’s  use  of  “ adjective  ” is  extremely  confusing.

® It  is  possible,  and  perhaps  necessary,  to  regard  red  as  a term  in  an  irreducible
multiple  relation.  But  the  understanding  of  such  a view  presupposes  that  we
know  what  is  meant  by  the  statement  that  red  is  a non-relational  quality.


THE  GENERALIZATION  OF  LOGIC  167

sort  as  K in  some  respect,  wMch  is  equal  to  K.  If  tMs  term  is
L,  then  K equals  L ” expresses  a relation  that  holds  between
K and  L.  To  assert  that  D is  a gift  is  to  assert  that  there  are  two
terms  such  that  one,  say  X,  has  the  characteristic  of  giving  D,  and
the  other,  say  Y,  has  the  characteristic  of  receiving  D,  Then  X
gives  D to  Y ’’  expresses  a relation  of  giving  that  holds  between
X,  D,  and  Y.  To  assert  that  £5  is  owed  is  to  assert  that  there  are
three  other  terms  such  that  one,  say  A,  has  the  characteristic  of
owing,  another,  say  B,  has  the  characteristic  of  being  owed,  and  a
third,  say  X,  has  the  characteristic  of  being  that  for  which  something  is
owed.  Then ''A  owes  £5  to  B for  X”  expresses  a relation  of  owing.

All  these  are  examples  of  relations  that  are  perfectly  familiar
and  are  in  common  use  in  ordinary  life.  These  relations  differ  in
the  number  of  terms  involved.  A term  is  anything  that  can  have
a quality  or  stand  in  a relation.  Both  qualities  and  relations  are
tmiveuads...  Terms  which  occur  as  Aoccims~mr!^^  A

and  B'^ccur  in  A loves  B are  'particulars,  or  individuals.  These
terms  cannot  occur  as  is  red  occurs  in  A is  red,  or  as  loves  occurs
in  A loves  B.  Such  constituents  as  is  red,  hves  are  universals.^
Every  proposition  contains  one  constituent  which  functions  as  loves
fimctions  in  A loves  B,  that  is,  which  combines  the  constituents
into  the  unity  of  a single  proposition.  The  constituents  thus  com-
bined need  not  be  particulars,  e.g.  Hatred  is  akin  to  love’’.
Nevertheless,  the  relating  universal  does  not  occur  as  hatred  and
love  occur.  We  have  already  distinguished  relations  according  to
the  number  of  terms  iuvolved,  viz.  dyadic,  triadic,  tetradic,  pentadic,
polyadic.  We  shall  symbolize  a dyadic  relation  either  loj  x'R'y,  or
by  E(ir,  y) ; relations  with  more  than  two  terms  will  be  symbplized
by  R{ir,  y,  z) ; R(t?,  x,  y,  z),  and  so  on.  We  symbolize  the  relation
in  which  y stands  to  x,  when  a;  E by  ^6.,  i.e.  yBx.  We  are  accus-
tomed to  the  converses  of  propositions,  so  that  the  conception  of
the  converse  of  a relation  presents  no  difficulty.  The  system  of
family  relationships  provides  the  most  familiar  example  of  relations
from  which  we  can  easily  derive  inferences.  ’Given  any  genealogical
tree,  say  that  of  The  House  of  Hanover,  we  can  establish  at  once
the  precise  degree  of  kinship  in  which,  say,  the  present  Duchess
of  York  stands  to  George  I.

The  great  importance  of  relations  in  deductive  theory  is  due  to
the  fact  that  they  possess  certain /ormaZ,  i.e.  purely  logical,  properties
that  lie  at  the  basis  of  all  inference.  Relations  can  be  classified  accord-
ing to  their  logical  properties.  We  shall  begin  with  some  definitions
that  wiU  be  found  useful  in  the  statement  of  these  properties.

Referent  and  Relatum.  Every  relation  has  a sense,  i.e.  the
direction^  in  which  it  goes.  For  example,  hves  goes  from  the  lover

^ a Chap.  IV.


168  A MODEKN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

to  the  loved  j father  of  goes  from  the  male  parent  to  the  child.  The  term
from  which  the  relation  goes  is  the  referent ; the  term  to  which  the
relation  goes  is  the  relatum.  In  A loves  R,  A is  referent,  B is  relatum.

Domain^  Converse  Domain,  Field,  If  R is  any  relation,  then
the  domain  of  R is  the  class  of  terms  that  have  R to  something.  The
converse  domain  of  iZ  is  the  class  of  terms  to  which  something  has  R.
The  field  of  R is  the  sum  of  the  domain  and  the  converse  domain
of  E.  Thus,  aU  possible  r^rents  of  R are  the  domain  of  R ; all
possible  relata  are  its  converse"  domami  TEeT[oB51iir^^
versr'dSmamTSa^^  E^TexSlple,  if  the  direct  descendants

of  George  I of  England  be  taken  as  the  field  of  the  relation  ancestor
of  (limited  to  this  field) ; thenthe  domain  is  the  class  of  all  those  in-
dividuals who  have  descendants ; the  converse  domain  is  the  class  of
his  descendants.  The  individual  Victoria  is  referent  to  Edward  VII,
George  V,  etc. ; and  is  relatum  to  the  Duke  of  Kent,  George  II,  etc.

We  shall  now  consider  those  properties  of  relations  that  are
important  for  inference.

Symmetry,  A relation  R is  symmetrical  when  R ==  fe.  Thus,
if  x^y,  then  y'Rx,  For  example,  cousin  of,  spouse  of,  equal  to,
different  from,  brother  or  sister  of,

A relation  R is  asymmetrical  when  R is  incompatible  with  R.
Thus,  rt  xRy,  then  not  y'Rx,  For  example,  father  of,  wife  of,
before,  darker  than,  greater  than.

A relation  R is  non-symmetrical  when  R is  neither  equal  to
nor  incompatible  with  R.  For  example,  implication,  loves,  sister  of.

Transitiveness,  The  property  of  transitiveness  is  a property  of
pairs  of  terms  with  reference  to  some  relation  R.

A relation  R is  transitive  when  it  is  such  that  ii  xRy,  and  yRz,
then  xRz,  For  example,  precedes,  ancestor  of,  equal  to,  exactly
contemporary  with,

A relation  R is  intransitive  when  it  is  such  that  if  a?  R y and
yRz,  then  never  xRz,  For  example,  next  to,  spouse  of,  father  of,
contradictory,

• A relation  R is  non-transitive  when  it  is  such  that  il  xRy  and
yRz,  then  sometimes  xRz,  sometimes  not  xRz.  For  example,
sister  of,  overlapping  in  time  with,  cheating,  friend  of,  different  from.

The  properties  of  symmetry  and  transitiveness,  and  their  opposites,
are  independent.  Hence,  if  R be  any  relation,  R may  be  (i)  transi-
tive and  symmetrical;  (ii)  transitive  and  asymmetrical;  (in)  in-
transitive and  symmetrical;  (iv)  intransitive  and  asymmetrical.
Relations  that  are  both^ransitive  and  symmetrical  have  the  formal
properties  of  equality,  is  a third  imnortant  property  that

belongs  to  such  relations!  T'his  property  has  been  called
ness  A ItlSay^Fe' defined  ai^follows:  A relation  is  reflexive  when
^Peano,  Bevue  du  Mathimatiques,  VII,  p.  22.


THE  GENERALIZATION  OF  LOGIC


169


it  holds  between  a term  and  itself.  The  relation  of  identity  is  reflexive.
Ir^TTar^term  'x  is  identical  with_a;.  A relation  may  be
symmetrical  without  being  reflexive^  for  exanipIer"ipQ^ge  off  THr.
Russell  has'‘poiniSe3r"ou^  that  can  be  said  to

be  reflexive  without  limitation  is  the  relation  of  identity.  The
properties  of  reflexiveness,  symmetry,  transitiveness  are  the  formal
properties  that  belong  to  the  relations  of  identity  and  equality.
Any  relations  that  have  these  properties  are  of  the  formal  nature
of  identity,  for  example,  coimplication,  coincidence.^

A relation  that  has  the  properties  both  of  transitiveness  and
asymmetry  has  also  a third  property,  to  which  C.  S.  Peirce  has
given  the  name  aliorehtive.  It  may  be  defined  as  follows : A
plation  B is  aliorelatwe  when  it  is  such  that  no  term  has  E to
Itself;  for  example,  greater  iEan,  successor  of.  It  is  oB^ous”l}Eat’“
"^symmetrical  ^relaS^s  are  always  aliorelative,  but,  as  we  have
just  seen,  the  converse  is  not  always  the  case,  since  spouse  of  is
Symmetrical  and  also  aliorelative.  But  if  a relation  is  both  transitive
and  aliorelative  it  is  also  asymmetrical.  Mr.  Russell  has  introduced
the  phrases  contained  in  diversity  ” or  ''  implying  diversity  ” as
synonyms  for  aliorelative

Connexity.  Given  any  relation  R and  the  field  of  R,  it  does
not  follow  that  any  two  terms  of  the  field  are  related  either  by
R or  For  example,  given  the  relation  parent  of  and  the  field
human  beings,  it  does  not  follow  that  of  any  two  terms  one  must
be  parent  of  the  other.  But  when  this  does  follow  the  relation
is  said  to  be  connected.  Connexity  may  be  defined  as  follows :
a relation  R is  connected  when  given  any~W<r”^m^'37Ss.  field,
vix.  X x'Ry  or  a;  y').

^^^^=ArTelatio3utEat  i¥ transit^^^^^^  is^a 'imoT

relation.  For  example,  the  relation  greater  than  limited  to  the  field
natural  numbers  is  connected,  since  of  any  two  numbers  one  is
greater  than  the  other.  The  relation  greater  than  is  asymmetrical
and  transitive.  It  suffices  to  generate  the  series  1,  2,  3,  4.  . . .
The  three  properties  of  asymmetry,  transitiveness  and  connexity
are  independent,  since  a relation  may  have  any  two  of  them  without
the  third.

We  may  obtain  another  and  iudependent  classification  of  dyadic
relations  based  upon  the  number  of  terms  to  which  a given  term
may  stand  in  the  relation  R.  It  will  be  easiest  to  see  this  first
in  the  case  of  familiar  examples  of  relations.  If  A is  father  of
B,  there  may  be  many  terms  other  than  B to  which  A stands  in
the  same  relation.  If  A is  twin  of  B,  there  is  no  other  term  to
which  A stands  in  the  same  relation.  If  A is  servant  of  B there

^Cf,  Bussell,  Principles  of  Mathematics,  §209.

*See  Int.  Math.  Phil.,  p.  32.


170  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

may  be  otber  terms  tLan  A wHcb  stand  in  that  relation  to  B.  If
A loves  B there  may  be  other  terms  than  A which  stand  in  that
relation  to  B,  and  there  may  be  other  terms  than  B to  which  A
stands  in  the  same  relation.  We  shall  accordingly  distinguish  four
kinds  of  relations,  defined  as  follows :

(1)  Many-many.  The  relation  R may  be  such  that  if  jrR^/,
then  there  may  also  be  m'Ry,  n'Ry  , . . and  also  x'Rl),  a? R c
. . . For  example,  of  latitude  north  of,  subjects  of  Emperors.

(2)  Many-one.  The  relation  R may  be  such  that  when  the
referent  is  given  the  relatum  is  determined,  but  there  may  be  many
referents.  Such  a relation  is  many-one.  For  example,  servant  of
Queen  Elizabeth  ; wife  of  the  Sultan.

(3)  One-many.  A one-many  relation  is  the  converse  of  a many-
one  relation,  e.g.  sovereign  of  is  a one-many  relation,  subject  of  is
a many-one  relation.

(4)  One-one.  A relation  R may  be  such  that  the  selection  of
the  referent  uniquely  determines  the  selection  of  the  relatum,  and
conversely.  There  may  be  many  members  of  the  domain  of  R
and  many  members  of  the  converse  domain,  but  the  selection  of
a given  term  (either  referent  or  relatum)  determines  which  term
must  be  selected  to  stand  in  the  relation  R (either  as  relatum  or
as  referent).  For  example,  eldest  son  of  a father,  married  to  one
spouse.  One-one  relations  may  be  regarded  as  a special  case  of
one-many  relations.  They  are  of  very  great  importance  in  the
exact  sciences.  Correlations  are  one-one  relations.  It  will  be
remembered  that  counting  is  a process  of  establishing  a one-one
relation  between  a set  of  objects  and  the  numerals.^

Definite  descriptions  involve  one-many  relations,  e.g,  “The
father  of  Oliver  Cromweir’,  “The  teacher  of  Socrates “The
Man  in  the  Iron  Mask  “ The  author  of  Waverley  ”,  Each  of  these
descriptions  implies  that  there  is  one,  and  only  one,  term  that  is
referent  of  the  relation.  Thus  Oliver  CromweE  could  have  only
one  father,  but  his  father  might  have  many  children.  If,  however,
there  is  only  one  relatum,  then  the  relation  is  one-one.  Thus  one-
one  relations  are  a special  case  of  one-many  relations,  e.g.  “ The
author  of  Waverley  ”,  “ The  Man  in  the  Iron  Mask  ”,  It  should
be  observed  that  the  relation  of  object  to  description  is  not  one-one,

^ These  relations  might  he  defined  as  follows :

(1)  R is  many-many  when  both  the  domain  and  the  converse  domain  contain
more  than  one  member,  and  the  selection  of  a term  from  either  does  not  deter-
mine the  selection  of  the  other  term.

(2)  Ris  wa%^-<mewhen  the  selection  of  a term  from  the  domain  determines
the  selection  of  the  term  from  the  converse  domain,  but  not  conversely,

(3)  R is  one-many  when  the  selection  of  a term  from  the  converse-domain
determines  the  selection  of  the  term  from  the  domain,  but  not  conversely.

(4)  R is  one-one  when  both  R and  S are  one-many.


THE  GENERALIZATIOK  OP  LOGIC


171


since  there  are  many  correct  descriptions  of  the  same  object,  e.g.

The  chief  speaker  in  Plato’s  dialogue  The  EepuUic  ”,  The  philo-
sopher who  drank  the  hemlock  ”,  The  husband  of  Xantippe  ”,
all  describe  Socrates.  The  relation  farent  of  is  not  a one-many
relation  since,  if  x is  parent  of  then  x may  be  either  father  or
mother  of  y,  so  that  two  terms  stand  in  that  relation  to  y.  If,
however,  the  referents  be  limited  to  males,  then  the  relation  is
one-many ; if  the  relatum  be  now  limited  to  eldest  son,  the  relation
is  one-one.  It  should  be  observed  that  mathematical  functions  result
from  one-many  relations,  e.g.  the  cosine  of  x,  the  logarithm  of  y.

We  have  now  to  consider  the  combination  of  two  relations.
Suppose  there  is  a relation  E such  that  xE>y,  and  a relation  S such
that  ySz,  then  there  is  a relation  between  x and  z compounded
out  of  the  two  relations  R and  S.  Such  a mode  of  combination  is
called  relative  multiplication  and  the  relation  thus  obtained  is  called
the  relative  product  of  R and  S.  We  may  give  the  following  definition  :
Given  any  two  relations  R and  S and  a term  y such  that  x'Ry  and
y^Z',  then  the  relation  that  holds  between  x and  z is  the  relative
product  of  R and  S.  Ru^ell  symbolizes  the  relative  product  ,oi
R and  S by  R | S.  E and  S are  called  the  factors  of  their  relative
product.  The  relative  product  of  sister  of  and  father  of  is  paternal
aunt.  If  the  order  of  the  factors  be  reversed  a different  relation
may  be  obtained.  That  is  to  say,  the  relative  product  is  not  as
such  commutative.  For  example,  if  we  reverse  the  order  of  the
factors  given  above,  we  obtain  father  of,  which  is  the  relative  pro-
duct of  father  of  and  sister  of.  The  converse  of  a relative  product
is  obtained  by  reversing  the  order  of  the  factors  and  then  sub-
stituting their  converses.  That  is,  (STS)  = S | R.  For  example,
the  converse  of  the  relative  product  of  husband  of  and  daughter-
in-law,  is  father  or  mother  of.

Square  of  a relation.  The  relative  product  of  R and  R is  the
square  of  R.  That  is,  R | R = E^.  For  example,  the  relative
product  of  father  and  father  is  paternal  grandfather.  The  converse
of  the  square  of  father  is  son^s  son.  The  square  of  ancestor  is  ancestor.

Containing  or  being  implied  by.  A relation  R contains,  or  is
implied  by  a relation  S,  when  it  is  such  that  i£  S holds,  R holds.
It  may  be  noted  that  a transitive  relation  contains  its  square  and
that  the  square  of  a transitive  aliorelative  relation  is  asymmetrical.

So  far  we  have  been  concerned  only  with  dyadic  relations  It
is  possible  to  classify  triadic,  tetradic  and  other  polyadic  relations
in  accordance  with  the  definitions  we  have  given,  provided  that
suitable  modifications  are  made.  We  cannot,  however,  discuss
these  definitions  here.  It  must  sufiB.ce  to  point  out  that  R(ct,  b,  c,
d . . .)  will  be  symmetrical  if  the  order  of  the  terms  can  be  changed
without  altering  the  relation  E,  i.e*  E(a,  6,  c,  d . • = R(6,  c,  d.


172


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


a , . etc.  TMs  would  be  the  case  with,  heing  points  on  the  same
straight  line,  provided  that  no  other  relation  were  involved.  R(a,  6,
c,  d)  would  be  non-symmetrical  if  the  interchanging  of  the  terms
involved  alteration  in  R,  e.g.  a paid  h £2  for  a week’s  wages

Transitivity  in  the  case  of  polyadic  relations  is  replaced  by
elimination*  We  shall  be  concerned  with  this  property  in  the  next
section.

§3.  THE  LOGICAL  PROPERTIES  OP  DEDUCTIVE
RELATIONS

It  is  convenient  to  distinguish  at  the  outset  three  forms  of
deduction  all  of  which  have  sometimes  been  regarded  as  ultimately
reducible  to  syllogistic  form,  with  or  without  the  addition  of  an-
other premiss.  These  are  (1)  the  implicational  syllogism,  (2)  the
subsumptive  syllogism,  (3)  the  a fortiori  form.  The  traditional
categorical  syllogism  is  subsumptive.  The  implicational  syllogism
is  traditionally  known  as  the  ''  pure  hypothetical  syllogism

These  three  forms  may  be  expressed  as  follows :

(1)  Let  p,  q,  r,  stand  for  propositions.

If  p implies  q
and  q implies  r,
then  p implies  r.

(2)  Let  a,  y,  stand  for  classes ; X for  an  individual.

There  are  two  forms  of  the  traditional  categorical  syllogism

only  one  of  which  is  subsumptive.

(i)  If  a is  included  in  jS  (ii)  If  a is  included  in  ^

and  /?  is  included  in  y,  and  X is  an  a,

then  a is  included  in  y.  then  X is  a /S.

(3)  The  relational  form  (of  which  the  a fortiori  is  a special  case)
will  be  expressed  by  two  examples.

(i)  If  A = B (ii)  If  A is  hotter  than  B

and  B ==  C,  and  B is  hotter  than  C,

then  A = C.  then  A is  hotter  than  C.

We  have  now  to  inquire  as  to  what  are  the  logical  properties  of
the  connecting  relations  in  each  of  these  cases.

Implies  has  the  properties  : reflexive,  non-symmetrical,  transitive.

Equals  has  the  properties : reflexive,  symmetrical,  transitive.

Is  included  in,  is  hotter  than  have  the  properties  : asymmetrical,^
transitive.

With  the  exception  of  2 (ii),  the  coimecting  relation  in  each  of
these  forms  is  transitive.  It  is  upon  this  property  of  transitivity
that  the  deduction  depends.  In  each  of  these  cases  the  conclusion

^ We  stall  see  later  that  it  is  possible  to  interpret  the  relation  of  inclusion  as
nott-symmetricaL


THE  GENERALIZATION  OE  LOGIC


173


establishes  a relation  between  the  first  and  the  third  of  three  terms ;
the  second  term  in  each  case  stands  in  the  given  relation  to  one
of  the  terms  and  in  the  converse  relation  to  the  other  term.^  Since
the  relation  is  transitive  the  intermediate  term  can  be  eliminated.
This  property  is  consequently  of  great  importance  in  deduction.
Whenever  premisses  are  connected  by  transitive  relations  chains  of
deduction  are  possible.  Given  that  the  premisses  are  true,  then  the
intermediate  term,  or  terms,  can  be  eliminated  and  the  conclusion
can  be  asserted.  There  is  not  the  slightest  reason  for  limiting  the
number  of  intermediate  terms  to  one,  as  is  done  by  the  traditional
Logicians.  William  James  has  graphically  expressed  the  principle
in  virtue  of  which  such  elimination  is  possible  as  the  "‘axiom  of
skipped  intermediaries  He  says,  " symbohcally  we  might  write
it  a <^b  c^c  c^d  . . . and  say,  that  any  number  of  intermediaries
may  be  expunged  without  obliging  us  to  alter  anything  in  what
remains  written  It  is  in  accordance  with  this  principle  that  the
conclusion  of  a Sorites  is  obtained,  and  that  the  middle  term  in  a
traditional  subsumptive  syllogism  is  eliminated.®  It  is,  therefore,
quite  unnecessary  to  split  up  a Sorites  into  a series  of  three-termed
syllogisms.

• We  have  now  to  consider  the  form  If  a is  included  in  f and  X
is  an  a,  then  X is  a The  relation  expressed  by  is  an  a was  con-
founded by  the  traditional  Logicians  with  the  subsumption,  or
inclusion,  relation.  But  we  have  abeady  seen  that  the  relation  in
which  an  individual  stands  to  the  class  of  which  it  is  a member
is  quite  different  from  the  relation  of  inclusion  between  classes.
Peano  symbolized  this  relation  by  e.  Thus  “ X a a ” is  to  be  read
“ X IS  a member  of  the  class  a or  more  shortly,  “ X is  an  a ’h
The  relation  e is  non-transitive.  Taking  this  relation  as  indefinable,
we  see  that  whatever  can  be  asserted  of  every  member  of  a class
can  be  asserted  of  any  specified  member.  This  is  a fundamental
principle  of  inference,  called  by  Mr.  Johnson  the  applicative  prin-
ciple, ^ It  permits  the  substitution  of  a given,  definite  individual  for  a
variable.  If  we  express  2 (ii)  in  the  form.  If  every  member  of  a is
a member  of  ^ and  X is  a member  of  a,  then  X is  a member  of  we  see
thatthe  validity  of  this  form  rests  upon  this  principle.®  It  is  clearly]
different  from  2 (i)  with  which  it  has  been  traditionally  confused.  *

We  see,  then,  that  the  subsumptive  syEogism  is  a simple  example

1 In  the  case  of  the  relation  equals  xR^y  = yRx,

^Principles  of  Psychology,  VoL  II,  p.  646.

^ The  property  of  transitivity,  as  we  have  defined  it  for  dyadic  relations,  is
only  a special  case  of  the  conditions  that  make  elimination  in  general  possible.
(See  Boole,  Laws  of  Thought,  Chap.  VII ; cf.  also  J.  N.  Keynes,  F,L,,  §§  489-94.)

Logic,  II,  p.  10.

® In  the  development  of  a logical  system  substitution  plays  a fundamental  part.
Ci  §4  below.


174


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


of  the  possibility  of  elimination  of  intermediaries  connected  by  a
transitive  relation.  The  failure  of  the  traditional  Logicians  to
apprehend  the  natme  and  importance  of  the  logical  property  of
transitivity  concealed  from  them  the  characteristic  in  virtue  of
which  such  deduction  was  possible.  They  consequently  failed  to
see  that  the  so-called  a fortiori  argument  is  valid  in  virtue  of  the
characteristic  which  renders  the  subsumptive  syllogism  valid,
although  it  cannot  be  twisted  into  the  subsumptive  form.  For
the  same  reason  they  were  content  to  rest  all  deduction  upon  Aris-
totle’s dictum  de  omni  and  were  thus  led  to  their  absurd  limitation
of  deduction  to  a single  form.

§4.  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  A DEDUCTIVE  SYSTEM  ^

A system  consists  of  elements  standing  in  certain  relations.  For
example,  the  solar  system  is  a system  consisting  of  certain  elements,
viz.  the  sun,  the  planets  and  their  satellites,  standing  in  certain
relations.  A social  organization  is  a system  consisting  of  social
classes  related  in  a certain  way.  In  any  given  system  the  fact  that
an  element  stands  in  a given  relation  can  be  expressed  by  a proposi-
tion. Thus  the  relative  positions  of  the  earth,  Jupiter,  and  the  sun,
can  be  expressed  by  the  proposition  The  earth  is  between  Jupiter  and
the  sun.  Given  any  system,  the  relation  of  its  elements  can  be
expressed  in  a set  of  related  propositions,  A deductive  system  is  a
special  kind  of  system  in  which  the  elements  are  propositions  and  the
relations  between  the  elements  are  logical  relations.  In  this  Chapter
we  shall  be  concerned  only  with  deductive  systems.  The  student
will  have  some  familiarity  with  the  most  highly  developed  of  such
systems,  deductive  mathematics.  But  he  may  not  have  much
insight  into  the  nature  of  the  system.  It  has  commonly  been  sup-
posed that  such  systems  are  demonstrations  of  complex  propositions
from  simple  axioms.  These  axioms  were  supposed  to  be  self-evident,
that  is,  indubitably  true.  But  they  were  thought  indubitable  only
because  they  were  not  doubted.  Self-evidence  is  a relative  notion.
What  we  are  able  to  doubt  depends  upon  our  previous  knowledge  and
our  mental  capacity.  For  centuries  Euclid’s  system  of  geometry  was
supposed  to  be  based  upon  axioms  which  were  self-evident,  or  indis-
putably true,  from  which  all  his  theorems  followed  deductively.
This  belief  is  now  known  to  be  mistaken.  The  elaboration  of  non-
Euclidean  geometries  has  shown  that  geometrical  systems  can  be
constructed  that  a«e  based  upon  other  axioms  than  Euclid’s  and
that  lead  to  different  results.  The  careful  examination  of  the  nature
of  these  axioms  and  of  the  connexion  between  them  and  the  resultant
theorems  revealed  the  fact  that  Euclid’s  theorems  do  not  follow

^For  a different  view  of  the  nature  of  deductive  systems  the  student
should  consult  Appendix  C.


THE  GENERALIZATION  OP  LOGIC


175


from  h-is  axioms,  but  require  the  assumption  of  further  axioms  not
recognized  by  Euclid  himself.  Hence,  we  find  it  is  important  to
ask  what  an  axiom  is.-cWe  cannot  answer  that  an  axiom  is  a pro-
position that  is  necessarily  true,  for  we  do  not  know  what  necessarily
true  means,  nor  does  the  use  of  an  axiom  in  a dedu^ive  systSi
d^end  upon  its  being  true.  It  is  probably  because  Euclid’s  axioms
were  regarded  as  descriptive  of  the  space  of  our  external  world
that  they  were  supposed  to  be  both  self-evident  and  true.  Now\
that  this  assumption  is  rejected  we  have  further  reason  to  douby
their  self-evidence.

^ ..^f-evidence  seems  to  combine  two  elements,  obviousness  and
logical  priority.  Obviousness  is  a matter  of  fanfiliarity  and  point

of is  not  a notion  useful  for  logic.  It  might,  however,

be  supposed  that  we  could  define  axioms  in  terms  of  logical  priority.
Hence,  axioms  would  be  propositions  logically  prior  to  any  other
propositions.  But  logical  priority  is  not  absolute.  The  notion  of
logical  priority  is  obscurer  Its  discussion  has  been  encumber^
with  difficult  and  dubious  metaphysical  assumptions.  We  can
say  that  in  a deductive  system  a proposition  f is  logically  prior  to
another  proposition  q if,  and  only  if,  p is  logically  simpler  than  q.
We  have  now  to  inquire  what  is  meant  by  saying  that  p is  loqicalh
simpler  than  g.  If  we  can  assume  p without  assuming  q but  cannot
assume  q without  assuming  p,  then  is  logically  simpler  than  q.
Buf^'wEat  we  assume  depends  upon  our  starting-point.  Hence,
logical  simplicity  is  also  a relative  notion.  In  the  begiiirojQg  of
the* construction  of  a system  certain  concepts  are  taken  as  undefined
and  intelligible  without  definition.  These  are  called  primitive
concepts^  Certain  propositions  are  taken  as  undemonstrated.
These  are  called  primitive  propositions.^  We  have  to  substitute
for  the  vague  notion  of  logical  priority  the  notion  of  undefined
concepts  and  imdemonstrated  propositions.  But  we  do  not  say
that  these  concepts  are  indefinwhle,  or  that  these  propositions  are
indemonstrable.  It  is  as  meaningless  to  ask  whether  a given  concept
is  indefinable  and  a given  proposition  indemonstrable  without
specifying  the  system  within  which  they  are  being  used  as  it  would
be  to  ask  whether  the  earth  moves  without  specifying  the  system
of  reference.  We  must  not  commit  the  absurdity  of  defining  a
primitive  proposition  as  a logically  prior  proposition.  We  desire
to  replace  the  latter  notion  by  the  former.  By  saying  that  a pro-
position is  primitive  we  mean  that  it  is  assumed,*  and  affords  a basis
for  demonstration  although  it  is  not  itself  demonstrated.  It  is
thus  in  the  position  of  an  axiom,  or  a postulate ; but  it  is  not  to  be
'tegarded  as  axiomatic  in  the  old  sense,  i.e.  as  necessarily  true.

^ The  terms  “ primitive  concept  ” and  ‘‘primitive  proposition  ” are  due  to
Peano.


176


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


A primitive  concept  and  a primitive  proposition  are,  then,
primitive  only  in  relation  to  a given  system.  The  selection  of  these
primitive  notions  and  primitive  propositions  determines  a given
deductive  system.  yWhat  is  a theorem,  or  demonstrated  proposition,
in  one  system  may  be  a primitive  proposition  in  another ; what
is  defined  in  one  system  may  be  undefined  in  another.  CHence,
it  is  meaningless  to  say  that  a given  primitive  proposition  is  indis-
pensahk)  or  logically  presupposed  by  other  propositions^  This
may  be  made  clearer  by  considering  the  logical  relation  of  physics
and  mathematics.  There  is  a sense  in  which  physics  presupposes
mathematics,  since  physics  cannot  be  developed  without  reference
to  mathematics,  whereas  mathematics  can  be  developed  without
reference  to  physics.  But  it  would  be  a mistake  to  argue  from  this
that  mathematics  is  in  an  unqualijied  sense  logically  prior  to,  or
necessarily  presupposed  by,  physics.  To  say  that  p is  necessarily
presupposed  by  q would  be  to  say  that  q implies  p,  i.e.  that  the
falsity  of  p follows  from  the  falsity  of  q.  But  this  is  not  the  case.
Physics  does  not  imply  mathematics;  it  might  be  false  though
mathematics  were  not.  Physics  might  be  true  even  though  there
were  no  general  laws  of  mathematics.^  Similarly,  the  special
sciences  presuppose  the  principles  of  logic ; but  these  principles
are  not  implied  by  the  special  sciences.  Mathematical  propositions
are  verified  inductively  in  so  far  as  physics,  deduced  by  means  of
these  propositions,  is  true.

It  might  be  thought  that  the  principles  of  logic  provide  an
instance  of  propositions  that  are  necessarily  true  because  implied
by  all  deductive  systems.  But  this  would  be  a mistake.  They
are  presupposed  only  in  the  sense  in  which  mathematics  is  pre-
supposed by  physics.  To  argue  from  this  to  an  unqualified  pre-
supposition would  be  to  argue  from  the  particular  to  tETgeneral.
It  mayT)e  admitted  that  logical  principles  are  assumed  in  all  deduc-
tion. But  we  have  first  to  assume  propositions  asserting  the  possi-
bility of  deduction.  The  necessity  of  logical  principles  is  nothing
but  the  necessity  of  constructing  systems.  The  construction  of
such  systems  may  be  the  expression  of  the  thinking  of  rational
beings.  But  this  would  not  establish  the  necessity.  We  do  not
intend  to  dispute  this  necessity  but  to  deny  that  any  significance
can  be  attributed  to  the  notion  of  absolutely  necessary  principles
and  absolutely  indemonstrame  propo^ions.  It  follows  that  no
deductive  system  can  be  regarded  as  demonstrating  necessarily

^ Of  course,  unless  some  general  laws  of  mathematics  had  been  assumed,
scientists  would  not  have  been  able  to  build  up  the  system  known  as  physics.
But  the  fact  that  physical  propositions  can  be  verified  (even  assuming  this
[verification  to  be  exact)  does  not  enable  us  to  deduce  from  such  propositions  any
jgeneral  laws  of  mathematics.  We  might  express  this  by  saying  that  the
Articular  does  not  imply  the  general.


THE  GENERALIZATION  OE  LOGIC


177


true  propositions  by  means  of  necessary  primitive  propositions  or
axioms.  The  propositions  of  a deductive  system  are  established
as  true  only  by  means  of  inductive  verification.  Such  verification
is  never  complete ; it  could  not  amount  to  demonstration.  Nor
are  those  propositions  which  serve  to  verify  the  system  inductively
more  obvious,  more  self-evident,  than  the  propositions  from  which
they  are  deduced.  For  example,  in  the  rigorous  deductive  system
developed  in  Princi'pia  the  proposition

requires  more  than  a volume  for  its  demonstration.  “^tis

proposition  does  not  become  more  obvious  as  a result  of  the  demon-
stration. \ Indeed  some  of  the  axioms  employed  in  the  demonstra-
tion may  well  be  doubted.  The  demonstration,  however,  helps  to
verify  the  assumptions  upon  which  the  deduction  is  based.-

If  the  rigorous  development  of  a deductive  system  does  not
lead  to  the  discovery  of  indisputable  premisses  by  means  of  which
indisputable  conclusions  can  be  proved;  if,  on  the  contrary,  a
complicated  deduction  is  required  in  order  to  demonstrate  obvious
truisms,  it  may  be  thought  that  such  a deductive  system  has  very
little  significance.  That,  however,  would  be  a mistake.  It  is  not
as  a method  of  froof  that  the  deductive  development  is  important
but  as  a method  of  analysis.  The  method  of  Princi'pia  Mathematica
is  not  pursued /or  sahe  of  proving  ijhsjt  mxn  = nx^^but  in  order
to  analyse  the  nature  of  the  entities  involved,  to  exhibit  their
relations  in  an  orderly  manner,  and  to  ascertain  what  exactly  can
be  demonstrated.  It  thus  attempts  to  discover  all  the  axioms
that  are  employed,  and  to  show  which  of  these  must  be  assumed
as  primitive  propositions,  and  which  can  be  demonstrated  from
these  ; then  all  the  consequences  that  follow  from  the  initial  axioms
and  concepts  are  deduced.  It  starts,  then,  from  a generally  accepted
system,  for  example,  arithmetic  or  geometry,  and  proceeds  back-
wards, analysing  the  premisses  employed.  It  thus  involves  a
rigorous  analysis  of  the  fundamental  notions.  In  the  course  of  this
analytic  procedure  it  has  been  discovered  that  ordinary  mathe-
matics employs  axioms  that  can  be  deduced,  within  the  system,
from  logically  simpler  propositions.  It  has  also  been  shown  that
many  proofs  in  traditional  systems  have  been  lacking  in  rigour.
An  obvious  example  of  this  is  afforded  by  Euclid’s  system.  A
simple  illustration  must  suffice.  The  first  proposition  cannot  be

- 1 Proposition  * 113-27.  (Op.  cit.,  H,  p.  103.)

2 Cf.  op.  cit.,  I,  Preface  : “ In  mathematics  the  greatest  degree  of  self-evi-
dence is  usually  not  to  be  found  quite  at  the  beginning,  but  at  some  later  point ;
hence,  the  early  deductions,  until  they  reach  this  point,  give  reasons  rather  for
believing  the  premisses  because  true  consequences  foUovr  from  them,  than  for
beheving  the  consequences  because  they  follow  from  the  premisses  ” (p.  v).
Cf.  below,  p.  486.

12


178


A MODEKN  INTKODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


established  by  means  of  the  axioms.^  In  constructing  an  equilateral
triangle  on  a given  base  Euclid  assumes  that  the  two  circles  used
will  intersect.  But  his  system  does  not  contain  an  explicit  axiom
to  that  efiect,  so  that  the  demonstration  fails.  That  it  seemed
satisfactory  to  Euclid  is  no  doubt  due  to  the  fact  that  he  constructed
figures  on  a plane  surface,  which  gave  him  the  required  result.
But  the  use  of  figures  involves  an  appeal  to  intuition ; hence  the
deduction  is  not  logical.  It  gives  obviousness  but  not  demonstra-
tion, In  constructing  a deductive  system  we  do  not  ask  whether  a
given  result  will  be  obtained  if  we  construct  something  perceptible  ;
we  ask  whether  the  proposition /oKow /mm  the  axioms  and  definitions
alone.  If  the  axioms  are  true,  then  the  demonstrated  propositions
will  be  true.  But  the  correctness  of  the  demonstration  is  inde-
pendent of  the  truth  or  falsity  of  the  axioms.  It  is,  indeed,  mean-
ingless to  ask  whether  the  axioms,  or  primitive  propositions,  are
true.  They  can  be  so  used  as  to  lead  to  results  that  can  be  inter-
preted in  such  a manner  as  to  make  them  true,  or  false,  ^ut  apart
from  interpretation  the  question  of  truth  does  not  arise^

Since  the  axioms  are  not  given  as  true  in  the  sense  that  they
are  supposed  to  be  obtained  by  intuition,  i.e.  by  appeal  to  the
immediate  apprehension  of  perceivable  entities  and  their  relations,'
the  choice  of  the  initial  propositions  of  a deductive  system  is|
unlimited.  In  practice  the  selection  of  the  primitive  concepts
and  the  primitive  propositions  is  determined  by  the  starting-point.
As  indicated  above,  the  actual  starting-point  will  not  be  logically
primitive  but  will  be  dependent  upon  the  acceptance  of  some  gener-
ally recognized  system.  The  analysis  of  this  system  will  lead  to  the
assumption  that  a set  of  elements  have  certain  properties.  In
this  way  the  primitive  concepts  wiU  be  obtained.  Certain  relations
win  be  assumed  to  hold  between  these  elements.  These  will  yield
the  primitive  propositions.  Thus,  instead  of  asserting  “ This
element  A will  have  the  property  0 ”,  we  assume  the  hypothesis,
‘‘  If  the  element  A has  the  property  0 ”,  and  so  on.  Proceeding
in  this  way  we  prove  that  such  and  such  a set  of  elements  have
the  properties  required  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  system  with
which  we  are  concerned,  for  example,  Euclidean  geometry.  Different
sets  of  primitive  propositions  may  yield  results  that  admit  of  the
same  interpretation.  But  the  correctness  of  the  demonstration  is,
we  have  seen,  independent  of  this  interpretation.  Hence,  we  are
led  to  regard  the  primitive  concepts  as  symbols  which  are  not  defined  j
but  upon  which  we  can  operate  by  means  of  the  primitive  pro-)

^ Euclid’s  first  Proposition  is  a Problem : To  describe  an  equilateral  triangle
on  a given  finite  straight  line.  The  method  of  construction  is,  given  the  straight
line  AB,  to  describe  a circle  with  centre  A,  radius  AB ; and  another  circle  with
centre  B,  radius  BA,  Euclid  assumes  that  these  circles  will  intersect.


THE  GENERALIZATION  OF  LOGIC


179


positions.  Tlie  lack  of  a determined,  interpretation  is  conapensated
for  by  tbe  increased  generality  of  the  system.  The  system  is  purely
formal,  independent  of  any  matter  of  fact  to  which  it  may  be  applic-
able. Such  a system  provides  a deductive  scheme  which  can  be
applied  to  various  objects  provided  that  they  are  capable  of  verifying
the  primitive  concepts  and  primitive  propositions.  Since  the  symbols
do  not  stand  for  determined  objects  but  for  any  objects  having
certain  formal  fro  forties,  the  utmost  degree  of  generality  is  attained.^

The  selection  of  the  primitive  propositions  is  not  purely  arbitrary.
They  must  be  both  sufficient  to  jdeid  the  required  results  and  mutually
consistent.  A set  of  primitive  concepts  and  primitive  propositions
win  be  sufficient  if  it  is  possible  to  de&ie  aU  the  concepts  and  to
demonstrate  all  the  propositions  that  occur  in  the  system  in  terms
of  these  initial  concepts  and  by  means  of  these  initial  propositions.
To  establish  the  mutual  consistency  of  the  initial  propositions  it
is  necessary  to  interpret  the  undefined  concepts  in  order  to  ascertain
whether  the  primitive  propositions  will  be  true  when  so  interpreted.
Such  an  interpretation  yields  an  existence  theorem,  which  asserts
that  there  are  objects  having  the  properties  laid  down  in  the  defini-
tions.^ It  is  further  desicable  that  the  primitive  propositions  should
jbe  indefendenL  A primitive  proposition  is  independent  when  it
cannot  be  logically  derived  from  any  of  the  other  primitive  pro-
positions, or  from  any  combination  of  them.  To  establish  the
independence  of  the  primitive  propositions  it  is  necessary  to  select
each  in  turn  and  to  show  that  the  remaining  primitive  propositions
can  be  combined  with  the  contradictory  of  the  selected  proposition
so  as  to  yield  a consistent  set.  If  it  is  possible  to  interpret  the
undefined  concepts  in  such  a way  that  all  but  one  of  the  primitive
propositions  will  be  verified,  then  that  proposition  is  independent
of  the  rest.  The  ideal  is  to  select  the  fewest  possible  number  of
primitive  propositions.  Such  a selection  satisfies  an  aesthetic  pre-
ference for  elegance  and  simplicity.  A clear  distinction  between
a primitive  proposition  and  a theorem,  i.e.  a proposition  demon-
strated by  means  of  primitive  propositions,  depends  upon  the(p£?m-
plete  independence  of  the  set  of  primitive  propositions.)  It  is  possible

^ Cf.  Poincar^,  Science  et  HypotMse,  p.  32 : ‘ Les  matli6inaticiens  n’etudient
pas  des  objets,  mais  des  relations  entre  les  objets ; il  leur  est  done  indifferent  de
remplacer  ces  objets  par  d’antres,  pourvu  que  les  relations  ne  changent  pas.  La
matiere  ne  leur  import©  pas,  la  forme  seule  les  interesse.’

2 Cf.  WMtebead,  The  Axioms  of  Projective  Geometry,  p.  3 : ‘ According  to  tbe
logical  “ Law  of  Contradiction  ”,  a set  of  entities  cannot  satisfy  inconsistent
axioms.  Thus  tbe^  existence  theorem  for  a set  of  axioms  proves  their  consist-
ency. Seemingly  this  is  the  only  possible  method  of  proof  of  consistency.
But  the  only  rigid  proofs  of  existence  th^rems  are  those  which  are  deduc-
tions from  the  premisses  of  formal  Logic.  ( Thus  there  can  be  no  formal  proof
of  the  consistency  of  the  logical  premisses  themselves.’  i


180


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOQIC


that  there  should  be  different  deductive  systems  in  which  the  primi-
tive propositions  of  the  one  are  theorems  in  the  other.  The  charac-
teristics of  any  given  system  will  be  completely  determined  by  the
logical  properties  of  the  relations  given  in  the  primitive  propositions.

It  is  important  to  realize  the  part  played  by  definition  in  a
deductive  system.  From  the  strictly  logical  point  of  view  definition
is  the  assignment  of  a short  name  to  a lengthy  complex  of  ideas
Such  definitions  are  nominal ; what  is  defined  is  a symbol.  From
this  point  of  view  definitions  are  symbolic  conveniences.  But
whenever  the  question  of  interpretation  arises,  then  the  selection
of  the  concepts  to  be  defined  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  since
this  selection  will  determine  the  nature  of  the  system.  ^ Thus,  as
Professor  Whitehead  points  out,  ‘ if  we  abandon  the  strictly  logical
point  of  view,  the  definitions— though  in  form  they  remain  the
mere  assignment  of  names — are  at  once  seen  to  be  the  most  important
part  of  the  subject  To  make  the  selection  best  fitted  to  yield  a
deductive  system  capable  of  important  interpretations  requires
that  insight  which  we  call  mathematical  genius.

The  complete  generality  of  a deductive  system  is  due  to  the
fact  that  the  primitive  propositions  do  not  determine  a unique
set  of  objects.  When  such  deductive  systems  can  be  constructed
it  becomes  possible  to  develop  a part  of  several  abstract  sciences
at  the  same  time.  In  this  way  increase  of  generality  aids  the
development  of  science.  ^

§ 5.  THE  SYSTEM  OF  PROPOSITIONS  AND  CLASSES
The  attempt  to  generalize  logic  led  to  a twofold  development.
An  attempt  was  made,  on  the  one  hand,  to  provide  a calculus  of
reasoning  j on  the  other,  to  analyse  the  logical  relations  proper  to
a deductive  system.  A calculus  is  an  instrument  for  reasoning.
Its  purpose  is  to  economize  thought  by  providing  a mechanical
method  of  obtaining  results,  which  can  then  be  interpreted  in  a
manner  analogous  to  the  way  in  which  a mathematical  equation
can  be  interpreted.  Such  a calculus  may  have  great  value.  To
economize  thought  is  not  to  waste  time.  By  means  of  such  economy
important  discoveries  may  be  made  that  would  otherwise  have
been  beyond  the  reach  of  finite  minds.  ^ As  a matter  of  historical

^ Cf.  Whitehead,  The  Axioms  of  Projective  Geomeirtt.  nn.  2-3

2 Cf.  Chap.  XXn,  p.  441  below.

« For  a further  discussion  of  different  sets  of  primitive  propositions  the
student  may  be  referred  to : Transactions  of  the  American  Mathematical  Society  •

E.  V.  Huntingdon : ‘ Sets  of  Independent  Postulates  for  the  Algebra  of  Logic "
(1904),  and  ‘ A set  of  Postulates  for  Real  Algebra  ’ (1905).

* Any  one  who  doubts  the  value  of  a calculus  may  be  invited  to  answer  the
simple  question : What  people  are  not  the  descendants  of  those  who  are  not  my
ancestors  ? He  Morgan  showed  by  means  of  this  example  how  extremely  diffi-


THE  GENERALIZATION  OF  LOGIC


181


fact  recent  work  on  the  logical  foundations  of  mathematics  has
grown  out  of  the  attempt  to  develop  a logical  calculus.  This
development  has  come  about  in  this  way.  In  order  to  obtain  a
calculus  a well-defined  symbolism  must  be  used.  The  ambiguities
of  ordinary  language  make  it  unfitted  for  this  purpose.  It  is  neces-
sary to  use  ideographic  symbols  which  represent  concepts  and  the
relations  between  them  directly.  In  order  that  conclusions  should
be  drawn  with  the  utmost  economy  of  thought  it  is  necessary  to
use  rules  of  transformation  of  formulae  analogous  to  those  used
in  ordinary  algebra.  In  this  way  an  almost  mechanical  process  of
calculation  takes  the  place  of  reasoning.  Owing  to  the  use  of
exact  rules  of  transformation  and  to  the  use  of  ideographic  symbols
each  of  which  is  well  defined  all  the  premisses  of  the  reasoning  are
explicitly  stated.  Thus  the  development  of  a calculus  prepared
the  way  for  the  analysis  of  deductive  systems.

The  earliest  attempts  to  construct  a logical  calculus  were  based
upon  the  analogy  of  ordinary  mathematical  procedure.  In  con-
sequence, mathematical  analogies  were  stressed  and  mathematical
sjunbols  were  used  to  express  the  relations.  In  some  respects  this
analogy  has  been  unfortunate  but  it  undoubtedly  aided  the  earliest
attempts  of  logicians  to  generalize  the  processes  of  logic  owing  to
their  familiarity  with  the  mathematical  notation.  It  was,  however, .
a hindrance  so  far  as  the  problem  of  analysis  was  concerned.  Thus
Frege  in  his  inquiry  into  the  foundations  of  arithmetic — ^in  which
he  raised  the  question  whether  its  basis  is  empirical  or  purely  logical
— ^was  led  to  lay  greater  stress  on  the  differences  than  on  the  analogies
between  ordinary  mathematics  and  that  generalization  of  logic  which
is  now  commonly  called  mathematical  logic,  A mathematical  theorem
is  a proposition  and  a mathematical  proof  is  a set  of  related  pro-
positions. To  investigate  the  conditions  of  such  proof  is  to  analyse
the  logical  relations  in  order  to  ascertain  theic  properties.  In  this
analysis  subtle  distinctions  have  to  be  made  that  are  frernathematical
— to  use  a convenient  expression  of  Mr.  Johnson’s.  Accordingly
Frege  and  Peano,  to  whom  the  inception  of  modern  work  on  the
foundations  of  mathematics  is  due,  used  ideographic  symbols  of  a
different  shape  from  those  used  in  ordinary  algebra.^  In  this  way
they  emphasized  the  aspect  of  logical  analysis  rather  than  the
aspect  of  calculation.

We  shall  consider  the  calculus  only  in  so  far  as  it  throws  light
upon  the  process  of  the  generalization  of  logic.  As  Mr.  Russell
says,  ‘Symbolic  logic  considered  as  a calculus  has  undoubtedly
much  mt^fest"b5  its  own  account;  but  iiTour  opinion  this  asp^

cult  it  is  to  answer  quite  simple  questions  in  tke  logic  of  relations  without  the
help  of  some  form  of  calculus.

^ For  a further  discussion  of  Frege  and  Feano  see  Chap.  XXV,  § 2.


182  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

has  hitherto  been  too  much  emphasized  at  the  expense  of  the  aspect
in  which  ^^bblio  Idg:ic~ir“ m^^~  tJie  most  eiementar3rpart^f
matEematics,  anST^he  lop;icari3rereqidsite~oFannffiL^^  ^
’“TChSFe  are  obvious  analogies  between  the  system  of  propositions
and  the  system  of  classes.  The  most  fundamental  relation  between
propositions  is  implication  ; the  most  fundamental  relation  between
classes  is  inclusion.  The  logical  properties  of  these  two  relations
are  the  same.  Accordingly,  the  logical  equivalence  of  propositions
and  the  equality  of  classes  have  the  same  formal  properties.  Hence,
up  to  a point,  a system  constructed  out  of  elements  related  by  an
undefined  relation  having  these  properties  could  be  interpreted
either  as  a system  of  propositions  or  as  a system  of  classes.  But
there  are  important  respects  in  which  the  parallelism  breaks  down.
Thus,  as  Mr,  Russell  observes,  " The  symbolic  affinity  of  the  pro-
positional  and  the  class  logic  is  something  of  a snare,  and  we  have
to  decide  which  of  the  two  we  are  to  make  fundamental,’  ^ There
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  propositional  system  is  more  fundamental.
This  can  be  seen  by  considering  the  distinction  between  an  operation
and  a relation.  An  operation  is  a process  performed  upon  some-
thing which  yields  a certain  result.  Thus  if  3 be  added  to  6,  the
operation  of  addition  is  performed  and  yields  the  result  9.  This
result  is  also  a number.  It  could  replace  3,  or  6,  in  any  propositional
function  about  all  numbers.  This  might  be  expressed  by  saying
that  the  result  of  an  operation  can  be  significantly  substituted  in
any  formula  in  which  the  elements  of  the  operation  occur.  Thus,
the  mathematical  symbols  +,  — , X,  symbolize  operations.  In
learning  the  multiplication  tables,  or  in  learning  to  add  our  accounts,
we  are  learning  how  to  perform  operations.  A relation  is  quite
unlike  an  operation.  The  connexion  of  two  elements  by  a relation
does  not  yield  a result  which  is  of  the  same  kind  as  the  elements
related.  For  example,  the  relation  between  classes  yields  a pro-
position^  not  a class.  A deductive  system  is  generated  by  logical
relations,  not  by  operations.

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  system  of  propositions  is  more
fundamental,  we  shall  consider  the  system  of  classes  first.  The
reason  for  this  procedure  is  to  be  found  in  the  historical  develop-
ment of  generalized  logic  out  of  the  calculus.  The  calculus  was
first  worked  out  for  classes  and  was  then  interpreted  so  as  to  apply
to  propositions.  Certain  peculiarities  in  the  way  in  which  deductive
systems  have  been  developed  can  be  more  easily  grasped  by  the
elementary  student  if  it  is  approached  through  the  system  of  classes,
v^he  extension  of  a class  is  a familiar  idea,  so  that  the  extensional
interpretation  of  classes  ofiers  no  great  difficulty.  But  the  exten-
sional interpretation  of  propositions  is  not  easdy  grasped  by  the

^Principia  Matlmiatica,p.  116.  ^ PrincipUs  of  Mathematics^  p.  12,


THE  GENERALIZATION  OF  LOGIC


183


be^imer,  For  this  reason  we  adopt  a metbod  of  treatment  not
wholly  satisfactory  from  the  logical  point  of  view.

In  the  system  of  classes  we  begin  with  the  nnanalysed  concept
of  a class,  i.e.  of  a set  of  individuals,  called  members  of  the  class.
We  make  the  following  assumptions :

(1)  There  is  a class  of  all  possible  individuals,  called  the
‘"universe”.  The  universe  will  be  symbolized  by  I.

(2)  There  is  an  operation  of  selecting  individuals  which  results
in  a class  of  which  those  individuals  are  members,

(3)  Any  class  can  be  selected  from  I.

(4)  Classes  can  be  combined.

(5)  Any  combination  of  classes  is  a class.

At  this  point  we  pause  to  inquire  what  we  already  know  as
to  the  modes  in  which  classes  can  be  combined.  It  is  to  be  observed
that  these  modes  of  combination  are  the  operations  we  perform
upon  classes.  Hence,  assumption  (5).  In  our  assumptions  we  have
assumed  only  one  mode  of  combination,  viz.  the  operation  of  select-
ing classes.  This  would  not  suffice  for  the  construction  of  a system.
But  there  are  an  infinite  number  of  modes  of  combination  that
would  suffice.  How,  then,  are  we  to  choose  which  modes  to  assume  ?
The  answer  in  practice  is  that  we  choose  those  modes  which  will
yield  systems  capable  of  being  so  interpreted  as  to  apply  to  the  actual
world.  This  is,  no  doubt,  an  accident  of  the  logician’s  interest,
as  a thinker,  in  achieving  knowledge  of  the  actual  world.  The
fact  that  it  is  possible  to  construct  systems  having  no  actual  inter-
pretation shows  that,  from  the  logical  point  of  view,  all  that  need
be  considered  are  the  logical  forms  and  relations,  whether  or  not
the  system  is  to  be  interpreted.  But  Euclid  would  not  have  con-
structed his  geometrical  system  had  he  not  begun  with  spatial
intuitions.  Just  as  the  logician  starts  from  a knowledge  of  the
modes  of  combination  that  are  capable  of  yielding  interpretable
results,  so  the  student  will  best  understand  how  a system  may  be
constructed  by  first  considering  operations  that  are  already  familiar.

We  shall  begin,  then,  with  some  familiar  examples  of  selecting
classes  and  combining  them.  From  the  universe  of  possible  indi-
viduals we  select  all  those  that  are  'politicians.  From  the  class
politicians  we  select  those  that  are  Tonights.  The  class  resulting
from  these  two  successive  operations  is  the  class  Jmighted  politicians,
i.e.  the  class  of  all  those  that  are  both  Tonights  and  politicians.

We  select  from  the  universe  those  that  are  politicians ; we  also
select  those  that  are  poets.  We  combine  the  class  politicians
with  the  class  poets.  The  resultant  class  is  the  class  of  all  those
that  are  either  politicians  or  poets.

We  select  from  the  universe  all  individuals  except  politicians.
The  ]pesultant  class  is  the  cl^ss  of  all  those  who  are  not  politicians.


184


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


These  familiar  modes  of  combination  involve  logical  conjunctions.
These  may  be  summed  up  as  follows,  using  a,  /?,  to  stand  for  any
classes :

(i)  The  class  without  a,  i,e.  not-a,  symbolized  by  a.

(ii)  The  class  a and  /?,  i.e.  a^.

(iii)  The  class  a or

There  are  obvious  analogies  between  these  operations  upon
classes  and  the  mathematical  operations  of  subtraction,  multiplica-
tion, and  addition.  The  operation  of  selecting  the  class  without  a is
analogous  to  subtraction.  The  operation  yielding  a or  ^ is  analogous
to  addition  ; hence  the  resultant  class  is  called  the  logical  sum  of  a
and  /9A  The  operation  yielding  is  analogous  to  multiplication  ;
hence  the  resultant  class  is  called  the  logical  product  of  a and  p.

Since  a,  are  to  stand  for  any  classes,  and  since  one  of  our
fundamental  assumptions  is  that  any  combination  of  a with  /S  yields
a class,  it  follows  that  a^,  a + P,  must  be  classes,  no  matter  what
members  a has,  or  has.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a is  the  class
knights,  and  P the  class  scavengers ; then  ap  is  the  class  knighted
scavengers.  But  there  are  no  individuals  that  are  both  knights
and  scavengers  ; hence,  knighted  scavengers  is  a class  with  no  members.
Such  a class  is  said  to  ‘be  empty ; it  is  called  the  null-class.  It
might  be  objected  that  it  is  an  accidental  characteristic  of  the  world
up  to  the  present  that  there  are  no  knights  who  are  scavengers  ;
a Gilbertian  revolution  might  supply  this  class  with  members.  It
is  easy,  however,  to  find  examples  to  which  such  an  objection  could
not  be  made,  Eor  example,  the  class  squares  has  no  members  in
common  with  the  class  circles  ; hence,  their  logical  product,  square-
circles  is  an  empty  class ; it  is  the  null-class.  The  null-class  is
symbolized  by  0.

The  class  circles  combined  by  or  with  knighted  scavengers  yields
the  class  circles  or  knighted  scavengers.  This  is  the  same  as  the
class  circles,  since  knighted  scavengers  has  no  members ; thus,  the
class  consisting  of  every  member  of  circles  together  with  every
member  of  knighted  scavengers  is  the  class  circles.

The  class  circles  combined  by  and  with  the  class  squared  circles
is  the  null-class,  since  the  class  consisting  of  every  individual  that
is  both  a circle  and  a squared  circle  has  no  members.

These  results  can  be  expressed  by  giving  the  ordinary  mathe-
matical interpretations  to  tjie  symbols  + and  x,  in  generalized

^ But,  since  ‘ or  ’ is  not  to  be  interpreted  exclusively,  the  analogy  with  mathe-
matical addition  is  not  exact.  There  is  no  inverse  operation  of  subtracting
^ from  a,  since  a and  may  have  common  members.  Moreover,  a or  a yields  a.
The  proper  analogue  of  subtraction  is  the  selection  of  a from  the  universe,  which
leaves  the  class  not-a.  Accordingly  this  is  sometimes  symbolized  by  “ — a ”,
hut  is  now  usuaEy  written  a.  La  Boole’ s system  ‘ or  ’ is  interpreted  exclusively,
and  is  thus  a proper  inverse  of  subtraction.


THE  GENEEALIZATION  OF  LOGIC


185


foririj  a standing  for  any  class  that  is  not  empty,  0 for  the  nnll-class  :
(i)  a + 0 = a.

(ii)  a X 0 = 0.

That  is : (i)  What  is  either  a or  nothing  is  a.

(ii)  What  is  both  a and  nothing  is  nothing.

We  now  introduce  the  relation  is  included  in,  which  at  present
we  shall  take  as  undefined.  By  its  help  we  can  give  a precise
definition  of  the  logical  sum  and  the  logical  product  of  any  two  classes.

The  logical  product  of  two  classes  is  the  class  included  in  each
and  including  every  class  included  in  both.

The  logical  sum  of  two  classes  is  the  class  including  each  and
included  in  every  class  including  both.

It  follows  from  the  definition  of  the  logical  sum  that  the  null-
class  is  included  in  tie  class  a,  whatever  a may  be.  That  is  to  say,
the  null-class  is  included  in  every  class.  This  result  is  unfamiliar,
and  is  therefore  apt  to  seem  absurd.  But  it  is  a consequence  of
the  fact  that  we  are  interpreting  classes  extensionally.  For  example,
by  the  class  scavengers  we  mean  those  individuals  who  are  scavengers  ;
we  do  not  mean  what  is  sometimes  called  the  class-concept  scavenger.
Since  the  null-class,  i.e.  the  class  without  'members,  is  taken  exten-
sionally, it  follows  that  there  is  only  one  null-class.

The  relation  is  included  in  is  transitive  and  non-symmetrical,
since,  if  a is  included  in  it  does  not  follow  that  there  are  any
members  of  that  are  not  a.  In  other  words,  a and  may  be
coextensive,  or  they  may  not  be  coextensive.  It  will  be  convenient
to  symbolize  is  included  in  by  <^.  Then  the  results  we  have  obtained
with  regard  to  the  null-class,  i.e.  the  class  with  no  members,  and
the  universe,  i.e.  the  class  of  all  possible  members  of  any  class,  can
be  summed  up  as  follows :

1.  0<[^a,  i.e.  the  null-class  is  included  in  every  class.

2.  0 0,  i.e.  the  null-class  is  included  in  the  null-class.

3.  a<^l,  i.e.  any  class  is  included  in  the  universe.

4.  1 <1 1,  i.e.  the  universe  is  included  in  the  universe.

The  combination  of  propositions  can  be  carried  out  in  a manner
analogous  to  the  combination  of  classes.  We  shall  again  begin
with  familiar  examples  of  combination,  and  shall  then  consider
whether  it  is  possible  to  define  some  of  these  modes  of  combination
in  terms  of  other  modes.  ^

We  shall  begin  with  the  unanalysed  concepts  of ; (i)  a pro-
position, (ii)  assertion  of  a proposition.

^ It  must  be  remembered  that  in  following  tins  mode  of  procedure  our  purpose
is  not  to  construct  a deductive  system  but  to  exhibit  the  manner  in  which  the
possibility  of  constructing  such  a system  might  be  suggested.  For  this  reason,
w©  begin  with  what  is  obvious,  not  with  what  is  logically  simple,  and  w©  then
proce^  to  state  formal  principles  without  any  attempt  at  precise  proof.


186  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

We  make  the  following  assumptions :

(1)  Any  proposition  can  be  asserted.^

(2)  Propositions  can  be  combined.

(3)  Any  combination  of  propositions  is  a proposition.

There  is  a familiar  relation  not  by  means  of  which  from  a given
proposition  p we  obtain  another  proposition  noPp.  The  proposition
not-p  will  be  called  the  contradictory  of  p.^

Three  modes  of  combining  two,  or  more,  propositions  are  familiar,
viz.  the  modes  of  combining  by  means  of  the  logical  relations  and,
or,  implies.  Thus,  given  any  two  propositions  there  is  a third
proposition  which  consists  in  their  simultaneous  assertion,  i.e.  the
assertion  of  both  together.  This  proposition  is  derived  from  com-
bining p,  q by  means  of  and,  which  yields  p and  q.  The  simultaneous
assertion  of  p and  q may  be  meaningless  in  a manner  analogous
to  the  logical  product  of  two  classes  which  yields  the  null-class.
Again,  given  two,  or  more,  propositions  there  is  a third  proposition
which  consists  in  their  alternative  assertion.  This  proposition  is
derived  by  combining  p,  q by  means  of  or,  which  yields  the  single
proposition  p or  q.  Again,  given  any  two  propositions  there  is  a
third  proposition  which  asserts  that  one  of  these  propositions  implies
the  other.  That  is  to  say,  given  any  proposition  p,  there  is  another
proposition  q,  such  that  p implies  q.

These  modes  of  combination  are  called  functions  of  the  pro-
positions so  corhbined,  and  the  derivation  of  a proposition  by  means
of  ^^^)X.is  called  a function  of  the  original  proposition.  We  can  now
sum^  up  these  four  functions,  adding  appropriate  names  and  symbols.®


Logical

Relation.

Function.

Symbolized  by

(1)  not

negation,  ox  contradiction.

I'

(2)  or

addition,  or  disjunction.

fvq

(3)  and

multiplication,  or  conjunction.

p.q

(4)  implies

implication.

V -=>i

It  is  not  necessary  to  take  all  the  modes  of  combination  as
undejmed  modes.  Given  negation,  we  can  define  disjunction  if  we
assume  conjunction;  conversely,  we  can  define  conjunction  if  we
assume  disjunction  ; finally,  we  can  define  implication  if  we  assume
conjunction,  or  if  we  assume  disjunction.

(I)  We  begin  by  taking  disjunction  as  undejmed  and  define  (3)
and  (4)  in  terms  of  negation  and  disjunction.

1 To  say  “ is  asserted  ” is  equivalent  to  “ p is  true

2 To  deny  p is  equivalent  to  “ p is  false

®We  use  the  symbolism  of  Principia  Mathematica,  but  it  is  to  be  observed
that  we  could  use  4-  for  disjunction,  x for  conjunction,  hence  the  names
“ addition  “ multiplication  The  disjunctive  mode  of  combination  is  what
we  have  called  in  Chapter  VII  the  “ alternative  form  It  is  much  to  be
yegretted  that  the  name  “ disjunction  ” has  been  preferred  by  symbolic  logicians.


THE  GENERALIZATION  OF  LOGIC  187

(i)  p . q . = , V r^q)  Df.

This  may  be  read : ‘ It  is  false  that  either  f is  false  or  q is

false  ’ is  the  defined  equivalent  of  ‘ p ^^<3.  q

(ii)  j)Dq.  = .r^vqDf,

This  may  be  read : ^ p implies  q ’ is  the  defined  equivalent  of

‘ either  p is  false  or  q is  true

(II)  Taking  conjunction  as  undefined^  we  define  (2)  and  (4)  in
terms  of  negation  and  conjunction.

(a)  pV  q , = . . r^q)  Df.

This  may  be  read  : ^ p or  y ’ is  the  defined  equivalent  of  ‘ It

is  false  that  both  p is  false  and  q is  false

(&)  p D 2 . = . ^(p  . r^q)  Df

This  may  be  read  : ‘ p implies  q ’ is  the  defined  equivalent  of

‘ It  is  false  that  p is  true  and  q is  false

Since  any  proposition  may  be  true,  or  may  be  false,  there  are
four  possibilities  with  regard  to  the  truth  or  falsity  of  p and  These
possibilities  are :

(1)  p true,  q true.

(2)  p true,  q false.

(3)  p false,  q true.

(4)  p false,  q false.

Any  mode  of  combination  must  exclude  at  least  one  of  these  four
possibilities.  We  see  that

p . q excludes  (2),  (3),  (4) ;

p V 2 excludes  (4) ;

p D 2 ^^cludes  (2).

It  is  found  to  be  symbolically  convenient  to  take  negation  and
disjunction^  not  negation  and  conjunction^  as  the  undefined  concepts.
We  shall  later  be  concerned  with  the  consequences  of  the  definition
I (ii).  It  should  be  contrasted  with  II  (6).

The  conjunction  of  two  (or  more)  propositions  is  called  their  logical
product ; the  propositions  thus  conjoined  may  be  called  factors  of  the
operation  of  multiplication.  There  may  be  any  number  of  factors.

The  disjunction,  or  alternation,  of  two  (or  more)  propositions
is  called  their  logical  sum  ; the  propositions  thus  disjoined  may  be
called  summands  in  the  operation  of  addition.  There  may  be  any
number  of  summands.

The  logical  product  of  the  two  propositions  is  their  simultaneous
assertion,  i.e.  hoik  are  true.  This  may  be  defined,  analogously  to
the  definition  of  the  logical  product  of  two  classes,  as  follows : The
logical  product  of  two  propositions  is  a proposition  implying  each
and  impHed  by  every  proposition  which  implies  both.

The  logical  sum  of  two  propositions  is  their  alternative  assertion^


188  A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

i.e.  &t  least  one  is  true.  THs  may  be  defiaed,  analogously  to  tbe
definition  of  the  logical  sum  of  two  classes,  as  follows  : The  logical
sum  of  two  propositions  is  the  proposition  implied  by  each  of  them
and  implying  every  proposition  implied  by  both.

We  shall  now  state  certain  formal  principles  which  hold  both
with  regard  to  the  relation  between  classes  and  the  relation  between
propositions.  We  shall  use  an  undefined  symbol  < which  can
be  interpreted  either  as  “ implies  ”,  in  which  case  the  elements
related  will  be  propositions,  or  as  is  included  in  ”,  in  which  case
the  elements  related  will  be  classes.  These  elements  will  be
s3unboli2;ed  by  A,  B,  C,  standing  indifferently  for  classes  or  for
propositions.  When  we  wish  to  emphasize  one  interpretation
rather  than  the  other  we  shall  employ  a,  jS,  y,  for  the  former,  p,

r,  for  the  latter  as  before.  We  shall  symbolize  logical  products
by  simple  juxtaposition  of  the  elements,  i.e.  AB  ” stands  for

Both  A and  B ” ; we  shall  symbolize  the  logical  sum  by  +.  We
shall  symbolize  negation  by  a bar,  i.e.  A ” stands  for  not-A  ”.
Where  convenient  we  shall  use  brackets  to  show  that  two  or  more
elements  are  to  be  taken  as  a single  compound  element,  e.g.

(A  + B)  ” shows  that  the  logical  sum  of  A and  B is  to  be  taken  as  a
single  element.  The  negation  of  such  a compound  element  will  be
expressed  by  a bar  drawn  over  the  whole  bracket,  e.g.  (A  + B).

It  will  sometimes  be  found  convenient  to  express  these  principles
as  equalities.  Equality  may  be  defined  as  follows :

A = B . = . (A— <B)(B-<A)  Df.

It  should  be  noted  that  in  the  propositional  interpretation  the  symbol
of  equality  ” is  replaced  by  the  symbol  of  logical  equivalence  ” A

Formal  Princi'ples.

1.  Princi'ple  of  Identity.

A-" -^A.

2.  Princifle  of  Commutation^

(i)  AB — <BA.

(ii)  A + B— <B  + A.

3.  Princi'ple  of  Association.

(i)  (AB)CU<A(0B).

(ii)  (A  + B)  + C— <A  + (B  + C).

It  should  be  observed  that  since  the  definitions  of  addition  and
multiplication  do  not  involve  any  determination  of  the  order  in
which  the  elements  are  to  be  combined,  these  relations  are  sym-
metrical.  Consequently,  the  above  three  principles  are  obvious.
We  do  not  attempt  to  prove  them  here.^

^See  Chap.  Vni.

8 The  student  who  wishes  to  pursue  this  tdpic  further  should  consult
Couturat,  Algebra  of  Logic,


THE  GENEEALIZATION  OF  LOGIC


189


4.  Princi'ple  of  Distribution.

(i)  A(B  + C)— <AB  + AO.

(ii)  AB  + C— <(A  + C)(B  + C).

This  principle  connects  multiplication  with  addition.  It  should
be  noted  that  (ii)  does  not  hold  for  ordinary  algebra,  whereas  (i)
and  the  jBrst  three  principles  do  hold.^  Thus  4 (ii)  is  a distinguish-
ing principle  of  a logical  calculus.  As  an  illustration  of  this  principle
we  may  take  the  three  classes,  scholars.  Cabinet  Ministers,  peers.
Then  (i)  is  exemplified  in : All  scholars  who  are  either  Cabinet
Ministers  or  peers  are  included  in  the  class  of  those  who  are  either
scholars  and  Cabinet  Ministers  or  are  scholars  and  peers.  Also
(ii)  is  exemplified  in : All  those  who  are  either  both  scholars  and
Cabinet  Ministers  or  are  peers  are  included  in  those  who  are  either
scholars  or  peers  and  are  also  Cabinet  Ministers  or  peers.

6.  Principle  of  Tautology.^

AA — <A.

The  class  consisting  of  scholars  and  scholars  is  clearly  the  same  as
the  class  scholars.

6.  Principle  of  Simplification*

(i)  AB — <A.

(ii)  A— <A  + B.

Thus  p 3 *p.  That  is  to  say,  the  logical  product  of  two

propositions  implies  either  of  the  factors  taken  alone.  Again,

p . D . p V That  is  to  say,  any  proposition  implies  the  logical

sum  of  itself  and  any  other  proposition.  Thus,  we  can  always

add  to  the  implicate  of  a proposition  any  number  of  alternatives
without  affecting  the  vahdity  of  the  implication.  We  can  always
drop  one  of  two  (or  more)  propositions  asserted  simultaneously
and  assert  the  remainder.  This  principle  permits  the  simplifica-
tion of  an  argument  by  dropping  out  a proposition  that  is  not
required  for  a given  purpose.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  principle
holds  when  the  elements  are  classes.  It  will  be  suflSicient  to  give
an  illustration  of  (ii).  The  class  of  intelligent  people  is  included
in  the  class  of  those  who  are  either  intelligent  or  Socialists.

7.  Principle  of  Absorption.

(i)  A + AB---<A.

(ii)  A(A  -f-  B) — <A.

^ There  are  non-commutative  algebras  for  which  the  second  principle  does
not  hold.  So  long  as  the  basis  of  arithmetic,  and  therefore  of  algebra,  is  based
upon  our  intuitions  with  regard  to  counting,  non-commutative  algebras  will
seem  absurd;  just  as,  so  long  as  geometrical  axioms  are  based  upon  our
intuitions  of  space,  non-Euclidean  geometries  will  seem  absurd.  These  formal
principles  stand  to  algebra  as  Euclidean  axioms  to  geometry.

* See  W.  E.  J.,  I,  p.  30.  Mr.  Johnson  points  out  that  the  principle  of
Tautology  (which  he  calls  the  “ Reiterative  li,w”)  indicates  that  the  content
of  what  is  asserted  is  not  affected  by  any  re-assertion  ’•


190


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


For  example,  (i)  Those  who  are  intelligent  or  are  loth  intelligent
and  socialists  are  included  in  those  who  are  intelligent  (ii)  Those
who  are  musical  and  also  either  musical  or  irritable  are  included  in
those  who  are  musical.

It  should  be  observed  that  A — ’’  expresses  a proposition
whatever  A,  B,  may  stand  for,  since  — < is  a relation.  If  A,  B,
be  interpreted  as  standing  for  classes,  then  ^ ’’  must  be  inter-
preted as  ‘‘  is  included  in  If  A,  B,  be  interpreted  as  standing
for  propositions,  then  ” must  be  interpreted  as  “ implies

The  remaining  principles  are  concerned  with  implications  between
propositions  relating  to  class  inclusions,  or  with  implications  between
propositions  relating  to  implications.  Hence,  in  both  cases,  the  main
relation  is  an  implication  relation.  Accordingly  we  shall  use  3 to  ex-
press these  principles,  distinguishing  between  the  class  interpretation
and  the  propositional  interpretation  by  using  <[  for is  included  in

8.  Principle  of  Composition.

(i)

pDy.pDr.D  .q.r.

(ii)  /S<a.7<a.3:/?-l-y<a.

pDq.rDq.Dipvr.D.q.

The  two  forms  of  this  principle  may  be  illustrated  with  reference
to  classes  as  follows : (i)  If  pedants  are  included  in  scholars,  and
pedants  are  included  in  lores,  then  pedants  are  included  in  the  class
of  those  who  are  both  scholars  and  lores,  (ii)  If  the  industrious
are  included  in  the  competent,  and  the  well-paid  are  included  in  the
(^mpetent,  then  those  who  are  either  industrious  or  well-paid  are
included  in  the  competent

9.  Principle  of  Transposition,

p D ? . D . D

It  is  easy  to  see  that  contraposition  rests  upon  this  principle.
Since  the  implication  is  reciprocal  this  principle  could  be  stated  as
an  equality,  viz.

p D g . = . D

10.  Principle  of  Syllogism,

.3  .a<y.

pDq-qDr.o:  p^r.

TMs  principle  follows  from  the  transitivity  of  the  relations  of
inclusion  and  implication.

11.  Principle  of  Excluded  Middle,

p V

This  may  be  read : * Either  p is  true  or  p is  false.’  ^

^ This  and  the  following  principle  should  be  compared  with  the  results
obtained  with  regard  to  classes,  given  above.  (See  p.  185.)


THE  GENERALIZATION  OF  LOGIC


191


12.  Principle  of  Contradiction*

TMs  may  Ibe  read : p is  not  both  true  and  false/’

Since  “ p ” stands  for  “ any  true  proposition  ” and  ”

stands  for  any  false  proposition  ”,  these  last  two  principles  might
be  expressed  as  follows :

(11)  Any  proposition  is  either  true  or  false.

(12)  Not  any  proposition  is  both  true  and  false.

Throughout  the  statement  of  these  principles  we  have  taken

negation  as  undefined.  If  we  assuage  the  notions  true  and  false^
negation  can  be  defined  by  means  of  multiplication  and  addition.
We  shall  use  to  symbolize  is  true  ”,  and  = 0 ” to

symbolize  is  false

Given  any  proposition  p,  then  is  its  negation  if
p . ^ = 0 ; p V ==  1.

That  is  to  say,  the  negation  of  p is  that  proposition  which
is  so  related  to  p that  one  of  them  must  be  false,  and  the  other  true.
Thus  p and  are  contradictories.  It  should  be  observed  that
both  the  principle  of  excluded  middle  and  the  principle  of  contra-
diction are  required  to  define  “ contradictory  propositions  The
principle  of  contradiction  alone  does  not  suffice  to  show  that  p
and  ^ are  contradictories  ; they  might  be  contraries.  The  above
formulation  of  negation  brings  out  what  is  involved  in  the  denial
of  a proposition  but  it  does  so  only  because  true  and  false  have
been  taken  as  undefined  notions.^

13.  Principle  of  Double  Negation*

A = A.

It  is  easy  to  see  that  this  principle  follows  from  the  symmetry  of
the  relations  of  multiplication  and  addition  used  to  define  negation.
From  this  definition  we  can  derive  two  formulae,  known  as  do ,
Morgan's  formulae :

(i)  + B)  ==  A B,

i.e.  the  negation  of  a sum  is  the  product  of  the  negations  cf  the
summands.  This  holds  whether  the  elements  of  the  product  and’
the  sum  be  propositions  or  classes.

(ii)  (IB)=A  + B,

i.e.  the  negation  of  a product  is  the  sum  of  the  negations  of  the
factors.  This  holds  whether  the  elements  of  the  product  and  the
sum  be  propositions  or  classes.

^Tlie  principles  of  identity,  excluded  middle,  and  contradiction  Iiave  been
traditfonaHy  considered  as  the  only  fundamental  logical  principles.  TMs  is  a
complete  mistake.  They  are  neither  less,  nor  more,  important  than  the  other
principles  we  have  stated.  (See  below.  Chap.  XXIV.)


192  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

From  these  formulae  it  is  possible  to  derive  the  negations  of
expressions  of  any  degree  of  complexity.  The  genera]  rule  is  For
every  element  substitute  its  negation,  and  change  sums  to  'products
and  products  to  sums.

Given  the  definitions  of  negation,  addition,  and  multiplication,
and  the  resulting  principles  of  excluded  middle  and  contradiction,
we  can  derive  formulae  expressing  an  exhaustive  and  exclusive
division  of  any  number  of  elements.  Since  of  any  element  we  can
either  assert  A or  assert  A,  or  can  assert  B or  can  assert  B,  and  so
on,  it  follows  that,  given  two  elements  A,  B,  we  can  assert

1 = AB  + AB  + AB  + IB.

That  is  to  say : the  universe  contains  either  what  is  both  A and  Bj
or  what  is  both  A and  not  B,  or  what  is  not  A but  B,  or  what  is
neither  A nor  B.  These  alternatives  may  not  all  be  reahzed,  that
is,  any  of  the  alternatives  may  represent  the  null-class.  Collec-
tively these  alternatives  are  exhaustive,  that  is,  everything  in  the
universe  must  fall  into  one  or  other  of  these  sets  of  alternatives.

In  the  statement  of  the  formal  principles  we  assumed  that  ^ p ’
is  equivalent  to  ‘ is  true  ’,  and  that  ‘ ’ is  equivalent  to  ‘ p

is  false’.  These  assumptions  can  be  expressed  as  follows,  using
1 and  0 as  before  :

(i)  p . = . p ==  1.  (ii)  ^ s . p = 0.

The  formal  principles  stated  above  in  terms  of  implication
suffice  for  the  construction  of  deductive  systems,  but  they  do  not
suffice  for  the  drawing  of  conclusions.  The  transitivity  of  the
relation  of  implication  yields  the  principle  of  syllogism,  but  it  does
not  yield  a principle  which  permits  the  omission  of  the  impl3dng
element.  1 To  secure  this  there  is  needed  the  independent  assertion
p = 1 ”,  or  an  additional  principle  to  the  effect  that  the  implicate
of  a true  proposition  stating  an  implication  can  be  asserted.  Thus
we  have,

14.  Principle  of  Deduction^

What  is  implied  by  a true  proposition  is  true.^

This  is  called  the  principle  of  deduction  since  it  is  in  virtue  of
this  principle  alone  that  we  can  deduce  a conclusion.  Without  this
principle  implication  would  not  yield  proofs.  It  might  equally
well  be  caUed  the  principle  of  assertion,  since  by  means  of  it  we  are
enabled  to  assert  a conclusion  instead  of  merely  considering  the
conclusion  as  imphed  by  the  premisses.  This  principle  cannot

1 See  Chap.  XII,  § 2 j and  cl  the  quotation  from  Bussell  given  in  the  footnote
to  page  215.

2 See  Frincifia  Mathmiatica,  p.  94,  p.  132  ; Principles  of  Mathematics,  | 38  ;
Ooutnrat,  Encyclopaedia  of  the  Philosophical  Sciences,  pp.  141-2.


THE  GENEEALIZATION  OF  LOGIC


193


foe  formulated  symbolically.  It  would  be  a mistake,  for  example,
to  suppose  that  the  principle  of  deduction  could  be  formulated  by

p D 2.  p ==  1 : D : (Z  = 1,
or  by  25  D : p D 2 : 2,

for  in  neither  of  these  symbolic  expressions  is  it  shown  that  p can
be  omitted  and  q asserted  alone.  ^ Any  symbolic  expression  will
yield  only  an  implication,  that  is  the  hypothesis  that  p is  true,  not
the  assertion  that  p is  true.  But  it  is  the  assertion  of  p that  is  required
to  enable  us  to  draw  the  conclusion  q from  the  implication  ^ p'Dq^
Another  non-symbohc  principle  is  required  in  order  that  in  an
assertion  with  regard  to  every  instance  of  a certain  set  we  should
be  able  to  substitute  a given  instance.  This  is,

15.  Principle  of  Substitution,

Whatever  can  be  asserted  about  any  instance,  however  chosen,
can  be  asserted  about  any  given  instance.^

The  principle  of  deduction  and  the  principle  of  substitution  are
involved  in  all  demonstrative  reasoning.  Without  these  two
principles  it  would  be  impossible  to  construct  a deductive  system.
Once  the  primitive  propositions  have  been  stated  it  is  possible  by
means  of  these  principles  to  deduce  conclusions  that  are  more  and
more  complicated.  The  development  of  the  primitive  propositions
stated  in  Principia  Mathematica  takes  place  in  virtue  of  the  repeated
use  of  these  two  principles.  They  can  accordingly  be  seen  to  be
of  very  great  importance  in  the  construction  of  a deductive  system.^
The  mathematical  logicians  have  for  the  most  part  adopted
the  definition  of  implication  in  terms  of  negation  and  disjunction,
which  was  stated  on  page  187.  Certain  theorems  which  follow
from  this  definition  have  been  regarded  as  paradoxical.  These
must  now  be  considered.  The  definition  of  implication,  which  we
have  to  consider,  is :

p D 2 • = • V 2 Df-

Since  ‘ ^ ’ means  ‘ p is  false  ’,  and  ' p ’ means  ‘ p is  true  this
definition  requires  either  p,  the  impljdng  element,  to  be  false  or  q,
the  implied  element,  to  be  true.  Whenever  this  is  the  case  the
first  proposition  implies  the  second,  according  to  this  definition  of
' ‘‘  implication  We  saw  that  ^ p D 2 ’ excludes  only  the  possibility
‘ p true,  2 Thus,  for  example,  given  the  true  proposition

‘2  + 2 = 4’,  and  the  false  proposition  ‘ The  sun  is  cold  ’,  then
the  compound  proposition  “ Either  ‘2  + 2 = 4’  is  true  or  ‘ The

^ The  proposition  ‘ p D : pO  2*9'’  true  whether  p be  true,  or  false,  and
whether  p irtiplies  q,  or  not.  Hence,  this  proposition  yields  only  the  hypothesis
that  p is  true,  so  that  it  does  not  permit  the  independent  assertion  of  q.

2 See  Principia  Mathematica,  * 9*12.

® Cf.  W.  E.  Johnson,  Logic,  Pt.  II,  Chaps.  I and  II.

13


194


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


sun  is  cold  ’ is  false  ” is  true.  Consequently,  the  proposition  ^ The
sun  is  cold  ’ implies  ^2  + 2 = 4’”  is  true,  since  implies  ’’  is
defined  to  mean  ‘‘  either  the  first  (i.e.  the  implying)  proposition
is  false,  or  the  second  (i.e.  the  implied  proposition)  is  true  not
excluding  the  possibility  that  they  may  both  be  true.

This  definition  of  “implies”  is  unfamihar,  so  that  its  conse-
quences are  apt  to  seem  queer.  It  is  important  for  the  reader  to
become  familiar  with  this  notion.  It  may  be  made  clearer  if  we
consider  the  following  equivalences :

pDq  . ^ . r^p  V j . ^{p  . r>^q)  1

D 2 . ^ • 2^  V 2 . S , r^q)

p D '^q  . ^ V r^q  . = r^{p  . q)

^ D '^q  . ^ p V r^q  • = • . q)

Thus,  given  this  definition  of  “ impHes  ”,  then,  when  p D 2,
it  is  not  the  case  that  p is  true  and  q false  ; also,  if  both  p and  q
are  true,  then,  again,  it  is  not  the  case  that  p is  true  and  q false.
Accordingly,  when  p is  false,  and  also  when  both  p and  q are  true,
then  p implies  q.  These  consequences  of  this  definition  of  implica-
tion are  analogous  to  the  consequences  that  result  from  the  intro-
duction of  the  null-class  into  the  class-system.  Thus,

(i)  D ? corresponds  to  0 <;  a

(ii)  r^p  D r^q  corresponds  to  0 0

(iii)  p32  corresponds  to  fa<^l

ti<i

From  (i)  we  get : any  false  proposition  implies  any  true  pro-
position ; from  (ii)  we  get : any  false  proposition  impHes  any  false
proposition.  Thus,  any  false  proposition  implies  any  proposition^
true  or  false.  From  (iii)  we  get:  any  true  proposition  implies  any
true  proposition ; from  (i)  we  get : any  true  proposition  is  implied
by  any  false  proposition.  Thus,  a true  proposition  is  implied  hy  any
proposition^  true  or  false.  These  results  correspond  to  the  inter-
pretation for  classes,  viz.  (1)  The  null-class  is  contained  in  every
class ; (2)  Any  class  is  contained  in  the  universe.  On  the  pro-
positional  interpretation  the  theorems  italicized  above  are  known
as  ‘paradoxes  of  implication’.  But  these  theorems  axe  not
paradoxical ; they  are  the  inevitable  consequences  of  the  definition
of  implication  in  terms  of  negation  and  disjunction.  It  should
be  observed  that  in  the  case  of  propositions  there  are  only  two
possibilities  with  regard  to  truth  and  falsity,  i.e.  p = 1,  or  p = 0.
The  elements  p;  q,  interpreted  on  the  analogue  of  the  class  regarded
as  an  extension  are  limited  to  these  two  possibilities.  Thus  p,  q,
are  equivalent  when  both  are  true,  or  when  both  are  false.  Conse-

^ The  first  row  may  be  read : ‘ p implies  q ’ is  equivalent  to  ‘ either  p is  false
or  2 is  true  ’ is  equivalent  to  ‘ It  is  not  the  case  that  p is  true  and  q i&  false


THE  GENERALIZATION  OE  LOGIC


195


quently,  to  deny  that  p implies  q is  to  assert  that  implies  q,
i.e.  Dg)  Dy).

But  in  the  case  of  classes,  to  deny  that  a is  included  in  ^ is  not  to
assert  that  a is  included  in  since  a and  ^ may  overlap.  Thus
there  are  three  possibilities  with  regard  to  a and  but  only  two
possibilities  with  regard  to  p and  q.  In  the  case  of  the  class  inter-
pretation, therefore,  these  apparent  paradoxes  do  not  arise.

The  fact  that  the  consequences  of  the  definition  of  implication
that  we  have  been  considering  should  have  been  called  ‘para-
doxes ’ has  undoubtedly  caused  some  confusion.  As  Professor
Moore  has  pointed  out,  they  ‘appear  to  be  paradoxical,  solely
because,  if  we  use  “ implies  ’’  in  any  ordinary  sense,  they  are  quite
certainly  false It  is  clear  that  “implies”  is  ordinarily  used
in  such  a sense  that  implication  affords  a basis  for  inference.  But
we  have  seen  that,  in  order  that  q should  be  inferred  from  p,  we
must  be  able  to  omit  p.  But  p can  be  omitted  only  if  p is  true,
that  is,  only  if  p can  be  asserted.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  a false  pro-
position we  cannot  omit  the  implying  element.  If  we  hnow  p to
be  false,  then  we  know  that  p implies  q (in  the  sense  defined) ; but
we  cannot  proceed  to  assert  p,  since  such  a procedure  would  be
contradictory.  Hence,  we  cannot  infer  q,  since  this  inference
requires  the  assertion  of  p.  Again,  if  we  know  q to  be  true,  then
we  know  that  p implies  q ; but  we  cannot  proceed  to  infer  g,  since
we  already  knew  q to  be  true.^  As  Mr.  Russell  has  admitted,  ‘ When-
ever p is  false,  “ not-p  or  q ” is  true,  but  is  useless  for  inference,
which  requires  that  p should  be  true.  Whenever  q is  already  known
to  be  true,  “not-p  or  g”  is  of  course  also  known  to  be  true,
but  is  again  useless  for  inference,  since  g is  already  known,  and
therefore  does  not  need  to  be  inferred.’  ^ He  draws  a distinction
between  the  validity  of  the  inference  and  what  he  calls  the  ‘ practical
feasibility  of  the  inference  This  distinction  does  not  appear  to
be  very  happily  named.  What  is  important  is  to  distinguish  between
the  logical  relations  that  may  hold  between  propositions,  in  virtue
of  which  relations  deduction  is  possible,  and  the  truth  of  the  pre-
misses without  which  the  deduction  would  not  be  valid.  False
propositions  imply  other  propositions,  but  they  cannot  be  made
the  basis  of  valid  inferences  in  which  the  conclusion  is  asserted  to
be  trm.  There  is,  then,  no  reason  to  regard  the  consequences  of  the
definition  of  implication  as  paradoxical.  They  would  be  paradoxical
only  if  they  were  taken  to  be  paradoxes  of  inference.  But  in
that  case  they  would  not  strictly  speaking  be  'paradoxical ; they
would  be  false,

^ PMlosopMcal  Studies,  p.  295.

^ Reference  slionld  be  made  to  p.  215  and  p.  223  below.

* Introd,  Math.  Phil.,  p.  153.


CHAPTEE  XI
SYSTEM  AND  OEDEE


* To  search  for  “ unity  ” and  “ system  ” at  the  expense  of  truth,  is  not,  I take
it,  the  proper  business  of  philosophy,  however  universally  it  may  have  been  the
practice  of  philosophers.’ — 0.  E.  Moore.

§1.  THE  NATUEE  OF  SYSTEM  ^

The  notion  of  system  lies  at  the  basis  of  all  science  and
philosophy.  Deductive  systems,  which  we  considered  in
the  last  chapter,  are  a special  kind  of  system.  The  notion
of  system  ” in  general  is  much  less  precise  than  that  of  deductive
system  for  the  properties  of  deductive  systems  have  been  care-
fiilly  determined.  The  generating  relation  of  a deductive  system  is
implication.  We  have  now  to  consider  what  modes  of  connexion
suffice  to  determine  a system.  It  is  not  difficult  to  find  examples
.of  systems  exemplifpng  different  kinds  of  relations,  such  as  the  solar
[system,  the  social  system,  the  post-office  system,  the  ecclesiastical
I system.  These  various  systems  are  characterized  by  various  modes
of  connexion ; they  have  in  common  the  fact  that  the  constituent
elements  are  compatible  and  that  all  the  elements  aredefceSnn^
by^ome  at  least  of  the  other  elements.  We  shall  call  the  constituent
elements  of  a system  tEe  ''  facts  of  the  system,  meaning  by  a
fact  ” whatever  could  be  expressed  in  a proposition,  without  refer-
ence to  whether  the  proposition  is  true  or  false.  Each  fact  will
itself  consist  of  elements,  viz.,  its  constituents,  but  we  are  not  here
concerned  with  the  coniStuents  of  facts  but  with  facts  as  constituents
of  systems.  The  question  we  have  to  consider  is  under  what  condi-

tions  an  array  of  facts  can  be  regarded  as  a systmiiicligiW

/•'  Facts  ma,y  be  conjunctive^  comEmedI  BucE  an  array  would
^t  be  a systematic  array.  Facts  may  be  alternatively  combined,
xhis  mode  of  connexion  would  again  be  insufficient  to  determine  a
system.  is  a minimum  condition  without

which  there'comdbTnos^^  But  .though  a necessary,  it  is  not
a sufficient  condition.  We  cannot  define  mutual  compatibility
To  say  that  the  fact  Fi  is  mutually  compatible  with  the  fact  Fg
is  to  say  that  Fi  and  Fg  may  both  belong  to  the  same  system.  But

^ The  beginner  should  read  Chap.  XIII,  § 1,  before  reading  this  chapter.

190


SYSTEM  AND  ORDEE


197


the  notion  of  compatibility  is  simpler  than  the  notion  of  belonging
to  the  same  system^  and  cannot  be  defined  in  terms  of  it.  It  follows
that  any  fact  Fg  which  is  incompatible  with  Fi  cannot  be  a con-
stituent of  any  system  in  which  Fi  is  a constituent.  Again,  any
fact  which  requires  Fg  to  be  in  the  system  cannot  be  in  the  system
that  contains  Fi.  Although  the  constituents  of  a system  must  not
be  incompatible,  some  may  be  mutually  independent  of  others.
Such  mutually  independent  facts  will  be  conjunctive  facts.  But
it  is  not  possible  that  all  the  facts  should  be  mutually  independent,
for  in  that  case,  conjunctive  relations  would  suffice  to  determine  a
system.

There  are,  then,  four  conditions  to  which  any  system  must
conform.  These  may  be  precisely  formulated  as  follows  :

Given  a system  S,  then

"^1)  If  A and  B are  both  constituent  facts  in  S,  then  A and  B are
mutually  compatible.

•^2)  If  B is  a constituent  fact  and  B requires,  or  determines,  0,
then,  0 is  a constituent  of  S.

■^3)  If  B and  C are  constituent  facts  in  S,  then  S contains  the
conjoint  fact  BC,  though  neither  B determines  0 nor  conversely.

“^4)  If  BC  determines  E,  then  E is  in  S,  though  neither  B alone,
nor  C alone,  would  suffice  to  determine  E.

A system  is  not  necessarily  inclusive  there  may  be  facts  not
included  m the  system  but  not  incompatible  with  any  fact  in  the
system.  For  example,  a geometrical  system  excludes  facts  with
regard  to  colour.  Thus,  if  A is  a fact  in  a geometrical  system,  A
is  not  incompatible  with  any  fact  with  regard  to  a colour.  If  A
and  B are  facts  in  a classificatory  system  of  genera  and  species,
then  neither  A nor  B is  incompatible  with  any  fact  containing  as  a
constituent  the  relation  more  valuable  than.  The  determination  of
a system  does  not  involve  the  determination  ofeverytiimg tJiat  is
possTEIel  A given  system  Si  may  be  wJioiiy  contained  in  another
system  Sg,  and  Si  may  also  be  whoUy  contained  in  another  system
Sg,  although  there  is  no  system  S that  contains  Si  and  Sg  and  Sg.^
Different  geometries  afford  an  example  of  such  systems.  i

It  is  reasonable  to  ask  whether  the  worlds  or  the  universe,  is  a
system.  If  by  ‘‘the  world”  we  mean  “everything  that  is  the
case  then  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  world  is  a system.
Whether  or  not  it  is  a system  could  only  be  determined  by  empirical
observation  of  everything  that  is  the  case.  But  we  cannot  em-
pirically observe  everything  that  is  the  case ; hence,  we  cannot*
know  that  the  world  is  a system.  We  may  have  good  reason  for
believing  that  it  is  not  a system,  but  it  remains  possible  that  it

^ The  assumption  that  there  is  such  a system  £ is  the  assumption  of  Monism,

* Wittgenstein,  Tractatus  Logico-pMhsophicus,  Prop.  1*


198


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


sLould  be  a system  although  we  are  not  able  to  discover  the  mode
of  connexion  between  the  constituent  facts.  Everything  that  is  the
case  includes  the  facts  of  all  known  systems  as  well  as  those  facts
which  we  are  not  able  to  include  in  any  system  and  those  facts
I which  no  one  knows.  What  we  call  the  real,  or  actml  world,  does
\not  include  aH  facts  that  are  possible.  It  is  the  assumption  of  scien-
tific thinking  that  all  that  is  the  case  in  the  'physical  world  is  included
in  a system.  This  assumption  may  be  regarded  as  the  fundamental
postulate  of  science.  It  leads  scientists  to  reject  some  facts  and
to  include  other  facts  in  the  system  of  the  physical  world  Any
fact  incompatible  with  the  given  facts  is  left  out  of  account  in  order
that  the  constituent  facts  'may  determine  a system.  The  facts  in  the
actual  world  must  all  be  compatible,  but  there  may  be  conjunctive
^facts  not  related  by  other  than  conjunctive  relations  to  other  facts
Jn  the  actual  world.

A system  is  said  to  be  coherent  if  every  fact  in  the  system  is
related  to  every  other  fact  in  the  system  by  relations  that  are  not
merely  conjunctive.  A deductive  system  affords  a good  example
of  a coherent  system.  A work  of  art  is  a cobereut  systfTn.  The
relations  that  determine  its^coherence  are  peculiar  to  works  of  art,
but  what  is  meant  by  saying  that  these  relations  determine  it  as
coherent  is  what  is  meant  when  it  is  said  of  any  system  that  it  is
coherent.  The  coherence  of  a work  of  art  is  so  easily  apprehended
as  essential  to  it,  that  is  as  constituting  it  a work  of  art  so  that,
lacking  this  coherence  the  work  of  art  would  be  a failure,  that  the
expressions  we  use  to  express  coherent  systems  are  often  taken
rfrom  the  analogy  of  the  arts,  e.g.  ''  the  world-picture  Bt|l,not
^ systems  are  coherent  systems.  That  is  to  say,  “ system  ” a3S  |
*^^herence  ’’  are  not,  as  has  been  often  supposed,  coimplicant.  i
A jig-saw  puzzle  is  a system,  but  it  is  not  a coherent  system,  although"'
the  picture  that  is  cut  up  to  make  the  puzzle  might  be  coherent.
Each  piece  of  the  puzzle  must  fit  in  with  some  other  pieces  ; hence,
the  position  of  any  given  piece  is  not  indeterminate.  There  are
no  wild  bits,  which  might  or  might  not,  fit  in.  But  the  shape  of
a piece  in  the  right-hand  top  corner  of  the  picture  may  be  independent
of  the  shapes  of  any  pieces  in  the  left-hand  side  of  the  picture.  Thus
the  jig-saw  puzzle,  though  a system,  is  not  a coherent  system.  The
physical  world^may  be  such  a system.  ‘

It  is  a ‘tacuisin^^  ffi  science  is  the  achieveinent  i)f.

syst^.  It  is  for  this  reasonHSatHeto^iusm]?^^

Determinism  is  a characteristic  of^^aTsyitem  e^ry  consfiEuSot^ of
which  is  in  determinate  relations  determined  by  some  other  con-
stituent, or  constituents.  It  does  not  follow  that  every  constituent
is  determined  by  every  other  constituent.  Where  this  is  the  case
the  system  is  completely  coherent.  But  coherence  is  a matter  of


SYSTEM  AM)  OEDEE  199

degree.  A system  may  possess  some  degree  of  colierence  altkongli
some~  of  its  constituent  facts  may  be  independent  of  some  otter
facts,  provided  that  they  are  determined  by  other  facts  in  the  system.*"
Since  some  constituent  facts  in  a system  may  be  mutually  independ-
ent, it  follows  that  a system  S may  contain  either  of  two  contra-
dictory facts,  though  it  cannot  contain  both.^  For  example,  if  A
and  B are  mutually  independent,  then  A and  not-B  may  both  be
constituents  in  S,  and  there  may  be  another  system  S that  contains
both  A and  B.  Now  the  actual  world  contains  as  constituent  facts
all  facts  that  are  actual  facts.  Since  no  system  can  contain  both
B and  not-B,  and  since  either  B is  actual  or  not-B  is  actual,  it  follows
that  if  the  world-system  contains  both  A and  not-B,  it  cannot  contain
both  A and  B,  or  if  it  contains  A and  B,  it  cannot  contain  both
A and  not-B.  Thus  the  system  that  contains  A and  B (iE  the  world
contains  not-B),  or  the  system  that  contains  A and  not-B  (if  the
world  contains  B)  is  a 'possible  system,  (and,  therefore,  a possible
world),  but  not  an  actual  'world.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  dis-
covery of  incompatible  facts  is  useful  for  science,  for  science  is  con-
cerned not  with  any  possible  system  but  with  the  system  (if  there
is  one)  which  is  the  system  of  the  world.  ^

It  is  not  logically  necessary  that  everything  that  is  the  case,
that  is,  all  the  constituent  facts  of  the  actual  world,  should  be  con-
tained in  a system ; still  less  that  they  should  be  contained  in  a
coherent  system.  But  unless  actual  facts  do  constitute  a system
science  is  impossible  ; unless  the  physical  world  is  a coherent  system  ^
physicists  will  be  disappointed.  Whenever  inference  is  possible  the  j
facts  which  constitute  the  basis  of  the  inference  must  be  in  a system
with  the  facts  that  are  inferred  ; otherwise  the  inference  is  invalid.
But  we  cannot  tell  what  inferences  are  possible  until  we  know  the  ^
fact  from  which  the  inference  starts.  Accordingly,  in  order  to
ascertain  the  system  of  the  actual  world  we  should  need  to  know
facts  the  knowledge  of  which  could  not  be  derived  from  the  know-
ledge of  possible  systems.  In  other  words,  the  system  of  the  actuals
world,  because  it  is  actual,  cannot  be  determined  by  logical  consideraji
tions  alone.  Even  if  the  actual  world  were  a completely  coherenly
system,  it  would  not  follow  that  knowledge  of  part  of  the  system
woxdd  jdeld  knoivledge  of  the  whole  system,  nor  even  that  it  would
involve  knowledge  of  precisely  what  hind  of  system  it  was.  This
follows  from  the  possibility  that  the  system  S may  contain  a sub-
system both  in  Si  and  in  Sg,  although  some  facts  in  Si  were  in-
compatible with  some  facts  in  S2.  We  might  know  only  the  sub-
system, call  it  or,  contained  both  in  Si  and  in  Sg,  from  which  it

^ W&  ssbj  that  two  facts  are  contradictory  when  the  propositions  which  would
correspond  to  these  facts  are  contradictory.  Thus  in  this  chapter  “ fact  ” is
hemg  used  in  such  a sens©  that  not  ail  facts  are  actual


200


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


follows  tliat  a is  compatible  with,  either  of  two  systems  which  as
systems  are  not  compatible  with  each  other.  Our  knowledge  of  the
system  of  tbe  actual  world  (if  we  have  such  knowledge)  may  be  of
such  a sub-system  o'.  There  may  be  various  other  possible  systems
each  of  which  includes  o',  between  which  we  could  not  decide  as  to
which  is  actual.  This  would  be  the  case  if  we  did  not  know  the
facts  compatible  with  o'  and  compatible  with  Si  but  not  compatible
with  Sa.  If  this  argument  is  correct,  it  follows  that  we  cannot
Imow  that  the  system  of  the  actual  world  is  a coherent  system  such
that  given  some  of  the  constituent  facts  the  others  would  thereby
be  determined.

We  know  empirically  that  -there  are  facts  in  the  actual  world,
that  are  mutually  independent  From  this  rt  foUows'TEiFthe
world  contains  facts  that  are  "compatible  with  systems  that  are  not
actual  and  which  are  such  that  they  contain  facts  contradictory
of  facts  in  the  actual  world.  For  example,  the  Newtonian  law  of
gravitation  is  incompatible  with  the  conjoint  fact  consisting  of  all
the  facts  of  the  Euclidean  geometrical  system  and  of  all  the  facts
of  the  movements  of  light-waves.  But  there  is  a possible  system
that  would  include  the  system  of  Euclidean  geometry  and  also  include
the  facts  of  the  movements  of  light- waves  and  also  a fact  contra-
dictory to  the  fact  of  the  Newtonian  law  of  gravitation.  Thus,  if
F be  the  Newtonian  law,  E the  Euclidean  system,  L the  movements
of  light-waves,  then  there  might  be  a system  including  F,  E,  non-L,
and  another  system  including  E,  L,  non-P.  Similarly  there  might
be  another  system  including  F,  L,  non-E.  The  determination  of
facts  other  than  F,  L,  E,  is  necessary  in  order  to  ascertain  which,
if  any,  of  these  systems  is  actual.  Again,  consider  the  set  of  facts
consisting  of  facts  of  organic  development,  which  we  may  caU  the
fact  of  evolution.  Then  this  fact  may  be  independent  of  the  facts
contained  in  the  physical  system.  Let  this  system  be  represented
by  Si ; let  the  fact  of  evolution  be  in  a system  Sg.  Then  some  facts
will  be  both  in  Si  and  in  ; some  facts  will  be  in  Si  but  not  in
Sg ; others  will  be  in  Sg  but  not  in  Si.  Of  these  independent  facts
any  one,  or  its  contradictory,  might  be  contained  in  a system  Pj
including  Si ; or  in  a system  Pg  including  Ss ; or  there  may  be  a
system  R which  includes  Si  and  Sg  and  also  includes  a set  of  facts
independent  of  Si  and  independent  of  Sg.  That  is  to  say,  a system
may  be  enlarged  by  the  addition  of  independent  facts.  Thus  there
may  be  many  systems  compatible  with  the  sub-system  containing
dependent  facts.

There  is  no  good  ground  for  supposing  that  the  actual  world
is  a system  such  that  any  one  fact  determines,  or  is  determined
by,  every  other  fact.  On  the  contrary,  many  facts  are  known  to
be  actual  which  cannot  be  seen  to  be  related  to  other  facts,  also


SYSTEM  AND  ORDEE


201


known  to  be  actual,  as  constituents  in  any  possible  system.  But
tbe  world  may  be  a system^  since  every  fact  may  be  determined  by
some  otter  facts.  In  no  cases,  towever,  would  ttere  be  any  meaning
in  the  assertion  that  tte  system  of  tbe  actual  world  is  a necessary
system.  Tbe  nature  of  deductive  systems  shows  that  tbis  is  so.
A set  of  independent  postulates  may  suffice  to  determine  a deductive
system  in  which  all  tbe  theorems  are  consequences  of  tbe  postulates.
But  these  theorems  might  also  be  included  in  another  system  gener-
ated by  postulates  which  contain  aU  the  postulates  of  the  other
system  and  other  postulates,  and  which  will  therefore  include  other
theorems  as  well.  But  the  one  system  will  not  be  necessary  as  con-
trasted with  the  other  system,  though  both  might  be  coherent  systems.
Thus,  what  is  logically  possible  does  not  suffice  to  determine  the
system  of  the  actual  world  ; consequently,  the  system  of  the  actual
world  cannot  be  logically  necessary,  and  anything  that  is  the  case
might  have  been  other  than  it  is,  so  that  there  are  an  infinite  number
of  incompatible  systems.  Of  these  possible  systems,  only  one  (if
any)  can  be  actual ; which  is  actual,  if  any,  it  may  be  impossible
for  us  to  ascertain.

§2.  THE  NATURE  OE  ORDERS

A system  is  an  ordered  system  only  if  aU  its  constituent  elements
are  related  by  relations  having  certain  logical  properties.  These
logical  properties  dejme  order.  We  shall  begin  by  considering
familiar  examples  of  terms,  or  elements,  arranged  in  an  order.
The  set  of  whole  numbers  can  be  arranged  in  the  order  1,  2,  3,  4,
5 . . . 9^,  ^ + 1.  . . . The  set  of  points  on  a straight  line  exhibit
order.  The  succession  of  the  Kings  of  England  is  ordered.  The  set
of  words  on  this  line  exhibit  spatial  order  and  a syntactical  order.

Suppose  a non-defined  relation  S37mbolized  by  — of  which  the
following  assertions  are  true,  x,  y,  z,  being  the  elements ;

(i)  Not  (a;—

(ii)  Not  (both  a;*— and

(iii)  If  X is  other  than  then  either  x — > y ox  y — >•  x,

(iv)  li  x-^y  and  y — > 2^,  then  x — > z.

That  is,  the  relation  — > is  aliorelative,  asymmetrical,  connected
transitive.  Since  an  aliorelative  relation  that  is  also  transitive  must
be  asymmetrical  we  can  reduce  the  conditions  to  the  last  three.
It  will  be  seen  that  in  each  of  the  examples  given  above  the  elements
can  be  related  by  a relation  having  the  formal  properties  asserted
in  the  three  conditions.  When  they  are  so  related  the  elements  are
ordered.  For  example,  the  Kings  of  England  can  be  ordered  by  the

^ See  B.  A.  W.  Russell,  Int  Math.  PMl,  Chap.  IV ; Frinciflea  of
matics,  Chaps.  XXIY  and  XXV,


202


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


relation  successor  of;  tlie  points  on  a straight  line  can  be  ordered
by  the  relation  to  the  left  of;  the  set  of  numbers  can  be  ordered
by  the  relation  greater  than,

A relation  having  these  three  formal  properties  suflices  to  generate
an  order ; the  elements  thus  related  exhibit  serial  order.  It  is  to
be  observed  that  the  series  is  the  serial  relation  not  the  elements,
since  any  given  set  of  elements  may  have  different  orders.  For
example,  suppose  no  two  Kings  of  England  were  of  exactly  the  same
height,  then  the  Kings  could  be  arranged  in  the  order  generated  by
the  relation  taller  than  as  well  as  in  the  order  generated  by  the
relation  'predecessor  of  and  so  on.  Hence,  the  field  of  the  relation
cannot  be  taken  to  be  the  series.  The  minimum  number  of  elements
required  to  generate  an  order  is  three.  There  must  be  one  term
wHch  has  to  two  other  terms  converse  relations  that  are  asym-
metrical and  transitive.  Wherever  this  occurs  there  is  order.
Terms  which  are  not  in  an  order  can  be  ordered  by  the  construction
of  an  asymmetrical  transitive  connected  relation.  Thus  a series  can
be  generated  by  means  of  the  relation  between.'^  Between  is  an  asym-
metrical relation  transitive  by  pairs.  That  is  to  say,  if  h is  between
a and  c,  and  if  c is  between  b and  d,  then  c is  between  a and  d.  Any
triadic  relation  that  has  these  formal  properties  is  capable  of  ordering
the  elements  ; it  is  not  necessary  that  the  elements  should  be  spatial
or  temporal.  Mr.  Russell  has  shown  how  to  order  the  points  on
a straight  line  by  means  of  the  relation  between.  We  cannot  pursue
this  subject  here.  We  may,  however,  point  out  that  between  is  the
characteristic  of  an  open  series,  that  is  a series  that  does  not  return
to  the  starting-point.  If  we  consider  the  relation  to  the  left  0/ holding
between  people  seated  at  a round  table,  we  see  that  we  return,  after
a certain  number  of  steps,  to  the  person  from  whom  we  started.
If  now  we  have  the  five  people  A,  B,  C,  D,  E seated  round  the  circle,
we  see  that


D


A and  0 are  separated  by  B and  D,  and  B and  D are  separated
by  C and  E,  etc.  This  relation  is  called  the  separation  of  couples.

^ Of.  Russell,  Principles  of  Mathematics,  p.  214.  ‘ A term  y is  between  two
terms  x and  z with  reference  to  a transitive  asymmetrical  relation  R when  xBy
and  ^Ra;,  In  no  other  case  can  y be  said  properly  to  be  between  x and  z ; and


SYSTEM  AND  ORDER


203


It  has  been  shown  by  Vailati  that  the  separation  of  couples  involves
a dyadic,  transitive,  asjnnmetrical  relation,  relative  to  three  other
fixed  terms.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  given  at  least  four  terms  and
the  relation  between,  then  we  have  also  the  relation  of  separation  of
couples.  Thus  the  relation  of  separation  of  couples  may  he  formally
reduced  to  a relation  having  the  four  formal  properties  enumerated
in  the  four  conditions  laid  down  for  — >,  By  means  of  such  reduction
a closed  series  can  be  transformed  into  an  open  series.

It  win  be  observed  that  a transitive  dyadic  relation,  or  any
relation  transitive  by  pairs,  permits  of  the  elimination  of  inter-
mediate terms.  For  example,  if  a set  of  elements,  a,  b,  c . . , are
related  by  — the  place  of  any  element  k is  determined.  If  we  select
any  pair  (jy  k)  we  can  determine  the  place  in  the  series  of  any  other
element  /,  by  the  combination  of  assertions  such  as  a ->  c,  c — > j,
j — ^ In  this  way  we  are  able  to  base  inferences  upon  these
assertions  of  relation,  eliminating  any  number  of  intermediate  terms.
Thus  the  possibility  of  chains  of  deduction  is  seen  to  depend  upon
the  formal  property  of  transitiveness.  It  wiU  be  observed  that
implies  could  replace  since  it  has  the  required  property.

§ 3.  SIMILARITY  AND  STRUCTURE

The  notion  of  structure  is  one  with  which  we  all  feel  ourselves
to  be  familiar,  but  we  should  probably  be  at  a loss  if  we  were  asked
what  precisely  we  mean  by  it.  We  use  such  phrases  as  the  struc-
ture of  the  novel  ”,  the  structure  of  a play  ”,  and  so  on,  meaning
by  structure  ” the  ordered  connexion  of  the  component  parts.
Our  ordinary  conception  of  structure  is  reflected  in  its  etymological
derivation.  We  think  of  a structure  as  an  essential  framework,  a
way  in  which  elements  are  combined  in  an  ordered  manner.  A
house  is  a structure  because  it  is  not  a mere  heap,  or  agglomeration
of  bricks.  In  this  sense  “ structure  ” is  so  used  as  to  be  hardly
distinguishable  from  system.  But  when  we  speak  of  two  systems
having  the  same  structure  we  are  attempting  to  use  structure  ” in
a sense  that  requires  further  definition.  Thus  we  may  wish  to  ask
whether  a given  proposition  has  the  same  structure  as  the  sentence
by  means  of  which  it  is  expressed.  The  grammatical  structure  of
a sentence  is  the  syntactical  arrangement  of  its  component  elements.
To  understand  a sentence  it  is  necessary  to  know  both  its  syntax
and  what  the  separate  words  stand  for.  A dictionary-knowledge  of
the  meaning  of  the  words  used  does  not,  for  instance,  enable  the
beginner  in  Latin  to  construe  Latin  authors.  He  must  know  both

tMs  definition  gives  not  merely  a criterion,  but  tbe  very  meaning  of  between-
ness.’ It  is  not  possible  here  to  do  more  than  indicate  the  nature  of  serial  order.
The  student  who  is  interested  in  the  subject  should  consult  the  chapters  given  in
the  references.


204


A MODEEN  INTEODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


tlie  vocabulary  and  the  syntax.  He  can  then  ask  wbetber  a Latin
sentence  and  tbe  corresponding  English,  translation  have  the  same
structure.  Again,  we  may  ask  whether  the  space  we  perceive  has
the  same  structure  as  what  is  called  physical  space,  or  as  what  is
called  Euclidean  space.

Structure  is  a notion  of  fundamental  importance  for  science  and
philosophy.  Unless  we  have  a clear  conception  of  structure  we  are
not  likely  to  have  a clear  conception  of  the  nature  of  our  problems
and  the  possibility  of  their  solution.  It  is  to  Mr.  Russell  that
logicians  owe  the  precise  definition  of  structure.  We  shall  attempt
to  expound  his  explanation  as  simply  as  possible.  It  must  be  noted
jOrst  that  structure  does  not  apply  to  classes  or  collections  but  only
to  relations,  or  rather,  to  systems  of  relations.  There  is,  however,
a relation  that  holds  between  classes  the  consideration  of  which  is
useful  for  the  understanding  of  structure.  This  is  the  relation  of
similarity.

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  Chapter  VIII  we  pointed  out  that
counting  is  logically  a process  of  establishing  a one-one  correlation
between  a set  of  objects  and  the  number  series.  When  we  count
we  cannot  take  the  objects  in  any  order ; we  must  keep  the  order,
firsts  second,  third,  etc.  It  is  the  observance  of  this  order  that  enables
us  to  know  that  the  last  numeral  required  in  the  one-one  correlation
is  the  number  of  the  set  of  objects.  Under  certain  conditions  we
can  correlate  the  members  of  two  sets  without  observing  any  order.
If  one  member  of  the  one  set  can  be  correlated  with  one,  and  only
one,  member  of  the  other  set,  then  we  know  that  the  two  sets  have
the  same  number,  even  though  we  do  not  know  what  that  number
is.  Thus,  as  Mr.  Russell  points  out,  we  can  (assuming  monogamy)
establish  a one-one  correlation  between  the  set  of  wives  and  the
set  of  husbands,  since  (given  our  assumption)  the  relation  of  wife
to  husband  is  one-one.  We  can  thus  know  that  the  number  of
wives  is  the  same  as  the  number  of  husbands  although  we  do  not
know  how  many  married  couples  there  are.  Two  classes  that  can
be  thus  correlated  by  a one-one  relation  are  said  to  be  similar . The
correlating  relation  relates  each  term  of  the  one  class  with  one  and
only  one  term  of  the  other  class.  If  R is  a correlating  relation,
then  given  any  term  in  the  domain  of  R there  one,  and  only  one
term  in  the  converse  domain  of  R to  which  the  given  term  has  R.
We  can  now  state  Mr.  Russell’s  definition  of  similarity,  which  is
as  follows :

‘ One  class  is  said  to  be  similar  ” to  another  when  there  is  a
one-one  relation  of  which  the  one  class  is  the  domain,  while  the
other  is  the  converse  domain.’  ^

It  is  easy  to  see  that  similarity  is  reflexive,  symmetrical,  tran-
^ Int,  Math,  PML,  p.  16.  Tor  the  whole  of  this  section  see  loo.  cit..  Chap.  VL


SYSTEM  AND  ORDEK


205


sitive.  That  is,  if  a is  a class,  then  a is  similar  to  a ; if  a is  similar
to  the  class  ^8,  then  ^ is  similar  to  a ; if  a is  similar  to  and  ^ is
similar  to  the  class  y,  then  a is  similar  to  y.  Similarity  does  not
involve  qualitative  resemblance,  which  is  what  we  usually  mean
when  we  speak  of  likeness  It  is  a relation  wholly  definable
in  terms  of  one  to  one  correspondence.  By  means  of  this  notion
we  can  define  what  is  meant  by  the  assertion  that  two  systems  of
relations  have  the  same  structure.

We  shall  begin  by  considering  some  examples  of  systems  of
relations  that  have  the  same  structure.  For  example,  a ma'p  has
the  same  structure  as  that  of  which  it  is  a map.  Suppose  we  have
a map  of  England  and  Wales.  Then  the  place  on  the  map  corre-
sponding to  London  is  above  the  place  corresponding  to  Brighton,
because  London  is  north  of  Brighton.  ^ The  place  on  the  map
corresponding  to  Portsmouth  is  to  the  left  of  the  place  corresponding
to  Brighton,  because  Portsmouth  is  west  of  Brighton.  On  an  accurate
map  the  relative  positions  of  dots  representing  towns  correspond
to  the  relative  positions  of  the  actual  towns.  The  lines  representing
rivers  correspond  to  the  length  and  direction  of  the  rivers.  That
is  to  say,  the  relation  north  of  relates  one  town  to  another  town,
and  corresponding  to  that  the  relation  above  relates  one  mark  on
the  map  to  another.  We  often  make  maps  to  show  the  relations
holding  between  a set  of  terms,  since  the  spatial  relations  of  a map
are  easily  apprehended.  Whenever  we  use  a map  we  are  using  a
special  Imid  of  correlation.  We  correlate  each  town  with  a dot  on
the  map.  The  spatial  relation  on  the  map  corresponds  to  the  dis-
tance and  direction  of  the  towns.  Call  the  first  relation  R and  the
second  S.  Then  there  is  a one-one  relation  P whose  domain  is  the
field  of  R and  whose  converse  domain  is  the  field  of  S,  such  that
if  xlRy,  then  the  correlate  of  x has  S to  the  correlate  of  y.  In
such  a case  R is  said  to  be  similar  to  S.  Let  a and  J>  be  the  corre-
lates of  X and  y.  Then  we  have  xV  a .a^h  .hP  y.  Thus  the
relation  R is  the  same  as  the  relative  product  of  P and  S and  the
converse  of  P.  That  is  to  say,

‘^R  is  similar  to  S’’

The  relations  R and  S may  be  what  is  ordinarily  called  very
unlike  Relation-likeness,  or  similarity,  is  a special  kind  of
correlation.  The  members  of  the  field  of  R may  be  of  quite  a difier-
ent  kind  from  the  members  of  the  field  of  S,  so  that  the  relations
R and  S may  be  quite  different.  Black  dots  on  paper  are  very  unlike
towns,  but  the  system  of  dots  that  constitutes  the  noap  has  similarity,
or  relation-likeness,  to  the  system  of  towns.  Whatever  R may  be,
provided  that  it  is  sufficiently  simple,  we  can  make  a map  of  R.

^ It  is  a convention  of  cartographers  to  represent  north  of  by  above,  and,
consequently,  south  of  by  below.


206


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Consider,  for  instance,  a collection  of  people  and  the  dyadic  relation
hemf actor  of.  For  simplicity,  we  shall  limit  the  field  to  six  people,
a,  6,  c,  d,  e,  f.  Suppose  the  relation  B (benefactor  of)  holds  as
follows:  a]B&,  a'Bd,  aB/,  cB6,  cB  d^  fB  e.  We  can  make  a
map  of  B by  taking  six  points  and  connecting  with  arrows  the
couples  between  which  B holds.  Thus  we  get  the  map,

b


This  map  has  the  same  structure  as  the  relation  B.  If  we  add
c B e,  we  change  the  structure.  The  generating  relation  of  the  map
is  joined  hy  an  arrow.  If  we  changed  the  field  but  had  the  same
map,  we  should  have  the  same  structure.  Two  relations  that  have
the  same  map,  or  of  which  one  could  be  a map  for  the  other,  have
the  same  structure.  Thus  two  relations  which  have  relation-hkeness,
i.e.  which  are  similar ^ have  the  same  structure.  Hence,  structure  ’’
means  similarity  of  relations.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  simi-
larity is  confined  to  dyadic  relations  or  to  maps.  It  applies  to
relations  with  any  number  of  terms,  and  to  series.  Two  serial
relations  are  similar  when  their  terms  can  be  correlated  without
involving  change  of  order.  We  defined  similarity  by  means  of  a
one-one  relation.  But  we  can  adapt  the  definition  so  as  to  apply
to  a relation  in  which  the  correlating  relation  is  many-one.  We
shall  not,  however,  pursue  this  topic  further.  Enough  has  been
said  to  make  the  notion  of  structure  precise.

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  structure  is  an  important  notion
in  science.  Two  relations  that  have  the  same  structure  have  the
same  logical  properties.  Thus  if  S and  E are  similar,  then,  if  E
is  transitive,  S is  transitive,  if  E is  aliorelative,  S is  aliorelative,
if  E is  serial,  S is  serial,  and  so  on.  It  is  this  identity  of  logical
properties  that  makes  the  similarity  of  relations  so  useful.  To  say
that  the  space  of  the  external  world  is  Euclidean  is  to  say  that
the  system  of  actual  space  has  the  same  logical  properties  as  the
system  of  EucHdean  geometry.  To  deny  that  actual  space  is  Eucli-
dean is  to  deny  that  they  have  the  same  logical  properties*  Two
deductive  systems  that  have  the  same  structure  would  have  identical


SYSTEM  AND  OEDEK


207


properties.  If  every  element  in  a deductive  system  S could  be
interpreted  as  an  element  in  a system  S and  tbe  generating  relation
of  S were  similar  to  tbe  generating  relation  of  E,  then  S and  S would
have  identical  logical  properties.  Since  tbe  structure  is  independent
of  tbe  nature  of  tbe  terms,  and  similarity  is  independent  of  tbe
nature  of  tbe  relations,  it  follows  that  two  similar  systems  may
allow  of  diSerent  interpretations.  Tbe  development  of  science  is
due  to  a considerable  extent  to  tbe  discovery  that  two  different
systems  have  tbe  same  structure.

§ 4.  THE  METHOD  OF  INTEEPEETATION

Wben  we  ' read  a map  ’ we  interpret  tbe  coloured  markings  so
that  they  represent  contour  Hues,  isobars,  rivers,  mountains,  etc.
In  tbe  case  of  map-reading  we  know  to  begin  with  that  tbe  isobars
are  lines  connecting  places  on  tbe  map  correlated  with  places  on
tbe  eartb  where  tbe  mean  barometric  pressure  is  equal.  We  know,
if  we  look  at  a map  of  tbe  ' Chief  Occupations  of  tbe  World  ’ that
a green  patch,  for  instance,  can  be  interpreted  as  indicating  that
tbe  correlated  portion  of  tbe  eartb  surface  is  an  agricultural  area,
a red  patch  can  be  correlated  with  a manufacturing  area,  and  so
on.  Tbe  interpretation  is  easy  because  tbe  maker  of  tbe  map  knew
what  be  wanted  to  represent,  put  in  bis  lines  and  colours  accord-
ingly and  then  supplied  a key  to  explain  what  tbe  markings  repre-
sented. We  have  seen  that  if  tbe  map  is  accurate  it  has  tbe  same
structure  as  what  it  maps,  and  that  its  value  depends  upon  this
similarity.

Suppose  that  we  found  a map — or  rather  a sheet  of  paper  with
colours  and  markings  which  gave  it  tbe  appearance  of  the  geo-
graphical maps  with  which  we  are  familiar.  Suppose  that  we  did
not  know  bow  to  read  tbe  map  ; that  tbe  geographer  bad  forgotten
to  supply  a key.  It  is  conceivable  that  tbe  same  coloured  shapes
might  correspond,  for  a given  region,  both  to  tbe  distribution  of
occupations  and  to  tbe  distribution  of  forms  of  government.  It
would  depend  upon  our  interests  whether  tbe  map  interpreted  by
tbe  one  key  rather  than  by  tbe  other  would  be  more  important
for  us.  In  our  supposed  case  of  tbe  map,  however,  it  is  extremely
unlikely  that  both  modes  of  interpretation  would  fit  tbe  map.  But
in  tbe  case  of  a deductive  system  tbe  elements,  that  is,  tbe  proposi-
tions, might  be  taken  to  express  different  facts  and  yet  tbe  deductive
system  might  be  the  same  in  spite  of  this  difference.  We  saw  that
a deductive  system  can  be  constructed  starting  from  undefined
objects  to  which  we  assign  purely  logical  properties.  If  we  can
find  objects  that  can  be  fitted  into  the  system  because  they  are
related  by  similar  relations  we  are  said  to  " interpret  ’ tbe  system.

' Tbe  possibility  of  different  interpretations  is  due  to  tbe  fact


208


A MODEEN  INTEODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


that  deductive  systems  are  completely  formal.  The  elements  of  a
deductive  system  might  be  interpreted,  for  instance,  as  individuals,
or  as  classes,  or  as  sets  of  relations.  A system  of  geometry  is  a deduc-
tive system  the  nature  of  which  is  determined  by  the  initial  concepts
and  propositions.  We  saw  that  Euclidean  geometry  is  only  one
such  system.  It  is  sometimes  possible  to  interpret  a geometrical
system  in  such  a way  that  it  can  be  replaced  by  a system  initially
difierent.  Thus  the  two-dimensional  geometries  of  Eiemann  and
Lobatschewsky  have  been  interpreted  as  Euclidean  geometry  applied
respectively  to  a surface  with  a constant  positive,  and  a constant  nega-
tive curvature.  It  sometimes  happens  that  a scientific  theory  con-
structed with  reference  to  a certain  set  of  objects  is  found  to  be  a
system  having  the  same  structure  as  a system  constructed  with  refer-
ence to  another  set  of  objects.  For  example,  the  law  of  gravitation  is
the  law  of  the  inverse  square ; the  same  law  holds  of  electrical
attraction.  Hence  problems  in  electrostatics  can  be  solved  by  con-
sideration of  problems  of  gravitational  attraction.  Maxwell  was  led
to  his  electromagnetic  theory  of  light  by  consideration  of  the  similar-
ity of  relations  holding  between  light-waves  and  electric  currents.  ^
Thus,  a set  of  deductive  systems  differently  interpreted  became
maps,  or  models,  or  explanations  of  each  other.  The  detection  of
such  similarity  of  relations  aids  the  development  of  science.  The  fact
that  it  is  possible  to  derive  knowledge  of  one  set  of  objects  from  know-
ledge of  another  arises  from  the  similarity  of  their  relations,  which
involves  the  identity  of  their  formal  properties.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  method  of  interpretation  substitutes
for  the  initial  undefined  objects,  objects  that  have  non-formal  pro-
perties. In  this  substitution  consists  the  application  of  deductive
systems,  2 Mr.  EusseU  has  utilized  this  method  in  constructing  a
philosophical  theory  of  the  external  world.  His  explanation  of  the
method  may  be  quoted  here.

‘ It  frequently  happens  that  we  have  a deductive  mathematical  system
starting  from  hypotheses,  concerning  undefined  objects,  and  that  we  have  reason
to  believe  that  there  are  objects  fulfilling  these  hypotheses,  although,  initially,
we  are  unable  to  point  out  any  such  objects  with  certainty.  Usually,  in  such
cases,  although  many  different  sets  of  objects  are  abstractly  available  as  fulfilling
the  hypothesis,  there  is  one  such  set  which  is  much  more  important  than  the
others.  . . . The  substitution  of  such  a set  for  the  undefined  objects  is
“interpretation ’V  ®


^See  below,  Chap.  XVI,  p.  309.

* Cl  W.  K.  Clifford : ‘ Whatever  can  be  explained  by  the  motion  of  a fluid
can  be  equally  well  explained  either  by  the  attraction  of  particles  or  by  the
strains  of  a sold  substance ; the  very  same  mathematical  calculations  result
from  the  three  distinct  hypotheses ; and  science,  though  completely  independent
of  all  three,  may  yet  choose  one  of  them  as  serving  to  link  together  different
trains  of  physical  inquiry.’  • Analysis  of  Matter , p.  4.


SYSTEM  AND  OEDEE  209

Two  points  in  this  method  of  interpretation  require  emphasis.
First,  the  set  of  objects  substituted  for  the  imdefined  concepts  are
substituted  because  they  have  non-formal  properties.  It  follows
that  such  objects  can  only  be  discovered  by  experience  of  the  actual
world.  Secondly,  we  have  to  determine  what  is  meant  by  an  im-
portant interpretation.  The  importance  of  a given  set  of  objects
is  the  relevance  of  such  a set  to  our  interests.  Mr.  Bussell,  for
instance,  says  that  an  interpretation  is  important  when  ‘ the  initial
objects  have  been  defined  in  terms  of  entities  forming  part  of  the
empirical  world,  as  opposed  to  the  world  of  logical  necessity  The
interpretation  of  a geometry  which  would  make  it  a branch  of  pure
mathematics  is  said  to  be  convenient  and  legitimate,  but  it  is  not
an  important  interpretation.  There  is  no  doubt  that importance  ”
for  science  ultimately  means  capable  of  verification  by  sensible
observation It  is  in  this  way  that  deductive  systems  can  be
applied  to  the  exploration  of  the  external  world.  The  final  appeal
of  the  scientist  is  experimental.  The  logician  constructs  systems
which  are  susceptible  of  various  interpretations ; he  shows  that  the
data  of  experience  can  be  fitted  into  various  deductive  systems.
The  experimental  physicist  selects  that  deductive  system  which
admits  of  an  important  interpretation.  The  position  is  admirably
summed  up  by  Professor  Eddington,  who  says  : ‘ In  one  sense
deductive  theory  is  the  enemy  of  experimental  physics.  The  latter
is  always  striving  to  settle  by  crucial  tests  the  nature  of  the  funda-
mental things  ; the  former  strives  to  minimize  the  successes  obtained
by  showing  how  wide  a nature  of  things  is  compatible  with  all
experimental  results.’  ^

NOTE. — ^Mr.  J.  Wisdom  has  pointed  out,  in  Mind,  April  1931,  that  the  definition
of  similarity  of  structure,  given  on  page  205  above,  ‘ would  suggest  that  no  two
systems  can  have  the  same  structure  unless  the  generating  relation  of  the  one
is  difierent  from  the  generating  relation  of  the  other  ’ (loc.  cit.,  p.  268).  This
criticism  is  just.  Accordingly,  the  definition  should  be  amended  by  adding
that  R may  be  S.


^ The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Relativity,  § 103.


CHAPTEE  XII

INFEEENCE  AND  IMPLICATION


‘ It  is  not  therefore  the  object  of  logic  to  determine  whether  conclusions  be
true  or  false  ; but  whether  what  are  asserted  to  be  conclusions  are  conclusions^' —
A.  de  Morgan,

§1.  THE  NATUEE  OE  INEEEENCE

INFEEENCE  is  undoubtedly  a mental  process.  If,  therefore,  our
conception  of  logic  were  such  as  to  restrict  logic  to  the  theory
of  propositional  forms,  we  should  no  more  need  to  consider  the
nature  of  inference  than  the  mathematician  needs  to  consider  the
psychological  processes  whereby  a student  comes  to  apprehend  a
mathematical  theorem.  We  have,  however,  conceived  logic  more
widely.  We  recognize  that  the  systematic  investigation  of  the
conditions  of  valid  thinMng  forms  a part  of  logic.^  Hence,  the
logician  is  concerned  with  inference.

We  must  begin  by  distinguishing  inference  from  other  mental
processes  that  may  easily  be  confused  with  it.  A man  walking
along  a familiar  street  recognizes  more  or  less  clearly  the  various
objects  that  he  sees.  For  instance,  suppose  a Londoner  were  walk-
ing along  Oxford  Street.  He  might  see  a scarlet  object  moving
towards  him  and  at  once  recognize  it  as  a Royal  Mail  van.  Such
recognition  is  immediate.  It  would  be  naturally  expressed  in  the
judgement : “ That’s  a mail  van  Suppose,  now,  that  he  were
to  put  Jiis  hand  in  his  pocket  and,  feeling  an  object  against  his
fingers,  were  to  think  “ That’s  a pen  ”.  Here,  again,  his  recognition
would  be  immediate.  That  is  to  say,  in  the  first  case,  something
visually  presented  was  immediately  interpreted  as  ieing  a so-and-so  ;
in  the  second  case  something  tactually  presented  was  immediately
interpreted  as  being  a so-cmd-so.  Such  immediate  judgements  are
judgements  of  perception.  vWe  saw  in  Chapter  I that  what  is  visu-
ally  presented  to  us  is  always  less  than  what  we  correctly  say  we
see.^  But  it  does  not  follow  from  this  fact  that  when  we  say  “ This
is  a pen  ” we  are  inferring  the  pen  from  the  tactual  sense-datum ;
nor  that  we  are  inferring  the  table  from  the  sense-datum,  when
looking  at  a table  we  judge  “ That’s  a table  No  doubt  our  abihty

^ Cf.  Clia5>.  XXV,  § 1 tdoTT.  * See  p.  4.

210


INFERENCE  AND  IMPLICATION


211


to  perceive  that  this  is  a pen  and  that  that  is  a table  is  dependent
upon  our  past  experience.  But  there  is  equally  no  doubt  that  we
are  able,  as  a result  of  our  past  experience,  immediately  to  'perceive
that  this  is  a so-and-so.  In  such  immediate  recognition  no  inference
is  involved.^  There  is  no  passage  from  datum  to  conclusion.  Recog-
nition is  not  alwuysummedmteTTS^on  s^^  obstacle

in  a dark  room,  there  were  an  experience  that  would  be  properly
formulated  only  in  some  such  judgement  as  That  must  be  the
dog!!,  then  inference  is  involved,  however  rapid  the  process  of  inferring
may  have  been.

Inference  must  also  be  distinguished  from  suggestion  and  recol-
lection. A certain  scent  may  recall  some  occasion  in  the  past  when
^at  scent  was  perceived.  A wet  roof  in  the  distance  may  suggest
the  surface  of  a pond.  The  thought  of  the  pond  may  recall  a summer
holiday.  In  these  experiences  no  inference  need  enter.  There  may
be  nothing  that  could  be  expressed  in  the  form : “ This,  therefore
that  To  revert  to  an  illustration  given  in  the  first  chapter.  A
man  lying  on  a rock  indulged  in  an  idle  reverie  in  which  he  had
a succession  of  thoughts  suggested  partly  by  his  sense  experiences
of  the  moment,  partly  by  his  recollections  of  past  events.  This
random  thinking  was  not  controlled  by  factors  within  the  reverie
itself.  For  this  reason  we  contrasted  it  with  the  directed  thinking
in  which  the  man  engaged  as  soon  as  he  was  confronted  with  a
situation  that  presented  a problem  to  be  solved.  He  then  began  to
connect  one  apprehended  fact  with  others  in  a certain  definite,
way.  In  thus  connecting  he  was  inferring.

It  is  no  doubt  difficult  to  distinguish  precisely  between  those
experiences  in  which  inference  is  not  involved  and  those  in  which
it  is.  Psychologists  do  not  agree  as  to  where  the  line  should  be
drawn.  But  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  discuss  uncertain  cases.
We  are  concerned  only  to  decide  as  to  what  must  be  present  when-
ever  inf erence  occurs.  We  may  admit  that  a judgement  is  some-
tim^TakenToTSe  immediate,  which  later,  can  be  seen  to  have
involved  the  drawing  of  a conclusion  from  a datum.  It  is  not,
however,  legitimate,  to  distinguish  two  hinds  of  inference — psycho-
logical inference  and  logical  inference.  All  inference  is  psychological,
for  inference  is  a mental  process ; but  its  validity  depends  upon
conditions  that  are  not  psychological.

Inference,  then,  may  be  defined  as  a mental  process  in  which
a thinker  passes  from  the  apprehension  of  something  given,  the
datum,  to  something,  the  conclusion,  related  in  a certain  way  to

^ See  G.  E.  Moore,  “ Some  Judgments  of  Perception  ”,  Philosophical  Studies,
pp.  220-1, 225-7.  Ci.  especially  p.  226  : ‘ How  to  draw  the  line  between  judg-
ments of  tMs  kind,  which  are  judgments  of  perception,  and  those  which  are  not^
I do  not  know.^  ^


212


A MODEEN  INTEODtJCTION  TO  LOGIC


tlie  datum,  aud  accepted  only  because  the  datum  has  been
accepted.  The  datum  may  be  a sense-datum,  a complex  per-
ceptual situation,  or  a pronosition.  We  might  define  inference
more  shortly  by  saying  that  inference  is  the  mental  process  in
which  a thinker  passes  from  one  or  more  propositions  to  some
other  proposition  connected  with  the  former  in  a certain  way.  As
thus  defined  infer  ''  is  not  equivalent  to  ''  deduce  These  words
have  been  used  by  some  logicians  as  synonyms.  But  the  correct
synonym  of  “ deduce  ’’  is  formally  infer  The  word  inference  ”
is  correctly  used  in  a sense  wideen^gh  to  include  not  only  dedmtion
or  formal  inference,  but  also  any  passage  from  a datum.  A,  to  a cow-
elusion, ^Tln  other  words,  “ deductive  inference  ” is  not  a pleonasm,

or  inductive  j^emnee  ji^^o^a^tipn in  terms. ^ Whether  an

inference  is  deductive  or  inductive  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the
relation  that  holds  between  the  given  propositions  and  the  inferred
propositions.  This  relation  is  the  logical  basis  of  the  inference,  so
that,  unless  this  relation  holds  the  inference  cannot  be  valid.  But
this,  though  a necessary,  is  not  a sufficient  condition  of  inference.

I The  possibility  of  inference  depends  both  upon  the  iogicaljrela;tons
( holding  between  thejQroppsitioQ^  and  upon  tjmielati^^^

I to  these  propositions.  It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  inlerence  may
be  erroneous.  The  thinker  may  believe  that  two  propositions  are
so  related  that  the  one  can  be  validly  inferred  from  the  other,  and
he  may  be  mistaken  in  this  behef.  In  the  next  section  we  shall
consider  the  conditions  that  are  necessary  in  order  that  there  may  be
valid  inference.  But  we  must  first  discuss  the  nature  of  assertion.

It  is  obvious  that  a conclusion  that  is  inferred  is  asserted.  ”^iven
the  proposition  'p,  we  may  infer  therefor^.  '^The  therefore  ’’  marks
the  difference  "Between  implication  anainf^ence.  The  relation  of
implication  holds  between  two  given  propositions  inde^ndenHylof
any  i^iiE5F7wEo"ma^^  apprehendjEis  relatmn.  In


ofdSrthariEefe*sE^^  inference  there  must  be  a thinker  who
asserts  the  propositions.  There  is  clearly  a difference  between  assert-
^ pj^oposition  and  merely  considering  or  contemplating  or  assumvag
iti  Torexample  : ‘‘  If  p,  therTg^^’^'^does^^

assert  q ; whereas,  p,  therefore  q ''  both  asserts  y and  asserts  q.
It  is  not  easy  to  detef53ne"wEai*  exactly  constitutes  the  difference
between  an  asserted  and  an  unasserted  proposition.  It  is  obvious,
[however,  that  we  may  use  a form  of  words  to  express  a proposition


^ It  may  be  the  case  that  only  deductive  inference  is  valid  inference.  This
question  will  be  discussed  in  Chapter  XXI.  We  cannot,  however,  even  raise  the
question  as  to  the  validity  of  induction  without  assuming  that  there  is  such  a
thing  as  inductive  infere^e7~~It  is  hotewdflEwSiitlErRaaS^^
not  olstmguish  between  inference  and  deduction,  in  1927,  speaks  as  though  all
inference  were  inductive.  Cf,  The  Principles  of  Mathematics,  p.  11  n.,  v^h
An  Chaps.  VII  and  XXV,


imi^ENCE  AND  IMPLICATION


213


without  asserting  the  proposition.  Thus,  not  every  proposition  that
is  expressed  is  asserted.  For  example,  the  propositioii’^TCEe  match
will  he  scratched  ’’  may  be  the  implicate  of  the  proposition  If  this
heavy  rain  continues,  the  match  will  be  scratched  But  neither
of  these  simple  propositions  is  asserted ; what  is  asserted  is  that
the  implicate  is  true  if  the  implicans  is  rtuer“““S5a^^  one
rm^  say  Aristotle  believed  that  the  earth  is  immovable  ’’  without
agreeing  i5;5rj^h‘*335totIe*s  Belief,  and,  therefore,  without  asserting  the
proposition  “ The  earth  is  immovable  ”.  What  the  speaker  asserts
is  that  AristotleT33eved  a certain  proposition.  It  might  be  supposed
^ proposition  that  is  asserted  is  a proposition  believed  to  be

rtrue  Fy^e  person w£o  assertslU"“"Sut  there  would  be  a difficulty

in  maintaining  this ; for,  it  cannot  be  held  that  every  proposition
that  is  asserted  is  believed  by  the  person  asserting  it.  He  might
be  telling  a lie,  or  making  a joke.  Thus,  it  does  not  seem  correct
to  say  that  to  assert  a proposition  is  to  express  a proposition  that'
is  believed.  Thus,  belief  is  not J^he  same^  as  assertipji.  ^But  a pro-
position that  is  believ®"1s  "asserted  when  it  is  expressed.  It  may,
however,  be  believed  without  being  asserted  and  it  may  be  asserted
without  being  believed.^  All  that  we  seem  able  to  say  is  that  when
any  one  asserts  the  proposition  either  he  believes  p and  asserts
y to  be  true,  or  he  does  not  believe  'p  but  intends  his  hearers  to  accept
p as  true.  The  assertion  of  p,  then,  seems  to  be  equivalent  to  the
putting  forwarT7)TpnSi'lme7“evenT^

p m^TtoFbelBve  the  assertioiT^^  p mayT6^  regarded

as  equivalenETotEe  assertion  that  p is  true,^  It  is,  of  course,  obvious
that  p ” and  p is  true  ’’  do  not  express  the  same  proposition,
since  they  have  different  constituents ; but  they  express  equivalent
propositions.

It  seems,  then,  that  in  order  that  there  should  be  inference  the
propositions  which  constitute  the  premisses  of  the  inference  must
be_taken  for  true.  It  might  be  objected  that  a proposition  may
be  merely mTOToS^to  see  what  follows  from  it.  But  in
this  case  the  ccmclusion  would  not  be  inferred ; it  would  mSely
be  seen  to  b^TmpIiedrB^the  assumed  premiss.  Sometimes  we  may
sayT*"*TC^^  grante JlEEaFthe  proposition  p is  true ; then  q

^ Cf.  W.  E.  J.,  Pt.  I,  Chap.  I,  § 2.  Mr.  Johnson  seems  to  regard  assertion  as
eq.uivalent  to  conscious  belief,  and  to  hold  that  the  only  alternative  to  asserting
a proposition  that  is  believed  is  merely  to  utter  it,  i.e.  “ to  utter  without  belief
But  we  have  seen  that  a proposition  may  be  expressed  without  being  believed.
On  Mr.  Johnson’s  view  to  “ utter  ” a proposition  seems  to  mean  to  use  a form
of  words  that  couM  be  used  so  as  to  express  a proposition  but  which  is  so  used
as  to  express  nothing.

2 This  is  assumed  by  Frege  and  RusseU,  who  use  a special  symbol,  |~,  for
assertion.  Thus  “ |“  p ” is  to  be  read  “ It  is  asserted  that  p ” or  “ p is  true
(See  Principia  Mathematica,  p.  9.)


214


A MODEEN  lOTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


follows.”  Here  p is  assumed  to  be  true,  altbougb  tbe  assumption
tbat  f is  true  may  be  made,  as  we  sball  see,  in  order  to  establish
that  p is  in  fact  false.  We  conclude,  then,  that  for  the  purpose  of
inference,  the  propositions  must  be  asserted  and  that  an  asserted
proposition  must  be  taken  to  be  equivalent  to  the  assertion  that
the  proposition  is  true.

§2.  THE  COHDITIOHS  OE  VALID  INEEEENCE

In  this  section  we  shall  be  concerned  with  the  conditions  that
are  necessary  in  order  that  a deductive  inference  may  be  valid.  It
wiU  be  remembered  that  in  Chapter  VI  we  drew  a distinction  between
the  syllogism  regarded  as  a form  of  implication  and  the  syllogism
regarded  as  a form  of  argument.  Regarded  as  an  argument^  the
syllogism  is  an  inference  to  the  truth  of  the  conclusion  from  the
assertion  of  the  premisses.  We  marked  this  distinction  by  using
“If  . . . then  ...”  as  the  sign  of  implication,  and  “ therefore  ”
as  fhesigSTbl  argument,  i.e.  as  the  sign  of  an  disserted  conclusion.  In
order  that  we  should  be  able  to  pass  from  If  ,,  , then  to  therefore,
certain  conditions  must  be  fulfilled.  These  conditions  are  of  two
kinds,  which  have  been  clearly  distinguished  by  Mr.  Johnson.  One  set
of  conditions  refers  to  the  propositions  and  the,  relations  that  hold
between  theni.  These  conj^itions  are  independent  of  the  tfimES  and
are  called  by  Mr.  Johnson  the  “ constitutive  conditions  The
other  set  of  conditions  refers  to  the  relation  of  the  propositions  to
Iwhat  the  thinker  may  happen  to  Icnow.  These  relations  will  vary
iwith  the  knowledge  the  thinker  happens  to  possess.  They  are
called  by  Mr.  Johnson  the  “ epistemic  conditions  ” of  inference.^
JBoth  sets  of  conditions  are  necessary  for  valid  inference.  This  has
not  always  been  clearly  seen.  Mi.  Russell,  for  instance,  has
pressed  a view  that  suggests  that  alTEEat  is  necessary  lo?  inference
is  that  certain  rSaffons  should  hold’  between*  propositions.  Thus
he  said:  ‘In  the'discusSon  of  inference,"" it irbominonlio  permit
the  intrusion  of  a psychological  element,  and  to  consider  our  acquisi-
tion of  new  knowledge  by  its  means.  But^it  is  plain  that  where  we
valicHy  infer  one  proposition  from  another,  we_dp  sd^Js^^ of
^ "^^^oen  "ffie  propositions

perceive  it  or  not:  <{Be*lcmnd,  ihjfact”  is WpufelyTrec^Svein In-
ference a^commoi^sense  suppo  it  to  be"  in  perce^
objects.!  2 "gxit  the  possibility  of  ir^efence  is  conditioned  By^wTiat
the  thinker  knows  and  what  is  true,  as  well  as  by  the  logical  rela-
tions between  the  propositiops.

We  shall  begin  with  the  constitutive  conditions.  In  .order  that
the  proposition  q may  be  deduced,  or  formally  inferred  from  p,

^ Logic,  Pt.  I,  pp.  2-3 ; Pt.  11,  Chap.  I,  § 3.

* Bussell,  Principles  of  Mathematics,  p.  33.


INFERENCE  AND  IMPLICATION


215


there  must  be  between  'p  and  q a relation  such  that  ? is  a consequence
of  p.  This  relation  is  usually  called  implication  What  exactly
is  meant  by  implication  ” and  whether,  or  not,  there  is  more  than
one  relation  that  may  hold  between  p and  q in  order  that  q maybe
deduced  from  p,  will  be  discussed  in  a later  section.  Meanwhile
we  shall  continue  to  use  ^^implication  ” for  the  relatioETbSwieh
p and  q that  is  required  for  valid  mfereime.  It  is  to  be  noted  "that
implication  is  a logical  relation  holding  l)etween  the  propositions ;

thinker.  It  is  not  enough,  however,  that  n should  imply  q ; it  is
also  necessary  that  p shoMd  be  true,  if  q is  t^e  validly  iniSred  from
2^  This  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  in  inference  q is  asserted  and  p
must  also  have  been  asserted,  that  is,  p must  be  i{mZ~TEus,  as  Mr.
Russell  puts  it : ‘ When  we  say  therefore,  we  state  a relation  which
can  only  hold  between  asserted  propositions,  and  which  thus  differs
from  imnlication.  Whenever  therefore  occurs,  the  hypothesis  [i.e  the
implicans]  may  be  dr6ppe37“iiS!M§  itseff?  ^

That  IS  "to  say"  tTB.e  implicative  form  If  p,  then  q is  not  sufScient ;
we  need  If  p,  then  q, and  y..  The  conditi^oFtEat  v must  be  true
an^^iT^^^iatioa,  ■Oi.iffiplication..muslAdd^^  p and  q

are  the  constitutive  conditions.

Since  inference  is  a process  in  which  a thinker  passes  from  some-
thing known  to  something  inferred,  it  is  clear  that  we  could  not  say
we  had  inferred  q if  we  had  already  asserted  a.  It  is,  therefore,
obvious  that  q must  not  be  known  fo  be  true,  and  equally  obvious
that  q musTnoFRelSmi^^  We  must  also  know  that  p
imphes^^^T^  > relate  to  what  the

thmker  who  is  inferring  knows.  These  are  conditions  dependent
upon  the  relation  of  the  thinker  to  the  propositions  involved  in  the
process  of  inference.  These  two  sets  of  conditions  may  be  restated
briefly  as  follows :

Constitutive  Conditions  : (1)  p must  be  true ; (ii)  p must  imply  q.

Epistemic  Conditions : (i)  p must  be  known  to  be  true ; (ii)
p must  be  known  to  impfy  q without  its  being  known  that  q is  true.

^ loo.  cit.,  p.  35.  Cf.  also  Principia  Mathematica.  ‘ The  process  of  infer-
ence is  as  follows : a uronosition  “ nf  is  asserted,  and  a proposition  “ y implies
<f  ” is  asserted,  and  then  as  a seq  uS^the  ” is  asserted.  The  trust

in  infere^els  the  belief  that  if  the  two  former  assertions  are  not  in  error,  the
jBbaal  assertion  is  not  in  error.  . . . The  process  of  tErTn!erenSF}Mm.Qt^^^^
r^^^^^*[^mbols.  Its  sole  record  is  the  occurrence  of  pu.”  . . .

“ to  he  considered  as  a mere  abbreviation  of  tSetS&eefold

statement,  1- jp  ” and  “ D g)  ” and  Thus  “ [-“jpDj-g”  may  be

“ n.  therefore  g,’*  being  in  fact  the  same  abbreviation,  essentially,  as  this
is ; for  “pTtherSore  q ” does  not  explicitly  state,  what  is  part  of  its  meaning,
that  p implies  q.  An  inference  is  the  dropping  of  a true  premiss ; it  is  tlie
dissolution  of  an  implicailoirFlF^


216


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


It  follows  from  these  two  sets  of  conditions  that  although  p
may  imply  q when  q is  false,  yet  q cannot  be  validly  inferred  from
p unless  it  is  the  case  both  that  p is  true  and  is  known  to  be  true.
It  might  be  objected  that  the  form  of  argument  known  as  reductio
ad  is  incompatible  with  this  assertion.  But  such  an  objec-

tion would  rest  upon  a ncistake.  In  a reductio  ad  absurdum  we
assume  that ^jjproposition^^  toe Jn  order  to  show  thajt  jt^
wouldnm^  a^proposTtion  to  1^  true  which  hjcngwn  to  be  false ;
from  which  it  would  follow  that  the  proposition  assumed  to  be  true
is  false.  That  is  to  say  : we  know  (i)  g^Js  false  ; (ii)  p implies  q ;
we^sume  that  p is  toe,  and  hence  infer  that  q is  true."~Bursuice
the  truth  oij[  contradicts  the  falsity^of  y,  and^  is ^^own  to  be  false,
we  can  mfer  that  jo,  which  imphes  q,  is Jalse.  QThe  implicate  cannot
be  false  if  the  implicans  is  true.l  In  this  inference  the  same  con-
stitutive  and  jpistemc.^QOnditions  are  exhibited  as  "in  the  valid
inference  of£tom  p,  and  p implies  g',*  wFen  both  p and  q are  true.

§3.  THE  VALIDITY  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM  AS  A FORM
OF  PROOF

In  ordinary  discussion  the  syllogism  is  often  used  (generally  in
an  abbreviated  form)  as  a mode  of  establishing  that  a certain  pro-
, position  is  true.  Suppose  the  proposition  in  question  is  r.  Then
the  argument  takes  the  form : You  grant  p and  q ; you  admit
that  p and  q together  imply  r ; so  you  must  admit  that  r is  true.’’
The  word  proof  ” is  sometimes  applied  to  such  a mode  of  estab-
lishing that  a certain  proposition  is  toe.  The  validity  of  the  proof
depends  upon  the  correctness  of  the  admission  that  both^and  gr
are  true  as  well  as  uponnbErco5FectoSss“<^^
together  imply  r.  Now  it  is  clear  that  in  this  case  it  is  not  per-
nfissibIe*Touse  p and  q to  prove  r unless  it  is  the  case  either  that

p and  q require  no  proof,  or  that  they  have  been  proved withppt

me  assum^i^^  of  r.  If  r is  used  to  prove  y and  then

pin  used  to  provelT^EEereaSoning  is  circular,  and,  therefore,  fallacious.
iOSITacvno^^^  petitio  prw^^,  or  the  fallacy  of

begging  the  question.  For  exampe,  Suppose  tEit  we  attempted  to
prove  that  Hildebrand  is  fallible  by  deducing  this  proposition  from
the  two  premisses  All  men  are  fallible  and  Hildebrand  is  a man.
This  argument  would  be  fallacious  if  the  fallibility  of  aH  men  had
been  previously  established  by  reference  to  the  particular  case  of
Hildebrand  among  others.  Owing  to  the  cfrcularity  of  the  argu-
ment  the  conclusion  would  not  Eave  been  It  s

that  or  not.  *a  syllogistic  argument  is  circular  depends  upon

the  wav  in  which  the  major  premiss  has  been  obtained.

TSevuhdhtyand^tEeliselu^^  has  been

a platter  of  dispute  among  logicians,  Rut  the  main  points  that


INFERENCE  AND  IMPLICATION


217


arise  with  regard  to  syllogistic  inference  have  not  always  been  clearly
distinguished.  There  has  been  confusion  owing  to  the  fact  that

isome  of  the  disputants  have  attenipted  to  deAl  shnuItaneoud^^

four  quite ’different,,^questions.  We  shall  begin  by  distinguishing

these  four  questions.  Then  we  shall  attempt  to  see  what  bearing

[the  discussion  of  these  questions  has  ^ upon  the  question  whether
syllogistic  inference  is  valid.  Finally,  we  shall  briefly  consider
iSPstKeory"^^  syllogism.

The  four  questions  that  must  be  distinguished  are  as  follows :
(1)  Is  the  syllogism  a form  in  which  we  actually  do  reason  ? (2)  Is

the  syllogism  the  only  form  of  reasoning  ? (3)  Does  the  syllogism

give  us  knowledge  that  we  did  not  possess  before  ? (4)  Is  the  major
premiss  of  a syllogism  independent  of  the  conclusion  ?

(1)  That  the  first  question  should  be  answered  in  the  afiirmative
is  shown  by  our  treatment  of  the  syllogism  as  a form  of  argument.
Undoubtedly  our  everyday  arguments  are  abbreviated,  but  if  our
conclusions  were  challenged  we  should  often  attempt  to  reply  to  the
challenge  by  an  explicit  statement  of  the  premisses.  This  explicit
' statement  will  often  take  the  form  of  a syllogism,  ^r  of  an  antilogism.'

"^T^FWhen  it  IS  asked™ wEetheFlEe^syh^  is  th^nlyTorm  ot
reasoning  it  is  clear  that  reasoning  ^ must  be  understood  as  being
equivalent  to  ded.uctive  inf^ence^.  Certainly  it  is  impossIBre  to
malnlainthat  all  deduction  is  syllogistic.  Perhaps  no  contemporary
logicians  would  wish  to  maintain  that  it  is.  Accordingly,  it  is  not
profitable  to  discuss  the  erroneous  arguments  that  have  been  offered
in  support  of  an  aflSrmative  answer  to  this  question.

(3)  To  ask  whether  the  syllogism  gives  us  knowledge  that  we  did
not  possess  before  is  to  ask  whether  any  one  ever  learns  anjrfching
by  means  of  syllogistic  inference.  Tl^  is  equivalent  to  asking
whether  there  is  genuine  inference  in  a syllogistic  argument,  since,
unless  we  do  learn  something  which  we  did  not  previously  know,
there  is  no  inference.  It  may  at  once  be  granted  that  many  examples
of  syllogisms  given  in  textbooks  on  logic  are  so  familiar  that  the
reader  does  not  acquire  fresh  information  from  the  combination  of
the  two  premisses.  For  example,  the  reader  of  this  book  knew  that
Socrates  is  a man  and  that  all  men  are  mortal  long  before  he  found
these  propositions  so  put  together  as  to  constitute  a syllogism  in
the  first  figure.  But  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  find  exfl,-mp]p.,q
premisses  both  of  which  were  known  but  which  had  never  been
combined  by  the^inker  so  as  to  ^dd  a syllogism.  In  such  a case,
^e  thinker  might  apprehend  a connexion  between  the  extreme  terms
that  he  had  not  previously  noted. ^ But  it  is  not  at  all  easy  to  seel

^ Cf.  George  Eliot,  Daniel  Deronda,  Chap.  52 : ‘I  never  held  it  my  forte  to  be
a severe  reasoner,  but  I can  see  that  if  whatever  is  best  is  A,  and  B happens  to
he  best,  B must  be  A,  however  little  you  might  have  expected  it  beforehand/


218


A MODEKN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


wLat  tMs  question  Las  to  do  with,  the  problem  of  the  validity  of
syllofflstio  inference.  Yet  it  is  sometimes . assumed.,  that  if  this
question^te^ansTOredillJhjg„iij^a^  then  syllogistic  inference  can
■b0*'g0g2Tonbe  invalid.  Dugald  Stewart,  for  instance,  asks,  ‘ Is  it
possible  to  conceive  an  understanding  so  framed  as  to  perceive  the
truth  of  the  major  and  minor  propositions  and  yet  not  to  perceive
the  force  of  the  conclusion  ? The  contrary  must  appear  evident  to
every  person  who  knows  what  a syllogism  is’.^  There  is  some
difficulty  in  seeing  what  exactly  is  meant  by  this  question.  If  the
writer  means  to  assert  that  every  one  at  once  sees  the  connexion
betw:een  the  two  premisses^and  the  conclusion,
whether  his  reply  is  not  too  sweeping  au  .a^mative.  But  the  ques-
tion as  to  the  length  of  time  requir^ed  to  apprehend  the  connexion
between  ^ p and  q ’ and  ^ r ’ is  irrele^v^t  to  the  problem  at  issue,
for  the  problem  is  whether  we  can  know^  and  can  know  q and  can
know  ^ p and  q imply  r ’ without  having  previously  known  r.  If
we  ever  do  see  that  a proposition  follows  from  two  other  proposi-
tions, and  we  had  not  before  seen  that  this  was  so,  then  we  can  gain
fresh  knowledge  Wjneans  of  a syllogistic  inference.  "TBuFESe^
at  issue  is  not  ’wneOier  Ip-e  YEsgamEe^T^^  but  whether

the  truth  of  the  conclusion  must  be  known  before  the  truth  of  the
major  premiss  is  known.  This  question  relates  especially  to  the
subsumptive  syllogism,  and  leads  us  to  the  fourth  question.

(4)  The  question  whether  the  major  premiss  is  independent  of
the  conclusion  cannot  be  answered  until  we  know  what  is  meant
by  ''independent”.  The  major  premiss  can  certainly  be  known
without  its  being  the  ca^lSS^'EaF'cond^^  is  known.  That  is
fco  say,  it  may  be  independent.  We^,hay.e_,.now  to”s^

wfi^j^Ajcan  be  constitutively  independent.  In  all  valid  iSerence
the  conclusion  must  be  constitutively  implied  by  the  premisses,
so  that  the  major  premiss  cannot  be  true  unless  the  conclusion  is
true.  The  converse  does  not  hold,  since  implication  is  a non-sym-
Some  logicians  have  introduced  unnecessary
‘ confusion  in  discussing  this  question  by  using  the  word  " contain
In  this  context  " contain  ” is  an  unfortunate  synonym  for  " imply
We  have  not  to  consider  whether  the  premisses  imply  the  conclusion  ;
if  ^?^3’MO£S^mHSjQni5I^^aa7^Th£^q^stim  is  whethe
the  conclusion  forms

is  based.  If  it  does,  tES^SEreasomnSis^rcuia^^
the  case  if  the  major  premiss  were  a generalization  enumerating  a
number  of  instances  among  which  the  minor  term  had  been  included,
But  nojLjdljiijM  premisses  are  known  as  the  result  of  such  an  lenu-
xneratipi^.  If  mductioiTEe^vaBB^themSe^cond^

^ Works,  ed.  Hamilton,  III,  p.  74.

* Bosanquet.  The  j^ssentk^  of  Loqic^


INFERENCE  AND  IMPLICATION  219

may  not  constitute  part  of  the  evidence  upon  which  the  major
premiss  is  based.

To  sum  up  our  discussion  of  these  four  questions.  Those  lo^i-
cians  who  have  supposed  that,  no  reasoning  is  syllogistic  am  mistaken,
i^^fEnl^p^xho  to^jupppjed  th#

A valid  syllogistic  inference  involves  both  constitutive  and  epistemic
conditions.  It  is  sometimes  possible  to  know  the  major  premiss
without  knowing  the  conclusion;  in  such  cases  the  conclusion  is
epistemically  independent  of  the  m^or  jgremiss.  The  fallacy  of
petitio  principii  relates  to  the  epistemic  conations;  it  has  no
bearing  upon  the  constitutive  conditions.  Consequently,  since  the
syllogism  may  be  epistemically  valid,  it  cannot  be  regarded  as
circular  in  virtue  of  its  form.

Mill's  theory  of  the  syllogism  differs  in  two  respects. from  the

views  we  jj^t  J)ee^  considering.^  First,  whilst  agreeing  that
^ mHeviry  syUogism  considered  as  an  argument  to  prove  the  con-
clusion, there  is  a pctitio  principii ',  he  nevertheless  regarded  the
syllogism  as  a useful  and  valid  mode  of  inference  ; secondly,  he  held
that  the  evidence  for  the  conclusion  is  the  same  as  the  evidence
for  the  major  premiss,  so  that  either  (^Id  be  drawn  jpipi
from  tEF^mo  data.  The  first  of  IbEesiT  opinions  results  from  the
second,  which  must  be  examined  first.  There  has  been  considerable
misunderstanding  of  Mill's  views  due,  no  doubt  to  the  fact  tKaFFis
chapter  on  ‘ The  FmctioM,„and  Ya^^  of  the_  Syllogism ' is  ex-
tremely unclear  in  expression  and  contains  some  serious  inconsis-
tencies, some  of  which  may  be  only  verbal.  A careful  reading  of
the  chapter  suggests  that  Mill  recognized  that  the  problem  at  issue
was  the  epistemic  validity  of  the  syllogism,  and  that  its  solution
raises  the  question  how  we  have  come  to  know  the  maior  premiss.
His  answer  was  that  the  major  is  obtained  by  the  summation  of
particular  instances,  not  all  of  which  need  have  been  actually  ob-
served. ^ From  the  observation  of  certain  particular  instances  we
infer  a conclusion  that  includes  both  those  that  have  been  observed
and  those  that  have  not.  Thus  a universal  proposition  (which  forms
the  major  premiss  of  the  first  figure)  is  obtained  by  generalization

^ LogiCf  Bk.  II,  Chap.  III.  It  is  assumed  that  tlie  student  will  read  the  whole
of  this  chaptey

® Mills  language  is  very  misleading.  He  says ; * Now,  all  which  man  can
observe  are  individual  oases.  Rrom  these  all  general  truths  must  be  drawn,  and
into  these  they  may  be  again  resolved ; for  a general  truth  is  but  an  aggregate  of
particular  truths ; a comprehensive  expression,  by  which  an  indefinite  number  of
individual  facts  are  affirmed  or  denied  at  once.  But  a general  proposition  is  not
merely  a compendious  form  for  recording  and  preserving  in  the  memory  a
number  of  particular  facts,  all  of  which  have  been  observed.  Generalization
is  not  a process  of  mere  naming,  it  is  also  a process  of  inference,*

§ 3.)  ^


220


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


from  particular  cases.  The  generalization  takes  the  form : Xi,
Xa,  X3,  etc.  is  jp,  therefore  every  X is  ^ For  example,  from  the
particular  cases  ''  Plato  is  mortal  ’V^TAcistotle  is  mortal  and  so
on,  we  infer  the  conclusion  Every  man  is  mortal  Taking  this
universal  proposition  Mill  applied  it  to  the  case  of  a man  then  living,
viz.  the  first  Duke  of  Wellington,  and  deduced  the  conclusion  that
the  Duke  also  is  mortal.  Here  clearly  the  mortality  of  the  Duke
did  not  constitute  part  of  the  evidence  upon  which  the  major  was
based.  Hence,  the  conclusion  was  epistemically  valid.  Mill  then
contende(r'^EaFirTOrhWTog3HIIyne“^^^  the  major

in  order  to  draw  the  conclusion.  He  argued  that  we  could  pass  at
once  from  the  observation  of  the  particular  instances  to  the  general
premiss  or  to  the  particular  case  asserted  in  the  conclusion  of  the
syllogism.  He  maintained  that  the  evidence  for  the  conclusion
All  men  are  mortal  ” is  the  same  as  the  evidence  for  the  con-
clusion The  Duke  of  Wellington  is  mortal  Hence,  the  major
premiss  is  not  logically  necessary.  Mill  did  not,  however,  hold  that
the  major  is  superfluous ; he  maintained  th^  it  is  psychologically
useful JSi^rSi^i?ldisp^ens^

According  to  Mill  the  major  states  a generalization  from  the  observed
instances,  and  this  generalization  can  be  more  ggsily  rgmemb^ed
than  the  particular  instances,  .from  which  it  iF“  denyedT  The
major  thus  provides  a memory-saving  device.  Accordingly  ^ the
reasoning  lies  in  the  act  of  generalization  not  in  interpreting
the  record  of  that  act ; but  the  syllogistic  form  is  an  indispensable
collateral  security  for  the  correctness  of  the  generalization  itself
In  reviewing  Mfll’s  theory  of  the  syllogism  Mr.  Johnson  sums
up  his  argument  as  follows:  ‘Now  the  charge  of  circularity  or
'petitio  principii  is  epistemic ; and  the  whole  of  MitFs  argument
may  therefore  be  summed  up  in  the  statement  that  the  epistemic
validity  of  syllogism  and  the  constitutive  validity  of  induction,
both  of  which  had  been  disputed  by  earlier  logicians,  stand  or  fall
together ’.2  But  Ifc.  Johnson  appears  to  neglect  the  iTnpn-rt,a,nt.
part  of  MilFs  arguni^  A^ict  refuses  to  admit  that  the  major  jreimss
is  necessary.  Mill  saves  the  validity  of  the  .syilpgism  only

by  making  the^^  'it  must  also  be  noted  that

MilFis  certainly  mistaken  in  supposing  that  the  evidence  for  the
major  and  for  the  conclusion  is  the  same.  If  from  a set  of  instances
of  X,  each  of  which  is  p,  we  infer  that  one  other  X is  p,  the  prob-
ability of  the  truth  of  the  inference  is  much  greater  than  it  would
be  had  our  conclusion  been  every  X is  p.  MiU,  it  is  possible,  w'ould
have  refused  to  admit  this,  since  he  maintained  that  a proposition
obtained  by  induction,  such  as  “ All  men  are  mortal  is  certainly
true.  It  is,  however,  impossible  to  reconcile  Mill’s  views  on  induction
^ loocitFFir  xix.


INFEEENCE  AND  IMPLICATION


221


with  what,  he  says  a'^out  the  method  of  ol:^aining  the  major  premss
of  a sjUogism.  ^

§4.  IMPLICATION  AND  DEDUCTION
There  must  be  some  relation,  or  relations,  in  virtue  of  which
deduction  is  possible.  We  have  already  pointed  out  that  one  pro-
position is  sometimes  inferred  from  another  when  it  would  not  be
possible  to  deduce  the  one  from  the  other.  That  is  to  say,  not  all
inference  is  deductive.  We  have  now  to  consider  what  relation,  or
relations,  that  can  hold  between  propositions  would  make  deduction
possible.  This  question  has  been  very  fully  considered  by  the  mathe-
matical logicians,  who  desire  to  make  explicit  all  the  conditions  of
valid  deduction  and  to  carry  the  analysis  of  these  conditions  as  far
as  it  is  possible  to  carry  it.  Mr.  Eussell,  for  instance,  at  the  outset  of
his  discussion  says : ^ Now  in  order  that  one  proposition  may  be
inferred  from  another,  it  is  necessary  that  the  two  should  have  that
relation  which  makes  the  one  a consequence  of  the  other.  When  a
proposition  g'  is  a consequence  of  a proposition  p,  we  say  that  p
implies  q.  Thus  deduction  depends  upon  the  relation  of  implication,
and  every  deductive  system  must  contain  among  its  premisses  as
many  of  the  properties  of  irnplicatiQn  as  are  nece^^^^  tdlegitimate
theoHinarFpr^^  of  deduction.^  2 certainlyhe“agreed

that  in  order  that  q can  be  deduced  from  p,  there  must  be  such  a
relation  between  them  that  q is  a consequence  of  p.  This  relation  has
usually  been  called  implica^h'^Tsb  tha^^^  Eussell  appears  to  be
in  agreement  with  the  ordinary  usage  of  language  when  he  uses  the
expression  p implies  q ” for  the  relation  that  holds  between  p and  q
when  ? is  a consequence  of  p.  In  the  preceding  chapters  we  have
constantly  used  the  word  implies  ’’  in  this  sense.  We  said  that  the
premisses  of  a syllogism  imylu  the  conclusion ; that  a proposition
imylies  its  obverse,  and  so^on.  When  y implies  g,  then  q can  be
deduced  from  p.  This  language  is  in  agreement  with  common  sense.
To  say  that  g'  is  a consequence  of  p,  or,  to  use  an  equivalent  expres-
sion, that  q ''  follows  from  ” p,  is  to  say  that  q can  he  deduced  from  y,
^ There  will  be  general  agreement  that  imph'^ion
used  to  express  this  relation.  But  it  is  not  clear  from  this  agreement
wheSSnETjRSiSi^^  using  the  word  ''  implies  ” in  the  sense

in  which  implies  means  the  converse  of  is  a consequence  of
i.e.  in  a sensevhaST^wouM^e^r^^  of  the  relation

. follows  from  Whether,  or  not,  this  is  the  case  we  shall  have  to
consider.

^ It  is  impossible  to  reconcile  Mill’s  contention  that  the  general  proposition  is
a mere  convenient  abbreviation  with  his  view  that  the  generalization  involves
inference.

® Princifim  Mathematica,  p.  90.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  “ inferred  ” here
means  “ deductively,  or  formaEy,  inferred


^22  "A  MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

We  shall  begin  by  discussing  the  idd^&OTi  follows  from.  Professor
Moor^  uses  the  word  ^tails  ” to  express  the  converse  of  follows
from  ”,  and  we  shall  use  this  word,  since  we  want*to  discuss  whether
“ implies  ” is  used  in  a sense  in  which  it  does  not  mean  the  converse  of
‘ ‘ follows  from  ” . The  relation  of  entailing  is  not  definable.  ^ What  it
means  can  only  be  explained  by  giving  examples  of  propositions
between  which  the  relation  holds,  which  will  be  perfectly  familiar.
This  is  the  method  adopted  by  Professor  Moore.  ^ He  says  ihQi.%  follows
must  be  ' understood  in  the  sense  in  which  from  the  proposition  with
regard  to  any  term,  that  it  is  a right  angle,  it  follows  that  it  is  an
angle,  and  in  which  from  the  proposition  with  regard  to  any  term
that  it  is  red  it  follows  that  it  is  coloured.  There  is  obviously  some
very  important  sense  in  which  from  the  proposition  that  a thing  is  a
right  angle,  it  does  follow  that  it  is  an  angle,  and  from  the  proposition
that  it  is  red  it  does  follow  that  it  is  coloured  He  points  out  that
we  need  ‘ some  term  to  express  the  converse  of  that  relation  which  we
assert  to  hold  between  a particular  proposition  q and  a particular
proposition  p,  when  we  assert  that  q follows  from  or  is  deducihle  from  p \
This  relation  is  to  be  expressed  by  entails  He  points  out  that
‘ ‘‘  p entails  q ” will  be  related  to  q follows  from  p ” in  the  same  way
in  which  “ A is  greater  than  E ” is  related  to  E is  less  than  A ”
What  is  her^pomted^ut  is  that  there  is  a relation,  which  is  easy  to
see,  that  holds  between  the  proposition  ‘ This  is  red  ’ and  the  pro-
position ' This  is  coloured  ’ in  virtue  of  which  the  second  is  deducihle
from  the  first.  Thus, " This  is  red  ^ entails  ' This  is^'coIo^TU
again,  obvious  that  the  conclusion*’"^  sT  syllogism  in  Barbara  is
deducihle  from  the  two  premisses,  taken  as  a conjunctive  proposition.
This  conjunctive  p^mss  th^conclusjon.  For  example,  All
a’s  are  ^ and  S is  an  a ” entailP^^^m  a ^ When,  therefore,  we  use
the  word  implies  ” to  express  the  relation  that  holds  between  the
premisses  and  the  conclusion  of  a valid  syllogism,  we  mean  by
“ imnlies  ” what  is  now  being  called  entails  These  examples
showwhat'^'^entmls^^  we  do  not  attempt  to  define

the  relation.  The  meaning  may  be  made  clearer  by  the  consideration
of  some  examples  of  propositions  between  which  the  gelation  of  entail-
ingjines  not  hold,  although  one  of  the  propositions  isno’douEriome-
times  inferred  from  the  other.  The  proposition  Baldwin  is  a

^ Professor  C.  I.  Lewis  uses  the  expression  **  strictly  implies  ’’  for  entails
It  is  true  that  he  does  define  strict  implication  for  the  purposes  of  his  symbolic
system.  But  he  takes  the  notion  of  impossibility  as  undefined,  and  defines
‘ strict  implication  ’ in  terms  of  impossibility  and  negation*  But  such  a defini-^
tion,  though  useful  for  his  purpose,  would  not  help  us,  since  impossibility  is  a less
clear  notion  than  entailing*  (See  A Survey  of  Symbolic  Logic,  p.  298.)

* Philosophical  Studies : “ External  and  Internal  Relations  ”,  pp.  284-5, 291.

® In  the  remainder  of  this  section  we  use  inverted  commas  instead  of  italics
to  distinguish  propositions  from  the  text.


INFEEENCE  AND  IMPLICATION


223


politician  ” does  not  entail  “ Baldwin  does  not  keep  Ms  promises  ’’ ;

Socrates  is  a man  ’’  does  not  entail  Socrates  is  mortal  ’’  although,
both  are  true  and  “ Socrates  is  a man  ” together  with  ''  All  men  are
mortal  ” does  entail  Socrates  is  mortal’’.  It  might  be  suggested
that  ''  entails  ” is  a name  for  a se'^:evident  rela^n.  No"Houbt  the
relation  pl,5SiaiSn£ia.sdt  self  evident  is  a psychological

notiop,  and  we  are  maintaining  that  thej^^^  that^lds  betwe^
‘‘  TMsi^redjl,iP;nd  ^''^This.i^  ” is  kjqgicgi  relatio^“^w^^

could  n9l,]bQ  ..defined  psjchoMgical  terms7  ^

In  the  preceding  paragraph  we  have  been  contending  that  the
relation  that  holds  between  f and  q when  q can  be  deduced  from  y is
that  of  entailing.  Given  the  relation  entails^  then  deduction  is
possible.  We  have  now  to  inquire  whether  tMs  is  the  relation  which
Mr.  Eussell  expresses  by  implies  ”,  and  if  not,  whether  the  sense  in
which  he  uses  the  expression  ''  implication  ” is  such  that  when  ''  p
implies  q ”,  “ q is  deducible  from  p

Mr.  Eussell  distinguishes  between  material  implication  sioA.  formal
implication.  He  defines  material  implication  ” in  terms  of  dis-
junction 1 and  negation.  Thus  p implies  q ” is  defined  to  mean

Either  p is  false  or  q is  true  ” (i.e.  Either  not-p  or  q ”).2  This  is
equivalent  to  ‘‘  It  is  not  the  case  that  p is  true  and  q is  false  Eor
example,  Socrates  is  a man  ” materially  implies  Socrates  is
mortal  ” means  It  is  not  the  case  that  ‘ Socrates  is  a man  ’ is  true
and  ‘Socrates  is  mortal’  is  false”.  “‘Baldwin  is  a politician’
materially  implies  ‘ Baldwin’s  industrial  policy  is  far-seeing  ’ ” means
“ It  is  not  the  case  that  ‘ Baldwin  is  a politician  ’ is  true  and  ‘ Bald-
win’s industrial  policy  is  far-seeing  ’ is  false  ”,  or  in  the  equivalent
form,  “Either  Baldwin  is  not  a politician  or  Baldwin’s  industrial
pohcy  is  f^seeMg^’.  By  formal  implication  Mr.  Eussell  means
general  material  implication.  For  example,  to  say  that  “ All  men  are
mortal  ” states  a formal  implication  is  to  say  that  the  proposition
“ X has  the  property  of  heing  a man  ” materially  imphes  “ X has  the

^ p and  q are  disjoined  when  the  relation  either  ...  or  holds  between  them.
Thus  Mr.  Russell  uses  “ disjunction  ” to  express  what  we  have  called  " alterna-
tion

® It  will  be  convenient  to  quote  Mr.  Russell’s  own  statement :
‘The  essential  property  that  we  require  of  implication  is  this:  “What  is
impHed  by  a true  proposition  is  true.”  It  is  in  virtue  of  this  property  that
implication  yields  proofs.  But  this  property  by  no  means  determines  whether
anything,  and  if  so  what,  is  implied  by  a false  proposition.  What  it  does  deter-
mine is  that,  if  p implies  g,  then  it  cannot  be  the  case  that  p is  true  and  q is  false,
i.e.  it  must  be  the  case  that  either  p is  false  or  q is  true.  The  most  convenient
interpretation  of  implication  is  to  say,  conversely,  that  if  either  p is  false  or  q is
true,  then  “ p implies  g ” is  to  be  true.’  Princ.  Mathematical  I,  p.  94.  Mr.
Russell  uses  “ implication  ” without  the  prefix  “ material  ” in  Principia  Mathe-
matica  for  the  relation  which  in  the  Principles  of  Mathematics  he  called  “ material
implication  .


224


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTIOF  TO  LOGIC


property  of  being  mortal  whatever  X may  be.  Or,  to  use  Mr.
Russeirs  language  of  propositional  functions,  we  can  say  that  a formal
implication  is  obtained  when  it  is  asserted  that  for  every  value  of  x,
the  proposition  ' a?  is  a man  ’ materially  implies  ‘ x is  mortal  Thus
formal  implication  is  a class  of  material  implications  ; it  asserts  that
in  every  case  of  a certain  set  of  cases  material  implication  holds.

If  anything  has  S,  then  that  thing  has  M ''  states  a formal  implica-
tion.

It  is  the  relation  of  material  implication  that  Mr.  Russell  regards
as  the  sole  relation  in*’’ratue'‘or^  is  possible.  Thus

he  says,  ' The  relation  in  virtue  of  which  it  is  possible  for  us  validly
to  infer  is  what  I call  material  implication.’  ^ He  argues,  ‘ It  would
certainly  not  be  commonly  maintained  that  ‘'2  + 2 = 4”  can  be
deduced  from  “ Socrates  is  a man  ”,  or  that  both  are  implied  by
“ Socrates  is  a triangle  ”.  But  the  reluctance  to  admit  such  implica-
tions is  chiefly  due,  I think,  to  preoccupation  with  formal  implica-
tion, which  is  a much  more  familiar  notion,  and  is  really  before  the
mind,  as  a rule,  even  where  material  implication  is  what  is  explicitly
mentioned.’  It  is  at  least  clear  that  the  relation  that  holds  between
“ Socrates  is  a man  ” and  “ 2 + 2 = 4 ” is  not  the  relation  of  entail-
ing, Certainly  it  is  true  that  either  “ Socrates  is  a triangle  ” is  false
or  that  “ 2 + 2 = 4 ” is  true,  since,  in  fact,  the  first  of  these  pro-
positions is  false  and  the  second  is  true.  But  it  seems  clear  that  it
caimot  be  maintained  that  “2  + 2 = 4”  is  a consequence  of
“ Socrates  is  a triangle  ”.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  entails  and
materially  implies  are  quite  different  relations.  The  relation  that
holds  between  “ This  is  red  ” and  “ This  is  coloured  ” is  totally
different  from  the  relation  that  holds  between  “ Socrates  is  a triangle  ”
and  “2  + 2 = 4”.  If  this  be  so,  it  seems  unfortunate  that  the  same
word  “implies”  has  been  used  to  express  both  relations.  Mr.
Eussell  in  defending  his  use  of  “ implies  ” in  a sense  in  which  no  one
had  ever  used  the  word  says,  ‘ Provided  our  use  of  words  is  consistent
it  matters  little  how  we  define  them.’  ^ Ho  doubt  the  principle  of
Humpty  Dumpty  has  something  to  be  said  for  it.  But  the  use  of  a
word  already  familiar  in  a certain  sense  to  express  a sense  different
from  its  original  meaning  and  liable  to  be  confused  with  it  is  apt  to
lead  to  unfortunate  consequences.  It  is  diflicult  not  to  sUp  back  to
the  original  meaning,  and  thus  to  perplex  oneself  and  others  with
apparent  paradoxes,  and  even  to  fall  into  obvious  falsities.  Mr.
Russell  has  not  always  been  able  to  keep  the  two  meanings  of
“implies”  distinct.  He  seems  to  have  been  led  by  the  familiar
associations  of  the  word  “ implies  ” into  what  Professor  Moore  calls
the  “ enormous  ‘ howler  ’ ” of  supposing  that  ‘ “ q can  be  deduced
from  p ” means  the  same  as  “ p materially  implies  q ” This

^Princifles  of  Mathematics,  §38,  Math,  Phil,  p.  146.


INFEUMCB  AM)  IMPLICATION


225


‘ howler  ’ Is  the  explanation  of  Mr.  Eussell’s  statement  quoted  above
that  2 + 2 = 4 ” is  implied  hy  ‘‘  Socrates  is  a triangle  ’’  and  that
‘^2  + 2 = 4”  can  he  deduced  from  “ Socrates  is  a man

The  distinction  between  materially  implies  and  entails  might  be
brought  ouTmanotEeFl^  notion  of  logical

impossibility.^  We  can  see  that  it  could  not  be  true  that  X is  a right
angIe“S3.  yet  false  that  X is  an  angle  ; or  that  it  could  not  be  true  that
this  is  red  and  yet  false  that  this  is  coloured.  We  do  not  attempt  to
define  “ logical  impossibility  ”,  but  we  say  that  to  say  that p entails
j^TsTo~s^  that  it  could  not  be  the  case  that  p is  true  and  q false.
To  say  that  “ p materially  implies  q ” is  to  say  that  it  is  not  as  a matter
of  fact  the  case  that  p is  true  and  q false.  It  seems  plain  that  there  is
an  important  difference  between  cguld  not  he  ” and  is  not  as  a
rmtter  offact  ” and  that  this  difference  is  exemplified  in  the  difference
oTtETidation  that  holds  between  This  is  red  ” and  This  is
coloured  ” from  the  relation  that  holds  between  Socrates  is  a tri-
angle ” and  ‘‘2  -f-2  = 4 ”.  Can  anything  be  said  to  justify  our  mak-
ing this  distinction  ? In  discussing  this  question  it  will  be  convenient
to  use  shorthand  symbols.  We  shall  symbolize  entails  ” by
Professor  Moore’s  symbol  ‘‘  ent^\  and  materially  implies  ” by  the
symbol  ♦ which  Professor  Moore  uses  for  Mr.  Eussell’s  sjunbol  3 .

We  wish  to  maintain  that  if  ‘‘  p ent,  q ” means  p could  not  be
true  and  q false  ”,  then  there  is  between  p and  q a relation  such  that
q folhws  logically , OT  formally  from  p.  No  matter  what  p and  q may
be,  p ent,  q therT  be  formally  deduced  from  p.  If

p ♦ 2 ” means  y is  not  as  a matter  of  fact  true  and  o false  ”,  then
there  is  not  such  a relatio^etween  ^ that  q can  be  formally
deduce3’T?omri5r‘^^  couIdjaSTEP^is^^

lent  to  never  as  a matter  of  fact  is  ”.  This  means  that  to  say  “ ‘ a;  is
a right  angle  ’ ent  ‘ a?  is  an  angle  ’ ” is  equivalent  to  sa3dng  that  “ x
is  a right  angle  ’ ★ ' a;  is  an  angle  ’ whatever  x may  be.”  That  is  to
say,  we  explain  material  implication  when  it  holds  between  p and  q,
as  equivalent  to  entails  provided  that  p ♦ g'  ” is  an  instance  of  a
true  formal  implication.  In  other  words,  according  to  this  explana-
tion, ^ This  is  red  ’ ent  ^ This  is  coloured  ’ ” means  ' This  is  red  ’ *
‘ This  is  coloured  ’ ” and  this  is  an  instance  of  a propositional  function
that  is  always  true.

This  seems  to  be  Mr.  Eussell’s  view.  To  say  that  p could  not  he
false  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  p necessarily  is  true.  Now,  Mr.

Eussell  says  that  what  necessary  ^^jm^ans is  that  a propositional  <

function  is  alw-avs  true.  Thus  he  says,  ‘ . . .|

are  of  three  kinds  : those  which  are  true  for  all  values  of  the  argu-
ine3Fm^‘"arguments,  those  which  are  false  for  all  values,  and  those
whl3E*SrSuFlOT  io^  false  for  others.  TEe^Ssl

^Tbis  is  the  method  followed  by  Professor  C.  L Lewis.


15


226  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

may  be  called  necessary,  the  second  impossible,  the  third  possible/  ^
Thus,  accordingto"^.  Russell’s  view^^rins  no  difference  between
saying  This  is  red  ” enL  ""  This  is  coloured  ” and  ' This  is  coloured  ’
is  true  in  all  cases  when  ^ This  is  red  ’ is  true  Or  again,  between
saying  ''  ' This  is  a right  angle  ’ enL  ' This  is  an  angle  ’ ” and  ‘ This
is  an  angle  ’ is  true  in  aU  cases  when  ^ This  is  a right  angle  ’ is  true
Hence,  on  this  view  “ All  men  are  mortal  and  Socrates  is  a man  ” is
related  to  Socrates  is  mortal  ” as  Baldwin  is  now  Prime  Minister  ”
is  related  to  All  conservative  Prime  Ministers  in  this  century  have
had  names  beginning  with  B ”,  since  these  latter  two  propositions  are
both  true.  It  seems  clear,  however,  that  the  proposition  Baldwin
is  now  Prime  Minister  ” cannot  be  deduced  from  “ All  conservative
Prime  Ministers  in  this  century  have  had  names  beginning  with  B ”,
That  these  relations  are  not  the  same  does  indeed  seem  obvious.

This  long  discussion  can  be  summed  up  in  the  statement  that  the
relation  that  must  hold  between  propositions  when  they  are  such  that
the  one  can  be  deduced  from  the  other  is  the  formal  relation  of
entailing,  Theze,niav  be  different  kinds  of  enbailing^^  “ ^ can  be

^ The  Analysis  of  Matter,  p.  170.  Mr.  Russell  states  the  same  view  in  his
lectures  reprinted  in  The  Monist,  1919,  p.  193.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  that
Mr.  Russell  would  admit  that  his  identification  of  “ materially  implies  ” with  the
converse  of  “ follows  from  ’’  is  a ‘ howler  although  Professor  Moore  suggests
that  he  would.


PART  II


CHAPTEE  Xni

THE  NATURE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INQUIRY

‘ Me  ipsum  autem  ad  veritatis  contemplationes,  quam  ad  alia,  magis  fabre-
factum  deprehendi ; ut  qui  mentem  et  ad  reram  similitTidinem  (quod  maximum
est)  agnoscendam  satis  mobilem,  et  ad  differentiarum  subtilitates  observaudas
satis  fixam  et  intentam  baberem ; qui  et  quaerendi  desiderium,  et  dubitandi
patientiam,  et  meditandi  voluptatem,  et  asserendi  cunctationem,  et  resipiscendi
facilitatem,  et  disponendi  soUicitudiiiem  tenerem ; quique  nee  novitatem
afiectarem,  nec  antiquit  at  em  admirarer,  et  omnem  imposturam  odissem.’ —
Francis  Bacon.

§1.  THE  IMPOETANOE  OF  ORDER

SCIENTIFIC  tMnking  is  controlled  and  directed  tbinkiag  ; it  is
essentially  methodical.  Controlled  thinking  in  so  far  as  it  is
successful  issues  in  the  organization  of  facts  originally  appre-
hended as  fragmentary,  disconnected,  or,  it  may  be,  discordant.
Organization  is  achieved  by  the  discovery  of  connexions  whereby  one
fact  is  related  to  another.  The  isolated  facts,  given  as  disconnected
are  fitted  together  into  an  orderly  arrangement  that  yields  what
relatively  to  the  starting-point  may  be  regarded  as  a whole,  or
system.  Order  is  not  the  same  as  system.  What  is  ordered  are  the
particular  facts  ; the  system  is  the  orderly  arrangement  that  results.
The  vague  word  fact  ” has  been  used,  since  it  is  peculiarly  appro-
priate to  the  type  of  order  that  is  most  apparent  at  the  beginning  of
scientific  inquiry.  But  order  is  a concept  required  for  other  purposes
than  science.  In  attempting  to  explain  what  order  is  it  is  convenient
to  use  the  term  element.  Elements,  then,  may  be  regarded  as  indi-
viduals, as  facts,  as  objects  of  any  kind;  elements  are  what  are
ordered.  We  have  to  contrast  a disorderly  collection  of  individuals
with  an  orderly  array.  An  array,  or  class,  of  elements  is  not  as  such
an  orderly  array.  That  is  to  say,  order  is  not  achieved  by  classing.
If  aU  that  we  know  of  an  individual  is  that  it  belongs  to  a class  whose
defining  property  we  know,  then  what  we  know  of  that  individual  is
limited  to  what  can  be  deduced  from  that  defining  property.  Know-
ledge about  other  members  of  the  class  gives  us  no  further  knowledge
of  this  individual.  It  is  otherwise  with  an  orderly  array.

Consider,  for  instance,  the  class  composed  of  all  the  people  in  a

227


228


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


given  building,  say  a Quakers’  meeting-kouse.  We  can  infer  about
some  of  them  with  some  degree  of  probability  that  they  will  have
characteristics  usually  associated  with  Quakers.  But  others  than
Quakers  may  be  present.  Even  if  we  exclude  these,  thus  assuming
that  only  Quakers  are  in  the  building,  aU  that  we  know  about  any  one
of  these  individuals  is  what  is  given  in  the  defining  property  of
Quakerism.  But  now  suppose  that  the  building  is  the  General  Post
OfiSce.  Here  we  have  persons  acting  in  a certain  way  in  virtue  of
their  membership  of  a certain  organization.  The  building  is  no
longer  required  to  select  the  set  of  individuals.  We  include  all  the
individuals  ordered  by  the  Post  Office  organization.  Again,  a com-
mercial organization,  such  as  Selfridge’s  Stores,  orders  a set  of  indi-
viduals, whose  properties  are  determined  not  merely  by  membership
of  a class  but  by  membership  of  an  orderly  array.  A law-court,  a
college,  a school,  a well-conducted  household,  present  examples  of
Cbrderly  arrangement.  To  say  that  a household  is  well  conducted  ”
is  to  say  that  it  exhibits  orderly  arrangement,  that  the  duties  and
privileges  of  its  members  are  determined  by  their  position  in  the
organization.  Thus  an  orderly  arrangement  is  what  is  usually
meant  by  a system.  JChe  system  is  a system  because  it  consists  of
ordered  elemenfi^  ThewordT^^stem tsl)ften'use3rsdl)slo“^^
its  application  to  arrangements  that  exhibit  certain  types  of  order.
But  it  is  better  not  so  to  restrict  it,  and  to  admit  that  orderliness  is
susceptible  of  degrees.

We  may  say  more  precisely  that  a set  of  elements  exhibits  order
when,  given  the  properties  of  some  of  the  members  of  the  set  the
properties  of  other  members  of  the  set,  or  at  least  of  some  of  them,  are
thereby  determined.  This  determination  is  due  to  the  relation  that
orders  the  set ; it  is  not  a property  of  the  elements  regarded  as  a class.
For  example,  the  individuals  who  are  ordered  by  the  Post  Offi,ce
organization  may  be  members  of  various  classes  and  of  various  other
orders ; they  may  also  be  fathers,  novelists,  citizens.  Thus  an  order
is  a relation  that  orders  the  members  of  a class,  i.e.  a set  of  elements,
in  a certain  way.^  When  we  know  how  a set  of  elements  is  ordered
we  have  a basis  for  inference.  The  solar  system  provides  an  instance
of  an  ordered  set  of  elements.^  A set  of  individuals  subject  to  a code

crowd  is  disorderly  when  the  movements  of  any  members  of  it  are
independent  of  the  movements  of  any  other  members.  It  is  orderly  in  pro-
portion as  the  members  are  engaged  in  doing  the  same  things  or  are  determined
in  their  movements  by  the  movements  of  other  members,  e.g.  in  a market-place
where  some  are  buyers  some  vendors.  The  difference  may  be  formally  ex-
pressed as  follows : a crowd  is  disorderly  when  the  movements  of  A,  B,  etc.,  are
not  in  such  relation  to  the  movements  of  N,  S,  etc. , as  to  form  a basis  of  inference ;
the  crowd  is  orderly  in  proportion  as  such  inference  is  possible.  j

2 The  solar  system  may  be  regarded  as  an  order,  since  from  the  fact  that  a
planet  has  such  and  such  a position  inferences  can  be  drawn.  Such  inferences


THE  NATURE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INQUIRY


229


of  discipline,  such  as  an  army,  is  an  ordered  set.  Order  is  found  in
all  departments  of  life,  "^^at  is  called  civilization  is  largely
dependent  upon  the  establishment  of  systems  of  various  orders  which
enable  us  to  take  much  for  granted.  Thus  we  can  arrange  our  con-
duct with  reference  to  the  order-system  of  the  Railways,  the  Post
Office,  the  Penal  Code,  and  so  on.  Given  these  ordered  systei^we'
can  draw  inferences  that  relate  to  the  beh^our  of  other^^eleinents"
of  the  system.  There  are  various  types  of  order  as  well  as  var^ng
degrees  in  which  orderliness  may  be  found.  A work  of  art  exhibits
one  tjrpe  of  order.  It  may  be  contrasted  with  the  type  of  order
exhibited  in  a school,  a Government,  a Post  Office.

The  introduction  of  order  into  what  was  disorderly  may  be,  then,
of  all  degrees  of  complication,  and  these  complications  may  be  of
different  kinds.  For  the  most  part  order  is  discovered  by  reflective
thought.  It  does  not  lie  upon  the  surface  of  what  is  experienced.
This  is  obvious,  sincej^ny  given^^  of  indiyiduals  may  be  ordered  in
different  ways.  'Mteliwerage  ^ whose  interests  are  pracfical’easily
recognizes  an  order  in  the  large-scale  periodic  phenomena  of  Nature  :
in  the  recurrent  change  from  day  to  night,  t^  phasys^o^the  moon  i;
the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide,  and,  on  some  portions  of  the  surface  on
the  globe,  in  the  return  oFthe  seasons.  No  doubt  the  sophisticated,!
but  comparati^y "uneducated,*^^^!!!  man  of  the  twentieth  century*
would  assent  to  the  statement  that  the  phenomena  of  nature  are
ordered ; just  as,  in  spite  of  the  plain  deliverances  of  his  senses,  he
woffikTassent  to  the  statement  that  the  earth  goes  round  the  sun.
This  readiness  to  admit  an  order  that  has  not  been  apprehended  is  no
doubt  partly  the  result  of  adaptation  to  our  mechanical  civilization.
Order  is  most  apparent  where  man  has  been  at  work.  The  routine  of
daily  life  in  a modern  community  presents  an  order  of  the  type  that
is  most  easily  apprehended.  It  shares  moreover  to  a considerable
extent  in  the  periodicity  of  natural  phenomena.  So  long  as  no  sudden
or  overwhehmng  disaster  occurs  to  interrupt  the  routine  its  orderli-
ness is  accepted  as  natural,  and  as  providing  the  type  of  order  in
terms  of  which  the  order  of  nature  is  to  be  interpreted.

The  need  for  order  in  the  happenings  of  daily  life  is  obvious.
Without  some  degree  of  orderlmess  our  life  would  be  a chaotic  night-
mare,  even  t^ugh  it  wouETnot  be  ^ sucE  What

accouSJipTO  have  of  primitive  peoples  reveal  them  as  struggling  to
impose  some  order  on  events  so  that  they  may  control  them.  In  their
ritual  uniformity,  in  their  practical  origin,  and  in  their  development  in
the  face  of  different  situations,  magical  practices  are  akin  to  science.
We  are  not  here  concerned  to  trace  the  development  fropi  primitive
magic  to  modern  science.  It  is  enough  to  point  out  the  logical  con-

are  to  be  distinguished  from  those  that  are  dependent  upon  the  general  laws  of
planetary  motion,  e.g.  Newtonian  law  of  gravitation.


m


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


tinuity^  of^tlie  development,  however  broken  its  historical  progress_
and  however  diverse  its  ultimate  aim.  The  continuity  is  due  to  the
attempt  to  acEieve  orHerluTthe  5ihe7pf_facts»

*'"”*ThordOT  of  the  subject  of  order  to  systematic  inquiry  may,
then,  be  regarded  as  evident.  _Scientific  thinking;  essentially  consists
in  the  organization,  or  co-ordination,  of  the  facts  with  which  it  deals.
A collection  of  disconnected  facts  does  not  constitute  a science  any
more  than  a mob  of  men  constitutes  a college,  or  a heap  of  bricks  a
building.  The  sciences  are  concerned  not  with  facts  as  such  but  with
o^^red  facts.  One  main  difference  between  the  earlier  and  the  later
stages  of  science  is  to  be  found  in  the  growing  prominence  of  order.
What  is  ultimately  important  for  sciSacAisTE^ypFo^^  ‘rather
than  the  elements  that  are  ordered.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the
most  highly  developed  science,  theoretical  physics,  appears  to  be
concerned  with  something  far  removed  from  what  the  plain  man
would  regard  as  a fact  Science  has  its  origin  in  the  attempt  to
co-ordinate  the  facts  of  sensible  experience,  but  in  the  discovery  of
the  appropriate  type  of  order  it  passes  to  the  consideration  of  a
different  order  of  facts.  Isolated  facts  are  useless  for  science.  Such
facts  as  that  a cuckoo  was  heard  on  a certain  day  last  April,  that  an
echpse  of  the  sun  is  taking  place,  that  a worm  has  been  cut  in  two,  do
not,  as  isolated  facts,  constitute  even  the  raw  material  of  science.
<rhis  is  obvious,  but  it  is  not  always  remembered.  The  child  who
aimlessly  picks  up  shells  on  the  seashore,  or  who  plucks  for  his  im-
mediate delight  flowers  which  he  lets  drop  by  the  wayside,  is  not  more
remote  from  scientific  inquiry  than  the  man  who  happens  to  know
that  water  boils  at  100°  Centigrade  but  can  make  no  use  of  this  fact  in
co-ordinating  other  facts.  But  the  boy  who  arranges  his  shells,
even  though  the  arrangement  be  determined  by  their  size,  or  by  the
date  on  which  he  chanced  to  find  them,  is  placing  the  shells  within  an
order  that  makes  inference  possible.  He  is  following  a procedure  not
wholly  unlike  the  earliest  stage  of  scientific  method.

“SCIENCE”  AND  “SCIENTIFIC  METHOD”

It  is  not  possible  to  give  a precise  definition  of  what  is  meant  by
science  It  is,  however,  possible  to  point  to  certain  characteristics

distinguishing  those  branches  of  knowledge  called  sciences  ” from
others  not  so  called.  The  plain  man  uses  the  word  science  ” more
or  less  correctly.  If  he  were  asked  what  “ science  ” means,  he  would
probably  reply  by  giving  a Kst  of  the  natural  sciences — astronomy,
physics,  chemistry,  geology,  zoology,  botany,  physiology— adding
perhaps  mathematics.  He  would  possibly  include  psychology.  This
reply  might  be  due  to  the  belief  that  what  constitutes  a science  ’’  is^
the  hind  of  facts  studied.  The  naturariSencS"a^  with  facts
relating  to  sensible  experienc^in  q^ous  wiy.  Let  us  callluch


231


THE  NATURE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INQUIRY

facts  sensible  Then  a sensible  fact  is  an  observable  fact  But  a

mere  collection  of  such  facts  does  not  suffice  to  cohsStute  a science.
There  is  required  in  addition  a certain  kind  of  attitude  to  the  facts  andj
a certain  kind  of  predominantly  lo^cal  methodr  iFis  for  this  reason
that  the  student  of  logic  is  concerned  with  science.  The  require-*
ments  of  this  method  determine  whether  a given  observable  fact  is  a
possible  datum  for  science.  The  scientist,  that  is  to  say,  selects  those
facts  that  can  be  treated  in  accordance  with  his  method.  We  have,
then,  two  characteristics  that  belong  to  science : the  selection  of  a
certain  kind  of  facts  and  the  use  of  a certain  kind^pT^thod.  The
dependence  of  the  first  of  these  cEaracteristics  upon  the  second  can
be  illustrated  by  the  dispute  as  to  whether  psychology  is  a science.
Those  who  deny  that  it  is  a science  assert  that  the  psychologist
employs  a special  method,  called  introspection,  that  is  not  amenable
to  the  tests  employed  by  scientists  ; those  who  assert  that  psychology
is  a science  either  deny  that  it  uses  introspection  or  maintain  that  this
method  is  scientifLc.^  In  so  far  as  there  is  a dispute  as  to  what  the
data  of  psychology  are,  the  dispute  turns  upon  what  hind  of  facts  can
be  investigated  by  means  of  scientific  method.  It  is  the  methQd.tha|-
is  uspdJ}hat..detein]^^  not,...a^ven  study  is  a science. ^

Itlsthe  applicability  of  thisjnethod  to  the  facts  of  the  external  world
[that  makes  what  are  called  theliatural  sciences  scientific.  The  dis-
tinction between  one  branch  of  natural  science  and  another  is  deter-
mined by  the  class  of  facts  with  which  it  deals.  The  degree  of  rigour
with  wMch  the  method  can  be  used  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the
facts  investigated.  Thejess  rijopu^is  ^^mMhod  J^lieJess advanced
i^:^eLScienGe.

The  natural  sciences,  then,  are  concerned  with  the  investigation
of  observable  facts  in  accordance  with  a certain  method.  This
emphasis  upon  method  enables  us  to  see  that  mathematics  is  also  a
science.  But  mathematics  is  fundamentally  difierent  from  the  natural
sciences.  Whether  a proposition  asserted  in  natural  science  is  true
depends  upon  what  there  actually  is  in  the  world ; the  ultimate  test

^ The  behaviourist  psychologists  take  the  first  course ; Mr.  Bertrand  Russell
adopts  the  second.

* The  modern  use  of  the  word  “ science  ” would  ordinarily  be  understood  to
express  an  antithesis  to  “ philosophy  But  in  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth

centuries  what  we  now  call  “ natural  science  ” was  called  “ natural  philosophy  ”.
It  is  in  this  sense  that  Newton  uses  “ philosophy  ” and  “ philosophical
‘ Science  ’ is  said  by  Merz  to  have  ‘ acquired  its  present  definite  meaning  about
the  time  of  the  formation  of  the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of
Science  (1831)  He  points  out  that  in  France  it  had  been  so  used  much  earher.
Thus  the  ‘‘  Acaddmie  des  Sciences  ”,  founded  in  1666,  employed  the  word  in  its
present  meaning,  whereas  the  chief  English  scientific  body,  founded  in  1662,
was  known  by  the  title,  “ The  Royal  Society  for  the  Improvement  of  Natural
Knowledge”.  (See  Mearz,  History  of  European  Thought  in  the  Nineteenth
Century,  I,  p.  89.)


232


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


lies  in  tlie  appeal  to  what  is  observable.  A mathematical  proposition
is  independent  of  what  happens  to  exist.  The  distinction  between
mathematics  and  the  natural  sciences  is  the  distinction  between  pure
science  and  empirical  science.  The  opposition  is  between  pure  and
empirical,  not  between  pure  and  applied,  science.  The  adjective
empirical  ’’  is  derived  from  experience  It  is  not  easy  to  define
experience  but  the  notion  may  be  made  clearer  by  the  help  of
examples.  A blind  man  cannot  have  an  experience  which  consists
of  being  aware  of  a red  patch ; that  is  to  say,  he  cannot  be  acquainted
with  the  referend  of  “ red  Consequently,  he  does  not  know  what
red  ” means.  A deaf  man  cannot  be  aware  of  the  sormd  of  on  a
violin.  A man  paralysed  from  birth  cannot  be  aware  of  sensations
in  the  legs  such  as  those  experienced  by  normal  persons  in  walking.
Those  that  can  see,  and  hear,  and  walk,  can  have  such  experiences ;
their  knowledge  is  empirical.  If  nothing  in  the  world  were  red,  no  one
could  have  the  experience  that  consists  in  seeing  a red  patch.  The
red  patch,  the  sound  of  on  a violin  are  examples  of  what  we  have
called  sensible  facts.  They  can  be  known  only  by  acquaintance.
The  proposition ''  Some  roses  are  red  ’’  must  be  false  if  there  is  nothing
in  the  world  that  is  red.  It  could  only  be  known  to  be  true  if  some  one
had  seen  a red  rose.  Eacts  that  could  only  be  known  by  sensible
observation  are  empirical  facts.  Such  empirical  facts  constitute  the
original  data  of  the  natural  sciences,  and  consequently,  they  are  called
empirical.  Mathematical  propositions  being  independent  of  what
exists  are  independent  of  experience.  It  is  true  that  we  first  come
to  know  that  2 + 2 = 4 by  observing  two  sets  of  two  things  and  one
set  of  four  things.  But  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  truth  of  the  pro-
position 2 + 2 = 4 is  independent  of  these  sets  of  things  and  might
have  been  known  without  reference  to  them.  This  is  not  the  case
with  an  empirical  proposition.  Whether  the  pro|)osition  “ Sugar  dis-
solves in  water  ’’  is  true  depends  upon  what  there  actually  is  in  the
world ; it  could  only  be  known  to  be  true  fey  observation' of  particular
pieces  of  sugar.  This  difierence  in  the  nature  of  a mathematical  and
an  empirical  proposition  involves  some  difference  in  the  method
employed  by  the  mathematician  and  the  empirical  scientist.  Owing
to  its  independence  of  empirical  facts  mathematics  is  a whoEy  deduc-
tive science  ; hence  it  employs  a method  of  exact  demonstration.  In
other  words,  mathematics  is  a formal  science.  The  empirical  sciences
on  the  other  hand  depend  upon  generalization  from  experience ; their
conclusions  are  not  demonstrated  but  are  verified  by  sensible  observa-*
tion.  " In  other  words,  empirical  science  involves  induction.  With
the  precise  nature  of  induction  we  shaE  be  concerned  in  the  next
chapter.  Here  it  is  sufficient  to  point  out  that  the  empirical  sciences
differ  from  mathematics  both  in  the  nature  of  their  subject-matter
and  in  their  method.  Nevertheless,  both  alike  are  sciences  because


THE  NATURE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INQUIRY


233


their  method  has  been  developed  solely  with  a view  to  understanding
the  facts  with  which  they  are  concerned.  The  scientist  seeks  to  order
the  facts  so  as  to  render  them  intelligible.

The  sciences  are,  then,  orderly  branches  of  knowledge.  The
method  of  ordering  the  data  is  scientific  method.  The  adjective
scientific  ’’  is,  however,  often  used  more  widely  than  the  corres-
ponding noun  science  It  is  extended  to  characterize  all  the  pro-
cesses of  thought  which  terminate  in  conclusions  that  a reasonable
man  may  accept.  When  we  say  that  some  one  has  a scientific
mind  ” we  mean  that  his  convictions  are  reasoned  convictions ; that
before  he  comes  to  a conclusion  he  weighs  the  evidence,  taking  into
account  all  the  relevant  facts.  He  does  not  accept  a conclusion  simply
because  it  is  in  harmony  with  his  desires ; nor  would  he  consider
such  harmony  a reason  for  its  rejection.  This  readiness  to  accept
only  what  the  facts  warrant  is  a characteristic  of  the  scientific  thinker.
In  the  narrower  sense  the  scientific  thinker  is  one  who  seeks  to  under-
stand what  happens  simply  for  the  sake  of  understanding  it.  To
achieve  such  understanding  he  must  be  prepared  not  to  accept  things
at  their  face  value,  to  be  puzzled  by  what  is  familiar  and  apparently
obvious  and  yet  not  content  to  remain  puzzled.  The  scientist,  as
Bacon  says,^  should  be  ready  to  seek,  slow  to  assert,  prepared  to  doubt
yet  quick  to  apprehend  the  resemblances  between  things,  apt  to
distinguish  their  difierences,  and  careful  to  arrange  them  in  order.
Doubtless  no  scientist  exhibits  these  mental  characteristics  on  all
occasions.  But  scientific  discoveries  are  made  by  those  who,  with
reference  to  a given  region  of  fact,  are  capable  of  such  thinking.

§3.  COMMON-SENSE  THINKING  AND  SCIENTIFIC
METHOD

Science  has  been  described  as  organized  common  sense.  But
science  differs  from  common  sense  not  only  in  the  degree  of  organiza-
tion achieved  but  also  in  the  types  of  order  apprehended.  Neverthe-
less, the  descriptioh  is  not  wholly  inapplicable  to  the  earliest  stages  of
scientific  inquiry.  Science  has  grown  out  of  common-sense  faiow-
ledge,  having  for  its  origin  man’s  need  to  understand  his  environment
in  order  that  he  may  control  it.  The  disinterested  desire  to  know  is  a
late  development.  It  is  rare  even  to-day,  but  it  is  the  condition
without  wMch  the  development  of  science  is  impossible.

A commonplace  illustration  will  show  how  a practical  man  faced
with  an  unexpected  occurrence  may  attempt  to  explain  a situation
by  organizing  relevant  facts  into  a coherent  whole.  Suppose  that
a man,  having  left  his  flat  empty,  returns  in  the  early  evening  to
find  his  front  door  bolted.  He  knows  that  he  left  no  one  in  the
flat.  How,  then,  account  for  the  bolted  door  1 That  burglars  have
^See  quotii»tion  at  head  of  chapter.


234


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOOIC


broken,  into  the  flat  is  the  first  idea  likely  to  occtn  to  a Londoner.
The  suggestion  springs  into  his  mind  almost  before  he  has  had  time
to  reflect.  But  then  a difficulty  arises  to  check  the  acceptance  of
this  idea.  How  could  a burglar  have  left  the  door  bolted  on  the
inside  ? The  flat  is  on  the  third  floor  of  a straight-faced  block,  so
that  it  is  improbable  that  the  entry  should  have  been  made  tlnough
a window.  Perhaps  the  holt  has  sHpped.  But  that  idea  is  im-
mediately rejected,  since  it  is  a stiff,  horizontal  bolt  rarely  used.
Some  one  inside  must  have  drawn  the  bolt.  Having  succeeded  in
forcing  the  door,  he  inspects  the  flat,  looking  for  confirmation  of
his  suspicion.  There  is  no  one  in  his  study,  but  he  finds  the  drawers
of  his  desk  open  and  their  contents  scattered.  There  was,  he  knew,
no  money  in  the  desk,  so  he  does  not  pause  to  examine  the  drawers,
but  goes  at  once  to  the  dining-room  to  inspect  the  silver.  He  finds
that  two  silver  cups  have  gone  and  also  that  the  table  silver  has
disappeared.  These  facts  are  ample  confirmation  of  his  belief  that
he  has  been  robbed.  But  there  is  still  the  puzzling  fact  of  the  door
bolted  on  the  inside.  As  he  walks  down  the  passage  he  sees  a light
under  the  kitchen  door.  Perhaps  the  burglar  is  still  in  the  flat.
But  the  kitchen  is  empty.  On  the  table  are  the  remains  of  a meal.
TI;ie  window  is  wide  open.  He  remembers  the  parcels  lift  and  now
feels  that  the  situation  is  explained.  Whatever  the  means  of  entry,
the  exit  has  been  by  way  of  the  parcels  lift.  The  bolted  front  door
was  doubtless  to  give  the  burglar  time  to  escape  should  the  owner  of
the  flat  return  too  soon.

In  this  example  a set  of  isolated  facts  are  connected  together
in  order  to  account  for  an  occurrence  that  was  felt  to  be  in  need  of
explanation.  The  idea  of  robbery,  suggested  by  previous  experience,
was  developed  into  a series  of  suppositions  of  the  form  : If  so-and-so
then  such-and-such.  The  consequences  of  the  supposition  were  tested
by  direct  observation  of  a fact  that  had  been  supposed  to  be  likely,
ibiother  fact  that  was  observed  but  had  not  been  deduced  supplied
an  important  hnk  in  the  connexion  of  the  facts.  It  must  be
noticed  that  the  circumstance  to  be  explained  occurred  within  a
situation  familiar  in  its  main  features.  Consequently,  the  man  had  no
difficulty  in  ruling  out  some  possible  suggestions  as  simply  irrelevant.
The  stages  in  this  investigation  may  be  summarized  as  follows :

1.  Awareness  of  a familiar  complex  situation  in  which  some  one
fact  was  apprehended  as  peculiar,  i.e.  as  not  being  what  might  have
been  expected.  Hence  the  need  is  felt  to  account  for  this  fact  by
connecting  it  with  a total  situation  in  which  its  occurrence  would
not  be  unexpected.

2.  The  formation  of  an  hypothesis  which  would  connect  the
unexpected  fact  with  other  facts.

3.  Deductive  development  of  the  hypothesis.


THE  NATURE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INQUIRY


235


4.  Testing  the  consequences  deduced  by  appealing  to  observable
facts.  The  successful  accomplishment  of  this  fourth  stage  marks
the  acceptance  of  the  hypothesis  as  explaining  the  given  fact.  From
the  point  of  view  of  the  ordinary  Londoner  it  would  be  felt  that,  in
the  given  case,  no  other  supposition  would  so  weU  account  for  aU
the  observed  facts.

With  regard  to  such  an  investigation  we  may  be  said  to  explain
a fact  when  we  have  shown  that  it  is  connected  in  an  orderly  manner
with  other  facts  that  do  not  require  to  be  explained.  It  is  the
unusual,  and  therefore  unexpected  occurrences  that  lead  the  ordinary
man  to  ask  : How  has  this  happened  ? He  undertakes  the  analysis
of  the  conditions  upon  which  a fact  may  be  consequent  only  when
the  fact  is  unusual  or  startling.  The  scientist’s  curiosity  is  not  thus
limited,  nor  in  him  does  familiarity  breed  the  illusion  of  under-
standing. This  marks  a departure  from  the  plain  man’s  point  of
view.  As  Professor  Whitehead  says,  ‘ It  requires  a very  unusual
mind  to  undertake  the  analysis  of  the  obvious’.  Owing  to  this
difference  in  their  point  of  view  the  plain  man  is  often  satisfied  with
the  answer,  Because  it  always  happens  so  ”,  whereas  the  scientist
recognizes  that  such  an  answer  is  but  the  beginning  of  an  explana-
tion. Ultimately  the  explanation  of  facts  is  to  be  found  in  their
organization  into  a system.  That  the  plain  man  so  soon  stops  short
in  his  inquiries  is  due  to  his  predominantly  practical  interests  and
his  consequent  unwillingness  to  undertake  a laborious  analysis  of
the  situation.  Such  problems  as  he  encounters  can  usually  be
solved  to  his  satisfaction  without  going  beyond  the  order  that  results
from  the  habitual  associations  of  one  experience  with  another.

The  four  stages  enumerated  above  are  sometimes  regarded  as
constituting  what  has  been  called  inductive  method.  The  word
“ induction  ” is  ambiguous,  and  will  be  discussed  in  the  next  chapter.
Here  we  are  concerned  only  to  notice  the  resemblance  between
common-sense  thinking  and  some  aspects  of  scientific  method.  To
make  the  comparison  clearer  it  will  be  convenient  to  give  a sim-
plified illustration  of  scientific  reasoning.  The  plain  man,  although
he  has  frequently  experienced  the  resistance  of  the  air  when,  for
instance,  he  struggles  to  walk  in  the  teeth  of  a gale,  or  tries  to  com-
press with  his  hands  a bladder  filled  with  air,  nevertheless  does  not
usually  think  of  the  air  as  a body ; he  does  not  apprehend  air  as
having  weight.  But  the  supposition  that  air  has  weight  serves  to
connect  a number  of  disconnected  facts  that  would  otherwise  be
puzzlmg  because  of  their  disconnexion.  If  the  plain  man  were
asked  why  water  rises  in  a pump,  he  would  probably  be  content
to  answer  that  the  water  is  drawn  upwards  by  suction.  He  would
think  of  suction  as  a force,  and  would  not  consider  that  this  notion
of  8i>  force  itself  requires  explanation.  At  the  beginning  of  the  seven-


236


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


teenth  centuiy  scientists  were  content  to  explain  suction  by  nature’s
supposed  abkorrence  of  a vacuum.  But,  apart  from  tbe  unsatis-
factoriness of  regarding  abhorrence  as  an  explanatory  notion,  a diffi-
culty arises  from  the  observed  fact  that  this  abhorrence  seems  to
be  limited  to  about  thirty-three  feet  at  sea-level.  Galileo  ^ had
already  conceived  that  air  had  weight  and  had  tried  to  determine
its  weight.  Torricelli  ^ thought  of  connecting  the  weight  of  the  air
with  the  abhorrence  of  a vacuum.  He  conceived  the  plan  of  measur-
ing the  resistance  of  the  air  by  means  of  a column  of  mercury.  He
took  a glass  tube  rather  more  than  a metre  in  length,  closed  at  one
end  and  filled  with  mercury.  This  he  inverted  over  mercury  in  a
trough,  stopping  the  open  end  with  his  finger.  When  he  removed
his  finger  the  mercury  fell,  and  remained  stationary  at  about  a level
of  76  cm.  This  fall  could  be  explained  as  due  to  the  pressure  of  a
column  of  air.  This  discovery  not  only  led  to  the  invention  of  the
barometer  but  also  enabled  a number  of  hitherto  unconnected  facts
to  be  connected  in  an  orderly  manner.  It  seemed  reasonable  to
suppose  that  the  pressure  of  the  air  would  vary  under  different
conditions,  and  would  have  different  effects  at  different  heights
above  sea-level.  A committee  of  the  Eoyal  Society  drew  up  a series
of  questions  to  be  tested  experimentally  on  a high  mountain  in
Tenerife,®  The  questions  were  framed  so  as  to  suggest  what  might
be  expected  to  happen  if  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  were  a
fact.  Three  of  the  questions  will  serve  to  illustrate  the  fertility  of
this  supposition :

1.  Try  the  quicksilver  experiment  at  the  top,  and  at  several
other  ascents  of  the  mountain ; and  at  the  end  of  the  experiment
at  the  top  of  the  hiU,  lift  out  the  tube  from  the  restagnant  quick-
silver somewhat  hastily,  and  observe  if  the  remaining  mercury  be
impelled  with  the  remaining  force  or  not.  And  take  by  instrument,
with  what  exactness  may  be,  the  true  altitude  of  every  place  where
the  experiment  is  made ; and  observe  at  the  same  time,  the  tem-
perature of  the  air,  as  to  heat  and  cold,  by  a weather  glass ; and
as  to  moisture  and  drjmess  with  a horoscope ; and  note  what  sense
the  experimenters  have  of  the  air  at  those  times  respectively.

2.  ''  Carry  up  bladders,  some  very  httle  blown,  some  more,  and
others  full  blown ; and  observe  how  they  alter  upon  the  several  ascents.

3.  Observe  what  alterations  are  to  be  found  in  living  creatures,

1 Galileo  lived  1564-1642.

* Torricelli  invented  the  barometer  in  1643.  A good  account  is  given  of  this
experiment  in  C.  B.  Whetham’s  Matter  and  Change.  See  also  Mach,  Science  of
MechanicSi  Chap.  I,  § viii.

® This  account  is  taken  from  an  address  by  Sir  W.  Bragg  on  “ The  Influence
of  Learned  Societies  on  theDevelopnaent  of  England  ”,  which  is  published  in
Craftsmanship  and  Science  (Forum  Series).  See  pp.  37-8.


THE  NATUEE  OP  SCIENTIPIC  INQUIRY  237


carried  tMtlier,  both  before  and  after  feeding ; and  what  the  experi-
menters do  find  in  themselves  as  to  difficulty  of  breathing,  faintness
of  spirit,  inclination  to  vomit,  giddiness,  etc/’

These  examples  suffice  to  illustrate  how  a supposition  that  is
related  to  a set  of  facts  to  be  explained  may  be  capable  of  develop-
ment into  a series  of  suggestions  as  to  what  might  be  expected  to
happen  under  certain  determinate  conditions.  When  these  condi-
tions can  be  obtained,  the  suggestions  can  be  tested.  A supposition
that  in  this  way  serves  to  connect  facts  in  a regular  manner  is  what
is  known  as  an  hypothesis.  When  the  consequences  of  the  hypothesis
can  be  tested  by  direct  observation,  further  evidence  is  provided
for  accepting  or  rejecting  the  original  supposition.  Sometimes,  as
in  the  example  of  the  burglary,  the  consequences  deduced  are  of  the
kind  that  wifi  either  have  occurred  or  not.  All  that  the  man  had
to  do  was  to  look  and  see.  Sometimes  the  investigator  has  to
arrange  the  conditions  so  as  deliberately  to  bring  about  the  expected
result.  This  was  the  case  with  the  scientist’s  problem  given  above.
The  deliberate  arrangement  of  the  conditions  constitutes  an  experi-
ment, It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  experiments  suggested  above
are  as  experiments  very  simple.  They  did  not  require  the  marvel-
lously constructed  and  very  delicate  instruments  by  means  of  which
physical  knowledge  is  to-day  being  advanced.  Doubtless  they  would
have  been  performed  more  easily  had  the  instruments  used  been  more
adequate,  but  it  was  not  lack  of  suitable  instruments  that  had  pre-
vented earlier  scientists  from  carrying  out  such  observations.  The
importance  of  these  observations  lay  in  the  fact  that  they  provided
experiential  confirmation  of  an  hypothesis  that  served  to  connect
facts  that  would  otherwise  have  been  unnoticed  and  unexplained.

There  is  a constant  alternation  between  observation  and  h3q)0-
thesis  in  any  attempt  to  account  for  an  unexpected  fact.  A sup-
position, going  beyond  what  is  immediately  observed,  is  seen  to  be
such  that  it  would  connect  the  given  fact  with  other  facts  that  have
been  and  that  might  be  expected  to  be  observed.  If  observation,
whether  experimental  or  not,  reveals  such  a fact,  then  the  required
connexion  is  so  far  established.  Then  another  supposition  may  be
formulated  and  tested  by  further  observation.  The  investigation
is  completed  only  when  all  the  circumstances  that  led  to  it  have
been  fi.tted  together.  The  hypothesis  may  then  be  regarded  as
established  so  far  as  the  particular  problem  is  concerned.  Common
sense  uses  in  a rough  and  ready  manner  a method  of  alternate  obser-
vation and  h3q)othesis  that  has  been  gradually  re:foed  by  scientific
thinkers  into  an  instrument  more  and  more  ^tted  to  deal  withi
complicated  problems.  There  is  a stage  in  the  development  of/
every  science  in  which  the  methods  of  common  sense  can  be  clearly
discerned.  When,  as  the  result  of  this  method,  a considerable  amount


238  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

of  order  has  been  introduced  into  our  knowledge  of  the  external
world  the  method  is  developed  in  such  a way  that  it  is  no  longer
recognizable  as  the  organization  of  common  sense,  and  its  results
are  far  removed  from  the  common-sense  beliefs  out  of  which  it  has
slowly  grown.  Mr.  Russell  has  put  this  point  very  clearly.  He
says : ‘ The  development  of  science  out  of  common  sense  has  not
been  by  way  of  a radically  new  start  at  any  moment,  but  rather
by  way  of  successive  approximations.  That  is  to  say,  where  some
difficulty  has  arisen  which  current  common  sense  could  not  solve,
a modification  has  been  made  at  some  point,  while  the  rest  of  the
common-sense  view  of  the  world  has  been  retained.  Subsequently,
using  this  modification,  another  modification  has  been  introduced
elsewhere,  and  so  on.  Thus  science  has  been  an  historical  growth,
and  has  assumed  at  each  moment,  a more  or  less  vague  background
of  theory  derived  from  common  sense.’  ^

Common-sense  thinking  differs  from  scientific  thinking  in  two  very
important  respects.  The  former  is  fragmentary ; it  jumps  from
one  fact  to  another,  taking  much  for  granted  so  that  many  inter-
mediate links  are  left  unexplained.  The  latter  takes  much  less  for
granted  and,  in  consequence,  achieves  a higher  degree  of  organiza-
tion. Secondly,  the  plain  man  is  apt  to  regard  the  problem  he  is
investigating  as  being  almost  completely  isolated  from  other  prob-
lems ; hence,  he  is  unaware  of  the  bearing  of  his  solution  upon  other
problems.  The  scientist  apprehends  his  problem  as  capable  of  tem-
porary isolation  but  as  essentially  connected  with  other  problems
that  will  have  to  be  considered  in  relation  to  his  solution  of  the  given
problem.  Thus  the  scientist  is  more  aware  of  the  possible  ramifica-
tions of  the  inquiry  upon  which  he  is  at  the  moment  concentrating.
From  these  differences  there  follows  the  important  consequence  that
common-sense  thinking  is  necessarily  confined  to  comparatively  simple
problems,  not  only  because  of  the  mainly  practical  interests  of  the
plain  man,  but  because  his  method  of  investigation  does  not  lead
him  to  raise  the  right  questions.  The  deficiencies  of  common  sense*
are  most  obviously  revealed  in  the  deductive  development  of  t
the  hypothesis.  As  Professor  Whitehead  puts  it : ' Common-sensei
deduction  probably  moves  by  blind  instinct  from  concrete  proposi-
Ition  to  concrete  proposition,  guided  by  some  habitual  association
:of  ideas.  Thus  common  sense  fails  in  the  presence  of  a wealth  of
Imaterial.’  ^

§4.  THE,  IMPORTANCE  OF  RELEVANT  KNOWLEDGE

An  examination  of  the  examples  we  have  given  shows  that  a
considera^  amount  oLprevious  knowledge  relevant  to  the  situat^"

^ Analysis  of  Matter,  pp.  193-4,

Arist,  Soc.,  N.S.,  XVH,  p.  73.


THE  NATURE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INQUIEY


239


|s  required  before  a problem^^can  e^yen  be  stated-  Still  more  know-
ledge is  required  in  order  tliat  fruitful  suggestions  as  to  its  solution
should  occur  to  the  thinker.  The  primitive  thinker  may  well  have
been  as  intelligent  as  a modern  scientist,  but  he  was  less  able  to  deal
satisfactorily  with  his  problems  because  he  had  less  knowledge  of
what  was  relevant  to  its  solution.  Only  by  the  accumulation  of  a
large  and  systematized  body  of  knowledge  is  it  possible  for  science
to  develop.  The  importance  and  the  extent  of  what  can  be  taken
for  granted  became  its  connexion  with  the  'problem  is  already  hnown,
is  apt  to  be  obscured  by  the  treatment  of  scientific  examples  in  a
textbook  of  logic.  Just  so  much  as  is  required  to  provide  the  explicit
premisses  of  the  reasoning  is  given.  There  is  too  often  a selection
of  the  facts  in  the  light  of  the  theory  of  scientific  method  that  the
given  example  is  intended  to  illustrate.  ^ Hence,  scientific  method
is  not  presented  in  a manner  capable  of  suggesting  the  method  of
discovery.  This  is  no  doubt  unavoidable.  The  only  way  to  under-
stand scientific  method  is  to  carry  out  a scientific  investigation.
It  is  for  this  reason  that  it  is  worth  while  for  the  beginner  in  logic
to  attempt  to  analyse  some  process  of  controlled  thinking  that  he
has  himseM  gone  through  in  order  to  solve  some  difficulty  of  his
own.  It  is  as  impossible  to  obtain  a grasp  of  scientific  method  from
the  dissection  of  selected  examples  without  any  practical  experience
in  solving  problems  given  in  one’s  own  experience,  as  it  would  be
for  a physiologist  to  understand  what  a hving  body  is  like  if  his
acquaintance  with  bodies  had  been  confined  to  the  dead  body  on
the  dissecting-table.  All  that  a textbook  on  method  can  do  is  to
point  out  some  of  the  considerations  involved.  Something,  how-
ever, may  be  done  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  relevant  knowledge
and  of  the  necessity  for  a combination  of  knowledge  and  insight.
An  example  which  brings  out  this  point  well  is  given  by  Sir  William
Bragg  in  his  Presidential  Address  to  the  British  Association  (Sep-
tember 5,  1928).  The  passage  must  be  quoted  in  full :

* It  was  in  the  early  years  of  the  war  that  a body  of  young  scientific  students
from  our  Universities  was  assembled  for  the  purpose  c5f  testing  on  the  battlefield
the  value  of  such  methods  of  locating  enemy  guns  as  were  already  known.  In
their  mutual  discussions  and  considerations  it  became  clear  to  them  that  the
great  desideratum  was  a method  of  measuring  very  exactly  the  time  of  arrival  of
the  air  pulse,  due  to  the  discharge  of  the  gun,  at  various  stations  in  their  own
lines.  If  the  relative  positions  of  the  stations  were  accurately  known  it  would
then  become  a matter  of  calculation  to  find  the  gun  position.  But  the  pulse  was
very  feeble : how  could  it  be  registered  ? Various  methods  were  considered,
and  among  them  was  one  which  no  doubt  seemed  far-fetched  and  unlikely  to  be
successful,  A fine  wire  is  made  to  carry  an  electric  current  by  which  it  is  heated.
If  it  is  chilled,  for  example,  by  a puff  of  cold  air,  the  resistance  to  the  passage  of


^ Limitations  of  space  often  make  this  procedure  inevitable,  but  not  the
less  regrettable.


240


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


the  current  increases,  and  this  is  an  effect  which  can  he  measured  if  it  is  large
enough.  If,  then,  the  hot  wire  could  be  made  to  register  the  arrival  of  the  air
pulse  from  the  gun  a solution  of  the  problem  was  in  hand  No  doubt  this  method
occurred  to  several  members  of  the  company ; it  was  certainly  turned  over  in  the
mind  of  one  of  them  who  had  had  considerable  experience  of  these  fine  heated
wires.  They  had  been  in  use  about  thirty  years,  having  been  employed  for
the  measurement  of  temperature  in  many  circumstances  where  their  peculiar
characteristics  gave  them  the  supremacy  over  thermometers  of  the  ordinary  form.
But,  and  this  was  the  important  point,  was  it  to  be  expected  that  the  effect,
though  it  must  be  there,  would  be  big  enough  to  see  ? Could  the  faint  impulse
from  a gun  miles  away  produce  an  obvious  chill  in  a hot  wire  ? On  first  thoughts
it  did  not  seem  likely,  and  the  suggestion  lay  in  abeyance.

* But  it  happened  that  one  summer  morning  an  enemy  aeroplane  came  over
at  daybreak  on  a patrolling  expedition.  The  officer  of  whom  I have  spoken  lay
awake  in  his  bunk  listening  to  the  discharges  of  the  anti-aircraft  guns  and  the
more  distant  explosions  of  their  shells.  Every  now  and  then  a faint  whistling
sound  seemed  to  be  connected  with  the  louder  sounds.  The  wall  of  the  hut  was
of  felt ; it  was  in  poor  condition  and  there  were  tiny  rents  close  to  his  head  where
he  lay.  The  gun  pulses  made  a feeble  sound  as  they  came  through.  This  set  the
officer  thinking : if  the  pulse  was  strong  enough  to  make  a sound,  it  might  be
strong  enough  to  chiU  a hot  wire  perceptibly.  So  the  method  was  proposed  to
the  company  as  worth  trying.  It  was  tried,  and  proved  to  be  a complete  suc-
cess, The  sound  ranging  of  the  British  Armies  was  based  upon  it,  with  results
that  have  already  been  described  and  are  fairly  well  known.’

This  experience  illustrates  two  important  considerations ; first,
that  a considerable  amount  of  previous  knowledge  and  scientific
training  is  required  in  order  that  some  detail  of  a complicated  situa-
tion may  be  apprehended  as  being  the  fact  significant  for  the  solution
of  the  problem  ; secondly,  the  man  who  has  the  relevant  knowledge
must  be  in  those  circumstances  in  which  he  can  actually  observe
the  important  occurrence.  Vague  general  knowledge  of  sound  cur-
rents would  have  been  insufficient  to  suggest  the  possible  solution.
What  was  required  was  a definite  estimate  of  the  effects  of  the
quantities  actually  given.  Only  ‘‘a  man  actually  on  the  spot’’
could  have  been  in  possession  of  these  essential  details.  ^

Relevant  knowledge  and  the  opportunity  though  essential  are
not  always  sufficient  for  the  solution  of  scientific  problems.  There
is  needed  also  that  incalculable  element  of  scientific  insight  which
iis  the  mark  of  genius,  and  which  cannot  be  reduced  to  rules  capable
W formulation.

§ 5.  THE  FORM  OF  SCIENTIFIC  METHOD

Starting  from  the  point  of  view  of  common  sense  we  have  seen
that  the  initial  problem  of  science  is  to  order  the  facts  given  in  sen-
sible experience.  We  saw  in  Chapter  IV  that  by  ''  fact  ” is  meant
whatever  is  the  case.  Wlmt  is  the  case  is  always  complex,  for  example,
a thing  in  its  relations,  or  with  its  properties.  Facts  are  complex  in
the  same  way  in  which  propositions  are  complex.  When  the  pro-

^See  Sir  W.  Bragg,  loc.  oit.,  p.  22,


THE  NATURE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  INQUIRY  241

position  is  a proposition  about  the  external  world,  then  the  fact
which  the  proposition  expresses  is  an  actual  state  of  affairs,  provided
that  the  proposition  is  true.  It  is  this  kind  of  fact  with  which  we
are  at  present  concerned,  for  the  data  of  science  are  observable  facts.
We  have  already  seen  that  it  is  not  easy  to  draw  a precise  line  be-
tween what  we  actually  observe  and  what  is  inferred.  It  is  sufficient
for  our  purpose  if  we  recognize  the  distinction  between  ei,fact  taken
as  a datum  and  an  interfretation  of  the  fact,  which  naay  develop
into  an  elaborate  theory  about  the  facts.  An  illustration,  given  by
Professor  T.  P.  Nunn,  may  make  this  point  clearer :

‘ The  scientific  traveller  on  a high  plateau  of  the  Andes  and  his  native  guide
view  in  different  ways  the  impossibility  of  getting  their  potatoes  to  cook.  To
the  latter  the  impossibility  is  due  to  the  simple  fact  that  “ the  cursed  pot  ”,
doubtless  owing  to  the  devil  in  it,  “ did  not  wish  to  cook  potatoes  ” ; to  the
former  it  is  an  interesting  example  of  the  dependence  of  the  boiling  point  upon
the  pressure.  But  although  the  whole  “ situation  ” may  be  very  difierent  in  the
two  cases,  there  is  yet  a common  basis  of  inevitable  fact  upon  wMch  the  scientist
and  the  native  (if  he  is  intelligent  enough)  can  see  that  their  “ animistic  ” or
“ scientific  ” interpretations  are  simply  embroideries.’  ^

In  this  illustration  the  factual  basis — ^ the  fire,  the  pot,  the  luke-
warm yet  boiling  water,  the  unsoftened  potatoes  ’ — ^is  so  interpreted
both  by  the  natives  and  the  scientist,  as  to  be  constructed  into  an
ordered  situation.  Professor  Nunn  emphasizes  the  point  that  the
basis  of  fact  is  ‘ inevitable  ’ ; the  pot,  for  instance,  is  apprehended
as  a pot  by  native  guide  and  scientific  traveller  alike,  however  much
preliminary  experience  may  have  been  required  in  order  that  it
should  be  so  apprehended.  The  unperceivable  connexions,  viz.  the
devil’s  desire  that  the  potatoes  should  not  cook;  the  dependence
of  boiling  point  upon  pressure — are  not  inevitable  constructions ;
they  are  different  modes  of  interpretation,  their  difference  being  due
to  the  wide  difference  in  the  context  of  the  experience  from  which
they  are  drawn.  In  both  cases  the  purpose  is  so  to  order  the  con-
stituents of  the  factual  situation  that  it  may  be  understood.  The
first  step  in  understanding  is  achieved  by  generalization,  that  is,
by  connecting  a given  fact  with  other  facts  that  resemble  it.  But
facts  are  complex;  the  resemblance  between  facts  holds  between
some,  but  not  all,  of  their  constituents.  Hence,  facts  must  be
analysed.  The  constituents  of  primary  fact  must  be  grouped  in
classes ; these  classes  must  then  be  ordered  among  themselves.  In
this  way  increasing  generality  is  obtained.  The  scientist  wants  to
make  assertions  about  what  always  happens,  not  about  what  some-
times happens.  The  zoologist,  for  instance,  is  not  concerned  with
this  particular  cow  staring  at  this  particular  tree;  he  wants  to

^ The  Aim  and  Achievements  of  Scientific  Method,  p.  46,  It  is  very  much  to  be
regretted  that  this  excellent  book  is  out  of  print.

16


242


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


discover  the  properties  that  will  he  found  together  wherever  a cow  is
found.  Later,  Le  will  want  to  discover  wliat  are  the  properties  that
will  be  found  wherever  there  is  an  animal  having  a backbone.  Since
not  only  cows  have  backbones,  his  problem  is  now  one  of  greater
generality.  The  chemist,  for  instance,  wants  to  discover  what
happens  to  lime  whenever  it  is  exposed  to  the  air.  The  scientist  is
concerned  with  the  correlation  of  sets  of  properties.  Hence,  a
scientific  proposition  is  ultimately  of  the  form : Whatever  has  the
property  0 has  the  property  W.  A scientist  reaches  such  a propo-
sition from  propositions  of  the  form  : This  A,  this  jB,  this  C,  ei5c.,
have  the  properties  0 and  W/'  That  is  to  say,  he  generalizes  from
particular  cases.  The  instrument  by  means  of  which  true  generali-
zations are  obtained  is  scientific  method.

The  scientist,  then,  considers  particular  facts  only  in  order  to
obtain  generalizations  of  increasing  abstractness.  All  observation
involves  abstraction,  that  is,  selection  from  something  that  is  also
there  to  be  observed.  The  recognition  of  a given  situation  as  being
this  fact  involves  its  being  apprehended  as  relatively  disconnected
from  its  surroundings.  The  recognition  of  a property  involves  its
being  apprehended  in  abstraction  from  other  properties  with  which
it  is  in  fact  given.  Abstraction  may  be  of  various  degrees.  General
propositions  such  as  Buttercups  are  yellow  ’’  express  a low  degree
of  abstraction  ; the  proposition  ‘‘  This  buttercup  is  yellow  ’’  expresses
a lower  degree  still.  The  former  is  called  an  empirical  generalization.
It  is  with  such  generalizations  that  science  begins.  The  use  of  class-
names  indicates  that  a generalization  has  been  made.  Cows  are  a
set  of  individuals  that  have  been  grouped  together  because  each  of
them  possesses  certain  properties.  Many  such  classes  must  be  recog-
nized before  science  is  possible.  Given  the  class  consisting  of  living
icings,  we  may  go  on  to  inquire  as  to  the  properties  of  life  ; given
the  class  material  beings,  we  may  go  on  to  inquire  as  to  the  properties
of  matter.  In  the  course  of  such  an  inquiry  it  may  be  found  that
it  is  the  properties  that  are  important,  not  the  substantive  thing  of
which  they  were  said  to  be  properties.  Before  this  stage  is  reached
there  is  necessary  a period  in  which  are  prominent,  certain  special
modes  which  have  been  gradually  refined  from  the  rough  and  ready
methods  of  common  sense.  To  the  consideration  of  these  methods
we  must  now  turn.


CHAPTEE  XIV

INDUCTION : ENUMEEATION  AND  ANALOGY


‘ Sucli  appears  to  be  the  truth  about  the  generation  of  bees,  judging  from
theory  and  from  what  are  believed  to  be  the  facts  about  them ; the  facts,
however,  have  not  yet  been  sufficiently  grasped  ; if  ever  they  are,  then  credit
must  be  given  rather  to  observation  than  to  theories,  and  to  theories  only  if
what  they  affirm  agrees  with  the  observed  facts.’ — Aristotle,

§1.  INDUCTION

The  word  induction  ” has  been  used  in  various  senses.  It  is
traditional  to  oppose  induction  to  deduction  but  tbe  nature  of
this  opposition  is  by  no  means  always  clear.  Apart  from
some  acquaintance  with,  tbe  bistory  of  tbe  word  it  is  almost  impossible
to  understand  bow  various  writers  have  used  induction  Tbe
word  itself  is  a translation  of  Aristotle’s  term  iTtaycoyi],  Wbat
exactly  Aristotle  himself  meant  by  much  discussed

by  scholars.  1 Here  it  will  be  sufficient  to  distinguish  two  senses  in
which  be  seems  to  have  used  tbe  word.  In  one  sense  induction  ”
is  used  for  that  process  by  means  of  which  we  apprehend  a particular

instance  as  exemplif^dng  an abstract  generalization.  In  the  second

senseT'^TEHu^  ” means  a form  of  reasoning  in  which  we  establish
a generalization  by  showing  that  it  holds  of  every  instance  that  is  ^d
tojahlmdSritT  TCTboth  senses  induction  is  concerned  with  particular
instances.  To  the  first  of  these  processes  Mr.  W.  E.  Johnson  has
given  the  convenient  name  “ intuitive  induction  It  will  be  very
briefly  dealt  with  here.  — —

The  immediate  apprehension  of  an  axiom  by  means  of  its  exempli-
fication in  a particular  instance  affords  an  example  of  intuitive  induc-
tion. The  importance  of  this  form  of  reasoning  is  that  by  means  of
it  we  can  go  beyond  the  particular  instance  that  forms  the  basis  of
the  inference  and  yet  reach  a conclusion  that  is  indubitable.  For
example,  from  the  apprehension  of  this  red  'patch  as  being  darker  than
tJmt  pink  patch  we  may  pass  immediately  to  the  conclusion  that  what  |
holds  of  this  instance  holds  of  any  instance  exactly  similar  in  colour.

^ See  Joseph,  Chap,  XVIII,  for  a good  discussion  of  this  topic.  Cf,  Aristotle,
Anal  Priora,  Ek.  II,  Chap.  23 ; Anal  Post,  Bk.  I,  Chap.  13 ; Topica,  Bk.  I,
Chaps.  17-18.

^ Logic,  II,  Chaps.  VIII  and  IX.

. 243


244


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Hence,  we  pass  to  the  conclusion  that  any  red  patch  is  darker  than
any  pink  patch.  Thus  we  generalize  from  the  particular  instance.

in  the  form.  That  we  do  in  fact  apprehend  general  principles  in  this
way  is  not  likely  to  he  denied.  To  describe  this  method  of  discOTer-
ing  axioms  as  inductive  infereryce  involves  an  extension  of  the  word  in-
ductive ’’  as  ordinarily  used,  but  no  doubt  this  extension  is  desirable.

Aristotle^s  second  use  of  the  word  is  concerned  with  the  enumera-
tion of  particular  Instates.  Erom  the  consideration  of  each  of  the
meinbS^f  ^limited  cla^  we  may  pass  to  a generalization  concerning
all  the  memT:)Ss“drfFat  class.  This  process  has  usually  been  known
as  “ completejnduction  ’’  or  ‘‘  perfect  induction  The  name  is
peculiarly  inappropriate.  It  was  supp^dsed  that  induction  consists  in
generalization  from  particular  instances,  and  that  therefore,  if  every
instance  were  included  in  the  enumeration  the  inductive  process
would  be  perfected.  But  it  is  difl&cult  to  see  what  useful  purpose
could  be  served  by  calhng  such  a mode  of  inference  inductive
since  the  reasoning  is  clearly  syllogistic  in  character.  For  example,
from  the  examination  of  the  particular  cases  of  an  ellipse,  a parabola,
an  hyperbola  we  might  conclude  that,  since  no  one  of  them"cuts  a
straight  Ime  at  more  than  two  points,  no  conic  section  ct^ j^jkaight
line  at  more  than  two  points.  When  explicitly  stated  it  is  seen  that
this  reasoning  Is  syllogistic.  It  can  be  formulated  as  follows :
i No  circle,  no  ellipse,  no  parabola,  no  hyperbola  cuts  a straight
' line  in  more  than  two  points ;

Every  conic  section  is  either  a circle,  or  an  ellipse,  or  a parabola,
or  an  hyperbola ;

Therefore,  no  conic  section  cuts  a straight  line  in  more  than  two
pomts.

It  is  essential  that  the  class  that  is  enumerated  should  contain
only  a limited  number  of  instances.  It  is  not  possible  to  enumerate
a class  that  has  an  infinite  number  of  members,  nor  to  enumerate  a
class  which,  though  not  infinite,  contains  members  that  are  not
knnwn  byjxs.  In  neither  of  these  cases  could  we  complete^EEe'tom-
, mation.  This  mode  of  inference  is  of  very  little  value  save  as  a
shorthand  device.  It  can  be  symbolized  as  follows :

S„  S3 ...  S>P.

Every  S is  either  Si,  or  Sg,  or  S3 ...  or  S^.

Every  S is  P.  ^


Mr.  Johnson  has  suggested  the  convenient  name  summary
induction  for  this  mode  of  inference.  It  is  certainly  a more^^appf5-
priatenamTTIiin"*^^'^^


^Mr.  Johnson  holds  that  by  summary  induction  it  is  possible  to  establish
general  propositions  in  Euclidean  geometry  by  means  of  figures.  He  concludes


INDUCTION : ENUMERATION  AND  ANALOGY  245


Generalization  from  a nnmher  of  iyistfl.nep.R  which,  are

not  assumed  to  constitute  all  the  instances  of  the  given  class  is  now
usually  known  by  the  name  ''  Induction  by  Simple  Enumeration
With  this  mode  of  inference  we  shall  be  concerned  in  the  next  section.
Sometimes  induction  ’’  has  been  understood  as  an  exact  synonym
for  ''  simple  enumeration The  great  importance  of  simple  enumer-
ation in  scientific  investigation  is  no  doubt  responsible  for  the  fact
that  “ induction  ” has  also  been  used  as  a synonym  for  scientific
method  When  so  used  it  has  been  called  imperfect  induction  ’’
to  distinguish  it  from  '' p^fect  !i_<iL.mmma^^  This

variation  in  terminology  is  unfortunate.  It  seems  now  to  be  gener-
[ally  agreed  that  induction  essentially  consists  in  generalization  from
I particular  instances,  and  that  scientific  method  involves  not  only
induction  but  also  deduction.  J.  S.  Mill  defined  induction  as  the
^operation  of  discovering  and  proving  general  propositions  This  is
imdoubtedly  too  wide  a defitnition.  It  was,  however,  Mill’s  views  on
the  nature  of  induction  and  proof  that  led  him  so  to  define  “ induc-
tion ”,  rather  than  a desire  to  use  the  word  in  a sense  different  from
the  usual.  ^ Since  generalization  from  particular  matters  of  fact  ^n-
stitutes  induction71FTQl[a^"t^  the  empirical  sciences  are  based
upon  induction.  JBut  it  does  not  follow  that  such  scientific  general .
propositions  could  be  established  solely  by  induction,  nor  that  any
inductive  proposition  is.  capable  of  moof.  Whether  or  not  this  is"  the
case  will  be  discussed  in  Chapter  XX.  Here  we  are  concerned  only
to  point  out  that,  sihce  all  the  sciences  except  mathematic^  are
ernpirical,  i.e.  based  upon  particular  experiences,  it  follows  that  witE-
out  induction  there  could  be  no  science.  Whether  the  belief,  which
we  all  in  fact  share,  that  some  scientific  propositions  are  true  is  capable
of  logical  justification  cannot  be  profitably  discussed  until  we  have
considered  the  method  by  which  scientific  propositions  are  obtained.

We  may  begin  by  considering  a proposition  of  a type~"feadily
recognized  by  the  plain  man  as  scientific,  e.g.  Acids  are  sour  to  the  taste  ^
and  turn  blue  litmus  red.  We  may  contrast  this  with  a proposition
such  as  I donH  like  this  sour  orange.  The  latter  would  not  be  regarded
as  a scientific  proposition  because  it  states  an  isolated  fact,  an  indi-
vidual judgement  of  taste.  The  former  would  bEr^af3eS“aF scientific
because  it  states  a generalization.  It  could  be  tested  and  agreement

that  there  is  ‘ a more  interesting  type  of  summary  induction  in  which  the  con-
clusion applies  to  an  infinite  number  of  cases  which  are  non-enymerable  ’
(loQ.  cit.,  p.  200).  But  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  Mr.  Johnson’s  contention
can  be  admitted.  *

^ See  Logic,  Bk.  Ill,  Chaps.  I and  II.  Mill  also  defines  induction  as  ‘ the
iprocess  by  which  we  conclude  that  what  is  true  of  certain  individuals  of  a class
iis  true  of  the  whole  class,  or  that  what  is  true  at  certain  times  will  be  true  in
jsimilar  circumstances  at  aU  times  ’ (Chap.  II,  § 1).  Eor  a further  discussion  of
Mill’s  views  see  below.  Chap.  XVII,  § 5.


246


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


as  to  its  truth,  or  falsity  could  be  attained.  If  for  the  second  pro-
position we  were  to  substitute  No  child  likes  sour  ormges  we  should
have  a scientific  proposition  capable  of  being  tested  by  the  investiga-
tion of  children’s  tastes.  In  order  that  a proposition  should  be
scientific  it  must  relate  to  something  other  than  the  immediate  e:^eri-
ience  of  an  individual.  Our  first  proposition  was  not  an  assertion
about  a particular  instance  of  an  acid  and  a particular  individual’s
experience,  but  an  assertion  about  the  properties^  of  anij  acid.  It  was
of  the  form  : If  anything  is  an  acid,  it  is  sour  to  the  taste  and  turns  blue
litmus  red*  This  proposition  might  be  combined  with  the  proposition
This  is  hydrochloric  acid  to  yield  the  conclusion  This  is  sour  to  the  taste
and  turns  blue  litmus  red.  This  is,a.,valid  . deductive  ^ But  J^e

ques^n  whether  the  conclusion  is  cpujd  not^  be  am  by  a
congidefa^^  Jrthe  valid^^  the  f^m.  If  Both  premisses  are  tnie,
then  since  the  form  is  valid  the  conclusion  is  true.  (^But  the  pro-
position asserted  in  the  conclusion  might  be  true  ev^  though  this
were  not  hydrochloric  acid,  and  even  if  not  all  acids  had  the  property
of  turning  blue  litmus  red^  Validity  and  truth  are  quite  diffpr„gnt.
Science  is  concerned  with  propositions^ that  are  not  only  valid  in  form
I but  ar^S'so  kue.  We  need  not  attempt  to  discuss  the  proBlem  a's  to
what  is  meant  by  a true  proposition.  We  all  know  what  it  is  to  assert
that  a given  proposition  is  true,  and  another  given  proposition  is  false.
(^When  we  say  that  This  is  an  acid  ” is  true  we  are  asserting  that  it
is  the  case  that  this  is  an  acid.  If^it  is  the  case  that  the  sun’s  interior
is  hqt  j then  the  proposition  ” is  true.  If  it  is

the  case^BStlomatoes  "are  jmcy,  tEen  the  jTrojpsitioh""**  Tomatoes  are
juicy  ” is  true.  If  it  is  not  the  case  that  Socrates  is  alive,  then  “ Socrates
is  alive  ” is  false.  It  has  sometimes  been  said  that  to  say  that  a pro-
position is  true  is  to  say  that  there  is  a fact  to  which  the  proposition
corresponds  ; and  to  say  that  it  is  false  is  to  say  that  there  is  no  such
fact.  We  need  not,  however,  discuss  what  is  meant  by  corres-
pondence” here,  nor  consider  between  what  exactly  the  corres-
pondence holds.  It  is  enough  for  our  purpose  to  accept  the  plain
man’s  view  that  he  knows  what  he  means  when  he  asserts  that  a
proposition  is  true.  What  is  important  to  observe  is  that  unless  there
are  general  propositions  about  particular  matters  oftact,  and  unless
some  of  these  propositions  are  both  true,  and  are  believed  to  be  true,
there  can  be  no  knowledge  that  is  ri^tIy"caIK3r“M®BD^^^

The  first  question  we  have  to  discuss  is,  then,  how  we  are  to  obtain
il^owledge  of  general  propositions  such  acids  turn  blue  litmus  red.
It  is  this  typFolTnSi^^  that  must  now  be  considered.

§2.  SIMPLE  ENIJMEEATION

The  simplest  kind  of  induction  is  that  in  which  from  the  premiss
All  observed  S's  are  Fs  we  infer  the  conclusion  All  Fs  are  Fs*  It  is


INDUCTION  : ENUMEEATION  AND  ANAXOGY  247


assumed  that  the  observed  S’s  are  not  aU  the  S’s  there  are  ; hence  this
mode  of  induction  is  quite  different  from  summary  induction.  The
inference  is  not  logically  valid,  for  in  inferring  from  a premiss  about
\some  S to  ^.„there  is  an  illicit  disfeihution  of^.

For  example,  from  the  fact  that  all  observed  crows  have  been  found  to
be  black,  we  may  infer  that  all  crows  are  black.  This  mode  of  infer-
ence as  we  saw  is  known  as  induction  by  simple  enuTnemtion,  It  is
the  basis  of  generalization.  Every  one  ma^esTnlerSices  by  simple
enumeration.  Having  met  half  a dozen  Scotsmen  all  of  whom  are
somewhat  lacking  in  humour,  we  conclude  that  no  Scotsman  can  see  a
joke.  This  precarious  generalization  is  liable  to  be  i^et  by  the  next
Scotsman  we  meet ; it  could  not  suxvive"a  reading  of  the  works  of
■David  Hume.  The  appearance  of  a single  contradictory  instance
disproves  the  conclusion.  ^ It  is  obvious  that  if  the  number  of
observed  instances  are  few  in  comparison  with  those  that  have  not
been  observed,  there  is  considerable  likelihood  that  contradictory
instances  may  be  found  among  the  latter.  An  example  of  simple
enumSFaHon^  found  in  every  "Sfemehtary  book  on  logic,  has  become
famous  because  contradictory  instances  were  discovered.  The  con-
clusion all  swans  are  white  was  derived  by  many  people  from  their
observation  of  swans  in  Europe  all  of  which  happened  to  be  white.
On  the  discovery  of  Australia  black  swans  were  discovered.

Simple  enumeration  is  so  called  because  it  appears  to  be  a process
simply  of  counting  the  instances  and  finding  them  all  to  have  a certain
property.  It  does  not  seem  to  involve  analysis.  For  this  reason
Bacon  and  Mill  attempted  to  reject  simple  eun-meration  from  their
account  of  scientific  • method.  Thus  Bacon  says  : ‘ the  induction
which  proceeds  by  simple  enumeration  is  childish ; its  conclusions
are  precarious,  and  exposed  to  peril  from  a contradictory  instance ;
and  generally  it  decides  on  too  small  a number  of  facts,  and  on  those
only  which  are  at  hand.^^  Mill  says:  ^Popular  notions  are  usually
founded  on  induction  by  simple  enumeration ; in  science  it  carries  us
but  a little  way.  We  are  forced  to  begin  with  it ; we  must  often  rely
on  it  provisionally,  in  the  absence  of  means  of  a more  searching
investigation.  But,  for  the  accurate  study  of  nature,  we. require  a
surer  and  a rpbre  notent  instrument.^  ^ Whether  such  a ^ surer  and
more  potent  ’ instrument  can  be  found  we  shall  have  to  consider  later.
It  must  be  admitted  that  simple  enumeration  is  a precarious  mode  of
inference,  that  we  constantly  employ  it ; and  that  our  belief  in  the
' truth  of  propositions  so  inferred  is  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  likeli-
hoodoftheii  SutEI  But  it  must  also  be  admitted,  as  Mill  saw7  that

^ Bacon  named  tMs  mode  of  inference  in  tlie  phrase : ‘ Laductio  per  enumera-
tionem  simplicem,  nbi  non  reperitur  instantia  contradictoria.’

® j^ovmn  Organum,  Bk.  I,  Aph.  105.  ® Logic,  Bk.  III^  Chap.  Ill,  f 2,


248


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


An  inductive  argument  of  this  type  can  be  expressed  in  the  form  :

Such  and  such  instances  of  have  the  property  W ; no  instances  of
0 that  had  not  got  W have  been  found ; therefore,  every  0 has
The  instances  of  0 constitute  a class  having  the  properties  connoted
|)y  ^ Tlie  examples  so  far  given  have  all  been  of  classes  whose

members  have  many  properties  in  common  : crows,  swans,  Scotsmen,
The  popular  use  of  this  mode  of  induction  is  always  confined  to  such
classes.  This  point  is  worth  considering.  Any  set  of  things  can  be
classed  together.^  S<me  modes  of  grouping  things  into  classes  are  felt
be  important : some  are  felt  to  be  trivial.  Eor  exampe,  the  class
formed  of  all  the  things  in  the  world  that  are  scarlet  would  appear  to
be  a class  based  on  a trivial  resemblance.  Poppies,  scarlet-fever  rash,
doctors’  gowns,  covers  of  certain  boohs,  some  tablecloths,  and  so  on,
would  constitute  a class  having  very  little  in  common  except  their
scarlet  colour.  But  the  class  consisting  of  all  books,  or  the  class  con-
sisting of  all  crows,  seems  less  artificial.  Thus  the  property  of  heing
scarlet  has  never  been  regarded  as  important  enough  for  all  the  things
that  have  the  property  to  be  called  by  a class-na'ine.  We  can  refer
to  them  only  as  scarlet  things  But  sivans  ”,  politicians  ”,

Scotsmen  ” are  class-names.  This  point  has  been  put  very  clearly
bvDr.  Broad  as  follows  : ' Now  the  mere  fact  that  ordinary  language
has  taken  the  trouble  to  invent  a general  name  lil^e  sivan  or  crow  tells
us  a good  deal  about  nature.  It  implies  that  a large  number  of
objects  have  been  met  with  which  have  combined  pretty  constantly  a
large  number  of  properties  varyin.gjOiily:;s?it^

It  is  true  that  you  may  define  a crow  or  a swan  or  a man  by  a few
properties.  But  this  very  fact  is  symptomatic.  Whatever  may  be
the  dictionary  meaning  of  ^ man  ’ we  always  mean  by  it  something  with
a great  many  more  properties  than  animality  and  rationality  or  two-
leggedness  and  featherlessness.  An3rthing  that  had  these  properties
but  diSered  widely  in  other  respects  from  the  men  that  we  had  met
would  only  with  great  hesitation  be  called  a man.  Hence  the  fact
I that  we  are  content  with  the  dictionary  definition  is  due  to  the  fact
I that  so  far  in  our  experience  the  properties  mentioned  therein  have
been  associated  with  a whole  bunch  of  other  properties,  and  that  all
\these  have  been  exemplified  together  with  but  sHght  variations  in  a
great  number  of  instances.’  ^ That  is  to  say,  such  classes  as  swans  and
men  differ  from  such  classes  as  scarlet  things  and  sour  things  in  the  fact
that  every  member  of  the  class  swan,  for  instance,  has  several  pro-
perties in  common  with  all  the  other  members,  whereas  the  members
of  the  class  scarlet  things  have  few  properties  in  common  which  are  not

^ Mind,  N.S.,  Vol.  XXIX,  p.  17 : ‘ The  Belation  between  Induction  and
Probability.’  Dr.  Broad’s  two  articles  in  Mind  (Oct.,  1918,  January,  1920),  on
this  subject  are  of  the  greatest  importance.  Much  of  what  I have  to  say  about
scientific  method  has  been  learnt  from  Wm.


nroUCTION  : ENUMEEATION  AOT)  ANALOGY  242


also  possessed  by  things  that  are  not  scarlet.  Such  classes  as  sivans
were  called  by  Mill  natural  kinds  It  is  useful  to  adopt  this  term,

although  we  should  reject  the  assumptions  upon  which  his  choice  oi
the  name  rested,  and  should,  therefore,  not  be  prepared  to  define  a
‘‘  natural  kind  ” as  he  defi.ned  it.

• Simple  enumeration  is  not,  then,  to  be  regarded  ^s  a process
simply  of  counting  ; it  is  a , countingi„Qf  instances  recognized  as^  havmg
certain  vropmlws  in  common.  The  inference  is  dependent  upon
recognition  of  resemblances.  An  inference^fcom^esemhl^
inference  from  analogy,

§ 3.  ANALOGY

The  word  “ analogy  ” has  been  used  in  various  senses.^  We  are
now  concerned  with  it  in  that  sense  in  which  analogy  is  to  be  opposed
to  simple  counting  of  instances.  There  has  been  considerable  con-
fusion of  terminology,  some  logicians  maintaining  that  analogy  is  a
/om  of  induction,  some  maintaining  that  induction  i^fbased  upon
analogy,  whilst  others  maintain  that  analogy  is  a process  of  inference
sul^i^y  to  jnduciijQXi.  This  divergence  of  opinion' is  ^due  mainly
to  tle"'ambiguity  of  ''  induction  ’’  and  analogy  As  Mr.  W.  E.
J ohnson  puts  it : ‘In  what  sense  these  two  terms  are  used  is  not  clear,
except  that  induction  is  understood  to  depend  primarily  upon  the
number  of  instances  known  to  be  characterized  by  a certain
adjective  f’"®^'^ile  the  force  of  analogy  depends  upon  the  number  of
adj^tives  that  are  known  to  characterize  a certain  instance.  But  it
is  essential  to  insist  that  neither  by  accumulating  instances  alone,  nor
by  accumulating  adjectives  alone,  can  any  inference  be  drawn,  and
that  inference  of  this  type,  by  whatever  name  it  may  be  called,  is
governed  by  principles  which  underlie  both  induction  and  analogy —
requiring  an^intensiqnal  as  well  as  an  extensional  link.  Eor  example,
no  mere  accumulation  of  Instances  Si,  Sg,  S3 ...  S^  that  are  p could
give  any  probability  that  a new  instance  s will  be  p.  unless  s were
known  to  have  at  least  one  character  predicable  of  aU  these  instances.
And  conversely,  no  accumulation  of  characters  pi,  pgj  — Pm  that  are
predicable  of  s could  give  any  probability  that  a new  character  p is
predicable  of  5,  unless  p were  known  to  be  predicable  of  a;neast  one
instance  having  all  these  characters.’  ^ That  is  to  say,  the  opposition

1 See  Mill,  Logic,  Bk.  Ill,  Chap.  XXIL

2 For  a discussion  of  Aristotle’s  treatment  of  analogy,  see  Joseph,  Introd.,
Chap.  XXIV.

® Mr.  Johnson  uses  the  word  “ adjective  ” for  “ characteristic  ” or  pro-
perty ”,  and  not  as  a purely  grammatical  term.  His  peculiar  use  of  adjective  is
due  to  his  view  of  the  relation  of  grammar  to  logic — ^ view  which  seems  to  me
to  be  profoundly  mistaken.

* Logic,  Pi  in,  Chap.  IV,  § 3,


250


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


wMcli  we  are  kere  expressing  by  the  terms  induction  and  analogy  is  tb^
between,  the  number  oi  instances  and  the  resemblance  of  the  instances.

We  have  seen  that  in  passing  £romTEnpremissT"3iro^^
are  hlach  to  the  conclusion  Every  crow  is  ilach  the  inference  is  not
based  purely  upon  counting  the  instances,  since  these  instances  have
been  classed  together  on  account  of  their  possessing  certain  properties
which  constitute  the  connotation  of  crow  ’’ ; they  are  instances  of
crows.  Thus  wg  do  not  start  from  a ''mere  accumulatioi^Qf
instances  Sutl^oml^em^^^  jn^  certain^^respects.  Every
generSEiation  must  be  based  upon  resemblance;  hence,  every
generalization  involves  both  analogy  and  enumeration.

Much  the  clearest  treatment  of  the  nature  and  importance  of
analogy  in  inductive  investigation  has  been  given  by  Mr.  J.  Majnard
Keynes  in  his  A Treatise  on  Probability.  We  shah,  therefore,  make
use  of  his  discussion  here,  and  shall  adopt  certain  technical  terms  that
he  has  introduced.  We  shall  then  briefly  consider  what  has  most  often
been  meant  by  ‘‘argument  from  analogy”.

Given  any  two  objects  S and  N which  resemble  each  other  in
certain  respects  pi,  pa?  Ps  — Pn  J which  differ  in  certain  other
respects  fi,  Vz,  r^;  then  px,  p 2 -..p^  constitute  the  positive  analogy
between  S and  N ; r^,  rz ...  r^  constitute  the  negative  analogy  between
S and  N.  Since  knowledge  of  S and  N is  never  complete,  the  total
analogy  will  always  include  properties  which  are  not  Imoum  to  belong,
or  not  to  belong,  to  S and  to  N.  Hence,  we  must  distinguish  between
the  total  positive  analogy  and  the  hnown  positive  analogy  and  between
^the  total  negative  analogy  and  the  hnown  negative  analogy.  Let  us
consider,  for  example,  two  peas.  Peas  are  proverbially  alike.  Yet
they  differ  in  colour,  size,  flavour,  and  so  on.  Suppose  one  is  green
and  the  other  yellow.  Then  their  colour  is  part  of  the  negative
analogy.  But  the  two  peas  may  come  from  the  same  pod.  In  that
case,  being  in  the  same  pod  is  part  of  the  positive  analogy.  Or  they
may  come  from  different  pods,  and  yet  these  pods  may  have  the  same
parent  peas ; then,  the  first  property  would  constitute  part  of  the
negative  analogy,  the  second  property  part  of  the  positive  analogy.

If  our  argument  was  confined  to  these  positive  and  negative
resemblances,  we  should  be  concerned  only  with  analogy.  We
generalize  only  when  we  consider  the  instances  that  have  the  pro-
perties. The  generalization  from  “ all  observed  crows  are  black  ” to
“ all  crows  are  black  ” involves  both  analogy  and  enumeration.  We
have  already  seen  that  to  use  the  name  “ crow  ” of  an  object  is  to
imply  that  the  object  resembles  in  certain  respects  other  objects
called  by  the  same  name.-  Those  properties  belonging  to  all  the
instam^es  of  crows  constitute  the  total  positive  analogy.  The  process
of  classing  objects  together  on  account  of  their  resemblance  in  certain
' respects  is  the  jSrst  stage  in  inductiye  investigation ; it  is  presupposed


INDUCTION  : ENUMERATION  AND  ANALOGY  251


both  by  simple  enumeration  and  by  argument  from  analogy.^  It  is
the  fact  that  certain  properties  are  found  together  that  makes  class-
names  so  useful.  If  we  Imow  that  there  is  a set  of  properties  such  that
no  member  of  the  set  is  ever  found  without  other  members  of  the  set,
then  we  have  a basis  for  inference.  It  is  because  this  appears  to  be
the  case  with  natural  kinds  that  generalizations  about  natural  kinds,
such  as  crows^  acids,  men,  seem  to  be  plausible.

Any  striking  resemblance  may  form  the  basis  of  an  argument  by
analogy.  But  what  is  striking  depends  upon  our  previous  knowledge
and  our  mental  outlook,  which  determine  our  expectations.  We
have  seen  that  a metaphor  or  an  illustration  may  be  substituted  for
an  argument.  TETmvoIvesTnT^  use  of  analogy.  It  is

ill^timatebecausetEe  res^LBTance  is  not  relevant  to  the  conclusion
based  upon  it.  To  determine  what  is  relevant  and  j^at  is  not
relevant  is  to  empIoyscienpEcmdbho^^

befwSenTthm^YsYrft^^  be  misleading.  The

nature  of  an  argument  by  analogy  may  belhest  seen  by  comparing
two  examples  of  its  use.  The  first  example  is  taken  from  an  argument
directed  by  a seventeenth-century  writer,  Francesco  Sizzi,  against
Galileo’s  discovery  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter.

* There  are  seven  windows  in  the  head,  two  nostrils,  two  eyes,  two  ears,  and  a
mouth ; so  in  the  heavens  there  are  two  favourable  stars,  two  unpropitious,
two  luminaries,  and  Mercury  alone  undecided  and  indifferent.  From  which  and
many  other  similar  phenomena  of  nature,  such  as  the  seven  metals,  etc.,  which
it  were  tedious  to  enumerate,  we  gather  that  the  number  of  planets  is  necessarily
jeven.’  ^

This  argument  is  based  upon  resemblance  in  having  the  property
being  seven  in  number,  eked  out  with  a supposed  resemblance  in  the
division  into  three  sets  of  two,  and  one  of  one,  object.  The  things
which  have  the  number,^'  the  windows  in  the  head  ” and  the  planets,
are  obviously  very  unlike  in  other  respects.  The  argument  now
strikes  us  as  absurd.  We  feel  that  their  resemblance  in  hemg^men
unimportant,  that  it  does  not  provide  a sufficient  basis  for  inference .
It  miStTEuwev^^  that  although  the  explicit  basis  of  the

argument  is  simply  the  resemblance  in  number,  yet  this  particular
number,  seven,  has  been  regarded  as  itself  having  important  properties
and  thus  as  differing  in  importance  as  a number,  from,  say,  the  number
eighth

^ Of.  Bosauquet,  Logic,  Vol.  I,  p.  7.  ‘ To  give  a name  is  for  civilized  thought

the  first  step  in  knowledge.,  It  at  once  depends  upon,  and  in  a sense  creates,  a
recognizable  arrangement  of  things,  quahties  and  relations.  Wherever  neWi
ground  has  to  be  appropriated,  whether  actually  or  in  metaphor,  the  first  neces-
sity is  to  find  recognizable  points,  by  which,  being  named,  we  can  observe  and
communicate  our  whereabouts.’

^ Quoted  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  Pioneers  of  Science,  p.  106.

® It  is  not  necessary  to  inquire  into  these  properties,  since  the  argument  is
obviously  unsound,  and  its  conclusion  has  been  definitely  disproved.  It  is  here


252


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Tte  second  example  is  taken  from  a chapter  on  Analogy  from  the
works  of  the  philosopher,  Thomas  Eeid.

‘ We  may  observe  a very  great  similitude  between  this  earth  which  w'e  inhabit,
and  the  other  planets,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Venus  and  Mercury.  They  all
revolve  round  the  sun,  as  the  earth  does,  although  at  diiferent  distances,  and  in
different  periods.  They  borrow  all  their  hght  from  the  sun,  as  the  earth  does.
Several  of  them  are  known  to  revolve  round  their  axis  like  the  earth,  and,  by  that
means,  must  have  a like  succession  of  day  and  night.  Some  of  them  have
moons,  that  serve  to  give  them  light  in  the  absence  of  the  sun,  as  our  moon  does
to  us.  They  are  all  in  their  motions,  subject  to  the  same  law  of  gravitation,  as
the  earth  is.  From  all  this  similitude,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  think,  that  these
planets  may,  like  our  earth,  be  the  habitation  of  various  orders  of  living
creatures.  There  is  some  probability  in  this  conclusion  from  analogy.’  ^

It  is  not  difficult  to  determine  tlie  properties  wMch  in  this  argu-
ment constitute  the  known  positive  analogy.  Some  of  those  pro-
perties belonging  to  the  known  negative  analogy  are  indicated,  for
example,  varying  distances  from  the  sun,  with  the  connected  property,
increased  length  of  orbit ; but  the  positive  analogy  is  not  developed
in  a systematic  way.  Such  a development  would  be  necessary  to
complete  the  argument.  We  are  concerned,  however,  only  to  com-
pare this  argument  with  the  use  made  of  analogy  by  Francesco  Sizzi.
It  is  obvious  that  Eeid’s  argument  depends  upon  the  consideration  of
properties  that  are  important  in  the  sense  that  one  property  is  con-
nected with  others.  Thus  the  property  of  being  inhabited  by  various
orders  of  living  beings  iscomected  with  the  properties  round

the  sun,  deriving  light  from  the  sun,  and  possibly  with  rotating  since
this  involves  periods  of  darkness  necessitating  rest.  These  properties
render  the  argument  not  unplausible.  Further  investigation  would
be  required  with  regard  to  the  properties  known  to  be  connected  with
the  inferred  property  of  being  inhabited  by  various  orders  of  creatures,
such,  for  instance,  as  the  possession  of  atmosphere,  the  effects  of
gravity  at  the  surface  of  each  planet,  and  so  on.  Suppose  it  were
granted  that  the  existence  of  a creature  such  as  man  is  dependent  upon
the  presence  of  air,  then  the  question  whether  a given  planet,  say
Mars,  was  surrounded  with  air  would  be  an  important  question  to
decide.  Assuming  that  the  consideration  of  such  questions  is  left
open,  it  may  be  admitted  that  the  analogy  is  suggestive,  whereas
Sizzi’s  analogy  is  not.  Its  superiQx.sugffestiveness  consists  in  the  fact
that  the  positive  analogy  admits  of  development.  This  is  not  the  case
with  the  property  being  seven  in  number  upon  which  Sizzi’s  argument
is  based.

It  will  be  observed  that  Eeid’s  conclusion  is  restricted  to  the

cited  merely  as  an  example  of  the  way  in  wbicb  argument  from  analogy  has  been
used.  I do  not  suggest  that  the  statement  in  the  text  does  justice  to  the  system
of  organization  within  which  Sizzi  was  arguing.

^ Eeid’s  Worhs  (Hamilton’s  edition,  p.  236).


INDUCTION  : ENUMEEATION  AND  ANALOGY  253


possibility  that  these  planets  are  “ the  habitation  of  varions  orders  of
creatures  There  would  have  been  less  plausibility  in  the  argument
had  he  included  the  determinate  properties,  heing  such  creatures  as
men,  who  have  the  characteristics  of  heing  prone  to  fight,  sometimes
sensitive  to  heauty,  very  rarely  capable  of  creating  worhs  of  art,  often
tolerating  slum  conditions,  etc.  Had  he  done  so,  he  jwqidd^  have
increased  what  J.  M.  Keynes  calls  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  con-
clusion^  and  in  so  "doing  he  wduld  Eje“decreased  the  proBabilitx  of jVs  ^ ,
truth.

We  can  now  make  precise  the  characteristics  upon  which  the
strength  of  an  analogical  argument  depends.  Its  strength  depends
upon  the  character  of  the  initial  resemblance  ^and^upon  the  relative  ■
comnreheiisiveness  of  tlte  prop^ties  which, are_as^^^  be  con-

nec±jBiL  If  the  initial  resemblance  is  such  that  the  inferred  property  ;
would  account  for  the  resemblance,  then  the  conclusion  is  likely  to
be  true.  When  such  a relation  exists  between  the  known  positive
analogy  and  the  inferred  property,  the  positive  analogy  consists  of
important  properties.  Whenever  we  argue  feom  analogy  we  assume
that  this  relation  holds  between  the  properties  that  are  the  basis
of  the  analogy  and  the  property  inferred  from  them.  Thus  in  our
illustration  the  property  of  revolving  round  the  sun  would  be  an
important  property  relatively  to  the  conclusion  that  is  inferred.
The  initial  resemblance  must  be  a resemblance  between  properties
that  are  important  in  this  sense.  The  more  we  can  increase  the  total
known  analogy  the  more  likelihood  there  is  that  we  shall  increase  the
number  of  important  properties  that  it  contains;  hence,  the  less
likelihood  of  our  overlooking  an  important  difference  or  resemblance.
For  this  purpose  it  is  useful  to  examine  a number  of  instances  having
the  properties  which  constitute  the  initial  resemblance.  The  exam-
ination of  a number  of  such  instances,  which  in  other  respects  differ
as  much  as  possible,  is  likely  to  reveal  those  properties  which  are
important,  negatively  or  positively.

We  have  now  to  consider  the  second  factor  upon  which  the  strength
of  an  argument  from  analogy  depends.  The.mor^comprehensve  the
inferred  properties  are  the  less  likelY  js_.the^,eqnQtoiQn^ tq  ,b.O  true.
We  saw  that  Eeid’s  argument  was  more  plausible  because  he  was
contented  with  inferring  to  a restricted  property.  On  the  other  hand,
the  less  comprehensive  the  implying  properties  are  theless  likely  is  thft
conclusion  to  be  true.  Thus  Sizzi’s  argument  was  based  upon  the
single  property  of  resemblance  in  number,  eked  out  with  a fanciful
arrangement  into  sets  of  planets  corresponding  to  facial  character-
fistics.  A metaphor  expanded  into  an  analogy  has  this  characteristic
of  not  being  sufficiently  comprehensive  with  regard  to  the  implying
property.  In  attempting  to  develop  an  argument  from  analogy  we
must,  then,  seek  to  increase  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  implying


264


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


properties  and  decrease  tlie  compreliensiveness  of  the  implied  pro-
perties. It  is  in  tHs  sense  only  that  nmy^T^Jj^rpjgefties  h relevant
to  the  stren^b.  of  an  an^pgical^argument.  This  has  not  always  been
clearlyl:earked.  MU,  for  instance,  seems  to  lay  excessive  stress  upon
the  mere  number  of  properties  in  the  positive  analogy.^

We  are  all  at  times  apt  to  be  impressed  by  weak  analogies  owing
to  the  fact  that  a resemblance  that  is  interesting  or  emotionally  satisfy-
ing will  seem  to  ns  to  be  significant  if  we  are  not  on  onr  guard.  The
greater  our  ignorance  of  the  subject-matter,  the  more  likely  we  are  to
be  Dusled  by  a weak  analogy.  Consequently  we  should  not  be  sur-
prised to  find  that  primitive  peoples  have  often  based  conclusions
upon  unsound  analogies  since  they  were  led  to  regard  as  important
resemblances  which  we  now  know  to  be  extremely  superficial.  Thus
it  has  been  supposed  that  the  fighting  of  a candle  will  help  the  sun  to
rise,  that  a person  suffering  from  jaundice  will  recover  if  he  is  sur-
rounded with  red  things,  such  as  hairs  from  a red  bull,  the  skin  of  the
buU,  and  so  on,  whilst  the  jaundice  is  banished  into  the  bodies  of
yellow  birds.  Such  beliefs  seem  to  us  absurd  .because  of  our  consider-
able amount  of  knowledge  relevant  to  the  situation.  That  some  like-
nesses are  important  is  the  logical  foundation  of  argument  from
analogy.  The  distinction  of  those  likenesses  that  are  important  from
those  that  are  not  emerges  slowly  as  our  knowledge  of  natural
occurrences  increases.  Hence  we  should  not  find  it  diflS.cult  to  under-
stand that,  as  Mr.  Keynes  points  out,  ‘ the  common  sense  of  the  race
has  been  impressed  by  very  weak  analogies  Under  the  influence
of  emotion  or  as  the  result  of  a prior  belief  in  the  conclusion  people
less  ignorant  than  savages  may  be  so  misled.  Thus  Sir  Arthur  Keith,
in  his  Presidential  Address  to  the  British  Association  (1927),  in  the
course  of  an  argument  designed  to  deny  the  immateriality  of  spirit,
reasons  as  follows :

‘ Spiritualists  "believe  that  the  mind  or  soul  comes  out  of  space  . . . uses  tlie
body  as  a vehicle  of  its  manifestation  and  sooner  or  later  discards  its  material
garb  and  again  flits  out  into  space.  In  brief,  the  modem  biologist  presumes  that
the  material  body  or  candle  comes  first,  the  spirit  or  flame  afterwards ; whereas
the  Spiritualist  reverses  the  order  of  events.’  ^

We  do  not  need  to  be  in  agreement  with  the  Spiritualists  to  recog-
nize that  the  analogy  of  hrain  and  soul  with  candle  and  flame  is  an
unsound  one  which  begs  the  point  at  issue,  since  both  candle  and  flame
are  admittedly  material.  It  is  unl]3cely  that  an  eminent  anatomist

^ ^ Bk.  Ill,  Chap.  XX,  § 3.  Mill’s  treatment  of  analogy  suggests  several
points  of  importance.  But  his  statement  is  inexact  and  careless.  He  also
makes  the  mistake  of  opposing  analogy  to  what  he  calls  a “ complete  induction  ”•
In  so  doing  he  is  Hmiting  analogy  to  what  we  have  called  “ argument  from
analogy

^Darwinism  and  What  it  Implies*


INDUCTION : ENIMEEATION  AND  ANALOGY  255

would  tave  employed  sucli  a weak  analogy  had  tie  not  already  had  a
strong  predisposition  to  believe  what  his  argument  is  supposed  to
support.

An  argument  from  analogy  is  an  argument  based  upon  untested
resemblances.  Such  arguments  may  range  from  merely  metaphorical
statements  to  detailed,  important  comparisons.  An  unexplained
resemblance,  too  striking  to  be  regarded  as  accidental,  may  form  the
basis  of  an  hypothesis  which  would  account  for  the  resemblance.
Laplace’s  famous  Nebular  Hypothesis  is  an  example  of  an  important
theory  suggested  by  such  an  analogy.  His  statement  of  this  analogy
is  so  brief  and  so  illuminating  that  we  shall  quote  it.  He  thus  states
the  problem :

‘ However  arbitrary  the  elements  of  tbe  system  of  the  planets  may  be,  there
exist  between  them  some  very  remarkable  relations,  which  may  throw  light  on
their  origin.  Considering  it  with  attention,  we  are  astonished  to  see  ah  the
planets  ^ move  round  the  sun  from  west  to  east,  and  nearly  in  the  same  plane,  all
the  satellites  moving  round  their  respective  planets  in  the  same  direction,  and
nearly  all  in  the  same  plane  with  the  planets.  Lastly  the  sun,  the  planets,  and
those  satellites  in  which  a motion  of  rotation  has  been  observed,  turn  on  their
own  axis,  in  the  same  direction,  and  nearly  in  the  same  plane  as  their  motion  of
projection.

‘ The  satellites  exhibit  in  this  respect  a remarkable  peculiarity.  Their  motion
of  rotation  is  exactly  equal  to  their  motion  of  revolution ; so  that  they  always
present  the  same  hemisphere  to  their  primary.  At  least  this  has  been  observed
for  the  moon,  for  the  four  satellites  of  Jupiter,  and  for  the  last  satellite  of  Saturn,
the  only  satellite  whose  rotation  has  been  hitherto  recognized.  Phenomena  so
extraordinary  are  not  the  effect  of  irregular  causes.  . . .

‘ Another  phenomenon  of  the  solar  system  equally  remarkable  is  the  small
eccentricity  of  the  orbits  of  the  planets  and  their  satellites,  while  those  of  comets
are  very  much  extended.  The  orbits  of  this  system  present  no  intermediate
shades  between  a great  and  a small  eccentricity.  We  are  again  compelled  to
acknowledge  the  effect  of  a regular  cause ; chance  alone  could  not  have  given  a
form  so  nearly  circular  to  the  orbit  of  all  the  planets.  It  is  therefore  necessaiy
that  the  cause  which  determined  the  motions  of  these  planets,  rendered  them
also  nearly  circular.’  ®

Thus  Laplace  noted  resemblances  constituting  the  positive
analogy,  vk.  the  direction  of  revolution  of  planets  around  the  sun,  of
the  satellites  around  their  primaries,  of  the  rotation  of  the  planets
around  their  axes  ; he  observed  also  that  planets  have  nearly  circular
orbits,  whereas  comets  have  not.  Hence,  there  was  an  important
further  element  in  the  positive  analogy  not  possessed  by  bodies  not  in
solar  system.  Consequently  he'%sked : ‘‘  What  is  the  cause  of  this
remarkable  resemblance  ? ” Erom  the  analogy  he  argued  to  a com-
mon origin  of  the  planetary  movements,  and  was  thus  led  to  formulate
the  hypothesis  that  the  solar  system  originated  from  a rotating

^ Laplace  was  unaware  that  Herscbel  bad  discovered  in  1787  that  tbe  sateh
lites  of  Uranus  have  a retrograde  motion.

* The  System  of  the  World,  Chap.  LI.  Laplace  wrote  this  book  in  1798.


256


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


nebula.^  We  are  not  here  concerned  with  the  hypothesis  itself  but
with  the  fact  that  it  was  suggested  to  Laplace  by  the  remarkable
positive  analogy  which  we  have  just  described.  It  is  not  difficult  to
see  that  the  analogy  is  suggestive.  If  it  be  contrasted  with  Sizzi’s
analogy  it  will  be  o Wious  that  its  suggestiveness  is  due  to  the  fact  that
the  resemblances  noted  are  capable  of  being  connected  systematically
in  such  a way  as  to  exclude  merely  arbitrary  likeness.

Analogy  in  the  widest  sense  is  not  a special  form  of  argument
but  an  element  in  all  inductive  investigation.  We  saw  that  an
induction  by  simple  enumeration  is  possible  only  when  the  instances
enumerated  have  common  properties,  and  it  is  thus  based  upon
analogy.  There  must  be  not  only  repetition  of  instances  but  also
resemblance  and  variety  in  the  instances  themselves.  We  desire  to
rely  not  merely  on  number  but  on  resemblance.  As  Mr.  Keynes
points  out : ^ Scientific  method,  indeed,  is  mainly  devoted  to  discover-
ing means  of  so  heightening  the  known  analogy  that  we  may  dispense
as  far  as  possible  with  the  methods  of  pure  induction.’  ^

^ TMs  hypothesis  has  been  shown  not  to  be  tenable,  but,  Sir  James  Jeans
says : ‘ Laplace’s  conception  has  been  amazingly  fruitful.  It  would  hardly  be
too  much  to  say  that  it  has  either  revealed  or  given  a valuable  clue  to  the  origin
of  every  normal  formation  in  the  sky,  with  the  single  exception  of  that  of  the
solar  system  which  it  set  out  to  seek.’  {The  Nebular  Hypothesis  and  Modern
Cosmogony : Halley  Lecture,  1922,  pp.  26-7.)

*op.  cit.,  p,  241.


CHAPTER  XV
CAUSALITY

* We  wish  to  know  whether  knowledge  of  one  fact  throws  light  of  any  hind
upon  the  likelihood  of  another.  The  theory  of  causality  is  only  important
because  it  is  thought  that  by  means  of  its  assumptions  light  can  be  thrown  by
experience  of  one  phenomenon  upon  the  expectation  of  another/ — /.  M.  Keynes,

§1.  UXIPORMITIES  AND  MULTIFORMITIES

Few  people  would  be  seriously  perplexed  by  the  discovery  that
swans  may  be  black ; the  appearance  of  a white  peacock  is
interesting  but  not  alarming.  We  are  accustomed  to  seeing
brown  hens  and  white  hens,  black  horses  and  chestnut  horses,  red
tulips  and  yellow  tulips,  stormy  seas  and  calm  seas.  But  most  men
acquainted  with  snow  would  be  startled  if  a lump  of  snow  placed
in  front  of  a fixe  were  not  to  melt ; or  if  the  pavements  remained
dry  throughout  a downpour  of  rain  ; or  if  a man  shot  at  short  range
through  the  heart  were  to  remain  standing  upright  and  apparently
unaffected.  Again,  a man  might  be  surprised  if  on  arriving  one
morning  at  a station  he  found  that  there  were  no  porters,  nor  trains,
nor  any  signs  of  the  bustling  activity  usually  to  be  seen  at  railway
stations.  His  surprise  would  be  of  a very  different  kind  from  that
with  which  he  would  observe  pavements  remaining  dry  in  spite  of
the  heavy  rain  that  fell  upon  them,  or  with  which  he  would  observe
the  man  shot  through  the  heart  yet  remaining  undisturbed  in  position.
He  would  probably  at  once  explain  to  himself  the  unusual  state  of
the  railway  station  by  supposing  that  there  had  been  a lightning
strike  He  knows  that  the  working  of  a railway  station  is  partly
dependent  upon  human  volitions,  and  he  would  believe  that  these
are  capable  of  variation.  But  the  other  occurrences  would  produce
a feeling  of  nightmare.  A world  in  which  rain  did  not  wet  pavements
would  appear  chaotic.  It  would  appear  chaotic  because,  since  in
our  experience  we  have  always  found  rain  to  wet  the  surface  upon
which  it  falls,  we  have  come  to  expect  that  it  will  always  do  so.
Rain  that  lacked  this  property  would  not  he  rain.  But  that  a man
should  be  caught  in  a shower  without  his  umbrella  surprises  no  one
who  lives  in  England.  In  other  words,  we  believe  that  there  are
dependable  regularities  in  the  external  world,  although  some  things
just  happen  so  The  life  of  civilized  man  is  conditioned  by  the
17  257


258


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


belief  that  if  be  acts  in  suci.  and  sncb  a manner  such,  and  such  a
result  will  follow.  Every  one  believes  that  if  he  is  hungry  and  eats
food,  his  hunger  will  be  satisfied  ; that  water  will  quench  his  thirst ;
that  fire  will  warm  him;  that  the  ground  upon  which  he  stands
will  support  his  weight ; that  heat  will  melt  snow,  and  that  day
will  alternate  with  night.  Such  beliefs  as  these  are  held  with  varying
degrees  of  strength.  They  may  be  mistaken.  The  thirst  of  fever
is  not  quenched  by  water ; a dying  man  is  not  warmed  by  the  fire  ;
the  solid  ground  may  quake.  Nevertheless,  without  belief  in  some
dependable  regularities  we  should  not  act  as  we  all  in  fact  do.  That
our  expectations  are  sometimes  unfulfilled  presupposes  that  we  have
forrned  expectations.  The  man’s  surprise  at  the  deserted  railway
station  is  evidence  of  his  belief  in  orderly  behaviour.  But  he  does
not  expect  the  street  to  present  the  same  aspect  every  morning  as
he  walks  to  the  station.  If  he  saw  a man  killed  by  a tile  blown
from  a roof  he  would  describe  such  a death  as  ''  accidental

Such  experiences  show  that  we  are  accustomed  to  distinguish
between  occurrences  that  we  regard  as  being  regularly  connected
and  occurrences  that  we  consider  to  be  accidentally,  or  casually,  con-
joined. Occurrences  of  the  first  tjipe  we  shall  caU  uniformities ;
occmrences  of  the  second  type  we  shall  call  multiformities.  Science
begins  with  what  may  be  described  as  the  discovery  of  the  minor
uniformities  of  nature,  regular  connexions  between  facts  taken  in
relative  isolation  from  other  facts.  Simple  enumeration  is  a method
by  which  we  may  discover  such  minor  uniformities  as  the  connexion
between  crows  and  bheJo  colour,  or  between  flames  and  warmth,  or
between  drinking  water  and  quenching  thirst,  or  between  hea'oy  rain
and  wet  pavements.  These  examples  include  such  empirical  generaliza-
tions as  All  crows  are  black,  which  we  should  not  be  unprepared  to
discover  were  not  uniform,  as  well  as  such  uniformities  as  Bain  wets
pavermnts,  which  we  should  not  expect  to  fail.  Often  we  find  multi-
formities where  some  element  of  analogy  might  have  suggested
regular  connexion.  Sometimes  in  England  the  month  of  June  is
hot ; more  often  it  is  cold.  Some  of  those  who  live  by  the  sea  die
at  ebb  tide ; others  die  when  the  tide  is  full.^  Some  great  men
die  during  a thunderstorm ; others  do  not.  Sometimes  a person
who  has  looked  at  the  new  moon  through  glass  suffers  misfortune
before  the  moon  wanes,  whilst  others  who  looked  with  him  suffer
no  disaster.  The  first  stage  in  science  is  to  distinguish  such  multi-
formities from  uniformities.  It  may  then  be  possible  by  analysis
of  relevant  factors  in  the  complex  occurrence  that  constitutes  a

^ Cf.  ‘ “ People  can’t  die,  along  the  coast,”  said  Mr.  Peggotty,  “ except  when
the  tide  is  pretty  nigh  out.  They  can’t  be  born,  unless  it’s  pretty  nigh  in — ^not
Foperly  born  till  flood.  He’s  a going  out  with  the  tide.”  ’ David  CopperfieU,
Chap.  XXX..


CAUSALITY


269


multiformity  to  resolve  it  into  a uniformity  of  higher  generality  and
greater  abstractness.  In  this  stage  we  pass  insensibly  from  common-
sense  knowledge  through  organized  common  sense  to  knowledge  that
would  be  called  ‘‘  scientific  ” in  the  strict  sense.  There  is  no  sudden
break.  Primitive  man  discovered  some  of  the  minor  uniformities.
In  his  effort  to  control  his  environment  he  relied  both  upon  his
knowledge  of  these  uniformities  and  upon  ritual  practices  whereby
he  hoped  to  invoke  the  aid  of  magical  agencies.  Dr.  Malinowski
has  put  this  point  clearly : ^ If  you  were  to  suggest  to  a native  [of
Melanesia]  that  he  should  make  his  garden  mainly  by  magic  and
scamp  his  work,  he  would  simply  smile  on  your  simplicity.  He
knows  as  well  as  you  do  that  there  are  natural  conditions  and  causes,
and  by  his  observations  he  knows  also  that  he  is  able  to  control
these  natural  forces  by  mental  and  physical  effort.  His  knowledge
is  limited,  no  doubt,  but  as  far  as  it  goes  it  is  sound  and  proof  against
mysticism.  If  the  fences  are  broken  down,  if  the  seed  is  destroyed
or  has  been  dried  or  washed  away,  he  will  have  recourse  not  to
magic,  but  to  work  guided  by  knowledge  and  reason.  His  experi-
ence has  taught  him  also,  on  the  other  hand,  that  in  spite  of  aU  his
forethought  and  beyond  all  his  efforts  there  are  agencies  and  forces
which  one  year  bestow  unwonted  and  unearned  benefits  of  fertihty,
making  everything  run  smooth  and  well,  rain  and  sun  appear  at
the  right  moment,  noxious  insects  remain  in  abeyance,  the  harvest
yield  a superabundant  crop ; and  another  year  again  the  same
agencies  bring  ill-luck  and  bad  chance,  pursue  him  from  beginning
to  end  and  thwart  all  his  most  strenuous  efforts  and  his  best-founded
knowledge.  To  control  these  influences  and  these  only  he  employs
magic One  is  reminded  of  Cromwell’s  advice  to  his  soldiers:
^Put  your  trust  in  God  and  keep  your  powder  dry’.

Daily  experiences  lead  us,  then,  to  distinguish  between  what
always  happens  and  what  sometimes  happens  hut  not  always.  If  we
are  successfully  to  order  our  experience  and  to  know  what  to  expect,
we  must  be  able  to  replace  sometimes  by  always.  We  have  now  to
consider  whether  there  are  any  characteristics  belonging  to  uni-
formities such  that  they  are  intrinsically  different  from  multiformities.
There  would  be  such  an  intrinsic  difference  if  all  uniformities  were
causal  connexions.  We  have  to  inquire  whether  this  is  the  case,
and  what  precisely  we  mean  by  saying  that  a uniformity  is  a causal
uniformity.  Before  discussing  this  problem  we  need  a more  exact
definition  of  the  terms  we  have  used.  These  definitions  may  be
given  as  follows :

(1)  A multiformity  is  a set  of  occurrences,  or  of  properties,  such
that  some  one,  or  more  than  one,  member  of  the  set  sometimes
recurs  without  the  rest.

^Bdigion,  Science  and  Reality,  p.  30*


260


A MODEEN  INTEODECTION  TO  LOGIC


(2)  A uniformity  is  a set  of  occurrences,  or  of  properties,  suci
tliat  if  any  one  of  them  recurs,  the  others  recur.

§2.  THE  COMMON-SENSE  NOTION  OF  CAUSE
The  plain  man  quite  well  understands  how  to  use  the  word
''  cause  Most  transitive  verbs,  except  those  that  express  emotional
attitudes,  express  causation,  e.g.  malce,  produce,  influence,  cure,  fell,
cooh,  raise,  build,  destroy.  If  the  plain  man  is  asked,  “ What  do
you  mean  by  a cause  ? he  will  probably  reply  ''  What  makes  a
thing  happen”.  He  knows  that  he  is  using  the  notion  of  cause
when  he  says,  ''  The  child  died  from  pneumonia  ”,  “ It  was  a fused
wire  that  set  the  house  on  fire  ”,  ''  The  heat  has  expanded  the  rail-
way line  ”,  She  moved  the  clock  so  roughly  that  it  has  stopped
He  means  something  definite  when  he  says,  You  won’t  find  a cure
for  cancer  until  you  know  its  cause  This  correct  use  of  the  notion
of  causation  is,  however,  compatible  with  an  extremely  confused
conception  of  what  exactly  causation  is.  The  discussions  of  philo-
sophers have  done  little,  if  anything,  to  clear  up  these  confusions.
There  is  some  justification  for  Mr.  Russell’s  remark  that  ‘ the  word

cause  ” is  so  inextricably  bound  up  with  misleading  associations
as  to  make  its  complete  extrusion  from  the  philosophical  vocabulary
desirable  But,  whatever  may  be  the  case  with  philosophy,  it  is
not  possible  to  expel  the  word  or  the  conception  from  science.

Cause  ” expresses  a concept  indispensable  to  the  earlier  stages  of
the  attempt  to  order  the  facts  of  experience.  It  is  by  reference  to
this  concept  that  the  conception  of  uniformities  may  be  made  deter-
minate. It  is  from  this  point  of  view  that  we  have  now  to  consider
what  is  meant  by  causal  connexion.

As  the  examples  given  above  suggest,  the  primitive  notion  of
cause  assimilates  causation  to  agency.  A cause  is  what  makes
things  happen.  Every  one  knows  what  it  is  actively  to  produce
changes  in  his  environment.  We  move  things  about.  We  pinch
a piece  of  india-rubber  and  its  shape  changes.  We  blow  into  an
air-cushion  and  it  swells.  We  poke  the  fire  and  a fl.ame  bursts  out.
We  strike  a golf  ball  and  it  rises.  These  various  things  that  we  do
are  followed  by  changes  that  we  can  perceive.  Upon  such  experi-
ences as  these  the  popular  notion  of  cause  is  based.  Locke,  who
is  pre-eminently  the  plain  man  among  philosophers,  thus  defines
cause : ‘ A cause  is  that  which  makes  any  other  thing  . . . begin
to  be,  and  an  effect  is  that  which  had  its  beginning  from  some  other
thing  ’.^  It  is  to  be  noted  that  cause  and  effect  are  here  defined

^ Mysticism  and  Logic,  p.  180.  Mr.  Russell  himself  has  recently  based  his
philosophy  of  science  upon  the  conception  of  “ causal  lines  ”,  which,  however,
he  does  not  attempt  to  analyse,  and  which  perhaps  cannot  bear  the  weight  of  the
construction  he  rests  upon  it.

^ Essay  on  the  Human  Understanding,  Bk.  II,  Chap.  XXVI,  §2,


CAUSALITY


261


as  terms  in  a relation  of  producing.  From  this  point  of  view  the
effect  is  regarded  as  relatively  passive ; it  is  made  what  it  is  by
the  cause  which  is  regarded  as  an  agent.  Thus  the  notion  of  cause
is  interpreted  in  terms  of  the  experience  I have  of  being  active  when
I exert  effort  to  force  something,  or  some  one,  to  do  what  I want
done.  This  analogy  is  revealed  in  such  expressions  as  the  cause
compels  the  effect  “ a power  in  the  cause  to  produce  the  effect  ”,
which  have  been  constantly  used  in  statements  of  causation.  This
view  is  known  as  the^aptivity  view  of  causation.  It  is  undoubtedly
the  view  of  the  unsophisticated  person.  He  feels  that  he  under-
stands what  happens  when  one  billiard  ball  hits  another,  since  he
assimilates  it  to  his  own  experience  of  pushing  something.  This
anthropomorphic  tendency  is  natural  at  the  beginnings  of  science.
The  technical  language  of  the  sciences  shows  how  deeply  rooted  it
is  : force,  work,  energy,  least  action,  are  terms  assimilating  what
happens  in  nature  to  human  experience.  But  with  the  advance  of
science  anthropomorphic  elements  are  gradually  eliminated.  It  may
be  confidently  asserted  that  the  notion  of  cause  as  exerting  com-
pulsion, as  an  agent  forcing  something  to  act  in  some  way,  no  longer
merits  serious  consideration.  Nevertheless  the  activity  view  dies
hard.  Professor  T.  P.  Nunn  has  pointed  out  that  Hhe  average
student  of  physics  to-day  is  probably  still  at  heart  an  anthropo-
morphist.  He  takes  his  science  to  be  a hunt  after  causes  and  not
merely  a search  for  what  Lucretius,  with  fine  inspiration,  called
naturae  species  ratioque  ; and  the  causes  he  reads  into  nature  almost
always  convey  into  the  transactions  between  material  bodies  features
of  the  trajBfic  between  man’s  mind  and  his  environment’.^  Thi^
persistence  of  the  activity  view  hinders  the  analysis  of  the  causal
relation  since  it  places  the  emphasis  upon  the  terms  instead  of  upon
the  relation.  The  result  of  this  emphasis  has  been  to  stress  unduly
both  the  temporal  priority  of  the  cause  to  the  effect  and  the  dis-
tinction between  cause  and  condition.  With  these  two  points  we
shall  be  concerned  later.  They  are  both  essential  to  the  common-
sense  notion,  which  we  must  first  examine  more  carefully.

Consider  the  proposition  The  rain  wets  the  pavement.  This  might
be  expressed  by  The  rain  causes  the  pavement  to  be  wet  In
asserting  such  a proposition  the  plain  man  would  mean  that  on  this
occasion  the  pavement  would  not  have  been  wet  imless  the  rain
had  fallen  on  it.  He  would  be  ready  to  admit  that  on  other  occasions
the  wetness  might  be  due  to  the  spraying  from  a water-cart,  or  from
a burst  water-main.  Again,  “ Charles  I died  because  his  head  was
cut  off  ” would  be  taken  to  mean  that  the  beheading  of  Charles  I
was  that  occurrence  that  ended  his  life ; that  had  the  axe  not  struck

^ Anthropomorphism  and  Physics,  p.  5.  {British  Academy.  Annual
Philosophical  Lecture,  1926.)


262


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


his  neck  with  some  degree  of  force  he  would  not  have  died  as  and
when  he  did  die.  Thus  common  sense  seems  to  regard  the  cause
as  an  occurrence  relevant  to  the  happening  of  the  effect.  Given
that  the  cause  occurs,  then  the  ellect  occurs.  It  seems  clear  that
the  conception  of  causation  is  confined  hy  common  sense  to  what
happens  in  space  and  time  (or  in  time  only  in  the  case  of  mental
events  ^ ) and  to  this  only  in  so  far  as  what  happens  is  regarded  as
changing,  that  is,  as  altering  in  character.  In  the  example,  “ The
rain  wets  the  pavement  ”,  clearly  it  is  the  falling  of  the  rain  that  is
the  cause,  and  what  it  causes  is  a change  in  the  character  of  the
pavement.  It  does  not  cause  the  pavement  but  the  wetness  of  the
pavement  which  was  previously  dry.  If  the  pavement  had  not
been  there,  there  could  not  be  a wet  pavement ; but  the  pavement
may  be  there  without  being  wet.  Or,  to  take  an  example  given  in
an  earlier  chapter,  ‘‘  The  air  pulse  chills  the  hot  wire  ”.  Here  the
effect  is  a change  in  the  temperature  of  the  wire.  Thus  the  notion
of  causation  seems  to  be  applied  to  a change  in  the  character  of
something.  We  have  used  occurrence  ” to  denote  a spatio-
temporal  happening  having  determinate  characters,  or  properties.
Thus  the  cause  is  an  occurrence  related  to  some  other  occurrence,
the  effect  Occurrence  ” suggests  something  changing.  But  the
effect  is  considered  to  be  a change  in  something  which  relatively  to
it  continues  unchanged.

The  notion  of  cause,  then,  seems  to  arise  when  we  observe  a
change  occurring  in  something.  It  is  obvious  that  common  sense
will  pay  most  attention  to  striking  changes.  A change  is  striking
when  it  is  sensationally  impressive  or  emotionally  affecting.  It  is
for  such  changes  that  common  sense  seeks  causes.  Further,  in
determining  which  of  the  various  occurrences  that  are  present  is  to
be  taken  as  the  cause  common  sense  again  selects  what  is  striking.
This  selection  is  due  to  the  practical  attitude  of  the  plain  man  who
wants  to  know  not  only  what  has  caused  a given  effect  but  how  to
produce  such  an  effect  on  another  occasion.  This  practical  attitude
is  reflected  in  the  traditional  problems  of  causation.  On  the  one
hand,  the  occurrence  selected  as  the  cause  has  been  isolated  from
other  occurrences  which  are  in  fact  joint-factors  with  it ; on  the
other  hand,  the  occurrence  regarded  as  the  effect  has  been  left  un-
analysed so  that  different  sets  of  factors  have  been  regarded  as  the
same  effect.  Hence  has  arisen  what  is  known  as  the  problem  of
the  plurality  of  causes.  The  hackneyed  illustration  Many  causes
may  produce  death”  affords  the  best  example.  There  are  more

^ Common  sense  certainly  regards  mental  events  as  nomspatial,  and  somewhat
waveringly  applies  the  conception  of  causation  to  such  events.  It  is  not  necess-
ary for  our  purpose  to  discuss  this  application.  Hence,  our  discussion  is
limited  to  non-mental  events.


CAUSALITY


263


ways  of  killing  a cat  than  drowning  it  in  butter.  Each  of  these
ways  would  effectually  Mil  the  cat,  although  its  state  of  mind  and
body  might  be  very  different  according  to  what  mode  of  killing  it
was  actually  adopted.  The  procedure  of  a coroner’s  court  is  based
upon  the  assumption  that  if  the  total  characters  of  the  effect-occur-
rence, viz.  the  death  of  the  person,  be  made  determinate,  then  the
precise  character  of  the  cause-occurrence  can  be  ascertained.  This
assumption  may  be  mistaken  but  it  is  at  least  plausible.  It  suggests
a refinement  of  the  common-sense  notion  of  cause,  and  one,  more-
over, that  would  be  quite  useless  to  common  sense.  For  practical
purposes  it  is  a positive  advantage  to  know  various  different  ways
of  obtaining  a certain  result,  and  it  is  often  irrelevant  for  the  given
purpose  what  other  results  are  also  brought  about.  Thus,  if  a man
desires  to  kill  his  enemy  he  can  achieve  his  object  by  stabbing  him
through  the  heart,  or  by  poisoning  him,  or  by  drowning  him,  and
so  on.  One  can  obtain  roast  pig  by  burning  down  the  house  that
contains  the  pig.  The  method  may  be  wasteful,  but  it  does  not
therefore  fail  of  its  effect.  A desire  to  roast  pigs  with  less  expensive
apparatus  would  suggest  the  elimination  of  certain  factors  from  the
causal  occurrence,  and  this  would  involve  the  elimination  of  certain
factors  from  the  effect-occurrence.

Again,  since  its  standpoint  is  practical,  common  sense  can  afford
to  ignore  those  conditions  that  are  usually  present  and  can  therefore
be  taken  for  granted.  For  example,  the  plain  man  wants  to  light
a match.  He  rubs  it  on  the  side  of  the  match-box  and  obtains  the
desired  result.  He  would  say  that  the  Motion  caused  the  flame.  If,
however,  the  operation  were  performed  inside  a jar  from  which  the
air  had  been  exhausted,  it  would  be  found  that  the  match  did  not
light.  He  would  thus  find  that  the  presence  of  oxygen  is  also  neces-
sary for  the  production  of  the  effect.  Since,  however,  air  is  always
present  when  the  plain  man  strikes  a match,  he  takes  its  presence
for  granted  and  pays  attention  to  those  factors  only  in  the  total
situation  which  he  is  aware  of  as  changing.  So,  too,  he  takes  for
granted  the  prepared  surface  of  the  box  and  a certain  amount  of
phosphorus  on  the  match.  If  a match  struck  in  the  ordinary  way
fails  to  light,  he  is  forced  to  notice  some  counteracting  condition
such  as  dampness  of  the  surface.  The  failure  of  his  intended  action
leads  him  to  reflect  upon  the  conditions  and  thus  to  analyse  a situa-
tion that  would  otherwise  have  been  taken  for  panted.  In  this
way  practical  activity  is  replaced  by  theoretical  investigation.

S 3.  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  COMMON-SENSE  NOTION  OF

CAUSE

We  have  seen  that  as  practical  agents  we  start  from^  a complex
situation  within  which  we  desire  to  bring  about  certain  changes.


264  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

Provided  that  the  desired  result  is  achieved  what  else  is  achieved
can  he  neglected.  Similarly  with  what  is  not  desired.  It  is  what
is  always  present  when  death  is  present  that  matters  from  the  prac-
tical point  of  view.  Hence  death  ” stands  for  a set  of  properties
abstracted  from  a complex  set  of  conditions.  Whenever  a man  is
shot  through  the  heart,  he  dies.  Whenever  a man  is  dead,  he  ceases
to  respond  to  our  entreaties.  The  italicized  words  stand  for  complex
situations  which,  in  each  case,  is  from  the  practical  point  of  view
a single  occurrence.  Such  occurrences,  taken  as  single,  are  of  vary-
ing degrees  of  abstractness.  Thus  death  is  an  abstraction  requiring
analysis.  Such  analysis  takes  us  away  from  the  standpoint  of
'common  sense.  It  involves  looking  at  the  whole  situation  retro-
spectively, not  prospectively.  The  former  attitude  is  that  of  the
coroner’s  court  and  the  scientific  investigator,  the  latter  is  that  of
the  practical  agent ; the  one  is  concerned  with  knowing,  the  other
with  doing.  Both  are  concerned  with  uniformities,  i.e.  regular
connexions.  The  practical  agent,  however,  is  content  with  a relation
that  is  determinate  only  in  the  direction /rom  cause  to  eSect : wherever
X occurs,  E occurs.  Such  a relation  may  be  many-one : given
the  cause,  then  the  effect  is  determined,  but  not  conversely.  But
the  scientific  investigator  wants  to  find  a relation  that  is  equally
determinate  in  either  direction,  that  is,  he  seeks  a one-one  relation :
wherever  X occurs,  E occurs,  and  E does  not  occur  unless  X has  occurred.
He  has  accordingly  to  analyse  the  conditions  into  their  constituent
factors  so  that  he  may  ascertain  whether  any  are  irrelevant,  and
whether  any,  though  necessary,  are  not  sufficient  to  the  occurrence
of  the  result.  The  appearance  of  a plurality  of  causes,  for  example,
that  death  may  sometimes  be  caused  by  pneumonia,  sometimes  by
drowning,  etc,,  or  that  thirst  may  be  quenched  by  water  or  by  cider,
arises  from  the  neglect  of  certain  factors  in  the  total  situation  that
constitutes  the  effect-occurrence.  This  should  be  clear  from  what
has  preceded.

The  question  of  one-one  determination  belongs  to  the  retro-
spective attitude ; it  concerns  knowledge,  not  action.  Action  takes
place  within  a concrete  situation  having  a one-way  time  direction
from  present  to  future.  As  an  investigator  the  thinker  is  also  an
agent,  situated  within  a one-way  time  direction.  He  observes  an
occurrence,  e.g.  the  shooting  of  a man,  or  the  dissolving  of  a lump
of  sugar  in  a liquid,  which  as  a definite  event  does  not  recur.  Nor
could  he  resuscitate  this  particular  man  and  try  whether  the  same
effect  occur  if  he  is  again  shot  in  the  same  way.  But  when
he  says  ''  Shooting  a man  through  the  heart  causes  his  death  ” he
is  asserting  that  whenever  a man  is  shot  through  the  heart,  he  dies.
The  statement  of  a causal  uniformity  is  a generalization;  con-
sequently, it  involves  abstraction.  Certain  factors  in  the  total


CAUSALITY


265


situation  are  neglected  as  being  irrelevant.  Belief  in  the  general
causal  proposition  Whenever  a man  is  shot  through  the  heart,  he  dies
is  based  upon  the  experience  of  particular  instances  in  which  it  was
judged  that  some  factor  in  the  immediate  past  was  relevant  to  the
efiect-occurrence,  viz.  his  dying,  A given  factor  is  observed  to  be
relevant.  This  is  not  to  say  that  it  is  observed  to  be  necessary.
The  question  of  necessity  does  not  arise  for  the  practical  agent  and
cannot  arise  for  the  scientific  investigator  until  he  has  generalized
from  the  particular  instances  so  as  to  obtain  the  form  whenever  X,
then  E,  The  investigator  must,  then,  neglect  those  factors  which
are  peculiar  to  the  happening  of  the  particular  event  described  as
this  occurrence  ”,  and  which  consequently  determine  the  im-
possibility of  its  recurrence.  In  such  generalization  from  the  par-
ticular occurrence  emphasis  is  placed  upon  the  causal  relation  instead
of  upon  the  terms.  This  change  of  emphasis  marks  an  advance
from  the  point  of  view  of  common  sense.  It  is,  however,  a develop-
ment of,  not  a radical  departure  from,  the  common-sense  notion.
We  must  now  attempt  to  trace  this  development.

We  pinch  a piece  of  india-rubber  and  its  shape  changes.  We
drop  a lump  of  sugar  into  hot  cofiee  and  it  dissolves.  Here  we  have
two  examples  of  common-sense  things  whose  characteristics  change.
The  india-rubber  left  lying  on  the  table  does  not  change  in  shape.
The  sugar  in  the  bowl  does  not  dissolve.  If  the  table  is  pinched,  it
does  not  change  in  shape.  This  last  example  suggests  that  the
occurrence  of  an  effect  depends  upon  the  nature  of  both  the  things
that  are  brought  into  relation.  The  same  movement  of  pinching
will  change  the  shape  of  the  india-rubber  but  will  not  change  the
shape  of  the  table.  Thus  the  common-sense  notion  of  cause  seems
to  involve  three  assumptions : (1)  that  it  is  things  that  enter  into
the  causal  relation ; (2)  that  the  characteristics  which  belong  to  the
thing,  or,  as  common  sense  would  say,  ""  the  nature  of  the  thing  ”,
is  relevant  to  the  causal  situation ; (3)  that  things  left  to  them-
selves do  not  undergo  changes.  The  attempt  to  see  what  precisely
is  involved  in  these  assumptions  may  enable  us  to  understand  more
clearly  what  causation  is.

(1)  The  conception  of  what  constitutes  a thing  is  more  or  less
vague.  The  philosopher  Locke  who  inclined  to  the  common-sense
point  of  view  as  to  what  constitutes  a thing  considered  that  there
must  be  some  imperceivable  substratum  to  which  the  sensibly  per-
ceptible characters  of  the  thing  belonged.  He  believed  this  sub-
stratum to  be  unknowable.  Common  sense  does  not,  however,
regard  the  thing  as  an  unknown  support  of  perceivable  characters.
The  plain  man  feels  that  he  knows  quite  well  what,  for  instance,
the  table  is.  The  prototype  of  the  common-sense  notion  of  thing
is  a solid  body,  just  as  the  prototype  of  the  common-sense  notion


266


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


of  causation  is  oux  experience  of  activity.  A solid  tody  lias  spatial
boundaries ; it  is  tangible  ; it  resists  pusHng ; it  in  some  sense
persists,  or  endures,  for  a longer  or  shorter  duration ; it  has  char-
acteristics recognizable  as  belonging  to  it.  On  reflection,  the  plain
man  would  admit  that  a gas,  for  example,  hydrogen  is  a thing,  that
rain  is  a thing,  that  air  is  a thdng,  and  so  on.  These  are  things
because  they  have  characteristics ; they  are  not  characteristics  of
something  else.  But  common  sense  distinguishes  between  a thing
and  its  states.  For  example,  the  paper  covering  a wall  would  be
regarded  as  a thing ; the  changes  in  colour  as  the  wall-paper  fades
would  be  regarded  as  states  of  the  wall-paper.  These  states  also
have  characteristics.  For  example,  the  state  of  the  wall-paper  has
the  characteristic  of  being  a pale  grey-blue.  The  wall-paper  is  a
thing ; it  has  characteristics  of  a different  kind ; for  example,  it
has  the  characteristic  of  altering  in  colour  under  the  action  of  sun-
light. Or  consider  this  'piece  of  india-rubber.  It  is  a thing ; it  has
the  characteristic  of  altering  in  shape  when  pinched.  This  lump  of
sugar  is  another  thing ; it  has  the  characteristic  of  dissolving  in  water.
These  characteristics  of  fading,  of  elasticity,  of  solubility  belong  to  the
thing’not  to  its  states.  W e shall  call  such  characteristics  causal  charac-
teristics?- Each  state  of  the  thing  has  determinate  characteristics,  a
definite  shade  of  colour,  a definite  shape,  and  so  on.  Such  character-
istics we  shall  call  primary  characteristics.  When  a thing  changes  from
one  state  to  another  these  primary  characteristics  may  be  different.
Since  these  states  are  states  o/the  thing  we  say  that  the  thing  changes.
But  we  want  also  to  regard  the  thing  as  persisting  through  its  changes.
It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  seek  for  a cause  of  change  but  not  of
persistence.  What  changes  are  the  states ; what  does  not  change
is  the  thing  of  which  the  states  are  states.  The  state  of  a thing  is
an  occurrence.  We  easily  recognize  this  in  the  case  of  water  that
has  become  frozen.  We  recognize  the  water  in  a frozen  state  and
we  see  that  this  is  an  occurrence  that  has  happened  to  the  water.
We  do  not  so  easily  recognize  persisting  in  a state  as  an  occurrence.
For  example,  if  the  table  is  in  the  state  of  continuing  to  be  a definite
shade  of  brown,  we  do  not  commonly  think  of  this  persisting  in  a
definite  shade  as  an  occurrence.  But  if  the  table  is  knocked  over
we  think  of  it  as  in  the  state  of  falling.  There  is  no  logical  justifica-
tion for  thus  distinguishing  between  these  two  cases.  In  both  cases
the  table  has  a certain  state,  or  is  in  a certain  state,  and  each  state
has  determinate,  primary  characteristics.  Common  sense  usually
calls  such  primary  characteristics  “ simple  qualities  Although  it
is  things  that  common  sense  regards  as  entering  into  the  causal

^ The  expression  ‘causal  characteristic*  is  taken  from  Dr.  0.  D.  Broad  (see
The  Mind  and  its  Place  in  Nature,  p.  432).  In  the  discussion  of  this  problem
I am,  as  always,  much  indebted  to  Dr.  Broad’s  writings.


CAUSALITY


267


relation,  it  is  not  a thing  that  is  taken  to  be  the  cause  but  a certain
state  of  the  thing.  For  example,  a table  is  not  a cause,  but  a table
in  the  state  of  falling  may  cause  some  one’s  leg  to  be  hurt.  It  is,
however,  a state  of  the  table,  so  that  the  causal  relation  involves
reference  to  things.

(2)  What  common  sense  calls  the  nature  of  the  thing  ” is  the
set  of  characteristics  that  belong  to  it.  But  common  sense  does  not
clearly  distinguish  between  the  causal  characteristics  which  belong
to  the  thing  and  the  primary  characteristics  which  belong  to  its
states.  Nor  is  common  sense  at  all  clear  with  regard  to  the  dis-
tinction between  a state  of  a thing  and  a characteristic.  Some  of
the  confusions  and  difficulties  in  the  common-sense  conception  of
substance  and  causation  are  due  to  the  failure  to  make  these  dis-
tinctions. The  thing  does  not  have  primary  characteristics;  its
characteristics  may  be  called  non-primary  characteristics.  A non-
primary characteristic  is  quite  different  from  a primary  characteristic.
It  is  not  simple  but  relates  to  the  kind  of  primary  characteristics
which  the  states  of  the  thing  may  exhibit.  Thus,  we  cannot  say
that  this  india-ruhher  is  round  or  elliptical,  but  that  its  states  are
round  or  elliptical ; we  cannot  say  that  this  litmus  paper  is  red  or
blue,  but  that  when  this  htmus  paper  is  in  an  acidulated  state  it  is
blue,  and  when  it  is  in  an  alkalme  state  it  is  red.  This  distinction
between  non-primary  and  primary  characteristics,  of  which  the
former  belong  to  the  thing  and  the  latter  to  its  states,  shows  that  the
thing  is  an  abstraction  of  a certain  kind.^  We  cannot  here  discuss
the  nature  of  this  abstraction  ; it  is  sufficient  to  understand  what  is
meant  by  a causal  characteristic.  The  causal  characteristics  of  a
thing  are  what  the  chemist  calls  the  properties  ” of  a chemical
substance,  such  as  a fat  or  a metal.  We  can  now  define  this  notion.
A causal  characteristic  of  a thing  is  a characteristic  mode  of  behaviour
in  relation  to  other  things.  Thus  the  nature  of  a thing  ” includes  those
characteristics  that  it  exhibits  in  relation  to  other  things.  The  con-
ception of  the  nature  of  a thing,  then,  cannot  be  made  precise  without
reference  to  causal  connexions  ; conversely,  causal  connexions  cannot
be  made  precise  without  reference  to  states  of  things,  which  states
have  non-primary  characteristics.

(3)  The  assumption  that  ''  things  left  to  themselves  ” do  not
imdergo  change  also  fails  of  precision,  since  it  involves  the  notion
of  one  thing  The  conception  of  what  constitutes  one  thing  is
vague.  Whether  X is  to  be  called  one  thing  or  an  aggregate  of
thmgs  depends,  so  far  as  common  sense  is  concerned,  mainly  upon
practical  considerations.  A lampstand  and  the  electric-hght  bulb
and  the  shade  aU  constitute  one  thing  if  the  lamp  be  used  to  light


^ See  further,  Appendix  D*


268  A MODBEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

a room.  Brom  the  point  of  view  of  purchasing  the  lamp,  there  are
at  least  three  things.  It  is  easy  to  multiply  examples  to  show  how
vague  is  the  conception  of  one  thing.  Cofiee  and  milk  are  two
things  ; when  mixed  in  the  breakfast  cup  they  are  one  thing.  Apart
from  purely  practical  purposes  common  sense  would  probably  regard
one  thing  as  definable  by  reference  to  the  occupation  of  a sensibly
continuous  spatial  boundary,  either  neglecting  the  time  dimension
or  including  it  under  the  notion  of  persistence  of  sensibly  similar
characteristics  through  a period  of  time.  We  have  seen  that  common
sense  distinguishes  between  a thing  and  its  states.  When  there  is
considerable  alteration  in  the  primary  characteristics,  then  common
sense  would  refuse  to  admit  the  persistence  of  the  thing.  Thus
common  sense  requires  sensible  continuity  of  characteristics,  and
assumes  that  there  is  such  sensible  continuity  even  when  it  has  not
been  continuously  perceived.  Hence,  it  is  argued,  if  there  is  a
change  in  the  sensible  characteristics  manifested  by  a thing  in  a
certain  state,  there  must  be  something  to  make  it  change.  In  this
way  arises  the  assumption  that  things  left  to  themselves  do  not
change.  Bor  example,  given  that  a candle  is  one  thing,  then  common
sense  does  not  expect  it  to  change  while  the  candle  is  standing
unlighted  on  the  table.  If  the  candle  which  was  standing  upright
in  the  candlestick  is,  after  a few  hours,  bending  over  the  candle-
stick, common  sense  assumes  that  something  other  than  the  candle
has  caused  the  change,  e.g.  the  heat  of  the  room.  It  is  a causal
characteristic  of  the  candle  to  become  bent  under  certain  conditions
of  temperature.  These  conditions  are  dependent  upon  other  things,
for  example,  the  fire,  the  relative  positions  of  the  fire  and  the  candle,
etc.  Brom  the  causal  point  of  view  these  conditions  constitute  one
situation,  or  set  of  related  things,  which  may  be  regarded  as  a system.
If  the  candle  in  its  stick  were  regarded  as  one  system,  we  should
have  to  distinguish  at  least  three  different  things,  viz.  candlestick,
tallow,  wick.  These  things  are  in  spatio-temporal  relations.  If  no
change  were  occurring  in  this  system,  then  it  would  be  assumed
that  no  change  would  occur  unless  something  outside  the  system,
e.g.  a fire,  or  a lighted  match,  came  into  spatio-temporal  relation
with  it.  If,  however,  change  were  occurring  in  the  candle-system
independently  of  anything  outside  it,  then  it  would  be  assumed
that  somethmg  was  going  on  aU  the  time  in  the  system,  whether
it  were  at  first  perceptible  or  not.

We  see,  then,  that  the  attempt  to  analyse  a total  causal  situation
involves  the  distinction  of  different  factors  standing  in  spatio-
temporal  relations.  What  occurs  will  be  dependent  upon  the  causal
characteristics  of  the  things  in  that  situation.  Thus  the  fire  which
melts  the  candle  merely  warms  the  brass  candlestick.  A roaring
fire  in  the  kitchen  does  not  melt  the  candle  in  the  bedroom.  The


CAUSALITY


269


factors  in  a causal  situation  must  be  in  spatio-temporal  proximity.^
But  not  everytMng  in  tbe  given  situation  is  relevant  to  the  given
causal  occurrence.  If  it  were  there  would  be  no  causal  uniformities
since  some  factors  in  tbe  situation  do  not  recur.  No  two  causal
situations  are  exactly  alike.  A causal  uniformity  is  a connexion
between  factors  recognizable  as  the  same  on  different  occasions  of
tbeic  occurrence,  i.e.  under  varying  conditions  and  at  different  places
and  times.

Tbe  development  of  tbe  common-sense  notion  of  cause  brings
out  several  points  of  importance.  Tbe  consideration  of  these  will
enable  us  to  make  clear  certain  distinctions  with  regard  to  wbicb
common  sense  is  confused.

(1)  A causal  uniformity  is  an  abstraction  since  it  connects  sets
of  recurrent  cbaracteristics  belonging  to  events  wbicb  do  not  recur.

(2)  Neither  tbe  distinction  between  a thing  and  its  states,  nor  tbe
distinction  between  tbe  qualities  that  a thing  has  and  tbe  way  in
wbicb  it  behaves  in  relation  to  other  things  is  clearly  drawn  at  the
level  of  common  sense.  Thus  common  sense  would  say,  for  example,
that  an  orange  has  tbe  qualities  of  being  yellow,  having  a rough
surface,  being  juicy,  giving  out  an  easily  recognizable  smell.  It
would  thus  include  in  tbe  qualities  of  an  orange  cbaracteristics  that
are  not  always  perceptible  when  an  orange  is  perceived  and  that
are  exhibited  only  when  tbe  orange  is  in  relation  to  other  things.  It
would  also  be  admitted  that  an  orange  combined  with  sugar  in  a
certain  way  and  under  suitable  conditions,  e.g.  cooking  over  a fire,  be-
comes marmalade.  Tbe  perceptible  change  between  tbe  uncooked
orange  and  tbe  orange  in  tbe  marmalade  would  be  regarded  by  common
sense  as  tbe  result  of  a causal  process,  tbe  result  being  partly  depend-
ent upon  tbe  original  quabties  of  tbe  orange.  If  tbe  orange  were
squeezed  very  bard  so  that  it  were  slightly  flattened  and  tbe  juice
began  to  run  out,  tbe  state  of  tbe  orange  would  be  said  to  have
changed.  When  tbe  orange  is  made  into  marmalade,  tbe  orange
would  no  longer  be  said  to  exist  as  an  orange  ; it  has  been  made  into
something  else.  Common  sense  would  not  attempt  to  determine  tbe
exact  point  at  which  tbe  orange  ceases  to  be  an  orange  and  becomes
pulp,  or  becomes  marmalade.

In  accordance  with  tbe  distinctions  that  we  have  been  led  to
recognize  tbe  qualities  attributed  to  an  orange  are  primary  charac-
teristics of  its  states ; its  modes  of  behaviour  in  relation  to  other
things,  e.g.  sugar  and  tbe  heat  of  tbe  fire,  or  a person’s  band  squeez-
ing it,  are  causal  cbaracteristics  of  tbe  orange.  Since  common  sense
neglects  the  state  of  persisting  in  a state,  and  takes  notice  of  a state
only  when  there  is  change  of  state,  this  conception  of  a state  of  a

^ Jjx  saying  that  there  must  he  ‘ spatio-temporal  proximity  I mean  that  the
various  factors  cannot  be  separated  by  a spatio-temporal  gap.


270


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


thing  is  itself  falsely  conceived.  Hence,  common  sense  fails  to
apprehend  clearly  the  relations  between  the  two  pairs  of  dis-
tinctions that  we  have  been  discussing.  This  misconception  is
due  to  a natural  but  erroneous  conception  of  substance.  The
thing  is  regarded  as  something  substantial,  i.e.  as  a substance.
A substance  is  then  taken  to  be  something  persisting  through  a
period  of  time  and  possessing  simple  qualities,  i.e.  primary
characteristics.  A lump  of  gold,  or  an  orange,  could  be  yellow,
it  is  supposed,  even  if  it  existed  alone  in  the  universe,  and  but
for  a moment.  That  this  assumption  is  mistaken  should  have
been  evident  as  soon  as  it  was  recognized  that  light  is  trans-
mitted and  requires  a finite  time  for  its  transmission.  Locke  has
stated  the  common-sense  point  of  view  very  clearly,  and  has  also
indicated  that  it  is  mistaken,  in  a passage  which  it  is  worth  while
to  quote :

‘ We  are  wont  to  consider  tke  substances  we  meet  witli,  eacb  of  tbem  as  an
entire  thing  by  itself,  having  all  its  quahties  in  itself  and  independent  of  other
things  ; overlooking  for  the  most  part,  the  operations  of  those  invisible  fluids
they  are  encompassed  with,  and  upon  whose  motions  and  operations  depend  the
greatest  part  of  those  qualities  which  are  taken  notice  of  in  them,  and  are  made
by  us  the  inherent  marks  of  distinction  whereby  we  know  and  denominate
them.  Put  a piece  of  gold  anywhere  by  itself,  separate  from  the  reach  and
influence  of  all  other  bodies,  it  will  immediately  lose  all  its  colour  and  weight,
and  perhaps  malleableness  too  ; which,  for  aught  I know  would  be  changed  into
a perfect  friability.  . . . This  is  certain,  things  however  absolute  and  entire
they  seem  in  themselves,  are  but  retainers  to  other  parts  of  nature  for  that  which
they  are  most  taken  notice  of  by  us.’  ^

Here  Locke  lays  emphasis  upon  the  necessity  of  taking  into
account  the  relation  of  the  thing  to  oth^Tthln^rxE^^
ance  w^EThe  “importance  of  the  distinction  we  have  made  between
the  thing  and  its  states,  and  the  consequent  distinction  between
causal  characteristics  and  primary  characteristics.  These  distinc-
tions throw  light  upon  the  distinction,  so  vaguely  conceived  by
common  sense,  between  cause  and  condition.  Since  the  causal
characteristics  of  the  thing  are  its  characteristic  modes  of  behaviour
in  relation  to  other  things,  it  follows  that  how  a thing  behaves
depends  upon  what  other  things  are  in  relation  to  it.  This  may  be
made  clearer  by  means  of  an  example.  Let  us  consider  a simple
experiment.  A bell  so  arranged  that  it  can  be  continuously  rung
by  clockwork  is  hung  by  silk  threads  inside  a glass  jar.  The  air

^ Essay  concerning  the  Human  Understanding,  Bk.  IV,  Chap.  VI,  § 11*  It  is
not  suggested  that  this  passage  represents  Locke’s  usual  view.  On  the  con-
trary, Locke  himself  took  the  plain  man’s  view,  making  it  the  basis  of  his  dis-
cussion. But  in  his  treatment  ‘ Of  Universal  Propositions  ’ he  was  led  to  this
valuable  and,  so  far  as  his  main  thinking  is  concerned,  extremely  inconsistent
conclusion.


CAUSALITY


271


in  tlie  jar  is  exhausted  by  an  air-pump.  As  the  air  is  withdrawn,
the  sound  decreases,  and  very  soon  ceases  to  be  heard,  although
the  tongue  of  the  bell  still  strikes  against  its  sides.  Given  this
arrangement,  then,  the  air  is  a necessary  condition  for  the  propaga-
tion of  sound.  Now,  it  would  commonly  be  said  that  the  striking
of  the  bell  was  the  sufficient  cause  of  the  sound.  This  experiment
shows  that  a material  medium,  such  as  air  or  water,  is  also  req^uired
for  the  production  of  the  sound.  This  material  medium  is  then
said  to  be  a condition.  Both  the  air  and  the  striking  of  the  bell  are
necessary  for  the  production  of  the  sound ; together  they  are  suffici-
ent. Keflection  upon  this  distinction  emphasizes  the  importance  of
the  causal  characteristics  of  things.  In  the  bell  experiment  the
medium  has  the  causal  characteristic  of  being  able  to  propagate
sound-waves ; the  bell  has  the  causal  characteristic  of  vibrating  in
such  a way  when  struck  as  to  set  up  sound-waves  in  a suitable
medium  in  spatio-temporal  proximity  to  it.  A condition  is,  then,
whatever  must  be  present  in  a given  situation  in  order  that  a causal
characteristic  of  a thing  may  be  manifested  in  a state  of  the  thing,
which  state  will  have  certain  determinate  characteristics.  This  state
is  the  effect.  The  cause  is  that  state  of  some  other  thing  upon  which
the  effect  is  consequent.  In  the  example  of  the  bell,  the  cause  may
be  said  to  be  the  impact  of  the  tongue  upon  the  sides  ; the  effect  is
the  vibration  of  the  sides  which  has  for  %ts  effect  the  communication
of  sound-waves  to  the  surrounding  air.  This  distinction  between
cause  and  condition  cannot  be  made  perfectly  precise  and  is  mis-
leading if  pressed  too  far.  What  is  important  is  to  distinguish
between  a sufficient  condition  tod  a necessary  condition.  A condition
X is  a sufficient  condition  of  an  occurrence  A provided  that  when-
ever X is  present  A occurs.  But  if  A may  occur  when  X is  absent,
then  X,  though  a sufficient,  is  not  a necessary  condition  of  A.  Thus
a condition  N is  a necessary  condition  of  A provided  that  A never
occurs  in  the  absence  of  N.  A condition  NS  is  a necessary  and  suffi-
cient condition  of  an  occurrence  A provided  that  (i)  whenever  NS
is  present  A occurs,  and  (ii)  whenever  NS  is  absent  A does  not  occur.
Owing  to  the  failure  of  common  sense  to  recognize  these  distinctions
X is  sometimes  said  to  be  the  cause  ” of  A when  it  is  a necessary
but  not  a sufficient  condition,  and  also  when  it  is  a sufficient  but
not  a necessary  condition  J;  This  ambiguity  in  the  use  of  the  word
“ cause  ” is  due  to  the  practical  interests  of  common  sense,  which,
as  we  saw,  leads  to  the  selection  of  a striking,  or  impressive,  factor
out  of  the  set  of  factors  that  are  jointly  sufficient  and  independently
necessary  to  the  production  of  the  effect.  Hence,  common  sense
fails  to  recognize  that  what  we  have  to  take  into  account  is  a
system  the  parts  of  which  are  in  mutual  dependence.  This  depend-
ence is  causal  dependence.  )


272


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


(3)  It  follows  from  what  has  just  beeu  said  that  the  distinction
between  cause  and  efiect  cannot  be  made  as  sharply  as  common
sense  makes  it.  The  emphasis  must  be  placed  upon  the  relation,
came  and  effect  being  merely  the  terms  in  the  relation,  selected
because  they  are  striking,  or  practically  important,  or  are  easily  dis-
criminated. This  practical  emphasis  leads,  as  we  saw,  to  the  neglect
of  other  factors  that  are  relevant,  and  hence  to  the  conception  of
the  causal  relation  as  being  not  only  asymmetrical  but  also  many-
one.  But  it  is  usually  assumed  that  if  the  cause  and  the  effect
are  determined  with  equal  precision,  the  relation  will  be  one-one,
so  that  given  the  effect,  the  cause  is  thereby  determined,  given  the
cause,  the  effect  is  thereby  determined.  Whenever  the  distinction
between  cause  and  effect  is  applicable  to  a causal  situation,
then  the  cause  precedes  the  effect.  The  relation  is  thus  asym-
metrical since  the  relation  of  temporal  priority  is  asymmetrical.^
We  shall  find  that  this  distinction  becomes  less  important  as
science  advances.  This,  however,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  re-
lation of  causation  ceases  to  be  of  importance  and  is  replaced  by
the  relation  of  functional  dependence.  With  this  we  are  not  at
present  concerned.

(4)  Common  sense  assumes  that  if  in  a system  in  which  no  change
has  been  occurring,  a change  begins  to  occur,  then  that  system  must
be  in  causal  relation  to  something  outside  it  which  causes  the  change.
Such  causation  is  called  transeunt.  Thus  we  are  led  to  the  distinc-
tion between  a thing  left  to  itself  and  a thing  not  so  left.  We  saw
that  this  distinction  is  vague.  It  must  be  replaced  by  the  distinction
between  an  isolated  system  and  a system  in  causal  relations  to  some-
thing outside  the  system.  Changes  occurring  in  an  isolated  system
are  determined  by  the  mutual  relations  of  the  parts.  Such  deter-
mination is  called  immanent  causation.  For  example,  the  works  of
a watch  constitute  an  isolated  system.  Once  the  watch  is  wound
up  the  changes  occurring  in  it  are  causally  determined  by  the  mutual
relations  of  the  parts  of  the  works.  Thus  the  movement  of  the
hands  over  the  dial  is  immanently  caused.  If,  however,  the  watch
is  put  in  very  cold  or  very  hot  temperatures,  the  temperature  of
the  surrounding  medium  will  cause  a change  in  the  metal  case  which
will  cause  a change  in  the  working  of  the  watch.  This  would  /be
an  example  of  transeunt  causation.  The  business  of  a good  watch-
maker is  to  construct  a watch  as  little  subject  as  possible  to  changes

^ Mr.  BusseUiias  said : ‘ It  is  customary  only  to  give  the  name  “ effect  ” to
an  event  which  is  later  than  the  cause,  but  there  is  no  Mnd  of  reason  for  this
restriction.  We  shall  do  better  to  allow  the  effect  to  be  before  the  cause  or
simultaneous  with  it,  because  nothing  of  any  scientific  importance  depends  upon
its  being  after  the  cause.’  (Our  Knowledge  of  the  External  World,  p.  226.)
There  can,  however,  be  little  doubt  that  it  is  extremely  inconvenient  to  give  the
name  “ cause  ” to  that  which  is  temporally  successive  to  the  effect.


CAUSALITY


273


occurring  outside  tte  watch-case.  His  ideal  would  te  the  con-
struction of  a completely  isolated  system,  save  for  the  fact  that  the
watch  must  be  periodically  wound  up  by  external  agency.  This
ideal  is  unattainable.  The  distinction  between  systems  that  are
causally  isolated  and  systems  that  are  not  cannot  be  made  absolute.
The  latter  may  always  be  regarded  as  sub-systems  in  a wider  system.
But  unless  there  were  systems  that  are  practically  isolated  with
regard  to  many  changes  occurring  in  these  systems,  the  discovery
of  causal  uniformities  would  be  impossible.  The  determination  of
practically  isolated  systems  is  again  a problem  of  determining  what
is  relevant  to  the  occurrence  of  change.  The  belief  that  some
occurrences  are  irrelevant  to  the  happening  of  other  occurrences
is,  in  fact,  the  belief  that  there  are  causal  uniformities.  These
causal  uniformities  are  the  laws  in  accordance  with  which  changes
occur.

Our  discussion  of  causation  has  shown  that  there  is  a close
interrelation  between  causal  uniformities,  or,  as  we  may  caU  them,
causal  laws,  and  things.  The  attempt  to  determine  more  precisely
the  nature  of  this  interrelation  takes  us  beyond  the  standpoint  of
common  sense,

§ 4.  CAUSAL  LAWS  AOT)  THE  BEHAVIOUE  OF  TRINGS

We  have  seen  that  the  way  in  which  a thing,  for  example,  a
lump  of  sugar,  a candle,  a poker,  a living  being,  will  behave  in  a given
situation  depends  both  upon  the  nature  of  the  thing  and  upon  the
nature  of  the  situation  in  which  it  is  placed.  This  lump  of  sugar
dissolves  in  water ; this  piece  of  gold  does  not.  The  poker  put  into
a fire  will  become  red-hot ; when  it  is  taken  out  and  put  in  the
fender  it  wiU.  become  cold  again,  and  will  revert  (approximately)
to  its  former  condition.  The  thing  has  characteristics  which  dis-
tinguish it  from  other  things.  Some  of  its  characteristics  are  causal
characteristics,  i.e.  modes  of  behaviour  in  relation  to  other  things,
e.g.  solubility  in  water  which  belongs  to  this  lump  of  sugar.  The
thing  has  also  non-causal  characteristics  relating  to  the  kind  of
primary  characteristics  exhibited  by  its  states.  The  states  of  the
thing  have  determinate  characteristics.  These  determinate  charac-
teristics of  the  states  are  caused  by  the  causal  characteristics  and
the  situation  in  which  the  thing  is  placed.  For  example,  the  deter-
minate characteristics  of  the  state  of  the  poker  when  it  is  red-hot
are  being  red  and  being  hot  These  characteristics  are  caused  by  the
causal  characteristics  altering  in  colour  and  altering  in  temperature
.(which  belong  to  the  poTcer^  not  to  its  states)  and  by  the  situation,
viz.  the  fitre.

So  far  we  have  considered  definite  examples  of  things,  this  poher,
18


274


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


this  lump  of  sugar.  But  eacB.  of  these  is  recognized  as  belonging
to  a class  consisting  of  things  of  a certain  sort^  or  as  we  have  called
them  natural  hinds.  Every  instance  of  a hind  of  thing  has  certain
characteristics  of  a certain  sort  which  makes  it  the  sort  of  thing  it
is,  and  is  what  we  mean  by  a hind.  The  way  in  which  a thing
behaves  depends  upon  its  kind.  These  modes  of  behaviour  are
causal  laws.  "Wherever  there  are  things  of  a certain  kind  in  certain
situations  there  will  be  certain  modes  of  behaviour,  that  is  certain
variations  in  the  primary  characteristics  of  the  states  of  the  thing.
These  changes  recur  under  suitable  conditions  at  different  times  and
places.  Hence,  the  characteristic  modes  of  behaviour  of  things  are
recurrent  modes  of  change.  Causal  laws  are  the  laws  of  these
recurrent  modes  of  change.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  we  do  distinguish  kinds  of  things
by  observing  their  modes  of  behaviour  in  the  presence  of  other
things,  that  is  in  different  situations.  We  observe  the  primary
characteristics  of  the  states  of  a thing,  and  we  know  that  that  kind
of  thing  has  states  having  those  characteristics.  If  the  thing  fails
to  exhibit  that  mode  of  behaviour  which  is  characteristic  of  that
kind  of  thing,  we  know  that  we  were  mistaken  as  to  the  kind  of
thing  it  was.  For  example,  we  may  see  a dish  of  apples  which
looh  like  Blenheim  pippins.  We  may  take  up  one  and  bite  it,  only
to  find  that  it  tastes  of  soap.  We  conclude  (rightly)  that  this  thing
is  a piece  of  soap  made  to  look  like  a Bleiieim  pippin.  It  isn't
a Blenheim  pippin  because  it  doesn’t  behave  hke  one.  Thus  we
see  that  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  a kind  involve  modes
of  behaviour,  i.e.  causal  laws.  The  notion  of  kinds  of  things,  then,
leads  us  to  the  consideration  of  causation  and  conditions.  This
point  is  important,  since  it  shows  that  there  are  modes  of  change
which  recur  in  di^erent  situations  and  which  take  place  in  accordance
with  laws.  From  this  it  follows  that  there  are  occurrences  to  the
happening  of  which  much  else  that  is  also  happening  is  irrelevant.
If  this  were  not  true,  there  could  be  no  causal  laws  and  no  science.
The  discovery  of  a causal  law  is  the  discovery  of  what  is  relevcmt
to  a given  mode  of  behaviour.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  discovery
of  causal  laws  requires  observation  of  particular  situations.  We  do
not  know  independently  of  experience  that  sugar  dissolves  in  water
and  that  gold  does  not,  or  that  arsenic  is  poisonous.  We  discover
these  facts  by  observing  how  sugar,  gold,  arsenic  behave  in  certain
situations.  The  necessity  of  this  appeal  to  experience  is  not,  as  has
sometimes  been  supposed,  an  argument  against  there  being  any
causal  laws.  It  does,  however,  show  that  causal  laws  cannot  be
deduced  from  observed  characters,  “read  off  ”,  as  it  were,  from  a
given  situation.  On  the  contrary,  causal  laws  are  discovered  only
by  analysis  of  causal  situations ; things  must  be  brought  into  relation


CAUSALITY


276


with  other  things,  so  that  they  can  be  observed  in  varying  situations.
By  eliminating  factors  present  in  different  situations  we  discover
which  factors  present  in  those  situations  are  nevertheless  irrelevant
to  the  result.  This  process  of  elimination  has  to  be  carried  out  with
due  precautions,  for  it  is  easy  to  make  mistakes  and  to  neglect
precautions  the  need  of  which  noight  be  supposed  to  be  obvious.
We  shall  be  concerned  later  with  the  various  ways  in  which  causal
laws  may  be  ascertained.  Here  we  need  only  notice  that  we  do  in
fact  know  many  causal  laws,  and  that  these  causal  laws  refer  to
modes  of  change  which  recur  in  relative  isolation  from  what  else  is
happening.

To  say  that  X is  the  necessary  and  sufficient  condition  of  the
occurrence  of  E is,  then,  to  say  that  X ahne  is  relevant  to  the  occur-
rence of  E.  It  might  be  objected  that,  if  we  can  discover  what  is
relevant  only  by  eliminating  what  is  irrelevant,  then  we  could  never
tell  whether  permanent  factors  in  the  universe,  for  example,  the
presence  of  the  fixed  stars,  are  relevant  to  a given  causal  situation,
for  example,  sugar  dissolving  in  water.  This  is  true,  but  it  is  also
unimportant  since  the  statement  of  the  given  causal  law  does  not
require  us  to  take  account  of  the  fixed  stars,  nor  should  we  ever
be  concerned  with  causal  situations  in  the  absence  of  the  fixed  stars.
Moreover,  although  the  annihilation  of  the  fixed  stars  might  affect
the  result,  we  have  not  the  slightest  reason  for  supposing  that  this
would  be  the  case.  On  the  other  hand,  we  do  fiid  that  the  sub-
stitution of  gold  for  sugar  in  the  water  does  not  yield  the  result
dissolving  in  water.  It  seems,  then,  that  experience  does  provide
us  with  examples  of  multiformities,  and  with  examples  of  causal
occurrences  that  are  independent  of  other  causal  occurrences  hap-
pening contemporaneously  and  in  the  same  neighbourhood.  That
is  to  say  that  there  are  relatively  independent  causal  series.  The
difference  between  the  causal  set  Ai,  A2,  As  . . . and  the  causal
set  Bi,  B2,  Ba  . . . depends  upon  the  different  natures  of  A and
B.  We  have  seen  what  is  meant  by  the  phrase  the  nature  of  ”
in  this  context.  It  is  the  fact  that  A has  a certain  nature,  or  is
a thing  of  a certain  kind,  which  determines  in  what  situations  A is
a causal  factor.

It  is  important  to  distinguish  causal  laws  from  the  particular
causal  propositions  which  exemplify  them.  It  is  the  causal  law  that
is  fundamental.  A particular  causal  proposition  asserts  a definite
causal  occurrence  happening  once,  and  once  only,  for  example,
This  shot  through  his  l^art  caused  this  man^s  death.  In  asserting  that
this  man’s  death  was  caused  by  his  being  shot  through  the  heart
we  are  asserting  more  than  the  historical  fact  that  two  particular
occurrences  were  conjoined.  This  is  clear,  since  there  are  many
occurrences  happening  together  (simultaneously  or  successively)


276


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


wHcli  we  slLOnld  not  regard  as  being  causally  connected.  It  may
be  that  what  more  we  are  asserting  is  simply  that  this  is  an  instance
of  a conjunction  of  two  occurrences  of  a certain  sort  such  that  the
one  is  always  conjoined  with  the  other,  or  it  may  be  that  we  are
asserting  that  the  two  occurrences  are  related  by  a unique  relation
of  causation.  We  shall  consider  in  the  next  section  what  can  be
said  in  favour  of  either  of  these  two  views.  Whatever  view  we
adopt  we  must  admit  that  there  would  be  no  significance  in  the
assertion  of  causation  unless  we  at  least  meant  to  assert  that  when-
ever a given  occurrence  happens,  then  some  other  given  occurrence
happens.  The  causal  law  which  the  example  given  above  exemplifies
can  be  stated  precisely.  Whenever  there  is  an  occurrence  which  is
the  passage  of  a bullet  through  a man’s  heart,  there  follows  an
occurrence  which  is  the  cessation  of  the  beating  of  the  heart.  Thus
the  form  of  such  a causal  law  is : Whenever  an  occurrence  having
the  property  0 happens  at  a time  to  a thing  of  the  kind  Ki,  then
an  occurrence  having  the  property  W happens  at  a time  to  a thing
of  the  kind  Kg.  It  may  be  the  case  that  (i)  0 and  W are  properties
of  the  same  sort ; (ii)  Ki  and  Kg  are  the  same  thing  ; (iii)  and  tz
are  the  same  time.  When  (iii)  is  the  case,  there  is  an  instance  of
simultaneous  causality.  In  the  examples  we  have  given  the  things
have  been  of  different  degrees  of  complexity,  e.g.  gold,  an  element,
water,  an  inorganic  compound,  heart,  man,  organic  compounds.  The
behaviour  of  each  of  these  kinds  is  expressed  by  causal  laws.  These
causal  laws  will  differ  in  the  degree  of  their  abstractness,  and  from
some  points  of  view  and  with  regard  to  certain  problems  the  differ-
ences between  the  hind  of  these  kinds,  or  sorts,  of  things  will  be
very  important.  But  it  is  sufficient  here  to  notice  that  the  simplest
causal  law  is  abstract.

Throughout  the  preceding  discussion  we  have  made  many  assump-
tions. Thus  we  have  assumed  that  we  can  know  that  there  are
independent  causal  series,  and  that  we  can  know  particular  proposi-
tions of  the  form  This  X caused  this  Y.  It  is  not,  of  course,  asserted
that  such  knowledge  is  demonstrative.  On  the  contrary,  we  have
seen  that  causal  unifornoities  have  to  be  discovered  by  observation
of  what  happens,  and  it  is  clear  that  generalizations  from  these
observations  wiU  require  justification.  Whether  these  assumptions
can  be  justified,  and  if  so,  how,  are  questions  to  be  discussed  later.
There  is,  however,  an  assumption  that  we  have  not  so  far  made,
but  that  is  often  supposed  to  be  made  in  all  inductive  investigation.
This  is  the  assumption  that,  not  only  are  there  causal  uniformities
but  also  that  everything  that  happens  can  be  exhibited  as  an  instance
of  a causal  uniformity.  This  assumption  is  known  as  the  Law  of
Universal  Causation.  It  is  often  expressed  in  the  form  that  every
event  has  a came.  It  should  be  clear  from  what  we  have  already


CAUSALITY


277


gaid  that  this  is  a misleading  expression.  Events  as  such  do  not
cause  other  events.  It  is  because  an  event  has  a certain  property
that  it  causes  another  event  having  a certain  property  to  have  another
property.  In  order  to  make  clear  this  reference  to  froperties  we
have  used  the  word  occurrence  ” instead  of  ‘‘  event  The  Law
of  Universal  Causation  might,  then,  be  expressed  as  follows  : Given
an  occurrence  having  the  properties  02  • • • then  there  is  some
other  occurrence  having  the  properties  IPi,  ...  so  related  to
the  first  that  the  one  occurrence  is  the  cause  of  the  other.  This
Law  is  equivalent  to  the  assertion  that  there  are  no  uncaused  events.
This  involves  a much  wider  assumption  than  the  assumption  that
there  are  causal  uniformities,  since  the  latter  is  consistent  with  the
admission  that  there  may  be  some  occurrences  not  causally  related
with  any  occurrence.  That  is  to  say,  there  may  be  causal  laws
although  not  everything  that  happens  is  an  instance  of  a causal  law.
The  Law  of  Universal  Causation  refers  to  particular  occurrences,
whereas  causal  laws  are,  as  we  have  seen,  abstract.  The  Law  of
Universal  Causation  assumes  that  every  occurrence  can  be  uniquely
described  by  a set  of  characteristics,  whereas  a causal  law  is  a
generalization  just  because  it  takes  no  notice  of  those  characteristics
which  belong  to  a given  situation,  uniquely  determining  it  to  be
this  situation.  The  Law  of  Universal  Causation  can  be  most  con-
cisely expressed  as  follows : Every  event  uniquely  described  by  a
set  of  characteristics, is  so  related  to  another  event  also  uniquely
described  by  a set  of  characteristics  that  the  one  is  the  cause  of
the  other.


v/  §5.  MILL’S  THEOET  OF  CAUSATION

Probably  no  logician  to-day  would  contend  that  MilFs  treat-
ment of  causation  is  satisfactory.  Nevertheless,  the  inquiry  as  to
what  exactly  Jlill’s  theory  was  and  in  what  respects  it  was  unsatis-
factory will  throw  light  upon  the  conception  of  cause  since  his
theory  resulted  from  an  attempt  to  refine  the  common-sense  notion.
It  must  be  admitted  at  the  outset  that  Mill  was  exceptiffiPLa’lly-Jn-
consistent.  He  was  a careless  and  inexact  writer ; his  verbal  in-
consistencies are  obvious  so  that  destructive  criticism  of  Mill  is  easy.
But  such  verbal  criticism  is  also  profitless.  It  is  not  always  difiicult
to  see  what  Mill’s  meaning  was  in  spite  of  the  vague  and  inexact
way  in  which  his  views  were  expressed.  It  is  desirable  to  attempt
to  state  Mill’s  theory  without  laying  stress  upon  his  verbal  inaccur-
acies. But  it  cannot  be  denied  that  these  inaccuracies  are  sometimes
the  result  of  vague  and  confused  thinking.  MiU  did  not  carry  his
reflections  far  enough,  so  that  he  seldom  apprehended  a problem  in
all  its  details.  His  occasional  flashes  of  insight  were  disconnected.


278


A MODEEN  INTKODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


But  tHs  insiglit  enabled  bim  often  to  raise  tbe  rigbt  problem  and
to  suggest  the  most  fruitful  line  of  inquiry.^

The  marks  of  ^ scientific  proposition  are,  according  to  Mill,
universality  ahd^  cerS'intvl  He  believed  that  it  was  possible  by
means  of  inductive  argument  to  establish  universal  propositions
with  regard  to  the  external  world  that  were  certainly  true.  He
sought  an  instrument  foT  ‘ unravelling  the  complexity  of  nature
and  he  believed  he  had  found  this  instrument  in  the  ‘ Four  Induntive
Methods  which  rest  upon  the  law  of  universal  causatibh.  These
nSiSEods  will  he  discussed  in  CEapter  XVII.  ILT  present  we  are
concerned  only  with  Mill’s  statement  of  the  law  of  universal  causation.
He  says,  ‘ We  must  first  observe  that  there  is  a principle  implicit  in
the  very  statement  of  what  Induction  is  ; an  assumption  with  regard
to  the  course  of  nature  and  the  order  of  the  universe ; namely,  that
there  are  such  things  in  nature  as  jparallel  cases  ; that  what  happens
once  v^l,  under  a sufficient^  similarity  of  circisostances,

1 happen  again,  and  not  only  again,  but  as  often  as  the  same  cir-
cumstances recur  So  far  Mill  is  simply  pointing  out  what  is  in
fact  the  minimum  condition  of  science,  namely,  that  ^ there  are
such  things  in  nature  as  parallel  cases  or,  in  other  words,  that
there  are  uniformities.  He  also  emphasizes  the  fact  that  the  course
of  nature  is  not  only  uniform,  it  is  also  infinitely  various  ’ ; ® and
that  ‘ in  the  contemplation  of  that  uniformity  in  the  coiuse  of  nature
which  is  assumed  in  every  inference  from  experience,  one  of  the
first  observations  that  present  themselves  is,  that  the  uniformity  ill
question  is  not  properly  imifQrnaLity,  but  uniformities  These
imiformities  Mill  distinguished  as  of  two  fundamentally  different
kinds  : unffcumitijga.-»cff.nQe^  and  uniformities  of  succession.
Natural  kinds,  symbolized  by  class-names,  afford  examples  of  the
first  kind  of  uniformities.  Mill  thus  states  the  point : ‘ When  we

IafiSrm  that  all  crows  are  black,  or  that  all  negroes  have  woolly  hair,
we  assert  a uniformity  of  coexistence.  We  assert  that  the  property
of  blackness,  or  of  having  woolly  hair,  invariably  coexists  with  the
properties  which,  in  common  language  or  in  the  scientific  classifica-
tion that  we  adopt,  are  taken  to  constitute  the  class  crow,  or  the
class  negro  ’.®  These  uniformities  are  to  be  sharply  distinguished

^ This  same  characteristic  is  apparent  in  Mill’s  etMc%l  writings.  His
Utilitarianism  is  one  of  the  most  confused  and  inconsistent  books  that  have  ever
greatly  influenced  subsequent  thinkers.  He  makes  mistakes  so  crude  that  they
provide  material  for  the  easy  criticism  of  candidates  in  elementary  examinations
in  logic.  Yet,  in  spite  of  these  defects.  Mill’s  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  moral
life  is  revealed  in  every  chapter.  Had  his  insight  been  less  keen  he  might  have
achieved  the  superficial  consistency  of  his  master  Bentham.  A similar
estimate  may  be  madfe  of  his  work  in  logic.

^ Logic,  Bk.  IH,  Chap.  Ill,  § 1.

Chap.  IV,  § 1,


HUd.,  §2.

« ibid.,  Chap.  XXII,  § 3.


CAUSALITY


279


from  Timf ornoities  of  succession  since  the  latter  are  causal  uniformities
and  depend  upon  the  law  of  universal  causation.  No  proposition
asserting  a uniformity  of  coexistence  can  be  certain  since  ‘ there  is
no  general  axiom  standing  in  the  same  relation  to  the  uniformities
of  coexistence  as  the  law  of  causation  does  to  those  of  succession

Mill  gives  various  different  statements  of  the  law  of  causation,
but  it  wSl  be  sufficient  to  quote  one : " The  Law  of  Causation,  the
recognition  of  which  is  the  main  pillar  of  inductive  science,  is  but
the  familiar  truth  that  invariability  of  succession  is  found  by  ob-
servation to  obtain  between  every  fact  in  nature  and  some  other
fact  that  has  preceded  it  ’.2  He  adds : ^ To  certain  facts,  certain
facts  always  do,  and,  as  we  believe,  will  continue  to,  succeed.  The
invariable  antecedent  is  termed  the  cause  ; the  invariable  consequent
the  effect.  And  the  universality  of  the  law  of  causation  consists
in  this,  that  every  consequent  is  connected  in  this  manner  with
some  particular  antecedent  or  set  of  antecedents.  Let  this  fact  be
what  it  may,  if  it  has  begun  to  exist,  it  was  preceded  by  some  fact
or  facts  with  which  it  is  invariably  connected.  For  every  event
there  exists  some  combination  of  objects  or  events,  some  given
concurrence  of  circumstances,  positive  and  negative,  the  occurrence
of  which  is  always  followed  by  that  phenomenon  Three  points
are  involved  in  this  statement  of  causation,  namely,  (i)  every  fact,
or  event,  has  a cause ; (ii)  the  same  cause  is  always  followed  by  the
same  effect ; (iii)  the  cause  precedes  the  effect.  Mill  agrees  with
common  sense  in  finding  causal  connexion  only  where  there  is  change  ;
he  recognizes  that  causal  connexion  is  uniform,  and  he  stresses  the
notion  of  succession.  He  defines  cause  as  follows : ‘ The  cause,
then,  philosophically  speaking,  is  the  sum  total  of  the  conditions
positive  and  negative  taken  together  ; the  whole  of  the  contingencies
of  every  description,  which,  being  realized,  the  consequent  invariably
follows  By  ‘ the  negative  conditions  ’ Mill  means  the  absence
of  counteracting  causes,  for  example,  the  absence  of  a resisting
medium  in  the  case  of  freely  falling  bodies,  or  the  absence  of  an  emetic
speedily  administered  in  the  case  of  a man  poisoned  with  arsenic,
and  so  on.  Mill  differs  from  common  sense  in  recognizing  that  the
distinction  between  cause  and  condition  is  often  arbitrarily  drawn,
and  in  that  case  corresponds  to  no  fundamental  distinction.®  He

nm,  §4.  "Bk.  in.  Chap.  V,  §2.

® ibid.  It  should  be  noticed  that  Mill  uses  the  word  “ fact  ” where  we
should  have  used  the  word  “ occurrence

^ ibid.,  § 3.

® Cf.  loo.  cit.,  § 3.  ‘ Nothing  can  better  show  the  absence  of  any  scientific
ground  for  the  distinction  between  the  cause  of  a phenomenon  and  its  conditions,
than  the  capricious  maimer  in  which  we  select  from  am^g  the  conditions  that
which  we  choose  to  denominate  the  cause.’  The  whole  of  this  paragraph  is
worth  careful  reading.


280


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


lays  stress  upon  tte  inmnability  of  the  succession  of  antecedent  and
consequent,  and  he  explains  that  he  includes  under  the  notion  of
invariability  also  uncmditionalitv.  for  he  is  unwilling  to  adroit  that
all  invariable  successions  are  causal.  He  insists,  for  example,  that
day  is  not  the  cause  of  night,  although  day  is  invariably  succeeded
by  night.  The  differentia  of  causal  from  non-causal  successions  is
to  be  found,  he  asserts,  in  the  fact  that  the  former  are  unconditional.
He  says,  ‘ If  there  be  any  meaning  which  confessedly  belongs  to  the
term  necessity,  it  is  unco'^tionalness.  That  which  is  necessary,
that  which  must  be,  means  that  which  will  be,  whatever  supposition
we  may  make  in  regard  to  all  other  things’,  and  he  concludes,

‘ Invariable  sequence,  therefore,  is  not  synonymous  with  causation,
unless  the  sequence,  besides  being  invariable,  is  unconditional.  There
are  sequences  as  uniform  in  past  experience  as  any  others  whatever,
which  we  do  not  regard  as  cases  of  causation,  but  as  conjunctions
in  some  sort  accidental  ^ Such  to  an  accurate  thinker  is  that  of  day
and  night  This  consideration  leads  him  to  a second  definition  of
cause : ^ We  may  define,  therefore,  the  cause  of  a phenomenon  to
be  the  antecedent,  or  the  concurrence  of  antecedents,  on  which  it
is  invariably  and  unconditionally  consequent ’.2

Although  Mill  lays  such  stress  upon  the  element  of  succession
in  causal  uniformities,  he  does  not  attempt  to  discuss  the  nature
of  the  temporal  relation  itself.  He  is  content  with  the  assertion
that  whether  the  beginning  of  the  effect  be  simultaneous  with  the
cause  or  not,  still  ‘ the  beginning  of  a phenomenon  ^ is  what  implies
a cause,  and  causation  is  the  law  of  the  succession  of  phenomena  ’.
Hence,  he  reaches  a third  definition  of  cause : ‘ the  assemblage  of
phenomena,  which  occurring,  some  other  phenomenon  invariably
commences,  or  has  its  origin.  Whether  the  effect  coincides  with,
or  immediately  follows,  the  hindmost  of  its  conditions,  is  immaterial.
At  all  events  it  does  not  precede  it ; and  when  we  are  in  doubt
between  two  coexistent  phenomena,  which  is  cause  and  which  effect,
we  rightly  deem  the  question  solved  if  we  can  ascertain  which  of
them  preceded  the  other’.**  At  this  point  Mill  seems  to  have
abandoned  the  notion  of  succession  as  a fundamental  element  in
causation.  He  does  not  seem  ever  to  have  definitely  made  up  his
mind  whether  succession  or  unconditionalness  is  the  more  important
element.  There  is  much  in  Mill’s  treatment  that  suggests  that  he

^ It  is  extraordinarily  difficult  to  see  what  Mill  could  have  meant  by  the
statement  that  the  conjunction  day  following  night  was  ‘ accidental  \ This
example  affords  a good  illustration  of  the  insufficiency  of  MiFs  analysis  of  the
causal  relation.

a ibid.,  § 6.

® By  “ phenomenon  ” Mill  means  what  W©  have  called  an  ‘‘  oecurrence
which  he  also  often  ^caUs  a “ fact  ”,

Hbid„  §7,


CAUSALITY


281


sLould  liave  substituted  uniform  succession  ” for  unconditional
and  invariable  sequence  ”,  since  he  often  implies  that  the  importance
of  unconditionalness  is  its  value  as  a test  of  uniformity.  On  the
other  hand,  Mill  was  concerned  to  establish  the  certainty  of  causal
laws ; consequently,  he  sought  to  replace  the  notion  of  necessity
by  that  of  unconditionalness.  When,  however,  we  try  to  make  precise
what  Mill  could  have  meant  by  an  unconditional  sequence  ” we
encounter  difficulties.  The  cause  is  said  to  be  the  sum-total  of  con-
ditions positive  and  negative,  but  the  negative  conditions  consist
in  the  absence  of  counteracting  causes.  If  we  attempt  to  make
precise  the  notion  of  a counteracting  cause  ”,  we  find  that  we  must
take  into  account  the  nature  of  the  phenomenon,  or  occurrence,  that
constitutes  this  counteracting  cause.  The  notion  of  invariability  of
succession  is  not  enough.  For  example,  the  presence  of  air  is  a
counteracting  cause  ” which  prevents  a feather  and  a stone
dropped  simultaneously  from  the  same  position,  from  reaching  the
ground  together.  The  causal  characteristic  of  resisting  imfact,
which  is  a property  of  the  air,  is  relevant  to  the  total  situation.
Thus  it  seems  that  invariable  and  unconditional  succession
cannot  be  what  is  meant  by  causal  connexion.  Mill  obscures  the
problem  by  his  loose  use  of  language.  Thus  he  speaks  indifferently
of  events,  facts,  objects,  phenomena,  as  the  terms  of  the  causal  relation.
He  then  ignores  the  nature  of  the  terms  and  considers  only  one
relation  between  them,  that  of  succession.  But,  he  insists,  the  rela-
tion is  not  that  of  mere  succession  but  of  invariable  and  uncon-
ditional succession.  He  failed  to  see,  however,  that  the  invari-
ability and  unconditionalness  ” of  the  succession  is  dependent  upon
the  nature  of  the  terms  so  related.  The  terms  in  the  relation  of
succession  are  events,  but  the  causal  relation  does  not  relate  bare
events,  but  events  having  certain  properties,  or  what  we  have  called
occurrences  ”,  That  is  to  say,  the  terms  of  the  causal  relation
have  temporal  properties,  but  they  have  also  other  properties  in
virtue  of  which  one  is  the  cause  of  another.  The  neglect  of  this
important  consideration  accounts  for  Mill’s  failure  to  make  clear
whether  succession  or  imconditionalness  is  the  fundamental  element
in  causation,  or,  if  they  are  equally  fundamental,  what  is  the  relation
between  them.

It  must  be  admitted  that  a causal  law  is  unconditional  in  the
sense  that  it  does  not  admit  of  exceptions.  This  is  indeed  implied
in  calling  it  a law  ”,  for  a scientific  law  expresses  a uniform  con-
nexion. In  this  sense  a cause  is  an  unconditional  antecedent  ”,
since  it  is  a term  in  an  unconditional  law  of  the  form : Whenever
A,  then  B,  From  the  fact  that  A is  the  unconditional  antecedent
of  B,  it  follows,  then,  that  A is  invariably  connected  with  B.  Hence,
the  invariability  of  the  connexion  follows  from  the  unconditionality.


282


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


and  not  conversely*  If  it  were  the  case  that  A happens  always  to
be  followed  by  B,  but  that,  under  conditions  that  do  not  in  fact
occur,  A would  not  be  followed  by  B,  then  A would  not  be  the  cause
of  B,  i.e.  the  succession  would  not  be  invariable.  Mill  does,  then,
mean  by  invariable  ” something  other  than unvarying although
he  often  speaks  as  though  these  two  expressions  had  the  same
meaning,

§ 6.  CAUSATION  AND  REGULAR  SEQUENCE  i

The  problem  we  have  now  to  discuss  is  whether  causal  laws
express  nothing  hut  regularities  of  sequence.  If  so,  it  would  follow
that  all  regular  sequences  are  causal,  e.g.  the  sequence  of  day  and
night.  If  not,  the  difficulty  arises  of  finding  some  characteristic  dis-
tinguishing regular  sequences  that  are  causal  ficom  those  that  are
not.

There  is  undoubtedly  something  to  be  said  in  favour  of  the  view
that  causal  regularities  are  nothing  but  observed  regularities  of
sequence.  Its  best-known  recent  exponent  is  Mr.  Bertrand  Russell.  ^
Unfortunately  his  argument  is  so  carelessly  expressed  that  it  is
difficult  to  extract  the  main  points.  Perhaps  they  may  be  said  to
lie  in  the  two  following  considerations.  Starting  with  the  admission
I that  causal  laws  are  of  the  form  ^ A causes  B e.g.  ^ Arsenic  causes
death  Mr.  Russell  argues  that  such  laws  are  liable  to  exception,
and  that,  consequently,  they  cannot  be  universal  and  necessary.
..Now  a .!law  ^ that  has  exceptions  would  not  generally  be  regarded
as  a Kus^dlThwever,  does“’hbt“ta^ethfs“-wew,T6rTLe*^^^
to  wish  to  maintain  that  A causes  B,  expresses  a law  and  that  it
means  A is  the  nearly  inyariabla  antecedent  of  B By  nearly
invariable  Mr.  Hussell  seems  to  mean  almost  unvarying  He
argues  that  we  cannot  say  that  arsenic  always  causes  death  since  a
man  who  has  swallowed  arsenic  ‘ might  be  shot  through  the  head
after  taking  the  dose,  and  then  it  would  not  be  of  arsenic  that  he
would  die.  Again,  it  may  happen  that  immediately  after  the  man’s
death  his  body  is  blown  to  pieces  by  a bomb.  We  cannot  say  what
will  happen  after  the  man’s  death,  through  merely  knowing  that  he
has  died  as  the  result  of  arsenic  poisoning  Accordingly,  he  argues,
that  ^ if  we  are  to  take  the  cause  as  one  event  and  the  effect  as  another,
both  must  be  shortened  indefinitely.  W^age  tbggsJeft^^^w^^  Mwa
expressing  the^diection  of  change  firom  moment  to  moment  ®ie
upsKof  of  this  argument  appears  to  be  th^' smce^  cEange^  a

finite  time,  and  since  a change  A that  is  usually  followed  by  a change

This  section  should  be  omitted  on  a first  reading.

• See  The  Analysis  of  Mind^  Chap.  V,


CAUSALITY


283


B may  be  interrupted  bjefore  tbe  completion  of  tbe  process,  we  cannot
assert  that  ^ A is  always  followed  by  B ^ so  long  as  we  are  concerned
with  perceptible  changes.  Thus  causal  laws  are  not  universal.  ^-«The
second  point  concerns  the
be^gardeoai"^^  cause
Russell  to  deny  the  uniqueness  of  the  causal  relation.  He  argues :

^ Cause,  in  the  only  sense  in  which  it  can  be  practically  applied,  means
nearly  invariable  antecedent  We  cannot  in  practice  obtain  an
antecedent  wEicElsgm^e  invariable,  for  this  would  require  us  to  take
account  of  the  whole  universe,  since  something  not  taken  account  of
may  prevent  the  expected  effect.’  The  man  who  first  swallowed
arsenic,  who  was  immediately  afterwards  shot  through  the  head,  and
whose  body  was,  immediately  after  death,  blown  to  pieces  by  a bomb
is  said  to  provide  an  illustration  of  such  ^ prevention  Hence  Mr.
Russell  concludes  that  ' in  fact  we  cannot  find  any  antecedent  that
we  know  to  be  quite  invariable  but  ' we  can  find  many  that  are
nearly,  so.  For  example,  men  leave  a factory  for  dinner  when  the
hooter  sounds  at  twelve  o’clock.  You  may  say  the  hooter  is  the  cause
of  their  leaving.  But  innumerable  other  hooters  in  other  factories,  \
which  also  always  sound  at  twelve  o’clock,  have  just  as  good  a right  |
to  be  called  the  cause.  Thus  every  event  has  many  nearly  invariable
antecedents,  and  therefore  many  antecedents  which  may  be  called  its
cause

If  Mr.  Russell’s  view  be  correct,  then  every  regular  sequence  is
causal,  since  there  is  nothing  more  in  the  notion  of  cause  than
regularity  of  sequence.  Thus  night  will  be  the  cause  of  day  and  day
will  be  the  cause  of  night.  On  this  view  we  should  have  to  admit  that
the  blowing  of  the  hooters  was  the  cause  of  the  position  of  the  hands
of  the  clock  when  the  men  begin  to  leave  the  factory  for  dinner,  and
that  the  blowing  of  the  hooter  in  a Manchester  factory  caused  both  the
departure  of  the  men  from  that  factory  and  also  the  departure  of  the
men  from  factories  in  Liverpool  and  in  London,  and  conversely.  The
most  surprising  point  with  regard  to  Mr.  Russell’s  argument  is  his
belief  that  such  an  account  of  causation  gives  the  only  sense  in  which
the  notion  can  be  practically  applied.  Presumably  we  apply  the
notion  of  cause  when  we  use  it  for  purposes  of  inference.  It  is  not
obvious  that  the  hooter  illustration  could  be  used  satisfactorily  in
practice,  so  that  it  may  be  doubted  whether  this  definition  of  causal
connexion  could  be  recommended  on  the  ground  of  its  practical  utility.
It  is  unlikely,  however,  that  the  reasons  Mr.^Jlussell  gives  for  his  view
are  in  fact  the  reasons  that  led  him  to  it.  Possibly  his  main  reason
for  adopting  such  a paradoxical  view  is  to"be  found  in  the  extreme
dfficulty  of  pointing  out  my  characteristic  which  suffices  to  distinguish
regular  sequences  that  are  causal  from  those  that  are  not.  This
difficulty  may  have  led  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  no  such  char-


^T”grvm  event.


; any  one  event
This  difficulty  leads  Mr.


284


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


acteristic.  Such  an  argument  is  by  no  means  conclusive.  Dr.  Broad
has  put  this  point  very  clearly.^  He  argues  that  if  causation  did
involve  a unique  and  not  further  analysable  relation  it  would  be
‘ impossible  to  define  it  in  any  but  tautologous  terms  In  that  case
it  ‘ might  be  that  regular  sequence  was  not  even  fart  of  what  we  mean
by  causation,  but  was  merely  a sign  (though  by  no  means  an  infallible
one)  by  which  the  presence  of  this  other  relation  is  indicated  Dr.
Broad  admits  that  we  do  not  seem  to  be  directly  acquainted  with  any
‘ extra  factor  ’ in  causation  in  the  way  in  which,  for  instance,  we  are
directly  acquainted  with  the  unique  and  xmanalysable  relation  of
inside  and  outside  in  space.  Thus  it  remains  fiossihle  that  the  main
reason  for  rejecting  Mr.  RusselFs  view  may  simply  be  its  paradoxical
consequences.  Bjit,  ns  Dr.  Broad  further  argues,  " there  are  many
I cases  where  we  shoidd  admit  regular  sequence  and  unhesitatingly  deny
I causation  although,  he  adds^ ' there  are  perhaps  no  cases  where  we
I can  unhesitatingly  assert  causation  in  addition  to  regular  sequence
It  may  certainly  be  admitted  that  the  wooing  scientist  would
unhesitatingly  deny  that  the  blowing  of  a hooter  in  Manchester  was
the  cause  of  the  departure  of  the  London  workmen.

If  we  ask  why  the' hooter  illustration  is  paradoxical  we  may  be  able
to  discover  the  1 extra  factor  ’ that  is  missing  from  Mr.  RusselFs
account.  Dr.  Broad  says,  ‘ the  missing  factor  seems  to  be  a certain
spatio-temporal  continuity  between  the  sequent  events  and  he
‘’adds,  ‘ I am  inclined  to  think  that  it  is  the  absence  of  such  continuity
between  the  blowing  of  the  Manchester  hooter  and  the  movement  of
the  London  workmen  wl^h  makes  me  so  certain  that  the  former  is  not
a cause  of  the  latter  y^his  suggestion  will  meet  the  difficulty  only  if
a certain  spatio-temporal  continuity  ” be  interpreted  as  involving
reference  to  continuity  of  change  of  character  of  the  events  happening
in  Manchester,  or  in  London.  It  is  the  absence  of  continuous  change
of  character  that  leads  to  the  paradox.  If  what  we  have  already  said
about  causal  laws  is  correct,  then  it  is  a mistake  to  suppose  that  one
event  causes  another  event  We  have  insisted  that  it  is  an  event’s
having  a certain  character  that  causes  another  event  having  a certain
..character  to  have  some  other  character.  The  missing  factor  must
I then  be  found  in  the  character  evehT*'*T3a  connect

} changes  In  the’^characters  bf  events,  and  there  must  be  continuity  in
(j  this  change  of  character.  That  this  reference  to  character  is  essential
^ is  shown  by  the  fact  that  we  speak  of  regular  sequences  Events
do  not  recur.  As  we  have  Seen,  we^canjgeak^  same  cause  on
different  occasioiis  only  .because  th?pS^^  primarily

b^^n  Ihe  charact^s.  and  is  derivatively  between  the  events  to
, which  Jhese^haracters^bebngT^^  to  be

rejected  because  it  takes  no  account  of  the  continuity  of  change  of
^ 2%e  Mind  md  its  Place  in  Nature,  pp.  453-6.


CAUSALITY  m

character  that  is  essential  to  causation.  (We  .conclu.de  that  causation

We  have  still  to  consider  whether  any  raeamng" can  be  given  to  the
statement  that  a causal  connexion  is  a necessary  connexion.  To
assert  that  the  causal  relation  is  a necessary "relaBon^isTolE^  that
if  it  is  true  that  A causes  B,  then  it  could  not  be  the  case  that  A hap-
pens and  B does  not.  To  assert  that  the  causal  relation  is  uniform
but  not  necessary  is  to  assert  that  if  it  is  true  that  A causes  B,  thSi  it  is
not  in  fact  the  case  that  A happens  and  B does  not.  The  distinction
.between  these  two  relations  is  equivalent  to  the  distinction  between
entailing  and  material  implication?-  It  is  no^-possible  to  provide  con-
c^Svear^mSislnHv^  of  either  view.  /iSfanyJqgi^iaias  have  held
that  jfche  causal  relation  resembles  entailing.  ^ Those  who  have  held
this  view  have  by  no  means  always  seen  clearly  the  consequences  of
regarding  causation  as  equivalent  to  entailment,  and  have  thus  been
led  into  holding  views  that  are  extremely  unplausible.  It  will  be
granted  that  the  causal  relation  holds  only  between  terms  having
temporal  properties,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  field  of  the  relation  is
natural  entities,  possibly  including  mental  events.  Now,  on  inspec-
tion, it  seems  obvious  that  the  relation  that  holds  between  This  is  a
right  angle  and  This  is  an  angle  is  fundamentally  different  from  the
relation  that  holds  between  aflame  and  burning,  or  the  relation  that
holds  between  the  occurrence  consisting  in  the  absorption  of  a certain
quantity  of  arsenic  by  a living  organism  and  the  subsequent  cessation  of
life  in  that  organism.  But  what  seems  obvious  on  inspection  is  often
false,  so  that  the  fact  that  these  relations  do  seem  very  different  does
not  justify  us  in  asserting  that  there  is  such  a fundamental  difference.
It  does,  however,  suggest,  that  the  onus  probandi  lies  on  those  who
assert  that  there  is  no  such  difference.  On  the  other  hand,  there
seems  not  the  slightest  justification  for  the  view  that,  for  example,
the  causal  law  Sugar  dissolves  in  water  must  hold  in  all  possible  i
wc^dsTm  the  sense  in  which  ‘‘  must  ’’  means  could  not  be  other-f
wise  .

The  discussion  of  this  question  may  be  made  clearer  if  we  approach
it  from  a slightly  different  point  of  view.  Wc  have  insisted  that  the
causal  relation  holds  between  events  having  determinate  characters.
^What  we  have  said  is  in  this  respect  in  agreement  with  Mr.  J<^egh’s
statement : ‘ the  causal  relation  which  connects  a with  x connects  a
cause  of  the  nature  a with  an  effect  of  the  nature  x\'^  But  Mr.
jTosepVs  view  qi  the  causal  relation  makes  it  eq^uivalent  to  the  relation
"^of  entaiGm  ^/Accordingly  we  cannot  follow  him  with  regard  to  what
he  takes  to  be  the  implications  of  the  above  statement.  Mr.  Joseph

1 See  Chap.  XII,  § 4.


286


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


seems  to  hold  that  if  it  is  true  that  A causes  X,  then  it  follows  that
anything  that  does  not  cause  X could  not  be  A.  ‘ It  could  only  act
differently  he  says,  ^ if  it  were  different  and  he  adds,  ‘ to  say  that
the  same  thing  acting  on  the  same  thing  may  yet  pr(>duce  a different
effect,  is  to  say  that  a thing  need  not  be  what  it  is.  / Rut  this  is  in  flat
conflict  with  the  Law  of  Identity.  A thing  to  be  at  all,  must  be  some-
thing, and  can  only  be  what  it  is.  To  assert  a causal  connexion
between  a and  x implies  that  a acts  as  it  does  because  it  is  what  it  is ;
because,  in  fact,  it  is  a.  So  long  therefore  as  it  is  it  must  act  thus
In  drawing  this  conclusion  Mr.  Joseph  at  least  appears  to  be  confusing
two  different  propositions  which  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to
distinguish.  These  two  propositions  are  : (D‘  A has  the  causal  pro-
perty P because  it  in  fact  has  it ; (2)  A must  have  the  causal  property
P because  nothing  which  had  not  P could  be  A.  .Whilst  the  first  of
these  two  propositions  is  a truism,  the  second  is  by  no  means  obviously
true.  Professor  Moore’s  analysis  of  the  distinction  between  material
implication  and  entailment  makes  it  possible  to  state  exactly  what  it  is
that  the  second  proposition  asserts.  It  will  be  remembered  that  to
assert  that  one  proposition  entails  another  is  to  assert  that  the  first
could  not  be  true  and  the  second  false  ; to  assert  that  one  proposition
materially  implies  another  is  to  assert  that  the  first  is  not  as  a matter  of
fact  true  and  the  second  false.  Now  proposition  (2)  above  is  equivalent
to  the  assertion  that  it  is  not  the  case  th^  A has  the  causal  property
P ” is  true  whilst  anything  that  had  not  P must  be  other  than  A ” is
false.  2 This  may  be  more  simply  expressed  if  we  use  the  expression
« ^ causal  property  P ”,  and  “ xP  ” for  ‘‘  anything

that  has  not  P ”.  The  proposition  can  then  be  expressed : ‘ It  is  not
the  case  that  AP  is  true  whfle  xP  entails  x is  other  than  A ” is  false.’
^ Professor  Moore  has  shown,  it  very  often  is  false  that  xP  entails  x is
other  than  A,  so  that  the  compound  proposition  (2)  is  seldom  true.
It  only  is  true  when  P is  a special  kind  of  property  of  A,  namely  an
mternal  property,  that  is  a property  that  necessarily  belongs  to  A,  i.e.
a property  such  that  it  could  not  be  that  that  property  did  hot  belong
to  A.  For  example,  the  property  being  darker  than  yellow  is  an
internal  property  of  orange,  since  anything  that  was  not  darker  than
yellow  not  be  orange.  This  might  be  expressed  by  saying  that
from  the  assertion  that  A is  not  darker  than  yeUow  it  follows  that  A is
not  orange.  Clearly  not  all  properties  are  internal  in  this  sense.  For
example,  from  the  fact  that  this  book  is  on  this  table  it  does  not  follow

j

^Introduction,  p,  408.

® Inverted  commas  are  used  here  for  the  sake  of  oleaxiiess  in  order  to  dis-
tinguisk  tke  subordinate  propositions ; they  are  not  used  to  mark  the  distinction
between  symbols  and  what  is  symbolized.  Proposition  (2)  might  be  ex-
pressed in  the  form : Prom  the  fact  that  A has  4he  oaUsal  property  P U
fdlows  that  anything  that  has  not  P could  not  be  A.


CAUSALITY


287


that  this  hook  could  not  have  been  anywhere  hut  on  this  table.  That
is  to  say  the  property  leing  on  this  talle  is  an  external  relational  pro-
perty of  this  booh  The  distinction  between  internal  and  external
relational  properties  is  admitted  by  common  sense  which  certainly
holds  that  whilst  some  properties  are  such  that  they  could  not  but
belong  to  those  things  to  which  they  do  belong,  yet  admits  that
there  are  many  properties  which  things  have  which  are  such  that
these  properties  might  not  have  belonged  to  the  things  to  which  they
do  in  fact  belong.  The  recognition  that  some  properties  are  external
is  the  recognition  that  there  are  mere  matters  of  fact,  i.e.  things  that
might  have  been  other  than  they  in  fact  are.

It  should  now  be  clear  that  proposition  (2)  above  is  equivalent  to  ^
the  assertion  that  clausal  properties  are  internal.  This  assertion  is
certainly  not  a truism,  and  may  even  not  be  true ; hence,  it  is  clearly
difierent  from  proposition  (1),  which  is  a truism.  It  is  probable  that
Mr.  Joseph  assumes  the  truth  of  proposition  (2)  owing  to  a failure  to
distinguish  between  the  two  following  propositions :

{a)  If  A has  P,  then  it  follows  that  if  x has  not  P,  then  x is  other
than  A.

(6)  It  is  not  the  case  that  A has  P ” is  true,  and  that  if  x has
not  P it  follows  that  x is  other  than  A ’’  is  false.

If  we  use  the  shorthand  symbols  ent.’’  for  entails  i.e.  for  the  *
converse  of  it  follows,  and  #for  ‘‘  materially  implies  ”,  i.e.  for  it  is
not  the  case  that  the  first  proposition  is  true  and  the  second  false  ”,
then  we  can  express  propositions  [a)  and  (6)  more  clearly  as  follows :

(а)  AP  ent.  {xP  ic  x ^ A).

(б)  AP  ★ {xV  ent.  x ^ A).

It  is  very  easy  to  confuse  these  propositions,  but  it  is  extremely
important  to  distinguish  them,  since  (a)  is  certainly  true,  but  (6)  will
be  true  if,  and  only  if,  P is  an  internal  property  of  A.  Mr.  J oseph  has
either  failed  to  distinguish  these  propositions  or  he  has  simply  assumed
/ that  causal  properties  are  internal.^  The  statement  which  was  quoted
from  him  suggests  that  he  has  failed  to  distinguish  these  propositions,
for  he  seems  to  believe  that  it  follows  from  the  law  of  identity,  viz.
that  A is  identical  with  A,  that  A couU  not  lack  any  of  the  properties
which  it  does  in  fact  possess.  This  is  equivalent  to  the  assertion  that
every  property  of  A is  an  internal  property.  There  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  this  assertion  is  true.

Although  neither  Mr.  Joseph  nor  any  other  logician  has  given  any

, j

^ Mr.  Joseph  might  reply  that  he  is  concerned  to  assert  that  the  nature  of  A
cannot  be  determined  apart  from  P,  or  that,  in  other  words,  to  say  that  “ things
have  natures  ” is  equivalent  to  saying  that  “ causes  are  hecessary  This,
j^owever,  is  the  point  at  issue.  Mr.  Joseph  either  merely  assumes  that  causal
relations  are  necessary  or  begs  the  question  by  attempting  to  deduce  the  neces-
sity of  causation  from  the  Law  of  Identity.  Of.  p.  225  above.


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


288

/l^ason  for  the  belief  that  causal  properties  are  internal,  and  although
it  inay  be  the  pase  that  those  who  hold  this  view  do  so  only  because
they  have  failed  to  distinguish  between  the  very  dif  erent  propositions
^hich  we  have  expressed  by  (a)  and  (6),  it  may  nevertheless  be  true
^ that  all  causal  properties  are  internaL  To  say  that  the  causal  rela-
tion is  necessary  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  causal  properties  are
internal.  It  does  not  seem  possible  to  provide  any  evidence  in  favour
of  this  view,  so  that  we  must  conclude  that  it  may  be  the  case  that  the
causal  relation  is  not  a necessary  relation.

l|,^ej0^sal^relati  not  a necessary  relation,^  then  causal  uni-
formities are  equivalent  to  forrnal  implications.^  Thus  (using  ‘ A ’
and  TC”’ to  stand  respectively  for  " a thing  of  the  nature  a ’ and  ‘ a
thing  of  the  nature  x^)  A causes  X is  equivalent  to  Whenever  A,  then  X.
This  might  otherwise  be  expressed  ‘‘  It  is  not  the  case  that  A occurs
and  that  X does  not  occur  Now,  from  f ent  q (where  p,  q,  are  any
two  propositions)  there  follows  p 'k  q,  but  the  converse  does  not  hold.
Similarly,  if  a causal  uniformity  expresses  a necessary  relatfon,  there
follows  from  it  the  matter  of  fact  relation  expressed  by  such  a pro-
position as  ' It  is  not  in  fact  the  case  that  A ever  occurs  and  X does
not  occur  Accordingly  we  might  be  able  to  assert  the  latter  in  spite
of  the  fact  that  we  could  not  assert  the  former.  Hence,  the  latter
relation  is  all  that  is  required  in  order  that  we  should  be  able  to  assert
! causal  uniformities.  But  even  if  this  should  be  the  case  it  does  not
follow  that  causation  is  nothing  but  regular  sequence.  What  is
peculiar  to  the  causal  relation  is  not  any  characteristic  of  necessity
distinguishing  causal  uniformities  from  regular  sequences  but  the
reference  to  determinate  characters,  TOr  properties  of  events  that
‘'^^T^^eT’l^lecmrmirmodes  of  change.

Contemporary  -philosophers  tend  to  reject  the  notion  of
I causation  for  one,  or  both,  of  the  following  reasons.  \)  In  the  first  place
the  traditional  Logicians  have  insisted  that  the  causal  relation  is  a
necessary  relation  and  that  every  event  has  a cause.  Consequently  it
has  been  supposed  that  to  deny  the  necessity  of  the  causal  relation  is
to  reject  the  notion  of  cause,  whilst  to  throw  doubt  upon  the  Law  of
Universal  Causation  is  to  render  the  conception  of  causation  otiose. '
This  we  have  seen  not  to  be  the  case.  T^emight  well  be  causal
mmfqno^i^jexenjfAt.w^^  imfectthexase^that  miJvery  occurrence
w§gan  ins^nce^f  such  gjaniform^  nln  the  second  place  it  has  been
maintained  that  science  makes  no  use  of  the  notion  of  cause  so  that
scieiitific  mejbhpd  i^s  not  concerned  j^ith  the  concept  of  causation)
Those  who  hold  the  view  that  science  makes  no  use  of  the  notion  oi
cause  have  generally  been  more  interested  in  the  physical  than  in  the
biological  and  social  sciences.  Thus  Mr.  EusseU  says  ' in  advanced

^ See  above,  p.  223.  It  will  be  remembered  that  formal  implication  is
general  material  implication,  and  is  of  the  form ; {z),0x*  3 Wx,


CAUSALITY


289


sciences  such  as  gravitational  astronomy,  the  word  cause  ” never
occurs  and  he  adds,  ‘ the  reason  why  physics  has  ceased  to  look  for
f causes  is  that,  in  fact,  theje„aremQ  such  things  It  may  certainly  be  |

admitted  that  ^ in  advanced  sciences  ’ the  notion  of  cause  is  replaced
^ by  the  notion  of  toptioi^  dependence.  '^But  it  is  a mistake  to  sup-
pose that™  apart  feonTHie"^  advanced  sciences  ’ there  is  no  scientific
method.)  On  the  contrary,  the  development  of  science  from  its  earliest
stages  to  its  most  advanced  stages  has  been  continuous.  It  is  the
merest  dogmatism  to  confine  the  sciences  ” to  physics  and  to  argue
that  because  the  physicist  does  not  employ  the  notion  of  cause,  there-
fore science  ” has  no  use  for  it.  The  most  superficial  acquaintance
with  the  earlier  stages  of  a science  is  enough  to  reveal  that  the  notion  ^
of  cause  is  indispensable.  There  is  no  doubt,  for  instance,  that  the
word  “ cause  ” frequently  occurs  in  the  works  of  biologists.  ^ Those
sciences  that  are  concerned  with  the  recurrent  modes  of  behaviour  of
different  hinds  of  things  undoubtedly  use  the  notion  of  cause  in  the
form  of  causal  laws.  The  bio-chemist  carries  out  careful  experiments
with  regard  to  the  action  of  chemicals  upon  Hving  organisms  in  order
to  discover  their  modes  of  behaviour,  that  is,  their  causal  laws.
Thus,  for  instance,  he  uses  such  expressions  as  Nitrites  cause  a fall  in
blood-pressure  and  he  employs  the  notion  of  cause  when  he  infers
that  an  injection  of  amyl-nitrite  will  cause  such  a fall  in  blood-
pressure.  He  is  content  to  leave  to  philosophers  doubts  as  to  the
validity  of  the  concept  of  cause  so  long  as  he  is  able  to  continue  to  use
I it.  Hence,  it  seems  rash  to  conclude  from  an  examination  of  the
I words  used  by  physicists  that  ‘ there  are  no  such  things  ’ as  causes.

No  doubt  the  main  reasons  for  the  attempt  on  the  part  of  philoso-
phers to  reject  the  notion  of  cause  are  to  be  found  in  the  difficulty
of  stating  precisely  what  exactly  the  concept  involves,  and  in  the  close
connexion  between  the  traditional  treatment  of  causation  and  the
general  problem  of  the  validity  of  inductive  inference.  The  sub-
stitution of  the  notion  of  functional  dependence  for  that  of  causal
connexion  does  not,  however,  as  Mr.  Russell  seems  to  suppose,  throw
any  light  upon  the  latter  problem.  It  is  just  as  difficult  to  estabhsh
I a necessary  relation  in  the  case  of  a functional  correlation  as  in  the
I case  of  a causal  connexion.  The  difficulties  created  by  the^  tra-
ditional conception  of  causation  as  necessary  connexion  should  not
prevent  us  from  recognizing  that  there  are  causal  unlfornGiities,  al-
rthough  these  difficulties  should  lead  us  to  reject  the  traditional  analysis
[pf  the  concept  of  causation.  It  is  important  not  to  confuse  two  quite
different  questions,  namely : (1)  Do  scientists  employ  the  notion  of

^ Mysticism  and  Logic,  p.  180.

2 We  have  seen  that  the  physicist  also  employs  the  notion  of  cause,  although
no  doubt  its  analysis  would  be  different  in  the  case  of  the  physical  sciences  from
its  analysis  in  the  biological  sciences.


290


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


cause  ? (2)  Is  inductive  inference,  with  or  without  the  concept  of
causation,  valid  ? The  diBdculty  of  justifying  an  affirmative  answer
to  the  second  question  has  led  some  philosophers,  notably  Mr.
Eussell,  to  answer  the  first  question  in  the  negative.  It  provides  no
reason,  however,  for  rejecting  the  notion  of  cause,  and  meanwhile
scientists  continue  to  investigate  causes.  Hume,  whose  criticism  of
the  conception  of  necessary  connexion  is  the  most  penetrating  that
has  been  offered,  raised  the  general  question  of  the  validity  of  inductive
inference.  The  discussion  of  this  problem  must  be  postponed  to
Chapter  XXI,


CHAPTEE  XVI
HYPOTHESIS

* The  growth  of  a science  is  not  primarily  in  bulk  but  in  ideas.’ — A,  N,
Whitehead.

§ 1.  THE  CHOICE  OF  AH  OKDER

SCIENTIFIC  method  is  the  means  by  which  we  seek  to  answer
questions  about  the  order  of  nature.  The  questions  that  we
ask  are  determined  by  our  interests  and  are  conditioned  by
the  knowledge  we  already  possess.  Upon  these  two  factors  depends
also  the  hind  of  answer  that  we  shall  &id  satisfactory.  The  thinker
formulates  his  question  from  a given  point  of  view  determined  by
the  context  of  his  own  experience.  This  context  of  experience
includes  those  beliefs  that  are  widely  and  firmly  held  by  his  con-
temporaries. Not  all  these  beliefs  are  conscious  ; still  less  are  they
capable  of  explicit  formulation.  Such  beliefs  cannot  be  questioned.
There  are  other  assumptions,  more  or  less  explicit,  that  at  a given
period  of  thought  no  one  thinks  of  questioning.  These  assumptions
and  the  explicit  beliefs  that  follow  from  them  help  to  determine
the  attitude  of  the  thinker.  Within  the  context  thus  provided  only
certain  questions  will  be  asked,  only  certain  kinds  of  answer  will
appear  acceptable.  Thus  the  thinker  is  enveloped  in  what  Pro-
fessor Whitehead  has  aptly  named  ^a  climate  of  opinion  ’.  This
phrase,  as  used  by  Whitehead,  refers  to  the  total  outlook  of  educated
men,  which  is  conditioned  by  other  than  purely  scientific  factors.
There  is  also,  to  continue  the  metaphor,  ‘ local  weather  ’ for  every
thinker.  Certain  habits  of  thought,  certain  personal  preferences,
certain  emotional  attitudes,  combined  with  what  he  actually  knows,
determine  him  both  to  ask  ‘ Why  does  tfiis  happen  so  ? ^ and  to
accept  the  answer  ^ Because  of  such  and  such  Since  science  is  an
attempt  to  discover  the  order  of  natural  occurrences  or  to  impute
an  order  of  which  they  are  susceptible,  any  system  that  succeeds
in  ordering  the  facts  may  seem  acceptable.  Its  acceptability  will
depend  upon  the  climate  of  opinion.  The  type  of  order  that  we  now
regard  as  scientific  was  not  always  the  acceptable  type.  It  is  a
commonplace  that  the  Middle  Ages  almost  entirely  lacked  scientific
modes  of  thinking.  But  the  medieval  thinker  had  his  own  way
of  ordering  his  universe.  His  type  of  order  was  purposive.  He

291


292


A MODEEH  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


conceived  natural  occurrences  as  taking  place  in  accordance  with
the  decrees  of  God.  Thus  ever3rthing  that  happened  was  in  essential
relation  to  the  divinely  ordained  destiny  of  man.  Nature  thus
regarded  was  both  orderly  and  intelligible.  It  was  ordered  to  secure
an  end ; it  was  intelligible  in  terms  of  purpose.  From  this  point
of  view  the  correct  question  is  Why  ? ” ; the  correct  answer  is
“ Because  the  result  is  valuable  ”,  The  appeal  to  value  S final ; it
marks  the  termination  of  purpose.

At  the  beginning  of  the  scientific  period  stress  is  laid  upon  the
difference  between  Why  ? and  How  ? It  is  insisted  that  the  latter
is  the  only  proper  question  to  ask  about  events  in  nature.  This
is  the  scientific  attitude,  but  it  is  of  comparatively  recent  develop-
ment. The  question  Why  i.e.  For  what  purpose  ? ’’  is  the
proper  question  to  ask  when  we  are  concerned  with  personal  agency,
divine  or  human,  and  with  the  operation  of  motives.  For  example,
a politician  puts  forward  an  election  programme.  He  proposes  a
reduction  in  the  income  tax,  or  a return  to  the  penny  post.  We
want  to  know  why  he  does  so,  what  object  he  hopes  to  secure.  Is
it  to  catch  votes,  or  is  it  a measure  dictated  by  economic  policy  ?
Our  question  is  based  upon  the  assumption  that  men  act  in  certain
ways  to  bring  about  a result  they  deem  valuable.  The  answer  in
terms  of  value,  ultimate  or  instrumental,  satisfies  us.  But  when
we  ask  How  ? ’’  there  is  no  reference  to  purpose  ; hence,  value  is
irrelevant.  It  might  be  supposed  that  these  two  questions  are  so
different  that  they  would  never  be  confused,  that  the  one  would
be  confined  to  actions,  the  other  to  the  happening  of  natural  occur-
rences. But  it  is  not  always  easy  to  keep  these  questions  distinct,
confining  each  to  its  proper  sphere.  As  we  saw  in  considering  the
activity  view  of  causation  there  is  a tendency  deeply  rooted  in
human  thinking  to  interpret  natural  occurrences  in  terms  of  man’s
own  experience,  to  endow  nature  with  purpose,  and  thus,  finally,
to  attribute  all  that  happens  to  the  purposes  of  the  Creator,  God.
The  most  primitive  form  in  which  this  tendency  is  revealed  is  in
the  behef  in  animism.  This  belief  is  described  by  W.  H.  Hudson
as  ‘ that  sense  of  something  in  nature  which  to  the  enhghtened  or
civilized  man  is  not  there,  and  in  the  civilized  man’s  child,  if  it  be
admitted  that  he  has  it  at  all,  is  but  a faint  survival  of  a phase
of  the  primitive  mind.  And  by  animism  I do  not  mean  the  theory
of  a soul  in  nature,  but  the  tendency,  or  impulse  or  instinct,  in
which  all  mjiih  originates,  to  animate  all  things ; the  projection  of
ourselves  into  nature;  the  sense  and  apprehension  of  an  intelli-
gence like  our  own  but  more  powerful  in  all  visible  things  Some-
thing of  this  attitude  is  present  whenever  we  assimilate  natural
occurrences  to  human  experience.  It  lingers  in  the  anthropomorphic
^ Far  Away  and  Long  Ago^  pp,  224-'5*


HYPOTHESIS


293


tendency  of  science  ; it  is  present  to  some  extent  in  the  medieval
conception  of  nature  as  acting  in  accordance  with  laws  that  God
had  made.  To  it  is  due  also  the  expression  law  ” for  natural
uniformities.

An  interpretation  based  upon  purpose  is  called  teleological.  The
appeal  to  value  need  not,  however,  take  this  explicit  form.  Greek
thinkers  also  interpreted  nature  in  accordance  with  their  conception
of  value.  Their  criterion  was  not  moral  purpose  but  beauty  ; their
interpretation  was  determined  by  their  aesthetic  ideal  of  elegance,
perfection  and  simplicity.  This  aesthetic  element  is  present  also
in  the  familiar  dicta  of  the  Middle  Ages : ''  Nature  does  nothing
in  vain  ” ; Nature  works  by  the  simplest  methods  ” ; Nature
seeks  the  shortest  paths  No  doubt,  we  flatter  ourselves,  we  have
freed  our  scientific  thinking  from  the  appeal  to  value.  Certainly
our  ideal  is  no  longer  conditioned  by  the  reference  to  purpose  ; nor
do  we  make  any  explicit  assumption  of  value.  It  is  for  this  reason
that  the  present  age  is  an  age  of  science  ; its  greatest  achievements
are  in  science ; its  greatest  men  are  scientists.  Nevertheless,  the^
decision  between  conflicting  scientific  theories  is  still  detennined..hv.
aesthetic  considerations.  The  choice  is  always  between  different
Mnds  oi  order.  TEYTmedieval  order,  which  placed  man  at  the
centre  of  the  universe  whose  culmination  is  God,  is  replaced  by
an  order  the  controlling  principle  of  which  is  simplicity.  Our  belief
in  the  principle  of  simplicity  is  no  doubt  partly  due  to  the  fact  that
unless  natural  laws  are  ultimately  simple,  there  is  not  much  likeli-
hood of  our  discovering  them.  The  evidence  upon  which  this  belief
is  based  will  be  considered  in  a later  chapter.  Here  it  must  be
sufficient  to  point  out  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  simplicity.  There
is  first  simplicity  in  the  formulation  of  the  law  itself ; there  is  secondly
simplicity  in  the  kind  of  elements,  or  entities  with  which  the  formula-
tion is  concerned.  Newton’s  law  of  the  inverse  square  is  simple  in
both  respects.  Medieval  order  possessed  only  the  first  kind  of
simplicity.  But  even  this  simplicity  was  in  the  end  reduced  to  the
inscrutable  purposes  of  God.  The  Greek  and  modern  ideal  is  the
simplicity  of  mathematical  laws.

§2.  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HYPOTHESIS

The  mode  in  which  a scientific  hypothesis  develops,  and  in  its
development  is  gradually  freed  from  anthropomorphic  elements,  can
be  most  easily  illustrated  from  the  science  of  astronomy.  We  shall,
therefore,  consider  at  some  length  the  development  of  the  Ptolemaic
and  Copernican  hypotheses.

The  problem  is  to  account  for  the  observed  movements  of  the
heavenly  bodies,  and  in  particular  of  those  wandering  stars  ”,  the


294


A MODEKN  INTEODUCTION  TO.  LOGIC


planets.  It  was  assumed  that  these  movements  were  ordered  in
spite  of  their  apparent  irregularity.  To-day  every  schoolchild
knows  ’’  that  the  earth  is  a planet  that  goes  round  the  sun ; that
our  solar  system  is  but  one  among  many  such  systems ; that  the
fixed  stars  ’’  are  not  “ really  ” fcsed.  But  his  knowledge  is  not
based  upon  what  he  observes ; it  is  the  acceptance  of  something
established  by  science.  As  such  it  has  become  a factor  in  the
context  of  his  experience ; it  is  part  of  his  ‘ climate  of  opinion  ^
This  being  so,  it  is  important  to  consider  what  exactly  are
the  data  the  ordering  of  which  constitutes  a problem  for  the
astronomer.

The  primary  datum  is  the  observed  sky.  The  sky  cannot  be
touched ; it  can  only  be  seen.  Thus  the  datum  is  wholly  visual.
Let  us  suppose  that  the  sky  is  being  continuously  watched  by  an
intelligent  man  who  knows  nothing  whatever  about  astronomical
theories,  ancient  or  modern.  At  night  he  will  see  a blue  dome
speckled  with  shining  spots.  These  he  calls  stars.  Most  of  these
spots  will  remain  in  a fixed  position,  but  others  will  noticeably
change  their  position  relative  to  the  rest  and  to  the  observer’s  point
of  view.  These  he  calls  planets.  On  some  nights  he  will  see  a
round  silvery  disk  with  shadowed  markings.  This  he  calls  the
moon.  As  he  watches,  the  moon  moves  across  the  sky  from  east
to  west.  On  successive  nights  its  shape  changes ; it  wanes  to  a
slender  crescent ; the  time  of  its  appearance  becomes  later.  Then,
no  moon  appears.  After  the  lapse  of  a few  nights  it  appears  again,
a slender  crescent  low  down  in  the  sky.  Sometimes  a coppery  shadow
falls  across  the  moon,  blotting  out  the  light.  This  he  calls  an  eclipse
of  the  moon.  In  the  daytime  he  observes  a shining  yellow  disk,
which  he  calls  the  sun.  This  also  moves  across  the  sky  from  east
to  west.  Unlike  the  moon,  the  sun’s  shape  does  not  vary,  it  rises,
a circular  disk,  above  the  horizon  every  day.  But  its  size  and
colour  vary.  The  movements  of  the  moon  and  the  sun  are  periodic ;
they  follow  a regular  order.  Sometimes,  however,  the  hght  of  the
sun  is  eclipsed,  to  a greater  or  less  extent.  These  eclipses  occur  at
different  periods  of  the  day.  It  would  not  be  long  before  our  observer
would  have  formed  definite  expectations  as  to  the  appearance  of
the  sun  and  moon.  But  the  planets  would  present  a more  puzzling
problem.  Their  movements  across  the  sky,  relatively  to  the  fixed
stars,  are  irregular.  Continued  observation  would  reveal  a backward
movement  at  some  periods  of  the  year.

These,  then,  are  the  facts  that  have  to  be  ordered : the  move-
ments of  the  sun,  of  the  moon,  and  of  the  planets ; eclipses  of  the
sun  and  of  the  moon ; the  changing  shape  of  the  moon.  Our  hypo-
thetical observer  would  be  in  possession  of  these  data  only  if  he
kept  records  of  these  movements  over  a period  of  many  years.


HYPOTHESIS


295


Sucli  records  have  been  kept  from  very  early  historical  times.  The
Chaldeans  and  Babylonians,  placed  in  exceptionally  favourable
conditions  for  observing  the  sky,  accimmlated  records  of  the  periods
of  the  sun,  moon  and  planets.  They  recorded  eclipses  and  were
able  to  predict  lunar  eclipses.  Thus  they  laid  the  foundations  of
the  science  of  astronomy.

Any  attempt  to  account  for  the  various  positions  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  that  is,  to  order  the  data  of  astronomy,  presupposes  that
the  observer  does  not  believe  that  the  sun,  moon,  stars  and  planets
just  happen  to  be  where  he  sees  them.  There  is  so  much  regularity
in  their  movements  that  he  seeks  for  an  explanation  in  some  kind
of  order.  It  is  not  possible  here  to  trace  the  various  attempts  that
have  been  made  to  explain  these  facts.^  Our  purpose  is  the  limited
one  of  illustrating  by  means  of  a definite  example  the  way  in  which
hypotheses  may  be  developed  into  a comprehensive  theory  such  as
the  Copernican.  It  is  worth  while,  however,  to  notice  a more
primitive  type  of  explanation,  which  originated  in  a climate  of
opinion  very  difierent  from  our  own.  The  ancient  Egyptians,
starting  from  the  assumption  that  the  universe  is  like  a large  box
of  which  the  earth  forms  the  bottom  and  the  sky  the  top,  supposed
the  stars  to  be  lamps  either  carried  by  gods  or  suspended  by  cords
froni  the  top  of  the  box.  The  sun  was  supposed  to  be  a god,  E§-,
carried  daily  in  a boat  along  a river  of  which  the  Nile  was  a branch.
He  was  born  every  morning,  grew  in  strength  until  noon  when  he
changed  into  another  boat.  Finally  he  was  carried  in  another  boat
during  the  night  back  to  the  east.  The  eclipse  of  the  sun  was
accounted  for  by  the  supposition  that  a huge  serpent  sometimes
attacked  the  boat.  A similar  supposition  accounted  for  lunar
eclipses  and  the  phases  of  the  moon.  The  following  account  is  given
by  Dreyer  : ‘ Like  the  sun,  the  moon  has  its  enemies  ; a sow  attacks
it  on  the  15th  day  of  each  month,  and  after  a fortnight’s  agony  and
increasing  pallor  the  moon  dies  and  is  born  again.  Sometimes  the
sow  manages  to  swallow  it  altogether  for  a short  time,  causing  a
lunar  eclipse.’  Although  these  suppositions  do  not  involve  flagrant
contradiction  of  the  facts  upon  which  they  are  based,  and  although
they  are  the  outcome  of  a desire  to  explain  these  facts,  nevertheless
this  Egyptian  theory  is  rightly  ranked  as  mythological.  It  is  in
no  sense  scientific.  Its  failure  to  be  scientific  is  not  due  to  the
fact  that  it  rested  upon  unproved  assumptions.  Every  scientific
theory  rests  ultimately  upon  such  assumptions.  It  fails  because

^ See  J.  L.  E.  Dreyer,  History  of  the  Planetary  Systems,  for  a Ml  account  of
early  systems  of  astronomy.  The  various  quotations  in  this  section  are  taken
from  Dreyer,  from  whom  I have  also  mainly  derived  my  account  of  the  Ptole-
maic system.  Reference  might  also  be  made  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  Pioneers
of  Science ; W.  M.  Smart,  The  Sun,  the  Stars  and  the  Universe,


296


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


these  assumptions  were  of  such  a kmd  that  there  could  be  no  further
evidence  in  support  of  them.  They  were  essentially  unverifiable.
They  were  not  susceptible  of  development ; they  did  not  suggest
the  deduction  of  ohservaUe  data.  Further,  the  supposition  that  the
moon  was  periodically  swallowed  by  a sow  is  not  in  conformity  with
what  was  known  about  the  behaviour  of  sows.  The  continual
rebicth  of  the  god  Ra  was  a supposition  not  based  upon  known
analogies  with  living  bodies  on  the  earth.  The  Egyptian  theory,
therefore,  could  neither  be  developed  nor  tested.  But  a theory  is
scientific  only  if  it  admits  of  testing  and  development.  The  Egyptian
climate  of  opinion  was  not  favourable  to  the  production  of  scientific
theories.

The  theory  associated  with  Ptolemy  is  thoroughly  scientific.^
It  was  based  upon  observations  that  were  both  careful  and  extensive  ;
it  was  stated  in  the  precise  language  of  mathematics  ; finally,  it  rested
upon  explicit  assumptions.  There  were  three  assumptions  : (1)  that
the  earth  is  an  immovable  sphere  at  the  centre  of  the  universe ;
(2)  that  the  heavens  revolve  round  the  earth  and  contain  the  sun,
the  moon  and  the  planets,  whilst  beyond  these  is  the  fixed  sphere
containing  the  stars ; (3)  that  the  revolutions  are  circular.  Ptolemy’s
problem  was  to  work  out  in  detail  the  paths  followed  by  sun,  moon
and  planets.  Ptolemy’s  third  assumption  was  derived  from  Aristotle
and  his  followers.  The  circle  was  regarded  as  the  perfect  figure.
Consequently,  it  was  assumed  that  the  heavenly  bodies  must  move
in  circles,  since  their  motion  must  be  perfect.  We  see  here  how
the  reference  to  notions  of  value  seemed  to  afiord  a satisfactory
answer  to  the  question  why  the  heavenly  bodies  move  as  they  seem
to  move.  From  Aristotle  also  Ptolemy  derived  his  belief  that  the
earth  is  immovable.  ^ These  are  the  assumptions  that  rendered
necessary  the  elaborate  hypothesis  known  as  the  Ptolemaic  system.
It  was  not  diflEicult  to  account  for  the  position  of  the  stars  on  the
assumption  that  the  earth  is  the  centre  of  the  revolving  system,
since  the  stars  were  observed  to  be  uniform.  But  the  movements
of  the  planets  did  not  conform  to  the  circular  theory.  Ptolemy
explained  these  movements  as  resulting  from  the  combination  of
two  motions.  Each  planet  revolves  round  a circle  whose  centre
was  on  the  circumference  of  an  imaginary  circle  round  the  earth
as  centre.  This  imaginary  circle  was  called  the  deferent  ” ; the
smaller  circle  is  known  as  an  epicycle.  Hence,  the  path  of  a planet
as  viewed  from  the  earth  as  a fixed  centre  can  be  accounted  for

^ Ptolemy  lived  in  the  second  century  a.d.  The  system,  called  by  his  name
was  developed  bnt  not  originated  by  him,

2 Ptolemy  supported  this  assumption  by  the  argument  that  if  the  earth
moved  its  motion  would  be  proportionate  to  its  great  mass,  so  that  animals  and
ohjeots  thrown  into  the  air  would  be  left  behindL  But  this  does  not  happen.


HYPOTHESIS


297


by  tbe  combination  of  the  two  motions — circle  revolving  round  a
circle.  This  hypothesis  accounts  for  the  backward  movement  of  the
planet  at  some  stages  of  its  revolution.  The  following  simplified
diagram  shows  the  planetary  motion.

Owing  to  the  number  of  the  planets,  to  their  varying  distances
from  the  earth  and  their  varying  rates  of  movement,  Ptolemy  found
it  necessary  to  introduce  a great  number  of  epicycles  revolving  round
epicycles.  In  developing  the  mathematical  consequences  of  his
system  Ptolemy  proved  himself  to  be  a great  mathematician.  He
succeeded  in  accounting  for  the  observed  movements.  It  is  probable
that  he  did  not  think  of  his  system  as  a physical  fact.  He  says  : I
do  not  profess  to  be  able  to  account  for  aU  the  motions  at  the  same
time ; but  I shall  show  that  each  by  itself  is  well  explained  by  its
proper  hypothesis  In  beginning  the  theory  of  a particular  part
of  the  planet’s  motion  he  says  : ' Let  us  imagine  a circle  Ptolemy


E represents  the  Earth.  The  larger  circle  is  the  deferent.  The  planet  moves
round  the  epicycle  the  centre  of  which,  c,  moves  round  the  deferent.  Hence  the
planet  traces  out  the  path  marked  by  the  darker  curve.


was  thus  able  to  work  out  a satisfactory  theory,  whose  only  defect
was  its  complexity.  It  is  obvious  that  this  theory  is  scientific.
That  it  has  now  been  discarded  as  practically  useless  does  not  mean
that  it  was  not  a properly  scientific  theory.  It  is  scientific  because
(1)  it  ordered  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies  in  a regular
manner ; (2)  it  did  not  assume  the  existence  of  an3d3hing  that  could
not  be  observed ; (3)  it  did  not  require  the  aid  of  any  mysterious
and  unintelligible  activity;  (4)  all  the  various  movements  were
accounted  for  by  one  type  of  hypothesis.  Finally,  it  may  be  observed
that  Ptolemy  was  clearly  aware  as  to  what  assumptions  he  was
making;  his  theory  of  planetary  motion  was  put  forward  as  an
hypothesis  capable  of  ordering  the  observable  data.  It  was  super-
seded only  when  a theory  equally  scientific  but  mathematically


^Dreyet,  p.  201*


298


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


simpler  presented  as  capable  of  accounting  for  the  observed
facts.  Sucb  a theory  was  formulated  by  Copernicus.^

It  is  not  known  for  certain  what  exactly  led  Copernicus  to
suggest  that  the  earth  and  the  planets  go  round  the  sun.  He  was
a careful  observer  and  was  learned  in  the  astronomical  systems  of
the  past.  He  observed  a marked  difference  in  the  brightness  of
the  planet  Mars  when  rising  in  the  morning  and  when  rising  in  the
evening.  This  difference  suggested  a greater  distance  at  some
periods  than  could  be  allowed  on  the  epicycle  system.  But  this
fact  was  not  suf&cient  to  suggest  that  the  earth  revolved  round  the
sun.  It  is  more  likely  that  Copernicus  was  led  to  formulate  his
hypothesis  by  finding  that  different  astronomers  had  different
epicyclic  theories.  His  study  of  Greek  philosophers  revealed  to
him  that  others  had  supposed  the  earth  to  be  in  motion.  He  says  :
‘ Occasioned  by  this  I also  began  to  think  of  a motion  of  the  earth,
and  although  the  idea  seemed  absurd,  still,  as  others  before  me
had  been  permitted  to  assume  certain  circles  in  order  to  explain  the
motions  of  the  stars,  I believed  it  would  readily  be  permitted  me  to
try  whether  on  the  assumption  of  some  motion  of  the  earth  better
explanations  of  the  revolutions  of  the  heavenly  spheres  might  not  be
foxmd.  And  thus  I have,  assuming  the  motions  which  I in  the
following  work  attribute  to  the  earth,  after  long  and  careful  in-
vestigation, finally  found  that  when  the  motions  of  the  other  planets
are  referred  to  the  circulation  of  the  earth  and  are  computed  for
the  revolution  of  each  star,  not  only  do  the  phenomena  necessarily
follow  thereupon,  but  the  order  and  magnitude  of  the  stars  and  all
their  orbs  and  the  heaven  itself  are  so  connected  that  in  no  part
can  anything  be  transposed  without  confusion  to  the  rest  and  to
the  whole  universe.’  ^ Thus  Copernicus  rejected  the  first  assump-
tion of  Ptolemy,  viz.  that  the  earth  is  the  immovable  centre  of  the
universe.  Upon  the  assumption  that  the  earth  is  a planet  and
with  the  other  planets  revolves  round  the  sun,  a mathematically
simpler  description  of  the  planetary  movement  was  discovered.  It
is  to  be  noted  that  Copernicus  did  not  reject  the  assumption  that
the  motions  were  circular.  Hence,  he  still  required  the  assumption
of  epicycles ; but  he  was  able  greatly  to  reduce  their  number.  Fur-
ther, his  hypothesis  admitted  of  more  fruitful  development  than
had  been  the  case  with  Ptolemy’s,  since  the  complicated  system  of
epicycles  could  only  account  for  irregularities,  that  had  actually
been  observed.  Further,  Copernicus’  hypothesis  accounted  for

^ Copeniicus  lived  from  1473  to  1543.  His  statement  of  the  theory  was  not
published  until  his  death ; it  is  contained  in  a book  called  De  Bevolutionibus
Orbmm  Oaelestmm*  What  is  now  called  the  “ Copemican  system  ” was  not
completed  until  after  the  work  done  by  Kepler  and  Newton.

“Dreyer,  op,  cit.,  p,  311,


HYPOTHESIS


299


tlie  relation  between  tbe  sun  and  the  movements  of  the  other  planets
which,  on  the  Ptolemaic  hypothesis,  remained  unconnected  facts.
It  was  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  Copernican  system,  due  to  its
comparative  simplicity,  that  made  it  more  acceptable  than  the
Ptolemaic  system.^

It  is  important  to  reahze  that  both  these  theories  were  strictly
scientific,  so  that  the  decision  between  them  had  to  be  made  on
strictly  scientific  grounds.  It  would  not  have  been  impossible  to
continue  to  account  for  the  observed  facts  in  accordance  with
Ptolemy’s  hypothesis,  provided  that  new  epicycles  were  introduced
for  each  newly  observed  celestial  phenomenon.  Moreover,  the
testimony  of  the  senses  is  opposed  to  the  Copernican  hypothesis.
We  do  in  point  of  fact  see  the  planets  changing  their  position ; we
do  actually  observe  the  moon  rising  in  the  heavens.  We  do  not
perceive  the  motion  of  the  earth.  It  is  indeed  difiS-cult  to  imagine
that  the  earth  is  moving  with  considerable  speed ; it  seems  a massive,
immovable  thing.  Mfor  could  Copernicus  account  for  everything
that  followed  from  the  motion  of  the  earth.  2 Thus,  there  were
certain  objections  that  might  well  have  been  urged  by  scientifically
minded  men  against  this  heliocentric  theory.  It  is  a mistake  to
suppose,  for  instance,  that  the  opposition  of  the  Eoman  Church  to
the  Copernican  theory  had  nothing  in  its  favour  from  the  point  of
view  of  observable  fact.  Thus  we  are  led  to  ask  why  the  Copernican
hypothesis  displaced  Ptolemy’s  epicyclic  system.  The  answer  is  to
be  found  in  the  greater  mathematical  simplicity  of  the  heliocentric
system,  and  in  the  greater  possibility  of  its  fruitful  development.
It  is  not  to  be  found  in  its  conformity  with  the  testimony  of  the
senses.  Thus  Galileo,  speaking  of  tMs  system  says,  ‘ I cannot
sufl&ciently  admire  the  eminence  of  those  men’s  wits,  that  have
received  and  held  it  to  be  true,  and  with  the  sprighthness  of  their
judgements  offered  such  violence  to  their  own  senses,  as  that  they
have  been  able  to  prefer  that  which  their  reason  dictated  to  them,
to  that  which  sensible  experiments  represented  most  manifestly  to
the  contrary.  ...  I cannot  find  any  bounds  for  my  admiration,
how  that  reason  was  able  in  Aristarchus  and  Copernicus,  to  commit
such  a rape  on  their  senses,  as  in  despite  thereof  to  make  herself

^ Thus  tke  Copernican  Iiypotliesis  accounted  for  the  fact  that  the  completion
of  certain  planetary  epicycles  coincides  with  the  period  of  the  sun’s  apparent
revolution  round  the  earth.  On  the  Ptolemaic  hypothesis  these  two  facts  are
disconnected.

2 For  example,  he  could  account  for  the  fixity  of  the  “ fiixed  ” stars  only  on
the  assumption  that  they  were  at  a distance  from  the  earth  that  must  then
have  seemed  incredible.  This  difficulty  was  not  removed  until  1838,  when
Bessel  discovered^  the  annual  parallax.  Nor  was  Copernicus  able  to  account
for  the  fact  that  a body  projected  vertically  in  the  air  does  not  fall  to  the  west
of  its  starting-point,  as  would  appear  to  be  the  case  if  the  earth  revolves.


300


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


mistress  of  their  credulity Nevertheless,  Galileo  did  not  doubt
that  this  rape  of  reason  upon  the  senses  would  be  ultimately  justifiable
in  terms  of  sensible  experience.  Mathematical  theory  might  outrun
the  available  experiential  confirmation  but  in  the  end  we  must
‘ come  to  the  particular  demonstrations,  observations  and  experi-
ments He  was  himself  so  firmly  convinced  that  ^ mathematics
is  the  language  in  which  the  Book  of  Nature  is  written  that  he
did  not  feel  the  need  of  experiments  to  verify  his  mathematical  deduc-
tions. But  where  it  is  not  a question  of  mathematical  deduction,
appeal  must  be  made  to  sensible  fact.  For  example,  the  contem-
poraries of  Galileo  argued  that  the  moon’s  surface  must  be  uni-
formly bright  and  even,  and  that  none  of  the  planets  had  satellites.
By  means  of  his  telescope  Galileo  was  able  to  refute  both  these
assertions.  We  saw  in  Chapter  XIV  how  Sizzi  tried  to  argue  against
Galileo’s  discovery.  When  one  of  his  opponents  refused  to  look
through  the  telescope  to  test  the  truth  of  Galileo’s  statement,  he
wrote  to  Kepler :

‘ Oh,  my  dear  Kepler,  how  I wish  that  we  could  have  one  hearty  laugh
together ! Here,  at  Padua,  is  the  principal  professor  of  philosophy  whom
I have  repeatedly  and  urgently  requested  to  look  at  the  moon  and  planets
through  my  glass,  which  he  pertinaciously  refuses  to  do.  Why  are  you  not
here  ? What  shouts  of  laughter  we  should  have  at  this  glorious  folly !
And  to  hear  the  professor  of  philosophy  at  Pisa,  labouring  before  the  grand
duke  with  logical  arguments,  as  if  with  magical  incantations,  to  charm
the  new  planets  out  of  the  sky.’  ®

The  grand  duke’s  logical  arguments  ” were  derived  from  the
writings  of  Aristotle  so  far  as  the  philosophers  of  the  seventeenth
century  were  able  to  understand  them.  But  Galileo  believed  that
Aristotle  would  have  agreed  with  him  had  he  been  able  to  look
through  a telescope.  He  saw  that  Aristotle’s  method  was  essenti-
ally empirical.  I do  believe  for  certain  Galileo  wrote,  ' that  he
[Aristotle]  first  procured,  by  the  help  of  the  senses,  such  experiments
and  observations  as  he  could,  to  assure  him  as  much  as  was  possible
of  the  conclusion,  and  that  he  afterwards  sought  out  the  means
how  to  demonstrate  it ; for  this  is  the  usual  course  in  demonstrative
sciences  The  senses  provide  the  data  of  our  problems  and  to
them  also  we  must  look  for  the  final  test  of  our  theories.  But  the

'^Dialogues  concerning  Two  Great  Systems  of  the  World  (London,  1661),
p.  301  1632).

® ihiL,  p.  31.  Cf.  also  p.  96 : ‘ Our  disputes  are  about  the  sensible  world,
and  not  one  of  paper  ’ ; also.  Two  New  Sciences,  p.  4 : ' Please  observe,  gentle-
men, how  facts  which  at  first  seem  improbable  will,  even  on  scant  explanation,
drop  the  cloak  which  has  hidden  them  and  stand  forth  in  naked  and  simple
beauty.’

Quoted  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  Pioneers  of  Science,  p.  106.

^Two  Great  Systems,  p.  37.


HYPOTHESIS


301


senses  do  not  suffice  to  order  the  data  they  provide.  Hence,  the
mathematical  theory  must  first  be  thought  out,  then  tested  experi-
mentally. The  mathematical  statement  must  be  exact.  For  ex-
ample, it  is  not  enough  to  know  that  bodies  faU  with  an  accelerated
motion ; the  mathematical  relations  must  be  precisely  determined.
Thus  Galileo  says : ' Neither  does  this  suffice,  but  it  is  requisite  to
know  according  to  what  proportion  such  acceleration  is  made ; a
problem  that  I believe  was  never  hitherto  understood  by  any  philoso-
pher or  mathematician,  although  philosophers,  and  particularly  the
Peripatetics  [i.e.  the  Aristotelians],  have  writ  great  and  entire
volumes  touching  motion

It  is  because  Galileo  combined  mathematical  theory  with  experi-
mental con&mation  that  we  can  trace  to  him  the  beginning  of  modern
science.  He  was  a supreme  experimental  genius,  but  his  experi-
ments were  controlled  and  directed  by  exact  mathematical  deduc-
tion. ^ For  this  reason  he  has  been  the  main  influence  in  determining
the  present  scientific  climate  of  opinion.

A

§ 3.  EXPERIMENTAL  TESTING  OF  HYPOTHESIS

It  is  not  difficult  to  devise  ingenious  and  complicated  hypotheses
as  to  how  things  might  have  happened  so  long  as  we  are  not  con-
cerned carefully  to  observe  what  has  actually  happened.  The  ancient
Egyptian  explanation  of  lunar  eclipses  was  ingenious  but,  as  we  saw,
it  did  not  take  sufficient  account  of  observed  modes  of  behaviour.
The  explanation  of  the  eclipse  in  terms  of  the  relative  positions  of
the  earth,  moon,  and  sun  not  only  fitted  better  into  the  observed
facts,  it  did  not  require  the  assumption  of  hj^otheses  that  could
not  be  tested  by  appeal  to  observable  experience.  Scientific  method
differs  from  all  other  modes  of  thinking  by  reason  of  this  ultimate
appeal  to  observable  experience.  Common-sense  thinking  relies
mainly  upon  simple  and  uncritical  observation  combined  with  vague
and  uncriticized  beliefs.  Mathematics  is  wholly  deductive,  its  funda-
mental principles  are  neither  based  upon  experience  nor  necessarily
in  conformity  with  it.  Historical  writing  in  so  far  as  it  consists
in  the  imaginative  reconstruction  of  past  events  is  almost  entirely
independent  of  experimental  confirmation.  A scientific  theory,
however,  is  at  every  stage  controlled  and  tested  by  appeal  to  what
happens,  that  is,  by  appeal  to  what  could  be  observed.  But  the
appeal  is  never  to  random  observation  ; it  is  to  directed  observation.
Nothing  is  easier  than  to  mis-observe ; to  suppose  that  one  has
observed  what  is  not  there  to  be  observed,  or  to  fail  to  observe
what  could  have  been  observed.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  bare
observation.  A scientific  ^fact’  is  already  an  interpreted  datum,
often  a generalization.  Hence,  the  scientist  finds  it  necessary  to
1 ibid.,  p.  144.  ® Of,  below.  Chap.  XVIH.


m


A MODERN  INTEODTJOTION  TO  LOGIC


elaborate  his  observations,  to  check  one  observation  by  another
and  his  own  observations  by  other  people’s.  He  checks  his  observa-
tions in  order  to  eliminate  what  has  been  called  the  personal  factor.
In  other  words,  the  scientist  must  experiment  A scientific  theory
that  is  incapable  of  experimental  testing  is  valueless.  Experiment
is  deliberate  observation  in  the  light  of  a definite  expectation  as
to  what  will  he  observed.  In  this  sense,  all  observation  of  facts  that
have  been  deduced  from  a given  hypothesis  is  experimenting.  The
householder  who,  having  formulated  the  hypothesis  that  he  has
been  robbed,  proceeds  to  look  about  him  in  order  to  discover  whether,
for  example,  his  valuable  silver  has  gone,  is  experimentally  testing
the  validity  of  his  hypothesis.  He  expects  a certain  result  and  he
looks  to  see  whether  this  result  has  taken  place.  Sometimes,  how-
ever, the  fact  ” that  the  scientist  wants  to  observe  will  not  present
itself  unless  he  mahes  it  happen.  Then  he  dehberately  arranges  the
conditions  in  which  it  wiU  happen,  if  his  expectations  are  not  mis-
taken. It  has  become  usual  to  confine  the  word  “ experiment  ” to
such  deliberate  observation  under  conditions  deliberately  arranged
by  the  observer.  This  restriction  is  the  natural  result  of  the  in-
creasing complexity  and  subtlety  of  scientific  theories  and  the
increased  skill  in  the  devising  and  manipulation  of  scientific  apparatus.
But  from  the  logical  point  of  view  we  must  recognize  that  there  is
experiment  wherever  there  is  deliberate  observation  of  expected
results.  We  are  apt  to  oppose  the  experimental  to  the  non-experi-
mental  sciences.  There  are,  indeed,  good  reasons  for  this  opposition.
But  the  point  that  is  of  importance  is  that  experiment  enables  us
to  obtain  the  expected  result.  It  affords  a means  of  unravelling
the  complexity  of  nature.

Whereas  we  oppose  the  experimental  to  the  non-experimental
sciences,  a medieval  scientist  opposed  experiment,  i.e.  experience
to  reasoning.  Thus  Roger  Bacon  in  the  thirteenth  century  ^ urged
the  necessity  of  ‘ experimental  science  ’,  by  which  he  meant  ‘ know-
ledge based  on  experience’.  In  his  Magnum  Opus,  in  which  he
attempted  to  expound  the  correct  method  of  discovering  the  truth
about  nature,  he  began  his  exposition  by  insisting  upon  the  import-
ance of  testing  the  consequences  of  a theory  by  appeal  to  experience.
He  says :

‘ Having  laid  down  fundamental  principles  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Latins
so  far  as  they  are  found  in  language,  mathematics  and  optics,  I now  wish
to  unfold  the  principles  of  experimental  science,  since  without  experience
nothing  can  he  sufficiently  known.  For  there  are  two  modes  of  acquiring
knowledge,  namely,  by  reasoning  and  experience.  Reasoning  draws  a
conclusion  and  makes  us  grant  the  conclusion,  hut  does  not  make  the  con-
clusion certain,  nor  does  it  remove  doubt  so  that  the  mind  may  rest  on  the

* ^ Roger  Bacon  lived  from  1214  to  1294.


HYPOTHESIS


SOS

intuition  of  truth,  unless  the  mind  discovers  it  by  the  path  of  experience ;
since  many  have  the  arguments  relating  to  what  can  be  kno\vn,  but  because
they  lack  experience  they  neglect  the  arguments,  and  neither  avoid  what
is  harmful,  nor  follow  what  is  good.  For  if  a man  who  has  never  seen  a
fire  should  prove  by  adequate  reasoning  that  fire  burns  and  injures  things
and  destroys  them,  his  mind  would  not  be  satisfied  thereby,  nor  would
he  avoid  fire,  until  he  placed  his  hand  or  some  combustible  substance  in
the  fire,  so  that  he  might  prove  by  experience  that  which  reasoning  taught.
But  when  he  has  actual  experience  of  combustion  his  mind  is  made  certain
and  rests  in  the  full  light  of  truth.  Therefore,  reasoning  does  not  suffice,
but  experience  does.’  ^

Eeasordng,  i.e.  the  deductive  development  of  tlie  hypothesis,
must  then  be  tested  by  appeal  to  experience.  Roger  Bacon  no
doubt  overestimated  the  certainty  of  the  conclusion  thus  tested.
But  he  was  undoubtedly  right  in  maintaining  that  without  such
testing  the  theory  is  comparatively  valueless.  Moreover,  if  an
hypothesis  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  under  certain  conditions
some  definite  occurrence  will  take  place ; then,  if  we  can  produce
those  conditions  we  are  able  to  ‘ put  questions  to  nature  Thus,
as  Herschel  says,  in  experimenting  ^ we  cross-examine  our  witness,
and  by  comparing  one  part  of  his  evidence  with  the  other,  while
he  is  yet  before  us,  and  reasoning  upon  it  in  his  presence,  are  enabled
to  put  pointed  and  searching  questions,  the  answer  to  which  may
at  once  enable  us  to  make  up  our  mind  ’.2  The  question  is  'pointed
because  we  expect  the  answer.  When  Torricelli  inverted  the  glass
tube  in  the  bowl  of  mercury  he  expected  the  mercury  to  rise  ; for,
that  it  would  rise  followed  from  his  hypothesis.  When  G-alileo
dropped  two  cannon  balls  of  different  weights  from  the  Tower  of
Pisa,  he  expected  them  to  reach  the  ground  together.  When  the
Committee  of  the  Royal  Society  planned  experiments  with  regard
to  the  pressure  of  the  air  to  be  carried  out  on  the  ascent  of  a mountain,
they  expected  definite  results  to  be  observable.  They  also  hoped
that  unexpected  observations  might  provide  more  data  for  their
hjpotheses,  for  they  knew  fairly  well  what  observations  would  be
relevant.  Simple  observation,  that  is,  observation  without  deliberate
interference  with  the  conditions,  is  as  much  under  the  direction  of
theory  as  is  experiment,  if  the  observation  be  scientific.  The  scientist
is  not  a person  who  just  observes  ; he  observes  with  a purpose,  namely,
the  purpose  of  discovering  relevant  data.  He  observes  in  the  light
of  a theory  about  the  facts.  This  theory  may  be  very  vague ; never-
theless, it  directs  his  observation.  An  erroneous  theory  may  be
the  cause  of  mistaken  observation ; hence  the  necessity  for  checks
and  counter-checks.  The  scientific  thinker  will  be  prepared  for  the

^ Magnum  Opus,  trans.  R.  B.  Burke,  Vol.  II,  p.  583.

* A PrelimiTiary  Discourse  on  the  Study  of  Natural  Philosophy  (ed.  1842),
P-  '77.


304


A MODEEN  INTEODTJCTION  TO  LOGIC


failure  of  Hs  expectations.  SucIl  failure,  we  stall  see  later,  may  itself
be  fruitful.  The  dangers  to  which  expectant  observation  is  liable
does  not  rob  it  of  its  value.  As  de  Morgan  says,  ‘ wrong  hypotheses,
rightly  worked  from,  have  produced  more  useful  results  than  unguided
observation

Experiment  in  the  precise  sense  is  impossible  unless  the  hypothesis
is  sufficiently  definite  to  enable  the  scientist  to  form  perfectly  definite
expectations  as  to  what  will  happen  under  certain  conditions.  Such
experimental  investigation  is  not  confined  to  the  physical  sciences.

lX§4.  the  use  of  hypothesis

It  should  be  clear  from  what  we  have  already  said  that  no  precise
rules  can  be  laid  down  for  the  formation  of  hypotheses.  They  arise
out  of  the  context  of  our  experience.  A simple  hypothesis  framed
to  account  for  a comparatively  simple  fact,  or  set  of  facts,  may  be
suggested  by  any  one  of  ordinary  sagacity  provided  that  he  has
the  requisite  knowledge  of  relevant  facts.  Every  hypothesis  springs
from  the  union  of  knowledge  and  sagacity.  Neither  alone  is  enough.
Knowledge  of  facts  may  sometimes  be  acquired  by  patient  observa-
tion and  diligent  labour ; sagacity  is  a gift  from  heaven.  Finally,
only  a mind  well  stored  with  the  relevant  knowledge  and  trained
in  the  methods  of  science  is  capable  of  devising  hypotheses  that
are  both  fruitful  and  comprehensive.  Nor  is  it  possible  to  state
precisely  the  conditions  that  a good  hypothesis  must  fulfil.  Any
hypothesis  capable  of  ordering  the  facts  is  so  far  satisfactory.  Those
logicians  who  have  attempted  to  make  precise  the  requisites  of  a
good  hypothesis  have  either  been  led  so  to  qualify  these  conditions
as  to  rob  their  statement  of  precision,  or  have  been  contradicted
by  the  history  of  scientific  development.  Thus  Jevons,  who  finds
'httle  difficulty  in  poiuting  out  to  what  condition  an  hypothesis
must  conform  in  order  to  be  accepted  as  probable  and  valid  lays
down  as  this  condition:  ‘Agreement  with  fact  is  the  sole  and
sufficient  test  of  a true  hypothesis  ^ This  is  in  itself  not  sufficiently
clear.  He  resolves  it  into  ‘ three  constituent  conditions  which
are  repeated  in  most  textbooks  of  logic.  These  conditions  are :

(1)  That  the  hypothesis  should  be  capable  of  deductive  development
into  consequences  that  can  be  tested  by  appeal  to  experience;

(2)  That  it  should  not  conflict  with  established  ‘laws  of  nature,
or  of  mind  ’ ; (3)  That  the  deduced  consequences  should  be  in
agreement  with  fact.  With  regard  to  these  conditions  it  must  be
urged  that  the  first  is  unquestionably  essential  to  a good  hypothesis.
No  supposition  can  be  ranked  as  an  hypothesis  unless  it  be  capable
of  deductive  development.  The  logical  form  of  an  hypothesis  is :

Budget  of  Paradoxes^  Vol.  I,  p.  87.

* Jevons,  Principles  of  Science^  p.  510  seq.


HYPOTHESIS


305


If  H,  then  fi,  /2  * . . fn,  where  H stands  for  the  anticipated  order
formulated  in  the  hypothesis,  /i,  /2  . • • /«  for  the  facts  which  the
supposed  order  would  require.  These  facts  must  be  observaUe,
though  not  all  will  have  been  observed.  This  condition,  however,
is  not  so  much  the  statement  of  a condition  of  a good  h3p)othesis ;
it  is  a statement  of  what  h3p)othesis  ” as  used  in  scientific  method
means.

The  second  condition  has  an  illusory  appearance  of  precision.
In  his  discussion  of  this  condition  Jevons  makes  qualifications  which
seem  to  reduce  it  to  the  caution  Don’t  make  wM  guesses  Pro-
vided that  there  is  a well-established  law  of  nature  concerning  a
certain  region  of  fact,  it  would  be  foolish  to  entertain  an  hypothesis
directly  contrary  to  such  a law  unless  a certain  region  of  other  facts
requires  such  an  hypothesis.  The  occurrence  of  incompatible  hypo-
theses shows  that  a given  region  of  fact  has  not  yet  been  sufficiently
organized.  hTo  doubt  nature  itself  is  free  from  contradiction.  But
to  assert  that  an  hypothesis  cannot  be  a good  hypothesis  if  it  run
counter  to  some  other  hypothesis  is  to  confound  hypothesis  with
fact,  and  thus  to  mistake  the  function  of  hypothesis  in  scientific
development.  This  point  can  be  illustrated  by  reference  to  the
development  of  theories  of  light.  Two  rival  theories,  known  as
Newton’s  corpuscular  theory  and  Huyghens’  wave  theory  have  long
struggled  for  supremacy,  first  one  and  then  the  other  being  in  the
ascendant.  During  the  last  twenty  or  thirty  years  facts  supporting
both  theories  have  been  discovered.  Speaking  in  1911  Sir  William
Bragg  pointed  out  that  ^in  all  optical  questions  concerned  with
the  general  distribution  of  energy  from  a radiating  source  the  wave
theory  is  clearly  a full  explanation  but  when  we  are  concerned
with  " the  movements  of  the  electrons  which  both  cause  waves  and
are  caused  by  them  we  are  bound  to  resort  to  the  corpuscular
hypothesis.  Hence,  he  concludes,  " For  the  present  we  have  to  work
on  both  theories.  On  Mondays,  Wednesdays  and  Fridays  we  use
the  wave  theory ; on  Tuesdays,  Thursdays  and  Saturdays  we  think
in  streams  of  flying  energy  quanta  or  corpuscles.  That  is  after
all  a very  proper  attitude  to  take.  We  cannot  state  the  whole
truth  since  we  have  only  partial  statements,  each  covering  a portion
of  the  field.  When  we  want  to  work  in  any  one  portion  of  the
field  or  other,  we  must  take  out  the  right  map.  Some  day  we  shall
piece  all  the  maps  together  In  his  Presidential  Address  to  the
British  Association  (1928),  Sfr  William  Bragg  repeated  this  illus-
tration with  the  comment ;

‘ We  are  liere  face  to  face  witli  a strange  problem.  We  know  that  there
must  be  a reconcilement  of  our  contradictory  experiments;  it  is  surely


^ Edbert  BoyU  Lecture,  “ Electrons  and  Ether  Waves,”  p,  11.
20


306


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


our  conceptions  of  the  truth  that  are  at  fault,  though  each  conception  seems
valid  and  proved.  There  must  be  a truth  which  is  greater  than  any  of  our
descriptions  of  it.  Here  is  an  actual  case  where  the  human  mind  is  brought
face  to  face  with  its  own  defects.  What  can  we  do  ? What  do  we  do  ?
As  physicists  we  use  either  hypothesis  according  to  the  range  of  experiences
that  we  wish  to  consider.  . . . We  know  that  we  cannot  be  seeing  clearly
and  fully  in  either  case,  but  we  are  perfectly  content  to  work  and  wait  for
the  complete  understanding.’  ^

Jevons’s  second  condition  must,  then,  be  interpreted  as  being
merely  cautionary.  Otherwise  it  is  likely  to  lead  to  a mistaken
conception  of  the  practical  function  of  hypothesis.  The  conflict  of
hypotheses  is  an  incentive  to  further  development  in  order  that  the
conflict  may  be  overcome.  It  must  be  admitted  that  two  incom-
patible theories  cannot  both  be  true ; but  two  incompatible  hypo-
theses may  both  be  useful.  Their  function  is  to  guide  observation
by  suggesting  fruitful  experiments.  Nor  is  it  the  case  that  one  or
the  other  of  two  such  hypotheses  must  be  rejected  en  hloc.  To  quote
Sic  William  Bragg  again  : ^ The  theories  of  one  time  are  supplanted
by  those  of  a succeeding  tune,  and  those  again  yield  to  something
more  like  the  first.  But  it  is  no  idle  series  of  changes,  of  vagaries
of  whimsical  fashion  ; it  is  growth.  The  older  never  becomes  invalid,
and  the  new  respects  the  old  because  that  is  the  case  The  conditions
of  a satisfactory  hypothesis  are  the  conditions  of  scientific  method.
They  cannot  be  isolated  and  tabulated  for  the  convenience  of  the
elementary  student  of  logical  method.  Jevons’s  third  condition  can
be  accepted  subject  only  to  the  same  qualification.  The  consequences
that  are  deduced  must  be  tested  by  appeal  to  observed  facts.  In
so  far  as  there  is  conflict  the  hypothesis  must  be  modified  or  must
be  held  'provisionally.  Jevons  undoubtedly  overstates  the  position
when  he  asserts : " A single  absolute  conflict  between  fact  and
hypothesis,  is  fatal  to  the  hypothesis ; falsa  in  uno,  falsa  in  omnibus  \
When  a deduced  consequence  is  found  to  be  true,  the  hypothesis  is
so  far  verified.  If  a careful  experiment  shows  that  a deduced  con-
sequence is  false,  then,  it  follows  logically  that  the  h37pothesi8  as
it  stands  cannot  be  true.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  it  is  entirely
wrong.  Sometimes  the  negative  experiment  itself  afiords  a suggestion
as  to  what  kind  of  modification  is  required.

Two  contrary  hypotheses  may  then  account  equally  weU  for  all
the  known  facts.  If,  however,  a point  arises  at  which  it  is  possible
to  deduce  a consequence  from  one  hypothesis  that  be  incon-
sistent with  the  other,  an  opportunity  arises  for  what  is  known  as
a crucial  experiment.  The  theory  of  hght  again  afiords  a well-
known  illustration.  While  both  the  wave  theory  and  the  cor-

^ Craftsmanship  and  Science,  pp.  27--8.  Cf.  also  Whitehead,  Science  and
the  Modern  World,  p.  257  ; and  see  Eddington,  Nature  of  the  Physical  World,
Chap.  IX,


HYPOTHESIS


307


puscular  theory  accounted  fairly  well  for  the  optical  phenomena,  it
was  shown  that  the  two  theories  diverged  with  regard  to  the  velocity
of  light  in  different  media.  According  to  the  wave  theory  light
should  have  a greater  velocity  in  mcuo  than  in  material  media ;
according  to  the  corpuscular  theory  the  contrary  should  be  the  case.
The  crucial  experiment  consisted  in  determining  the  velocity  of  light
in  different  media.  The  experiment  was  not  performed  until  1850,
when  Foucault  by  determining  the  velocity  in  both  air  and  water
showed  that  the  velocity  of  light  is  inversely  proportional  to  the
refractive  index  of  the  medium.  Thus  the  experiment  was  de-
cisively in  favour  of  the  wave  theory.  But,  as  we  have  seen,  it  would
be  rash  to  say  that  the  other  theory  was  definitely  disproved.  A
crucial  experiment  is  crucial  with  regard  only  to  a particular  fact.
Jevons  says  : ‘A  crucial  experiment  must  not  simply  confirm  one
theory,  but  must  negative  another ; it  must  decide  a mind  which
is  in  equihbrium,  as  Bacon  says,  between  two  equally  plausible
views  This  confirmation,  however,  is  never  more  than  partial ;
the  result  of  the  experiment  provides  additional  reason  for  believing
the  favourable  hypothesis.  No  experiment,  nor  series  of  experi-
ments, can  suffice  to  establish  an  hypothesis  beyond  the  reach  of
doubt.  The  final  test  is  to  be  found  only  in  the  comprehensiveness
of  the  system  into  which  a given  h3q)othesis  fits.  We  shall  be  con-
cerned later  with  the  problem  of  the  verification  of  hypotheses  and
the  justification  of  the  hypothetical  method.  It  must  be  sufficient
here  to  point  out  that  verification  does  not  amount  to  proof.  To
suppose  otherwise  is  to  commit  the  fallacy  of  the  consequent.

It  must  further  be  observed  that  hypotheses  are  not  used  for
one  purpose  only.  There  are  different  hinds  of  hypotheses  and  the
nature  of  the  hypothesis  varies  with  its  function.  We  may  distin-
guish three  main  kinds — explanatory,  descriptive  and  analogical.
These  may  again  be  subdivided.  The  simplest  kind  of  hypotheses
fall  into  the  first  class.  These  hypotheses  are  intended  to  explain,
i,e.  td  account  for,  the  occurrence  of  a certain  fact  by  the  inter-
polation of  facts  that  might  have  been  observed  under  suitable
conditions.  Such  is  the  hypothesis  of  burglary  to  account  for  the

^ op.  oit.,  p.  519.  The  reference  is  to  Bacon,  yovum  Organum^  Bk.  II,
Aph.  36.  The  term  “ experimentum  crucis  ” is  due  to  Bacon.  He  says :
‘ When  in  search  of  any  nature,  the  understanding  comes  to  an  equihbrium,
as  it  were,  or  stands  uncertain  as  to  which  of  two  or  more  natures  the  cause  of
the  nature  in  question  should  he  assigned,  on  account  of  the  frequent  and
ordinary  concurrence  of  many  natures,  then  these  Crucial  Instances  [instantiae
crucis,  i.e.  instances  of  the  Fingerpost]  show  the  union  of  one  of  these
natures  with  the  nature  in  question  to  be  sure  and  indissoluble,  of  the  other
to  be  varied  and  separable  ; and  thus  the  question  is  decided,  and  the  former  is
admitted  as  the  cause,  wltile  the  latter  is  rejected.’

Cf.  also  Hume,  Enquiry  concerning  Morals,  § 178.


308


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


disappearance  of  a silver  cup.  The  interpolated  facts  are  such  that
an  observer  suitably  placed  could  have  observed  them.  The  supposed
facts  are  of  the  same  type  as  the  facts  that  constitute  the  data  of
the  problem.  This  homogeneity  of  hypothesis  and  data  is  no  doubt
partly  responsible  for  the  strength  of  our  belief,  in  some  cases,  that
no  other  explanation  could  so  well  account  for  the  facts.  The
‘^reconstruction’’  of  a crime  in  a court  of  law  is  an  instance  of
this  kind  of  hj^othesis.  The  suggestion  thsCt  a person  acted  from
such  and  such  motives  is  also  not  fundamentally  difierent,  although
motives  are  not  observable.  In  such  cases  it  is  felt  that  the  supposed
occurrences  would  render  what  is  observed  intelligible  since  they  are
not  outside  the  scope  of  our  actual  experience  even  though,  by  the
nature  of  the  case,  they  remain  unverifiable.  There  is  another
type  of  explanatory  hypothesis  in  which  the  interpolated  elements
are  non-observable  relations  between  the  occurrences  to  be  con-
nected. The  Newtonian  hypothesis  of  attraction  afiords  a weU-known
example.

The  function  of  a descriptive  hypothesis  is  to  symbolize  the
ordered  connexion  of  the  facts.  It  seems  likely  that  Ptolemy  offered
his  theory  as  an  hypothesis  of  this  type,  its  purpose  being  to  provide
a geometrical  representation  of  the  movements  of  the  heavenly
bodies.  The  hypothesis  of  the  ether  as  a frictionless  fluid  and  as
a completely  elastic  solid  must  be  regarded  as  descriptive.  This
hypothesis  had  undoubted  value  in  guiding  observation  and  in
suggesting  experiments.  The  Butherford-Bolm  theory  of  the  plane-
tary atom  would  seem  to  be  likewise  a descriptive  hypothesis.  The
heuristic  value  of  a descriptive  hypothesis  may  be  great  in  spite  of
its  containing  incompatible  elements,  as  in  the  case  of  the  hypothesis
of  the  luminiferous  ether.  The  essential  characteristic  of  descrip-
tive hypotheses  is  that  they  are  not  put  forward  as  generalizations
from  experience ; they  are  not  anticipations  of  natural  laws  awaiting
confirmation.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  descriptions  that  serve  the
function  of  models  enabling  the  scientist  to  understand  the  mode
of  connexion  between  the  facts  for  which  he  is  trying  to  account.
Such  hypotheses  must  be  regarded  as  being  essentially  provisional
and  temporary.  The  electric  theory  of  matter  affords  a good
example  of  this  type  of  hypothesis.  Earaday’s  researches  in  electro-
magnetism were  guided  by  the  h37pothesis  of  “ lines  of  force  ” through
which  action  is  transmitted.^  Clerk  Maxwell  in  developing  this
theory  says : ‘ I do  not  bring  it  forward  as  a mode  of  connexion
existing  m nature.  ...  It  is,  however,  a mode  of  connexion  which
is  mechanically  conceivable  and  easily  investigated  ...  so  that  I
venture  to  say  that  any  one  who  understands  the  provisional  and
temporary  character  of  this  hypothesis  will  find  himself  rather
' See  Experimental  Eesearchea,


HYPOTHESIS  309

telped  ttan  hindered  hj  it  in  his  search  after  the  true  interpretation
of  the  phenomena.’  ^

The  descriptive  hypothesis  may  develop  into  an  analogical
hypothesis.  By  an  analogical  hypothesis  we  mean  an  hypothesis
that  what  is  true  of  one  set  of  phenomena  may  be  true  of  another
set  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  two  sets  have  in  common  certain
formal  properties.  For  example.  Maxwell  recognized  an  analogy
between  certain  problems  in  the  theory  of  gravitational  attraction
and  certain  problems  in  electrostatics.  Thus  the  gravitational
formula  is  the  law  of  the  inverse  square ; the  formula  for  electrical
attraction  is  also  the  law  of  the  inverse  square,  although  the  nature
of  the  attraction  is  different.  There  is  between  these  two  sets  of
phenomena  what  might  be  called  a structural  identity.  By  develop-
ing this  analogical,  or,  as  it  might  be  called,  structural  hypothesis
Maxwell  was  led  to  formulate  his  electromagnetic  theory  of  light.
Maxwell  himself  raised  the  question  ' how  far  we  ought  to  regard
a coincidence  in  the  mathematical  expression  of  two  sets  of  phe-
nomena as  an  indication  that  these  phenomena  are  of  the  same
kind  ’.2  It  was,  however,  by  working  upon  the  hypotheses  suggested
by  such  mathematical  analogies  that  Maxwell  succeeded  in  achieving
his  remarkable  results  in  electrostatics,  magnetism,  and  current
electricity.  3 It  appears  to  be  the  case  that  Maxwell’s  attitude  to
his  original  descriptive  hypothesis  underwent  a change  so  that  he
came  to  regard  it  as  being  not  merely  descriptive.  What  is  important
for  us  to  observe  is  that  his  work  was  throughout  guided  and  con-

^ Collected  Scientific  Papers,  I,  p.  486.  Gf.  also  J.  J.  Tkomson,  wko  in  intro-
ducing Ms  conception  of  the  ‘ Faraday  Tube  ’ as  an  alternative  to  Maxwell’s
‘ displacement  says : ‘ Indeed  the  services  wMch  the  old  fluid  theory  has
rendered  to  electricity  by  providing  a language  in  wMch  the  facts  of  science
can  be  clearly  and  briefly  expressed  can  hardly  be  over-rated.  A descriptive
theory  of  this  kind  does  more  than  serve  as  a veMcle  for  the  clear  expression
of  well-known  results,  it  often  renders  important  services  by  suggesting  the
possibility  of  the  existence  of  new  phenomena.’  {Recent  Researches  in  Electricity
and  Magnetism,  p.  1.)

2 op.  cit.,  I,  p.  188.

® Cf.  also  op.  cit.,  I,  p.  157.  ‘ There  is  no  formula  in  applied  mathematics

more  consistent  with  nature  than  the  formula  of  attractions,  and  no  theory
better  established  in  the  minds  of  men  than  that  of  the  action  of  bodies  on
one  another  at  a distance.  The  laws  of  the  conduction  of  heat  in  uniform
media  appear  at  first  sight  among  the  most  different  in  their  physical  relations
from  those  relating  to  attractions.  The  quantities  wMch  enter  into  them  are
temperature,  flow  of  heat,  conductivity.  The  word  force  is  foreign  to  the  subject.
Yet  we  find  that  the  mathematical  laws  of  the  uniform  motion  of  heat  in
homogeneous  media  are  identical  in  form  with  those  of  attractions  varying
inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance.  We  have  only  to  substitute  source
of  heat  for  centre  of  attraction,  flow  of  heat  for  accelerating  effect  of  attraction
at  any  point,  and  temperature  for  potential,  and  the  solution  of  a problem  in
attractions  is  transformed  into  that  of  a problem  in  heat/


310


A MODBEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


trolled  by  bypotbeses  beld  more  or  less  tentatively  in  face  of  tbe
facts.  Tbe  bistory  of  tbe  atomic  theory  of  matter  also  affords  many
excellent  examples  of  tbe  way  in  wbicb  different  kinds  of  bypotbeses
bave  contributed  to  tbe  development  of  science.  ^

Unless  tbe  role  of  bypotbesis  be  grasped  tbe  structure  of  scientific
method  cannot  be  understood.  It  was  contended  by  tbe  great
German  chemist  Ostwald  that  bypotbeses  were  a hindrance  to
science.  2 This  view  cannot,  however,  he  maintained.  Ostwald
seems  to  bave  thought  of  bypotbesis  as  essentially  a picture,  or
model,  or  image  [Bild]  containing  elements  not  given  in  tbe  original
observations  but  imported  by  tbe  scientist  and  therefore  not  neces-
sarily in  accord  with  what  was  given.  Now  it  is  clear  that  a des-
criptive b5potbesis  may  well  contain  such  elements,  as  in  tbe  case
of  tbe  luminiferous  ether,  and  yet  tbe  bypotbesis  may  be  of  tbe
utmost  value  as  a guide  to  experiment.  Such  bypotbeses  are
psychologically  valuable  in  tbe  art  of  discovery.  Tbe  precise  form
which  bypotbeses  take  wiU  vary  from  one  individual  scientist  to
another.  Some  scientists  are  not  content  unless,  like  Lord  Kelvin,
they  can  devise  a ‘ mechanical  model  all  through  ’ ; others  are
content  with  a vaguer  form  such  as  Maxwell’s  bypotbesis  of  Mis-
placement ’ ; others  again  formulate  bypotbeses  of  more  abstract
kinds.  These  differences  relate  to  tbe  art  of  discovery;  in  tbe
perfected  scientific  method  bypotbesis  remains  as  tbe  ‘ anticipation
of  nature  ’ wbicb  conditions  the  process  of  experimental  inquiry.

§ 5.  NEWTON’S  CONCEPTION  OP  SCIENTIFIC  METHOD »

In  an  article  in  The  Times  written  in  February  1929  Einstein
asserted : ‘ Advances  in  scientific  knowledge  must  bring  about  tbe
result  that  an  increase  in  formal  simplicity  can  only  be  won  at  tbe
cost  of  an  increased  distance  or  gap  between  tbe  fundamental  bypo-
tbeses of  tbe  theory  on  tbe  one  band,  and  tbe  directly  observed  facts
on  tbe  other.  Theory  is  compelled  to  pass  more  and  more  from
the  inductive  to  tbe  deductive  method,  even  though  tbe  most  im-
portant demand  to  be  made  of  every  scientific  theory  will  always
remain  that  it  must  fit  tbe  facts  ^ Einstein’s  statement  is  in  accord-
ance with  Gableo’s  practice  and  with  bis  conception  of  scientific
method.  We  bave  already  seen  that  Gableo  was  prepared  to  commit
^ tbe  rape  of  reason  upon  tbe  senses  ’ since  be  was  convinced  that
by  mathematical  reasoning  ahne  could  tbe  laws  of  nature  be  dis-

^See  Meyerson,  Identity  and  Eeality,  Chap.  EL

2 Ostwald  says : ‘ Icb  habe  inich  bemuht,'em  Buob  zU  schreiben,  in  welohem
keine  Hypothese  aufgestellt  oder  benutzt  worden  ist.’  (See  Vorlesungen  iiber
NaturpMlosophie,  p.  212.)

section  should  be  omitted  by  a student  on  a first  reading.


HYPOTHESIS


311


covered.^  It  would  be  natural  to  suppose  tbat  Newton  siould
have  bad  a like  trust  in  reason  and  in  tbe  adequacy  of  mathematics.
This,  however,  was  not  the  case.  Newton,  great  mathematician
though  he  was,  insisted  upon  the  necessity  of  the  appeal  to  sensible
fact  at  every  stage  ; he  was  not  content  to  trust  to  his  mathematical
deductions  without  feeling  the  necessity  for  experimental  confirma-
tion. There  must  be  no  gap  between  hypothesis  and  observation ;
nothing  must  be  supposed  that  is  not  directly  derived  from  the
phenomena,  nor  any  hjpothesis  accepted  without  being  put  to  the
proof.  Thus,  for  example,  Newton  protested  against  the  claim  made
by  Eobert  Hooke  that  he  had  discovered  the  law  of  the  inverse  square,
since  this  claim  was  not  supported  by  any  attempt  at  detailed  proof.
It  remained  a mere  guess.  Moreover,  Newton  at  least  af^pears
anxious  to  deny  that  hypothesis  has  any  essential  part  to  play  in
scientific  investigation.  As  Whewell  has  pointed  out : ^ Ne'^on
appears  to  have  had  a horror  of  the  term  hypothesis,  which  probably
arose  from  his  acquaintance  with  the  rash  and  illicit  general  assump-
tions of  Descartes ’.2  His  writings  are  full  of  attacks  against  the
use  of  hypothesis  and  he  angrily  repudiated  the  suggestion  that  he
himself  made  use  of  them.  His  celebrated  dictum  ‘^Hypotheses
non  jingo  ’’  has  perhaps  been  too  often  quoted  out  of  its  context
and  has  been  subject  to  some  misinterpretation.  It  is  worth  while
to  attempt  to  bring  together  Newton’s  scattered  remarks  on  the
nature  of  scientific  method  in  order  to  discover  in  what  sense  he
was  concerned  to  exclude  hypotheses  from  scientific  investigation.
He  makes  the  following  definite  statement  with  regard  to  scientific
method :

* For  tke  best  and  safest  method  of  philosophising  ® seems  to  be  that  we
should  first  diligently  investigate  the  properties  of  things  and  estabhsh
them  by  experiments,  and  then  later  we  should  seek  hypothesis  to  explain
them.  Eor  hypotheses  ought  to  be  fitted  merely  to  explain  the  properties
of  things  and  not  attempt  to  predetermine  them  except  so  far  as  they  can
be  an  aid  to  experiment.’  *

In  this  passage  Newton  seems  to  admit  that  hypotheses  may
be  ‘ an  aid  to  experiment  and  that  after  the  properties  have
been  experunentaUy  determined  it  may  be  possible  to  formulate
explanatory  hypotheses.  His  views  on  this  question  seem  to  have

^ See  below,  Chap.  XVIII,  § 2.

^Philosophy  of  Discovery,  Chap.  XVIII.

® It  must  be  remembered  that  for  Newton  and  his  contemporaries  “ natural
philosophy  ” means  what  we  now  caU  “ physical  science,”  so  that  “the  method
of  philosophizing  ” means  “ scientific  method

^.Letter  to  Oldenburg.  (See  Isaaci  Newtoni  Opera  quae  exstant  omnia.
Ed.  Horsley,  1782,  PV,  p.  314.  All  quotations  except  those  otherwise  specified
are  from  this  edition,  which  will  henceforth  be  cited  N.  Op.  I have  translated
those  given  in  Latin.)


312


A MODEEN  INTKODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


undergone  some  cEange.  He  became  more  and  more  averse  to  tbe
admission  of  any  explanatory  bjrpotliesis,  of  anything  going  beyond
what  is  directly  observable.  He  sought  to  distinguish  sharply  be-
tween hypotheses  and  experimental  laws  directly  derived  from  the
phenomena  and  capable  of  exact  verification.  In  the  course  of  his
controversies  with  other  scientists  he  seems  to  have  been  led  finally
to  deny  that  hypotheses  could  be  useful  as  ‘ an  aid  to  experiment
which,  we  have  just  seen,  he  was  formerly  prepared  to  admit.  He
allowed  only  very  general  hypotheses  with  regard  to  the  order  of
nature.  This  point  may  be  made  clearer  by  a consideration  of  the
four  Eules  of  Eeasoning  in  Philosophy  ” which  Newton  prefixed
to  Booh  111  of  the  Princi'pia?-  They  must  be  stated  in  full.

Rule  L ‘ We  are  to  admit  no  more  causes  of  natural  things
than  such  as  are  both  true  and  sufficient  to  explain  their  appearances.’

Rule  IL  ‘ Therefore  to  the  same  natural  effects  we  must,  as
far  as  possible,  assign  the  same  causes.’

Rule  111,  ' The  qualities  of  bodies,  which  admit  neither  inten-
sion nor  remission  of  degrees,  and  which  are  found  to  belong  to  all
bodies  within  the  reach  of  our  experiments,  are  to  be  esteemed  the
universal  qualities  of  all  bodies  whatsoever.’

Rule  IF.  ^ In  experimental  philosophy  we  are  to  look  upon
propositions  collected  by  general  induction  from  phenomena  as
accurately  or  very  nearly  true,  notwithstanding  any  contrary  hypo-
thesis that  may  be  imagined,  till  such  time  as  other  phenomena
occur,  by  which  they  may  either  be  made  more  accurate,  or  liable
to  exceptions.’

There  has  been  considerable  discussion  with  regard  to  the  correct
interpretation  of  these  Eules,  especially  as  concerns  the  meaning
to  be  assigned  to  the  expression  “true  cause”,  which  occurs  in
Eule  I.  Into  this  discussion  it  is  not  necessary  for  our  purpose
to  enter.  It  is  more  important  to  notice  the  explanation  Newton
himself  added  to  this  Rule.  He  says  : ‘ To  this  purpose  the  philo-
sophers say  that  Nature  does  nothing  in  vain,  and  more  is  in  vain
when  less  will  serve ; for  Nature  is  pleased  with  simplicity,  and
affects  not  the  pomp  of  superfluous  causes.’  This  addendum  shows
that  Newton  was  here  laying  down  the  principle  of  simplicity,  in
the  form  in  which  it  was  accepted  by  Kepler  and  Galileo.  ^ In  the
second  Eule  Newton  states  that  where  effects  are  the  same  the
causes  must  be  the  same.  Rules  II  and  III  together  assert  that
nature  must  be  taken  to  be  uniform.  It  is  not  easy  to  determine
whether  Newton  wished  to  maintain  that  these  Rules  were  merely

^ The  Mathematical  Principles  of  Natural  Philosophy,  trans.  by  A.  Motte,
VoL  III,  pp.  160“2.  All  references  to  the  Principia  will  b^  to  Motte’s  trans-
lation, 3-Vol.  edition,  1803.

* See  p.  293  above,


HYPOTHESIS


313


methodological  principles,  or  whether  he  would  have  been  willing
to  admit  that  they  were  very  general  assertions  with  regard  to  the
actual  course  of  nature.  That  the  former  interpretation  is  probably
correct  is  suggested  both  by  the  fourth  Eule  in  which  the  tentative
and  provisional  nature  of  " propositions  collected  by  general  induc-
tion ’ is  stressed  and  by  the  following  statement  in  the  Of  tides  :

' That  it  should  be  so  [viz.  that  the  theorem  of  the  uniform  proportion
of  the  sines  applies  to  all  the  rays  of  light]  is  very  reasonable,  Nature
being  ever  conformable  to  herself ; hut  an  experimental  proof  is
desiredJ  ^ At  the  end  of  the  Optichs  Newton  makes  a further  im-
portant statement  concerning  his  conception  of  scientific  method.
He  says

‘As  in  Mathematics,  so  in  Natural  Philosophy,  the  investigation  of
difficult  things  by  the  method  of  analysis,  ought  ever  to  precede  the  method
of  composition.  This  analysis  consists  in  making  experiments  and  observa-
tions, and  in  drawing  general  conclusions  from  them  by  induction,  and
admitting  of  no  objections  against  the  conclusions,  but  such  as  are  taken
from  experiments,  or  other  certain  truths.  For  hypotheses  are  not  to  be
regarded  in  Experimental  Philosophy.  And  although  the  arguing  from
experiments  and  observations  by  induction  be  no  demonstration  of  general
conclusions,  yet  it  is  the  best  way  of  arguing  which  the  nature  of  things
admits  of,  and  may  be  looked  upon  as  so  much  the  stronger,  by  how  much  the
induction  is  more  general.  And  if  no  exception  occur  from  phenomena,  the
conclusion  may  be  pronounced  generally.  But  if  at  any  time  afterwards
any  exception  shall  occur  from  experiments ; it  may  then  begin  to  be  pro-
nounced, with  such  exceptions  as  occur.  By  this  way  of  analysis  we  may
proceed  from  compounds  to  ingredients ; and  from  motions  to  the  forces  pro-
ducing them  ; and  in  general  from  effects  ^o  their  causes ; and  from  particular
causes  to  more  general  ones,  till  the  argument  end  in  the  most  general.
This  is  the  method  of  Analysis.  And  the  Synthesis  consists  in  assuming  the
causes  discovered,  and  established  as  principles,  and  by  them  explaining
the  phenomena  proceeding  from  them,  and  proving  the  explanations.’  *

Newton  proceeds  to  assert  that  it  was  by  this  method  that  he
discovered  and  proved  the  properties  of  light  discussed  in  the  first
two  Books  of  the  Opticks,  It  seems  clear,  then,  that  Newton  con-
ceived scientific  method  to  be  analysable  into  three  essential  stages:
(1)  the  determination  by  experiment  of  those  properties  of  phe-
nomena that  vary  quantitatively ; (2)  mathematical  reasoning  by
means  of  which  these  variations  may  be  precisely  stated  in  a form
capable  of  further  elaboration;  (3)  exact  experiments  by  means
of  which  the  mathematical  reasoning  may  be  verified  and  extended
to  further  cases,  in  accordance  with  the  methodological  principles
laid  down  in  the  four  Eules.  Newton  continually  insisted  upon  the
necessity  of  this  experimental  verification.  The  initial  experiments
are  designed  to  simplify  the  phenomena  so  that  the  mode  of  variation
of  there  properties  may  be  apprehended.  It  was  in  this  way,  for

* N*  Op.,  IV,  pp.  263-4.


"^Ita/UQS  mine.


314


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


instance,  that  Newton  himself  determined  the  concept  of  refrangi-
bility  in  optics.  The  fourth  Rule  show’s  very  clearly  the  importance
Newton  attached  to  the  initial  and  the  verifying  experiments.  The
addendum  to  this  Rule  is  very  significant.  It  runs  : ^ This  rule  we
must  follow,  that  the  argument  of  mduction  may  not  be  evaded
by  hypothesis.’

There  thus  seems  to  be  considerable  evidence  in  favour  of  the
view  that  Newton  rejected  the  use  of  hypothesis  and  that  he  himself
did  not  follow  what  we  have  called  the  hypothetical  method.  There
is,  however,  some  danger  of  misinterpreting  this  evidence  and  of
misunderstanding  the  conclusion  it  warrants.  For  the  proper  dis-
cussion of  this  question  we  must  consider  the  famous  passage  in  the
General  Scholium  ” at  the  end  of  the  Princi'pia,  which  runs  as
follows :

‘ Hitherto  we  have  explained  the  phaenomcna  of  the  heavens  and  of  our
sea  by  the  power  of  gravity,  but  have  not  yet  assigned  the  cause  of  this  power.
This  is  certain,  that  it  must  proceed  from  a cause  that  penetrates  to  the  very
centres  of  the  sun  and  the  planets,  without  suffering  the  least  diminution
of  its  force  ; that  operates  not  according  to  the  quantity  of  the  surfaces  of
the  particles  upon  which  it  acts  (as  mechanical  causes  used  to  do),  but  accord-
ing to  the  quantity  of  the  solid  matter  which  they  contain,  and  propagates
its  virtue  on  all  sides  to  immense  distances,  decreasing  always  in  the  duplicate
proportion  of  the  distances.  . . . But  liitherto  I have  not  been  able  to
discover  the  cause  of  those  properties  of  gravity  from  phaenomena,  and  I
frame  no  hypotheses  {hypotheses  non  fingo) ; for  whatever  is  not  deduced
from  the  phaenomena  is  to  be  called  an  hypothesis ; and  hypotheses,  whether
metaphysical  or  physical,  whether  of  occult  qualities  or  mechanical,  have
no  place  in  experimental  philosophy.  In  this  philosophy  particular  pro-
positions are  inferred  from  the  phaenomena,  and  afterwards  rendered  general
by  induction.  Thus  it  was  that  the  impenetrability,  the  mobility,  and  the
impulsive  force  of  bodies,  and  the  laws  of  motion  and  gravitation,  were
discovered.  And  to  us  it  is  enough  that  gravity  does  really  exist,  and  act
according  to  the  laws  which  we  have  explained,  and  abun^ntly  serves  to
account  for  aU  the  motions  of  the  celestial  bodies,  and  of  our  sea.’  ^

From  the  consideration  of  this  passage  alone  we  should  certainly
not  be  led  to  interpret  the  statement hypotheses  non  fingo  ” in  the
way  in  which  it  has  often  been  interpreted.  Newton  is  here  clearly
speaking  of  the  cause  of  the  properties  of  gravity,  and  it  is  with
regard  to  the  cause  of  gravity  that  he  asserts  that  he  frames  no
hypothesis.  He  rejects  two  classes  of  hypotheses,  namely,  (i)  meta-
physical hypotheses  involving  occult  qualities,  and  (ii)  physical
hypotheses  involving  mechanical  qualities.  These  are  rejected  on
the  ground  that  they  cannot  be  inferred  torn  the  phenomena.  ^ It

1 Vol.  n,  pp.  313-14.

* Cf,  the  important  statement  in  the  Optichs  where  Newton  says  that  he  does
not  consider  the  principles  of  motion  (mass,  gravity,  etc.)  as  occult  qualities  but
‘ as  general  laws  of  Nature,  by  which  the  things  themselves  are  formed : their
appearing  to  us  by  phaenomena,  though  their  causes  be  not  yet  discovered.


HYPOTHESIS


315


is  not  tlie  business  of  ^experimental  pMlosopliy ’ to  introduce
unobservable  causes ; on  tbe  contrary,  its  business  is  to  infer  par-
ticxilar  propositions  from  tbe  phenomena,  and  to  generalize  these
by  induction  in  accordance  with  Eules  I and  II.  Whatever  is  not
* deduced  from  the  phenomena  ’ is  an  h3rpothesis  and  may  not  be
entertained  by  the  physicist.  The  word  deduced  ” here  requires
some  explanation.  Since  the  purpose  of  the  initial  experiments  is
to  determine  those  properties  which  vary  quantitatively,  so  that
these  variations  may  be  expressed  mathematically,  it  is  possible  to
pass  back  from  the  mathematical  formulation  to  the  mode  of  be-
haviour of  the  properties.  The  element  of  induction  comes  in  when
the  conclusion  is  generalized.  Newton  is  not  using  ''  deduction  ’’
in  the  precise  sense  of  '' proof”.  Once  again  he  is  insisting  upon
the  empirical  basis  of  science.  There  is,  however,  nothing  in  this
passage  to  suggest  that  hypotheses  are  inadmissible,  provided  that
they  be  not  put  forward  as  demonstrations,  nor  that  experimental
investigation  may  not  be  aided  by  such  hypotheses.  The  conclud-
ing paragraph  of  this  scholium  does  indeed  suggest  that  Newton  was
not  unwilling  to  consider  an  hypothesis  with  regard  to  the  mode
of  production  of  gravity,  namely,  that  there  was  a most  subtle
spirit  ’ to  whose  activity  gravity,  cohesion,  the  phenomena  of
electricity  and  light  are  due.  But  he  declares  ‘these  are  things
that  cannot  be  explained  in  few  words,  nor  are  we  furnished  with
that  sufficiency  of  experiments  which  is  required  to  an  accurate
determination  and  demonstration  of  the  laws  by  which  this  electric
and  elastic  spirit  operates’.  This  statement  brings  out  Newton’s
distinction  between  experimental  laws,  capable  of  demonstration,
and  hypothesis  which  we  lack  the  knowledge  to  establish.

Finally,  we  may  ask  whether  Newton  himself  appears  to  have
been  guided  by  hypothesis.  Owing  to  his  opposition  to  the  notion

For  these  are  manifest  qualities,  and  their  causes  only  are  occult.  And  the
Aristotelians  gave  the  name  of  Occult  qualities  not  to  manifest  qualities,  but  to
such  qualities  only  as  they  supposed  to  lie  hid  in  bodies,  and  to  be  the  unknown
causes  of  manifest  effects:  such  as  would  be  the  causes  of  gravity,  and  of
Magnetik  and  Electrik  attractions,  and  of  fermentations,  if  we  should  suppose
that  these  forces,  or  actions,  arose  from  qualities  unknown  to  us,  and  uncapable
of  being  discovered  and  made  manifest.  Such  Occult  qualities  put  a stop  to  the
improvement  of  natural  philosophy,  and  therefore  of  late  years  have  been
rejected.  To  tell  us  that  every  species  of  things  is  endowed  with  an  occult
specific  quality,  by  which  it  acts  and  produces  manifest  effects,  is  to  tell  us
nothing:  but  to  derive  two  or  three  general  principles  of  motion  from
phaenomena,  and  afterwards  to  tell  us  how  the  properties  and  actions  of  all
corporeal  things  follow  from  those  manifest  principles,  would  be  a very  great
step  in  philosophy,  though  the  causes  of  those  principles  were  not  yet  discovered :
and  therefore,  I scruple  not  to  propose  the  principles  of  motion  above  mentioned,
they  being  of  very  general  extent,  and  leave  their  causes  to  be  found  out/
(N.  Op.,  IV,  p.  261.)


316


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


of  hypothesis  Newton  was  careful  to  distinguish  his  unverified
speculations  from  propositions  that  he  had  demonstrated.  Thus
in  the  O'pticks  he  formulated  what  were  undoubtedly  guiding  hypo-
theses as  Queries  excluded  from  the  main  body  of  the  work.
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Newton  performed  his  experiments  in
the  definite  expectation  that  such  and  such  results  would  ensue.
When  these  expectations  were  realized  the  way  was  open  for  the
inference  of  particular  propositions  ’’  from  the  phenomena.  An
hypothesis  that  yielded  no  such  definite  expectation  would  be  use-
less for  science.  An  hypothesis  that  postulated  causes  lying  beyond
the  reach  of  human  observation  must  remain  unverified.  Con-
sequently Newton  excluded  the  former  as  mere  guesses,  the  latter
as  metaphysical  speculations.  In  this  sense,  and  in  this  sense  only,
did  Newton  reject  hypotheses.


CHAPTEE  XVII

PEINCIPLES  OF  CAUSAL  DETEEMINATION


‘ The  first  work  therefore  of  true  induction  (as  far  as  regards  the  discovery
of  Forms)  is  the  rejection  or  exclusion  of  the  several  natures  which  are  not
found  in  some  instance  where  the  given  nature  is  present,  or  are  found  in  some
instance  where  the  given  nature  is  absent,  or  are  found  to  increase  in  some
instance  where  the  given  nature  decreases,  or  decrease  when  the  given  nature
increases.’ — Francis  Bacon.

§ 1.  THE  SEAECH  FOE  CAUSES

The  earliest  stage  of  scientific  investigation  assumes  the  form
of  a search  for  the  causes  of  occurrences.  No  two  sets  of
occurrences  differ  merely  in  their  spatial  and  temporal
characteristics ; consequently,  the  first  stage  in  any  inductive  in-
vestigation is  the  determination  of  certain  factors  as  irrelevant.  By
the  accumulation  of  judgements  of  irrelevance  the  problem  is  nar-
rowed down  to  the  investigation  of  a comparatively  restricted  region.
We  are  often  confronted  with  a problem  of  determining  the  cause
of  an  occurrence  happening  in  conditions  with  which  we  are  fairly
familiar.  There  are  certain  definite  principles  in  accordance  with
which  such  causal  investigation  is  carried  on.  The  complex  situation
must  be  analysed  into  its  constituent  factors  in  order  to  determine
which  of  them  are  jointly  sufficient  and  independently  necessary  to
the  production  of  the  given  occurrence.  For  example,  a glass  into
which  hot  water  has  just  been  poured  cracks.  It  might  be  supposed
that  the  hot  water  is  the  sufficient  cause  of  the  cracked  glass.  Such
a supposition  is  in  accordance  with  the  common-sense  conception
of  cause.  The  glass  standing  on  the  table  is  a situation  into  which
a new  factor  contact  of  glass  with  hot  water  has  been  introduced.  The
introduction  of  this  factor  is  followed  by  a change  in  the  glass.  Accord-
ingly, this  factor  is  regarded  as  the  cause  of  the  change.  If  now
hot  water  poured  into  another  glass  standing  beside  the  first  does
not  have  the  same  result,  we  conclude  that  pouring  hot  water  into
a glass  is  not  a circumstance  sujBficient  for  the  production  of  the
effect.  This  conclusion  is  based  upon  the  assumption  that  a factor
which  is  present  although  the  given  effect  does  not  occur  is  not  the
cause  of  that  effect.  The  two  glasses  must  then  be  examined  in
order  to  ascertain  whether  any  difference  can  be  found  between  them
which  would  be  relevant  to  the  difference  in  the  result.  It  is  then

317


318


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOOIC


fotmd  that  the  two  glasses  differ  in  thickness.  It  might  also  be
the  case  that  they  differ  in  colour.  Previous  experience  may  have
shown  that  difference  in  colour  would  not  be  relevant  to  the  differ-
ence in  the  result.  It  remains  to  inquire  whether  the  difference
in  thickness  is  relevant.  If  we  knew  that  various  substances  expand
when  heated,  we  should  recogniize  that  the  difference  in  thickness
was  an  additional  factor  suiBicient  to  account  for  the  difference  in
the  result.  We  should,  then,  conclude  that  the  inner  surface  of
the  thicker  glass  expands  before  the  outer  surface  has  been  heated ;
that,  consequently,  this  expansion  causes  the  glass  to  crack.  The
thinner  glass  is  more  evenly  heated,  so  that  no  crack  results.  Had
the  case  of  the  thin  glass  not  been  observed,  the  first  instance  might
have  been  generalized  in  the  causal  proposition : Hot  water  foured
into  a glass  breaks  the  glass.  The  consideration  of  the  second  instance
leads  to  the  more  exact  statement : Hot  water  causes  glass  to  expand :
glass  of  a certain  thickness  will  expand  on  the  surface  to  which
hot  water  is  applied  before  the  outer  surface  is  heated ; the  expansion
of  the  inner  surface  of  the  glass  causes  the  glass  to  crack.

It  is  important  to  observe  that  such  an  investigation  presupposes
a considerable  amount  of  previous  knowledge  relevant  to  the  situa-
tion. The  importance  of  relevant  knowledge  can  scarcely  be  over-
emphasized, Any  one  who  successfully  investigates  a problem
with  regard  to  the  cause  of  an  occurrence  is  in  possession  of  relevant
knowledge,  but  he  does  not  need  to  ponder  its  relevance.  He  can
take  it  for  granted  since  his  object  is  the  discovery  of  a causal  factor,
not  the  examination  of  the  method  whereby  it  is  discovered.  When,
however,  as  logicians  we  are  considering  the  nature  of  the  principles
in  accordance  with  which  causes  may  be  deterimned,  our  problem
is  not  practical  but  theoretical.  Accordingly  we  examine  a 'problem
that  has  been  solved.  The  problem  as  stated  in  a textbook  of  logic
has  been  transformed  into  a museum  specimen.  The  consideration
of  museum  specimens  is  useful  for  the  student  of  nature  who  can
relate  the  specimen  to  its  natural  habitat.  In  so  doing  he  is  aware
that  he  is  dealing  with  a specimen  placed  in  an  artificial  isolation.
The  student  of  logic  is  in  a similar  position.  He  must  study  ex-
amples of  scientific  investigation  which  have  to  a greater  or  less
extent  been  artificially  isolated.  His  study  will  be  fruitful  only  in
so  far  as  he  is  aware  of  the  limitations  of  his  inquiry.  It  is  im-
portant, then,  to  remember  that  in  this  chapter  we  are  concerned
with  a narrowly  restricted  problem,  namely,  to  formulate  precisely
certain  principles  involved  in  the  determination  of  causal  factors
within  a limited  field  of  research.

The  an^itlysis  of  a causal  situation  into  its  constituent  factors
may  involve  literal  separation  of  the  factors,  i.e:  physical  analysis,
or  it  mhy  involve  isolation  only  in  thought.  Those  sciences  in  which


PEINCIPLES  OF  CAUSAL  DETEEMINATION  319

physical  analysis  is  possible  are  experimental  sciences  in  the  narrower
sense  of  “ experimental  The  rapid  advance  of  such  sciences  is
due  to  the  fact  that  when  the  conditions  can  be  varied  it  is  possible
to  determine  what  is  irrelevant.  Such  analysis  is  guided  by  two
principles  which  follow  directly  from  the  nature  of  a cause.  These
principles  are  : (1)  Nothing  is  the  cause  of  an  eSect  which  is  absent
when  the  effect  occurs ; (2)  Nothing  is  the  cause  of  a given  effect
which  is  present  when  the  effect  fails  to  occur.  Accordingly,  in
seeking  for  the  cause  of  an  occurrence  A,  we  shall  look  for  cases  where
A is  present  and  cases  where  A is  absent  such  that  many  factors
present  in  the  former  set  of  cases  are  present  also  in  the  second  set
notwithstanding  the  absence  of  A.

§ 2.  AN  EXAMPLE  OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  INVESTIGATION
Experiment  is  possible  only  when  the  field  of  inquiry  is  limited
within  a fairly  definite  range.  The  experimenter  must  have  more
or  less  detailed  knowledge  as  to  what  alternatives  are  possible  under
certain  conditions.  It  is  true  that  sometimes  unexpected  results
have  occurred,  whilst  experiments  performed  in  the  confident  ex-
pectation of  a given  result  have  sometimes  failed  to  produce  any
observable  result.  Such  a completely  negative  result  may  be  of
considerable  significance,  provided  that  the  situation  as  a whole  is
well  understood.  This  was  the  case  with  the  famous  Michelson-
Morley  experiment  to  detect  the  ether-drift.^  But  unless  the  details
of  the  situation  are  clearly  apprehended  no  significant  questions  can
be  asked.  To  experiment  is  to  ask  such  questions.

We  shall  now  exanoine  at  some  length  an  experimental  investiga-
tion carried  out  by  the  famous  French  scientist  Louis  Pasteur.  His
purpose  was  to  ascertain  the  conditions  under  which  certain  micro-
organisms were  generated.  He  sought  to  provide  evidence  in  refuta-
tion of  the  theory  of  spontaneous  generation.  This  was  the  theory
that  certain  kinds  of  living  organisms  were  generated  from  inorganic
matter.  Although  it  was  recognized  that  in  most  cases  organisms
are  produced  by  parents  whom  the  offspring  tend  to  resemble,  it  was
believed  that  certain  forms  of  life  could  be  produced  from  the  earth
and  from  decaying  animal  and  vegetable  matter.  There  was  evidence
apparently  in  favour  of  this  view.  Worms  and  maggots  breed  on
putrefying  flesh ; maggots  are  sometimes  found  at  the  core  of  apples,
pears,  and  other  soft  fruit,  the  skin  of  which  is  unpierced.  After
the  discovery  of  the  microscope  numerous  tiny  organisms  were  dis-
covered in  rain  water  and  in  any  hquid  that  had  been  exposed  to
the  air.  These  tiny  organisms  were  named  infusoria  ”,  and  the
liquids  in  which  they  were  generated  were  described  as  putrescible
Pasteur  set  himself  the  task  of  showing  that  when  all  living
^ See  p.  398  n.  below.


320


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


organisms  are  carefully  excluded  from  contact  with  these  liquids,
no  organisms  appear  in  them,  and  that,  consequently,  there  is  no
evidence  in  favour  of  the  spontaneous  generation  of  infusoria.  He
recorded  his  experimental  investigation  in  a Memoir  presented  to
the  Academie  des  Sciences  in  1862.^  He  began  with  an  historical
resume  of  the  position  of  the  theory,  from  which  the  opening  para-
graphs are  quoted  below:

‘ In  ancient  times,  and  until  the  Middle  Ages,  every  one  believed  in  the
occurrence  of  spontaneous  generations.  Aristotle  says  that  animals  are
engendered  by  all  dry  things  that  become  moist  and  all  moist  things  that
become  dry.

‘ Van  Helmont  describes  the  way  to  bring  mice  into  existence.

‘ Even  in  the  seventeenth  century,  many  authors  give  methods  for  pro-
ducing frogs  from  the  mud  of  marshes,  or  eels  from  river  water.

‘ Such  errors  could  not  survive  for  long  the  spirit  of  investigation  that  arose
in  Europe  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries.

‘ Redi  . . . demonstrated  that  the  worms  in  putrefying  flesh  were  larvae
from  the  eggs  of  flies.  His  proofs  were  as  simple  as  they  were  decisive,  for  he
showed  that  surrounding  the  putrefying  flesh  with  fine  gauze  absolutely
prevented  the  appearance  of  these  larvae.’

These  experiments  were,  as  Pasteur  says,  very  simple.  Redi  put
gauze  over  the  meat  the  smell  of  which  came  through  the  gauze
and  attracted  flies.  They  laid  eggs  on  the  gauze ; from  these  eggs
larvae  were  hatched  that,  had  the  gauze  not  been  there,  would  have
been  hatched  on  the  meat.  Later  another  Italian  scientist  showed
that  the  grub  in  fruit  is  hatched  from  eggs  deposited  by  insects
before  the  fruit  has  developed.  Thus  evidence  was  provided  to
account  for  some  of  the  facts  upon  which  the  theory  of  spontaneous
generation  had  been  based,  and  which  was  now  interpreted  as  being
decisively  against  that  theory.  The  discovery  of  the  microscope,
however,  seemed  to  provide  new  support  to  the  theory.  As  Pasteur
goes  on  to  say :

‘But  in  the  second  part  of  the  seventeenth  and  the  first  part  of  the
eighteenth  centuries,  microscopic  observations  rapidly  increased  in  number.
The  doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation  then  reappeared.  Some,  unable  to
explain  the  origin  of  the  varied  organisms  which  the  microscope  showed  in
their  infusions  of  animal  or  vegetable  matter,  and  seeing  nothing  among
them  which  resembled  sexual  reproduction,  were  obliged  to  assume  that
matter  which  has  once  lived  keeps  after  its  death,  a special  vital  force,  under
the  influence  of  which  its  scattered  particles  unite  themselves  afresh  under
certain  favourable  conditions  with  varieties  of  structure  determined  by  these
conditions.

^ Memoir  on  the  organized  corpuscles  which  exist  in  the  atmosphere.  Extracts
from  this  Memoir  are  given  inGambridge  Beadings in  the  Literature  of  Sciencehj
W.  C.  p.  and  M.  B.  Whetham.  AU  quotations  are  taken  from  this  work  unless
other\rise  specified.  My  account  of  this  investigation  is  drawn  from  this
Memoir  and  from  Vallery-Radot’s  Life  of  Pasteur,  (Pasteur  lived  from
1823  to  1895.)


PEINCIPLES  OP  CAtJSAL  DETBEMIHATIOH  321


‘ Others  on  the  contrary,  used  their  imagination  to  extend  the  marvellous
revelations  of  the  microscope,  and  believed  they  saw  males,  females,  and  eggs
among  these  Infusoria,  and  they  consequently  set  themselves  up  as  open
adversaries  of  spontaneous  generation.’

Pasteur  adds : ‘ One  must  recognize  that  the  proof  in  support  of  either  of
these  opinions  scarcely  bore  examination.’  ^

The  problem  which  he  had  to  solve  was  to  account  for  the  develop-
ment of  micro-organisms  in  putrescible  liquids.  Those  who  supported
the  h3rpothesis  of  spontaneous  generation  maintained  that  the  njinute
organisms  revealed  by  the  microscope  came  spontaneously  into  being
in  any  liquid,  even  though  it  had  originally  been  quite  free  from
any  such  organisms.  The  chief  contemporary  exponent  of  this
theory,  Pouchet,  and  his  two  students,  Joly  and  Musset,  in  urging
the  theory  of  heterogenia  or  spontaneous  generation  asserted  that
* they  did  not  mean  a creation  out  of  nothing,  but  the  production
of  a new  organized  being,  lacking  parents,  and  of  which  the  primor-
dial elements  are  drawn  from  ambient  organic  matter  To  Pasteur
this  hjTpothesis  appeared  extremely  unplausible.  He  wrote  to
Pouchet  pointing  out  that  no  decisive  evidence  had  been  ofiered
in  favour  of  the  theory.  ‘ I think  ’,  he  said,  ‘ you  are  wrong,  not
in  believing  in  spontaneous  generation  (for  it  is  dififtcult  in  such  a
case  not  to  have  a preconceived  idea),  but  in  af&rming  the  existence
of  spontaneous  generation.  In  experimental  science  it  is  always  a
mistake  not  to  doubt  when  facts  do  not  compel  aflSrmation.  . . .
In  my  opinion,  the  question  is  whole  and  untouched  by  decisive
proofs.  What  is  there  in  air  which  provokes  organization  ? Are
they  germs  ? is  it  a solid  ? is  it  a gas  ? is  it  a fluid  ? is  it  a principle
such  as  ozone  ? All  this  is  unknown  and  invites  experiment In
this  letter  Pasteur  reveals  the  scientific  temper.  It  is  necessary  to
be  guided  by  an  hypothesis  ; but  no  hypothesis  should  be  afiSxmed
unless  it  is  adequately  supported  by  experimental  evidence.  He
therefore  set  himself — as  he  explained  in  the  Memoir  setting  out
the  fruits  of  his  work — ' to  supply  sure  and  decisive  proofs,  obliging
non-prejudiced  minds  to  reject  all  idea  of  the  existence  in  the  atmo-
sphere of  a more  or  less  mysterious  principle,  gas,  fluid,  bone,  etc.,
having  the  property  of  arousing  life  in  infusions

These  ^ sure  and  decisive  proofs  ’ could,  he  saw  clearly,  only
be  provided  by  experiments  so  carefully  conducted  that  all  the
conditions  should  be  under  control.  In  this  way  alone  would  it  be
possible  to  analyse  out  the  factors  that  were  involved.  Pasteur  was
fully  aware  of  the  dfficulty  of  performing  decisive  experiments.
Writing  to  his  father  about  the  opposition  of  Pouchet  and  Joly,
he  said : ‘ They  do  not  know  how  to  experiment ; it  is  not  an  easy

^ loc.  cit.,  pp.  217-18.  ® Life  of  Pasteur,  I,  p.  123.

® Hid,,  p.  122.  * Memoir,  p.  226.


21


322


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


art ; it  demands,  besides  certain  natural  qualities,  a long  practice
wHcb  naturalists  bave  not  generally  acquired  nowadays  Among
tbe  natural  qualities  required  is  tbe  ability  to  tbinJk:  out  clearly
wbat  are  tbe  relevant  factors  tbe  presence  or  absence  of  wMcb  is
to  be  tested.  He  asked  himself  whether  the  minute  organisms  that
develop  in  water  that  has  been  sterilized  could  have  ^ome  from  the
air.  If  so,  then  the  little  solid  particles  that  can  be  seen  floating
in  the  air,  called  atmospheric  dust,  will  contain  germs.  Hence,
Pasteur  said  : ^ My  first  care  was  to  find  a method  which  should
permit  of  collecting  the  solid  particles  that  float  in  the  air  and  of
studying  them  under  the  microscope.  . . , The  method  which  I
used  to  collect  and  examine  the  dusts  suspended  in  the  air  is  very
simple ; it  consists  in  fiiltering  a known  volume  of  air  through  gun-
cotton, which  is  soluble  in  a nnxture  of  alcohol  and  ether.  The
solid  particles  collect  on  the  fibres  of  the  cotton.  The  cotton  is
then  treated  with  its  solvent,  and  after  a time  all  the  solid  particles
fall  to  the  bottom  of  the  liquid ; they  are  washed  several  times
and  transferred  to  the  stage  of  the  microscope,  where  they  are  easily
examined.’  This  experiment  showed. that  ‘ordinary  air  always
contains  a variable  number  of  corpuscles  whose  form  and  structure
show  them  to  be  of  organic  nature

Pasteur  then  asked  : ‘ Do  fertile  germs  really  exist  among  them
i.e.  the  corpuscles)  ? ’ To  find  the  answer  to  this  question  Pasteur
devised  experiments  imder  varied  conditions.  It  was  known  that
liquids  differed  in  the  degree  in  which  they  were  putrescible.
Sugared  yeast-water  is  a highly  putrescible  liquid.  He  put  some
of  this  liquid  into  a flask,  sealed  the  neck,  and  having  boiled  the
water  for  two  or  three  minutes,  he  allowed  it  to  cool.  The  flask,
which  had  been  only  half  jSlled  with  the  liquid,  was  then  slowly
filled  with  ordinary  air  that  had  been  heated.  The  neck  of  the
flask  was  then  closed.  This  flask  was  kept  for  a long  time  at  a
constant  temperature  of  30°  C.  No  minute  organisms  appeared —
Pasteur  thus  summed  up  the  results  of  this  experiment :

‘ I affirm  with  the  utmost  sincerity,  that  I have  never  had  a doubtful
result  from  an  experiment  of  this  kind.  Sugared  yeast-water  boiled  for  two
or  three  minutes  and  then  exposed  to  air  which  has  been  heated  never  alters
at  all,  even  after  eighteen  months  at  a temperature  of  25°  to  30°,  while  if  one
abandons  it  to  ordinary  air,  after  a day  or  two  it  is  seen  to  be  in  the  course  of  a
manifest  change  and  becomes  full  of  bacteria  and  vibrios,  or  covered  with
moulds.’

These  experiments  suflS.ced  to  show  that  ordinary  air  contains
organized  corpuscles  closely  resembling  the  germs  of  inferior  organ-
isms, and  that  sugared  yeast-water,  which  is  highly  putrescible  in
contact  with  ordinary  air,  remains  unaltered  when  left  in  contact
* Life  of  Pasteur,  p.  125.


PEINCIPLES  OF  CAUSAL  DETEEMINATION  323


with  heated  air.  Pasteur  had  now  to  ascertain  whether  atmospheric
duLst  alone  would  produce  infusoria  or  moulds.  Until  this  was
established  there  remained  the  possibility  that  something  in  the  air,
other  than  the  dust,  was  the  cause  of  the  putrescence.  He  accord-
ingly devised  an  ingenious  and  elaborate  experiment  by  means  of
which  he  was  able  to  introduce  atmospheric  dusts  collected  on  a
wad  of  cotton  (in  the  manner  described  in  the  former  experiment)
into  these  liquids,  in  the  presence  of  heated  air.  He  made  flasks
with  long  necks.  One  of  these  had  a long  thin  neck  which,  when
the  liquid  had  been  poured  into  the  flask  and  boiled,  was  curved
and  drawn  to  a point.  This  point  was  left  open,  in  communication
with  the  air.  The  liquid  in  the  other  flask  was  likewise  boiled  and
left  to  cool,  the  neck  being  open  to  the  air.  The  liquid  in  the  flask
with  the  curved  neck  remained  pure  ; the  liquid  in  the  other  flask
developed  infusoria.  The  only  diflerence  in  the  treatment  of  the
two  flasks  was  that  in  the  one  case  the  curved  neck  allowed  the
air  to  enter,  but  the  dusts  did  not  pass  through,  owing  to  the  small-
ness of  the  opening ; they  remained  on  the  curved  neck.  Thus,
in  both  cases,  everjdjhing  in  the  air  except  the  dusts  entered  both
hquids  ; the  dusts  entered  one  liquid  only.  That  liquid  developed
infusoria.  If,  however,  the  flask  containing  the  pure  water  was
shaken  violently,  infusoria  resulted.  The  violent  shaking  caused  the
air  to  enter  the  neck  with  enough  violence  to  carry  the  dusts  with  it.

There  remained,  however,  a further  factor  that  might  have  been
relevant.  The  cotton  on  which  the  dusts  were  collected  was  an  organic
substance.  It  might,  therefore,  have  given  rise  to  the  organisms.
Pasteur  accordingly  substituted  asbestos  for  the  cotton,  thus  using  a
mineral,  instead  of  an  organic  filter.  He  thus  states  his  procedure  :

‘ One  miglit  perhaps  wonder  if,  in  the  preceding  experiments,  the  cotton,
as  an  organic  substance,  had  some  influence  on  the  results.  It  would  above
all  be  useful  to  know  what  would  happen  if  similar  manipulations  were  carried
out  on  flasks  prepared  as  described,  without  the  atmospheric  dusts.  In  other
words,  has  the  method  of  introducing  the  dusts  any  influence  of  its  own  ? It
is  indispensable  to  know  this.

‘ In  order  to  answer  these  questions,  I replaced  the  cotton  by  asbestos.
Little  wads  of  asbestos,  through  which  a current  of  air  had  been  passed  for
several  hours,  were  introduced  into  the  flasks  according  to  the  preceding
instructions,  and  they  gave  results  of  exactly  the  same  kind  as  those  we  have
just  quoted.  But  with  wads  of  asbestos  previously  calcined  and  not  filled
with  dust,  or  filled  with  dust  but  heated  afterwards,  no  turbidity,  nor  Infusoria,
nor  plants  of  any  kind  were  ever  produced.  The  liquid  remained  perfectly
clear.  I have  repeated  these  comparative  experiments  very  many  times,  and
I have  always  been  surprised  by  their  distinctness,  by  their  perfect  constancy.
It  would  seem,  indeed,  that  experiments  of  this  delicacy  should  sometimes
show  contradictory  results  due  to  accidental  causes  of  error.  But  never  once
did  any  of  my  blank  experiments  show  any  growths,  just  as  the  sowing  of
dusts  has  always  furnished  living  organisms.’

Pasteur  varied  these  experiments  by  taking  specimens  ot  air


324  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

from  different  places : from  the  laboratory  cellars,  from  the  city
of  Paris,  from  rural  districts,  from  Alpine  heights,  and  even  from
a glacier.  The  purer  the  air  the  less  the  concentration  of  atmos-
pheric dusts.  In  every  case  he  found  that  contact  with  purer  air
produced  a less  degree  of  putrescence.  Thus  Pasteur  took  the
greatest  care  to  vary  as  much  as  possible  any  condition  that  might
seem  relevant  to  the  production  of  the  effect  that  he  was  investigat-
ing, His  experiments  were  carried  on  throughout  a period  of  years
and  were  so  uniformly  successful  that  he  might  well  feel  justified
in  regarding  the  result  as  conclusive.  He  had  answered  the  question
that  he  had  proposed  to  himseff,  and  which  we  have  already  quoted :

What  is  there  in  air  which  provokes  organization  ? ” He  had
shown  that  it  was  not  a gas,  nor  a fluid,  nor  a principle,  such  as
""  vital  force  but  a germ.

What,  we  may  ask  at  this  point,  had  Pasteur  actually  estab-
lished ? He  had  not  shown  that  biogenesis  is  the  only  possible
hypothesis  to  account  for  the  existence  of  living  organisms.  But
he  had  shown  decisively  that  there  was  no  evidence  in  favour  of
the  spontaneous  generation  of  micro-organisms  in  putrescible  liquids.
He  had  accounted  for  the  appearance  of  such  evidence  by  showing
that  it  was  due  to  the  neglect  of  factors  relevant  to  the  production
of  the  result.  He  had  analysed  out  the  factors  involved  and  had
shown  that  one  factor,  viz.  organized  corpuscles  closely  resembling
the  germs  of  inferior  organisms,  was  sufficient  to  the  production  of
the  result,  and  necessary  in  all  the  cases  investigated.  Whenever
this  factor  was  present,  then  infusoria  appeared ; whenever  it  was
absent,  the  relevant  conditions  remaining  the  same,  no  such  organ-
isms were  produced.  He  had  destroyed  the  evidential  basis  of  the
theory  of  spontaneous  generation,  and  had  consequently  shown  not
only  that  the  hypothesis  was  unplausible  but  also  that  it  was  unfruit-
ful. He  had  not  shown,  nor  is  it  probable  that  he  would  have  wished
to  claim  that  he  had  shown,  that  the  synthetic  production  of  living
organisms  in  a laboratory  is  impossible.  A further  consequence  of
his  investigation  was  that  it  laid  the  foundation  of  the  modern
science  of  bacteriology.  In  a significant  statement  in  a report  of
his  work,  presented  to  the  Academic  in  1880,  he  said : ' What  would
be  most  desirable  would  be  to  push  those  studies  far  enough  to
prepare  the  road  for  a serious  research  into  the  origin  of  various
diseases  ’ i It  is  well  known  that  the  result  of  Pasteur^s  work  was
to  prepare  the  way  for  this  further  research.  His  experimental
investigations  led  to  generalizations  with  regard  to  the  connexion
between  specific  micro-organisms  and  specific  diseases.  It  was  the
beginning  of  a systematic  organization  of  a branch  of  knowledge.

An  examination  of  Pasteur’s  investigation  brings  out  several
^ Quoted  by  Vallery-Radot,  op.  cit.,  I,  p.  128.


PEINCIPLES  OF  CAUSAL  DETERMINATION  325


points  of  the  greatest  significance  with  regard  to  experimental
inquiry.  It  will  be  useful  to  sum  these  up  here :

(1)  The  investigation  must  be  determined  by  a question  formu-
lated with  sufficient  definiteness  to  guide  the  inquiry.

(2)  The  complex  situation  from  which  the  investigator  starts
must  be  carefully  analysed  into  its  constituent  factors.

(3)  All  the  relevant  conditions  must  be  carefully  noted  and  kept
in  mind  throughout  the  course  of  the  inquiry.  Numerous  examples
could  be  given  of  erroneous  results  due  to  the  neglect  of  some  relevant
factor.  Previous  investigators  of  the  theory  of  spontaneous  genera-
tion had  frequently  failed  in  this  respect.  For  example,  Needham
— an  English  priest  in  the  eighteenth  century — claimed  to  have
obtained  infusoria  in  vases  that  had  been  filled  with  putrescible
liquid,  boiled,  and  then  closed.  But  he  had  closed  the  vases  with
cork  stoppers  that  are  sufficiently  porous  to  let  micro-organisms
through.  A contemporary  opponent,  the  Abbe  Spallanza,  repeated
this  experiment  with  greater  care.  He  thus  records  the  experi-
ment : ^ I used  hermetically  sealed  vases.  I kept  them  for  an  hour
in  boiling  water,  and  after  having  opened  them  and  examined  their
contents  within  a reasonable  time  I found  not  the  slightest  trace
of  animalculae,  though  I had  examined  with  the  microscope  the
infusoria  from  nineteen  different  vases.’  i

(4)  Relevant  factors  must  be  varied  one  at  a time.  This  condi-
tion was  observed  by  Pasteur  when  he  prepared  flasks  differing  only
in  the  circumstance  that  dust  could  pass  through  the  neck  of  one,
but  not  of  the  other.  ^

(5)  Those  circumstances  which  are  supposed  to  be  irrelevant
must  be  varied  as  much  as  possible  in  order  to  test  whether  they
are  m fact  irrelevant.  In  accordance  with  this  requirement  Pasteur
substituted  a mineral  filter  (asbestos)  for  cotton.

(6)  The  utmost  possible  care  must  be  taken  not  to  introduce
unnoticed  factors  that  may  be  relevant  to  the  result.  Failure  to
observe  condition  (2)  frequently  leads  to  violation  of  this  rule  of
experimental  inquiry.

These  rules  state  the  conditions  that  must  be  observed  in  order
that  experiments  may  be  performed  in  such  a manner  as  to  be
decisive  in  scientific  investigation.  They  may  be  summed  up  in
the  formula : Analysis  of  the  given  situation  and  control  of  the
conditions  so  that  every  relevant  factor  can  be  varied  one  at

1 Quoted  by  Vallery-Badot,  I,  p.  119.

® There  was  difference  in  one  relevant  circumstance.  That  this  was  an
assumption  must  be  granted.  The  flasks  differed  in  their  spatial  position,  in
the  time  at  which  they  were  filled,  and  so  on.  But  these  factors  were  judged  to
be  irrelevant.  Under  what  conditions  we  are  justified  in  making  these  judge-
ments of  irrelevance  we  shall  discuss  later.


326


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


a time  are  tte  essential  preconditions  of  scientific  experimental
investigation.

To  observe  tbese  rnles  exactly  is  not  easy.  The  investigator
needs  constantly  to  reconsider  Ms  experiments  so  as  to  ask  Mmself
whether  he  has  perhaps  been  assuming  that  some  factor  is  irrelevant
which  may  turn  out  not  to  be  so.  He  requires  the  ability  and  know-
ledge to  suggest  what  would  be  likely  to  happen  were  he  to  introduce
some  factor  not  yet  present  in  Ms  experiments.  It  is  clear  that
Pasteur’s  work  possesses  these  characteristics.  His  biographer
claims  that  Pasteur  had  ' a mind  which,  while  pressing  forward  to
estabhsh  new  facts,  was  ever  seeking  arguments  against  itself,  and
turned  back  to  strengthen  points  which  seemed  yet  weak’.^  It
was  these  qualities  of  mind  that  made  Pasteur  a great  experimental
scientist.


§3.  THE  SPECIAL  PEINCIPLES  OE  CAUSAL
DETEEMINATION

The  example  studied  in  the  preceding  section  was  an  example
of  a particular  set  of  experiments  undertaken  in  order  to  establish
a perfectly  definite  conclusion.  Pasteur  Mmself  summed  up  the
conclusion  of  Ms  first  set  of  experiments  as  follows : ‘ In  face  of
such  results  ...  I regard  tMs  as  mathematically  demonstrated  : all
organisms  wMch  appear  in  sugared  albuminous  solutions  boiled  and
then  exposed  to  ordinary  air  derive  their  origin  from  the  solid  particles
which  are  suspended  in  the  atmosphere.’  ^ Thus  he  claimed  that
not  only  on  this  particular  occasion  had  a certain  factor  been  shown
to  be  necessary  and  sufficient  for  the  production  of  the  result,  but
that  also  on  all  other  occasions  of  a like  kind  such  a factor  would
be  found  to  be  necessary  and  sufficient  for  the  production  of  a similar
result.  That  is  to  say,  he  generalized  the  conclusion  obtained  from
Ms  particular  investigation.  In  so  doing  he  assumed,  first,  that
there  are  regular  causal  conne^ons ; secondly,  that  ^these  causal
cbmeSonscan  be  asc^tained^ by  means  of  investigations  carried
out  in  accordance  with  general  principles  regulating  the  search  for
causes.  To  what  extent  these  assumptions  are  capable  of  justifica-
tion we  are  not  at  present  concerned  to  discuss.  In  this  chapter
we  are  adopting  the  standpoint  of  scientific  inquiry  wMch  undoubtedly
makes  such  assumptions.  Accordingly  we  take  for  granted  the
validity  of  the  conception  of  cause  that  has  developed  out  of  the
common-sense  notion,  which  was  discussed  in  Chapter  XV.  Thus
we  assume  that  in  a given  complex  situation,  which  can  be  regarded
as  relatively  disconnected  from  other  situations,  we  can,  for  the
purposes  of  a given  investigation,  distinguish  between  cwdiiicm-and
cause ; that  we  can  analyse  the  given  situation  into  a set  of  factors
^ op.  cit.,  I,  p.  129«  * Memoir,  p,  226,


PEINOIPLES  OF  CAUSAL  DETEEMINATION  327


jointly  sufficient  for  the  production  of  the  occurrence  under  investiga-
tion,  i.e.  the  effect  The  problem,  then,  is  to  determine  whether
any  one,  or  more,  of  these  factors,  and  if  so,  which,  is  not  only^
sufficient  but  also  necessary  for  the  production  of  the  effect.  ^ When-  j
ever  a given  result  occurs  the  total  situation  contains  what  is  sufficient  J
to  produce  it  but,  as  we  saw,  it  always  contains  also  more  than  is
sufficient.  Experiment  is  a practical  means  enabling  us  to  ascertain]
what  can  be  excluded  without  alteration  of  the  result.  Hence  we
reach  scientific  propositions  of  the  iormWEeneveFW,  then  W.

The  logical  process  of  elimination  depends  upon  the  two  prin-
ciples that  follow  from  the  nature  of  a causal  connexion,  which  we
stated  on  pag(^.  319.  Pasteur’s  investigation  exemplifies  these  prin-
ciples ; his  conclusion  was  drawn  in  accordance  with  them.  From
these  principles  we  can  derive  four  special  principles  determining
the  selection  of  material,  or  instances,  in  order  to  obtain  an  inductive
conclusion.  These  principles  are  essentially  principles  determining
experimental  investigation,  and  it  is  as  such  that  we  shall  state  them
although  they  ho  doubt  have  a wider  application.  These  principles
are  employed  by  the  investigator  whose  fundamental  rule  is  : Vary
one  factor  only  at  a time.  It  is  clear  that  such  a procedure  is  possiBle  ^
only  on  the  baSs"~o^ considerable  knowledge  with  regard  to  the  j
relevant  data.  Methodical  procedure  presupposes  knowledge  derived
frSoa  pre-scientific  experience  as  well  as  the  results  yielded  by  other
investigations  in  the  same  field  of  inquiry.

In  stating  the  four  special  principles  we  shall  find  it  convenient
to  use  literal  symbols.  Accordingly  we  shall  continue  to  symbolize
the  factor  whose  cause  is  being  investigated  by  X,  and  we  shall
use  letters  from  the  beginning  of  the  alphabet  to  symbolize  factors
in  the  complex  situation,  or  set  of  circumstances,  which  accompanies
(either  precedently  or  simultaneously)  the  occurrence  of  X.

Special  Pkinciples  Determining  the  Selection  op  Material  1

If  in  a number  of  instances  of  a set  of  circumstances  always  |
accompanied  by  X,  one  factor  A is  varied  whilst  the  rest  remain
constant,  then  X is  noFciusiiry^^  with  A.

'^II.  If  m a number  of  instances  of  a set  oT'circumstances  which
is  constantly  conjoined  with  X,  the  factor  A is  always  present,  and
if  the  remaining  factors  BODE.  . . of  that  set  of  circumstances
are  present  in  various  combinations  with  other  factors,  and  in  no
instance  are  these  sets  of  circumstances  conjoined  with  X,  then  A
is  probably  causally  connected  with  X.

III.  If  in  a complex  situation  X occurs,  and  if  the  withdrawal

^ It  must  be  remembered  that  in  saying  that  X is  necessary  for  the  production
of  A we  mean  that  if  X had  not  occurred,  A would  not  have  occurred*  In  this
©ase  X is  causally  necessary  to  the  production  of  A*


328


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


(of  a single  factor  A from  that  situation  is  accompanied  by  tbe  witb-
drawal  of  X,  then  A is  causally  connected  with  X ; and  conversely,
if  in  a complex  situation  X dogs  not  occur,  and  if  A alone  is  intro-
duc^mt^tSai^^
with  X.

f ^TVT”  If  in  a complex  situation  containing  both  A and  X,  the
factor  X varies  in  some  manner  whenever  A varies  in  some  manner,
then  A is  causally  connected  with  X.

It  is  clear  that  the  first  special  principle  directs  investigation
^ Q^ccordance  with  the  fundamental  principle  that  notimg:  thaVjs

aEsSit  when  the  effect o.GCUXS_can be  the  cause  of  that  eSejoi.  A

weIl5noW  experiment  of  Newton’s  aferdFX’godSTexample.  He
wanted  to  ascertain  whether  all  substances,  notwithstanding  their
chemical  constitution,  are  equally  affected  by  gravitation.  He  had,
then,  to  observe  a situation  in  which  one  factor  only  was  varied  in
each  instance.  The  motion  of  a pendulum  is  conditioned  by  the
resistance  of  the  air,  or  other  medium  in  which  it  swings.  Newton
accordingly  made  pendulums,  the  oscillations  of  which  were  to  be
compared,  of  ^ equal  boxes  of  wood,  hanging  by  equal  threads,  and
filled  with  different  substances,  so  that  the  total  weights  should
be  equal  and  the  centres  of  oscillation  at  the  same  distance  from
the  points  of  suspension.  Hence,  the  resistance  of  the  air  became
approximately  a matter  of  indifference ; for  the  outward  size  and
shape  of  the  pendulums  being  the  same,  the  absolute  force  of  resist-
ance would  be  the  same,  so  long  as  the  pendulum  vibrated  with
equal  velocity ; and  the  weights  being  equal  the  resistance  would
diminish  the  velocity  equally.  Hence,  if  any  inequality  were  ob-
served in  the  vibrations  of  the  two  pendulums,  it  must  arise  from
the  only  ciccumstance  which  was  different,  namely  the  chemical
nature  of  the  matter  within  the  boxes.  No  inequality  being  observed,
the  chemical  nature  of  substances  can  have  no  appreciable  influence
upon  the  force  of  gravitation  It  is  clear  that  in  this  experiment
only  one  factor  was  varied ; the  variation  of  this  factor  was  not
accompanied  by  any^fference  in  the  result,  hence  the  given  factor
was  not  causally  connected  with  the  result.  Newton’s  decision  to
vary  this  factor  was  due  to  the  natural  expectation  that  this  factor
might  be  causally  connected  with  the  given  effect.  In  showing  that
it  was  not,  Newton  was  reasoning  in  accordance  with  the  first
principle.

It  is  important  to  observe  that  this  principle  requires  agreement
in  all  the  relevant  factors  but  one,  and  is  thus  concerned  with  in-
stances in  which  there  is  a single  difference,  throughout  the  instances
of  the  causal  occuri^nce  and  no  difference  in  the  effect.  It  is  easy  to
confuse  this  prmcink3atlL±he  pmciple  called  bv  I^fll  jbe  principle
^ Jevons,  Primifles  of  Science,  p.  443.


PEINCIPLES  OP  CAUSAL  DETEEMINATIOK  329


ot  agwment,  wh-icli  we  shall  discuss  ia  the  next  section.  It  is  also  ‘
easy  to“lall  into  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  since  what  is  not
present  when  an  effect  occurs  cannot  be  the  cause,  then  what  is
present  must  be  the  cause.  But  a factor  may  be  present  and  yet
may  not  be  the  cause.  Failure  to  recognize  this  facFEaFLeen
the  cause  of  hasty  generalizations  that  are  as  ill-founded  as  many
of  the  generalizations  derived  from  simple  enumeration.  Thus  the
following  pseudo-principle  has  often  been  assumed : If  two  occur-
rences constantly  accompany  each  other  they  are  probably  causally
connected.  It  may  be  admitted  that  constant  conjunction  may
suggest  a causal  connexion,  but  no  conclusion  can  be  safely  drawn
until  instances  are  found,  or  devised,  which  provide  variation  in
one  of  the  factors.  The  fallacy  which  such  hasty  generalization
exemplifies  is  known  as  the  fallacy.__jQljpQ.9f,  hoc  ergo  froyter  hoc.
Popular  superstitions  illustrate  this  fallacy,  for  example,  that  pass-
ing under  a ladder  brings  ill-luck ; that  looking  at  the  new  moon
through  glass  is  unlucky ; that  if  thirteen  people  sit  together  at
a meal  one  of  them  will  die  within  a short  time ; that  a journey
taken  on  a Friday  is  unlucky,  and  so  on.  It  is  unlikely  that  nothing
but  the  constant  conjunction  of  the  two  occurrences  enters  into  the
reasoning.  In  the  case  of  the  last  two  superstitions  it  is  probable
that  the  origin  can  be  traced  to  theXast  Supper.  But  such  super-
stitions linger  on  mainly  because  reliance  is  placed  upon  this  pseudo-
principle. Instances  where  the  two  occurrences  are  conjoined  are
noted  : inst^'^s  v^ere  the  “con] unction  fails  are  ignored.  Every^*
one  knows  how  hard  it  is  to  take  heed  of  instances  contrary  to  our
prejudices ; we  are  prone  to  fail  to  observe  negative  instances.  Dar-
win, who  was  aware  of  this  danger,  formed  the  habit  of  paying  atten-
tion to  instances  unfavourable  to  his  hypotheses.  He  says : ‘ I
had  also,  during  many  years  followed  a golden  rule,  namely,  that
whenever  a published  fact,  a new  observation  or  thought  came  across
me,  which  was  opposed  to  my  general  results,  to  make  a memorandum
of  it  without  fail  and  at  once  ; for  I had  found  by  experience  that
such  facts  and  thoughts  were  far  more  apt  to  escape  from  the  memory
than  favourable  ones

The  second  principle  leads  us  to  select  sets  of  instances  so  related
that  one  group  contains  in  every  set  a certain  fact  A,  and  the  second
group,  which  is  in  pari  materia^  is  such  that  no  instance  contains
the  factor  A but  every  instance  contains  some  of  the  other  factors
contained  in  the  first  group.  The  former  group  constitutes  the  set
of  positive  instances,  the  latter  the  set  of  negative  instances.  If  the
positive  instances  are  accompanied  by  X,  and  the  negative  instances
are  not,  then,  in  accordance  with  the  principle  we  can  draw  the
conclusion  that  A is  probably  causally  connected  with  X.  This
and  Letters,  ed.  by  F.  Darwin,  1887,  Vol.  I,  p.  87.


330


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


principle  miglit  be  exemplified  in  an  investigation  designed  to  ascer-
tain wbetier  tlie  teaching  of  Latin  by  the  direct  method  produces
the  best  results.  For  the  purposes  of  such  an  investigation  it  must
be  assumed  that  there  is  some  means  of  determining  what  is  meant
by  ''the  best  results and  some  way  of  recognizing  when  such
results  are  achieved.  Let  this  complex  result  be  represented  by  E.
It  may  be  noticed  that  wherever  the  direct  method  of  teaching
Latin  is  used,  E is  secured.  The  various  schools  in  which  this
direct  method  was  used  would  differ  inter  se  in  many  respects.
Some  of  these  differences  might  easily  be  recognized  to  be  irrelevant,
but  there  would  probably  be  considerable  variation  in  other  factors
known  to  be  relevant,  for  example,  proficiency  of  the  teachers,
amount  of  time  given  each  week  to  Latin  lessons,  social  status  of
the  pupils,  amount  of  homework  done,  variation  in  the  curriculum,
ventilation  of  class-rooms,  and  so  on.  If  we  could  obtain  a set  of
negative  instances  in  which  each  of  these  factors  was  present  in
some  one,  or  more  combinations,  in  the  same  way  as  in  at  least
one  instance  of  the  positive  set,  then  the  two  sets  could  be  fruitfully
compared.  If  the  positive  instances  secured  E and  the  negative
instances  did  not,  then  we  could  conclude  in  accordance  with  the
second  principle  that  probably  E was  causally  dependent  upon  the
direct  method,  so  far  as  the  given  investigation  was  concerned.  In
reasoning  in  accordance  with  this  principle  we  could  feel  no  great
confidence  that  we  had  discovered  more  than  a many-one  relation.
Thus  it  is  clear  that  although  the  direct  method  of  teaching  Latin
may  be  productive  of  satisfactory  results,  yet  these  results  might
also  be  obtained  by  some  other  combination  of  factors.  There  is
at  least  an  appearance  of  the  plurality  of  causes.  Yet  it  is  with
regard  to  such  problems  that  we  constantly  employ  the  concept  of
cause.  The  same  considerations  apply  with  regard  to  the  problems
of  industrial  psychology.  The  data  of  the  problem  are  such  that
reasoning  must  be  in  accordance  with  this  second  principle.  The
conclusions  reached  may  be  worth  further  investigation,  although
they  cannot  be  experimentally  tested.

The  third  principle  determines  the  selection  of  hastances  capable
of  suggesting  decisive  conclusions.  It  may  be  called  the  'princi'ple
of  difference.  Given  that  a complex  situation  is  quiescent,  and  that
when  A is  introduced  mto  it  X occurs,  then  A is  the  cause  of  X.
Provided  that  A is  the  single  difference  between  the  two  instances,
then  the  principle  justifies  us  in  concluding  that  we  have  an  in-
[dubitable  example  of  a causal  connexion.  It  does  not,  however,
foUow  that  the  relation  between  A and  X is  one-one.  This  will
be  the  case  if,  and  only  if,  we  can  show  that  the  plurality  of  causes
does  not  occur.  The  principle  of  difference  foEows  directly  from
the  definition  of  cause  given  by  Galileo : ' That  and  no  other  is


PEINCIPLES  OF  CAUSAL  DETERMINATION  331

in  the  proper  sense  to  be  called  cause,  at  whose  presence  the  effect
always  follows,  and  at  whose  renaoval  the  e&ct  disappears  this
principle  is  constantly  exemplified  in  our  everyday  reasonings.  In
our  discussion  of  the  common-sense  notion  of  cause  we  gave  many
examples  of  its  use.  We  rub  a match  on  a prepared  surface  and
the  flame  bursts  out.  Here  the  match-box  surface  and  the  match  and
the  surrounding  air  constitute  the  complex  situation.  Into  this  is
introduced  the  factor  rubbing  the  match  against  the  surface.  This
factor  is  then  the  cause  of  the  bursting  of  the  match  into  flame.  The
match-box  situation  is  a quiescent  situation  into  which  a given
factor  is  introduced.  The  movement  of  the  striker’s  arm  is  causally
connected  with  the  movement  of  the  match  over  the  surface,  but  it
is  not  reckoned  as  a factor  in  the  flame  situation.  The  student  should
have  no  difficulty  in  finding  exemplifications  of  this  principle  in  the
experimental  investigation  recorded  in  the  preceding  section.  Ail
experimental  science  presupposes  this  principle,  as  indeed  Galileo’s
definition  suggests.  The  successful  employment  depends  upon
the  care  with  which  all  the  relevant  factors  have  been  analysed.
The  necessity  for  such  care  is  not  confined  to  instances  of  this
kind,  but  there  is  greater  danger  of  misapplication  of  this  prin-
ciple than  of  the  others.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  it  is  diffi-
cult to  be  sure  that  A alone  has  been  introduced  into,  or  withdrawn
from,  the  given  situation.  When  it  is  possible  to  make  this  assump-
tion, then  a single  experiment  performed  in  accordance  with  this
principle  yields  an  indubitable  result.

The  fourth  principle  determines  the  selection  of  instances  of
occurrences  which  vary  togeth^  We  reason  in  accordance  with  it
'^en  we  conclude  from  theWariation  of  one  factor  concomitantly
with  the  variation  of  another  factor  , in  a given  situation.  For
example,  since  the  faster  we  run,  the  hotter  we  get,  we  conclude
that  running  is  causally  connected  with  increase  of  bodily  heat.v
This  principle  is  of  great  importance  in  connexion  with  the  investiga-
tion of  precise  quantitative  variation.  The  conditions  under  which
it  can  be  applied  need  very  careful  statement.  Its  significance  is
revealed  only  when  we  have  gone  beyond  causal  determination.
Hence  it  will  be  more  fully  discussed  in  the  next  chapter.

§ 4.  MILL’S  FOUR,  METHODS  OF  EXPERIMENTAL  INQUIRY

Mill  held  that  aU  inductivemyestigation  was  a search  for  causes. .
He  maffitSne^TthaOh^^  EoT  the  "events  of

nature  than  that  which  arises  from  the  law  of  causation  ’.2  Accord-
ingly, for  him  the  problem  of  scientific  method  is  the  problem  of
determining  ways  in  which  causes  may  be  discovered.  His  analysis


^Opere,  IV,  p.  216*


* LogiCf  Bk.  Ill,  Chap*  XXI,  § 4,  note.


332


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


of  scientific  metliod,  tiierefore,  culminated  in  the  formulation  of  four
methods  which  he  sometimes  called  the  ^ direct  inductive  methods  ^
sometimes  the  ^ methods  of  experimental  inquirj  These  ‘ methods  ’
resemble  in  some  respects  the  four  principles  stated  in  the  preceding
section  but,  as  we  shall  see  later,  MilFs  conception  of  their  function
was  different  from  ours.  The  "methods’  as  Mill  stated  them,
have  played  an  important  part  in  the  development  of  inductive
logic  during  the  period  that  has  elapsed  since  the  publication  of  his
System  of  Logic,  They  have  played  a part— -out  of  all  proportion
to  their  importance— in  university  examinations  in  elementary  logic.^
They  have  been  both  hotly  espoused  and  derisively  criticized.  The
student  would  be  well  advised  to  read  Mill’s  own  exposition  of  these
method^^  The  following  discussion  will  make  no  attempt  to  make
a reding  of  Mill’s  own  statement  superfluous.

Exponents  of  Mill’s  logical  theory  seem  often  to  forget  the  motive
that  led  him  to  write  his  Logic,  Mill  was  primarily  interested  in  the
social  sciences  ; he  was  anxious  to  discover  whether  those  methods
which  had  been  so  signally  successful  in  the  natural  sciences  could
be  applied  with  equal  success  to  the  study  of  men  in  society.  He
accordingly  set  himself  the  task  of  carrying  out  a critical  examina-
tion of  the  procedure  which  he  believed  to  have  been  followed  by
scientists.  There  is  but  slight  evidence  for  the  not  uncommon  belief
that  Mill  believed  himself  to  be  instructing  the  scientist  how  to
perform  his  job.  He  studied  the  history  of  science  and  accounts
of  scientific  investigation ; he  prosecuted  a post-mortem  examination,
and  formulated  the  results  in  his  celebrated  " methods  Mill  was
by  no  means  the  first  logician  to  attempt  to  formulate  methods  of
causal  determination.  The  "meads  ’ mow  called  by  Mill’s  name
were  indicated  b^v^Hume  ] ^ something  resembling  them  was  stated
fairly  clearly  by  Bacon : ^ whilst  Herschel  ^ forimflated  " methods^
which  are  often  taken  to  be  equivalent  to  Mill’s.  But  Mill  did  not
only  give  a more  elaborate  and  definite  statement  of  the  methods
than  those  of  his  predecessors  ; he  approached  the  problem  from  a
diSerent  point  of  view,  since  he  sought  tjL  discover  " methods  oi-
groo/’.  EQsexgos^n js  npt^J^e^  His^tual

'statementsaboundTiiTabsm  Nothing,  however,  would  be  gained

by  commenting  upon  any  of  these  absurdities  except  those  for  the

1 Of.  N.  B.  Campbell,  Physics : The  Mements^  p.  89.  ‘ These  rules  are

termed  by  Mill  the  Canons  of  Induction,  and  there  are  few  of  us  sufficiently
fortunate  'as  to  have  escaped  encounter  with  them  in  the  examination  room.’

* See  BL  III,  Chap.  YIII.  The  student  should  also  consult  Mill’s  ninth
chapter,  in  which  he  gives  examples  of  the  use  of  the  methods.  In  the  analysis
ofthese  examples  many  of  the  deficiencies  of  his  exposition  of  the  methods  are
corrected.

® A Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  Bk.  I,  Pt.  Ill,  § xv.

* Novum  Orgarmm,  ® Natural  Philosophy,


PRINCIPLES  OF  CAUSAL  DETERMINATION  333

avoidance  of  wMcIl  some  care  is  necessary.  One  anomaly,  whicb
scarcely  amounts  to  an  absurdity,  may  be  mentioned  at  tbe  outset,
Mill’s  chapter  is  entitled  ‘ Four  Methods  of  Experimental  Inquiry
Yet  he  gives  five  methods — a point  which  exponents  and  criticsaEke
seem  to  have  overlooked.  The  inclusion  of  a fifth  method  would
appear  to  have  been  an  oversight  due  to  his  not  having  clearly
decided  what  exactly  a ‘ method  ’ was.  We  shall  see  the  import-
ance of  this  point  later  on.  The  fifth  method,  given  in  his  exposition
but  excluded  from  the  title  of  his  chapter,  would  appear  to  be  the
one  he  gives  fourth  and  calls  the  ' Method  of  Residues  not,  as
might  have  been  expected,  the  one  given  fifth,  nor,  as  is  often
supposed,  the  one  given  third  and  called  the  ' Joint  Method
Certainly  the  ^ Method  of  Residues’  is  in  no  sense  an  inductive
method,  even  in  the  sense  in  which  Mill  usually  under^oodTBiir
phrase.

It  is  desirable  to  state  Mill’s  ‘ methods  ’ in  his  own  words.  In
explaining  these  ^ methods  ’ Mill  used  letters  to  symbolize  the
factors  in  what  we  have  called  a causal  situation,  and  which  Mill
would  call  the  phenomenon  under  investigation.^  These  factors  are
called  antecedents  if  they  are  factors  in  the  cause-complex ; con-
sequents if  they  are  factors  in  the  effect-complex ; the  former  are
symbolized  by  capital  letters,  the  latter  by  the  corresponding  small
letters.  As  the  use  of  symbols  brings  out  clearly  the  assumptions
upon  which  the  analysis  rests,  a consideration  of  Mill’s  symbolism
will  enable  us  more  easily  to  recognize  the  diflS.culties  of  his  exposi-
tion. Mill  begins  by  laying  down  two  rules  of  experimental  inquiry,
which,  indeed,  follow  from  the  fundamental  principles  that  nothing
which  is  absent  when  an  occurrence  happens  can  be  the  cause  of
that  occurrence,  and  that  nothing  which  is  present  when  an  occurrence
fails  to  happen  can  be  the  cause  of  that  occurrence.  These  rules
are : (1)  Compare  different  instances  in  which  the  phenomenon
under  investigation  occurs;  (2)  Compare  instances  in  which  the
phenomenon  occurs  with  instances  in  other  respects  similar  in  which
it  does  not  occur.  From  these  two  fundamental  rules  Mill’s  four
‘ methods  ’ are  derived.  Each  ‘ method  ’ is  formulated  hypo-
thetically in  what  Mill  calls  a ‘ canon  ’.

Statement  oe  Mill’s  Four  Methods
1.  The  Method  of  Agreement.

Canon : ‘ If  two  or  more  instances  of  the  phenomenon  under
investigation  have  only  one  circumstance  in  common,  the  circum-
stance in  which  alone  all  the  instances  agree  is  the  cause  (or  effect)
of  the  given  phenomenon.’

^ Mill  uses  “ phenomenon  ” to  include  both  what  we  have  called  an  “ occur-
rence ” and  what  we  should  call  a property  ’’  or  a set  of  properties.


334


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Symbolization  : ^ A B C — > abc
ADE-->ad!e
/.A  — a

Example  : ^ Instances  in  wMct  bodies  assume  a crystalline  struc-
ture are  found  to  have  been  preceded  by  instances  wbicb  have  in
common  only  one  antecedent,  namely,  tbe  process  of  solidification
from  a fluid  state.  TMs  antecedent,  therefore,  is  tbe  cause  of  tbe
crystalline  structure.

2.  The  Method  of  Difference.

Canon : ‘ If  an  instance  in  wbicb  tbe  pbenomenon  under  in-
vestigation occurs,  and  an  instance  in  wbicb  it  does  not  occur,  have
every  circumstance  in  common  save  one,  that  one  occurring  only
in  tbe  former ; tbe  circumstance  in  wbicb  alone  tbe  two  instances
differ  is  tbe  effect,  or  tbe  cause,  or  an  indispensable  part  of  tbe
cause,  of^tbe  pbenomenon.^

Symbolization  : ABC-^abc
BO^bc
/.  A — -a

Example  : A man  in  tbe  fullness  of  life  is  shot  tbrougb  tbe  heart ;
be  is  wounded  and  dies.  Tbe  wound  is  tbe  only  circumstance  that
is  different ; hence,  bis  death  is  caused  by  the  wound.

3.  The  Joint  Method  of  Agreement  and  Difference.

Canon : ' If  two  or  more  instances  in  wbicb  the  pbenomenon
occurs  have  only  one  circumstance  in  common,  while  two  or  more
instances  in  wbicb  it  does  not  occur  have  nothing  in  common  save
tbe  absence  of  that  circumstance,  tbe  circumstance  in  wbicb  alone
tbe  two  sets  of  instances  differ  is  tbe  effect,  or  tbe  cause,  or  an  in-
dispensable part  of  tbe  cause,  of  tbe  phenomenon.’

It  is  desirable  to  postpone  tbe  symbolization  of  this  method,  as
well  as  any  attempt  to  exemplify  its  use,  until  after  tbe  statement
of  tbe  remaining  "Method’.  Mill’s  "fourth  canon’  for  tbe
" Method  of  Residues  ’ must  be  omitted  here,  since  not  even  Mill
was  able  to  maintain  that  this  method  was  properly  to  be  Regarded
as  one  of  tbe  " four  experimental  methods  ’.  It  will  accordingly
be  discussed  in  tbe  next  chapter.  We  have  now  to  consider  Mill’s
" fifth  method wbicb  must  be  stated  before  an  attempt  is  made
to  estimate  tbe  purpose  and  tbe  value  of  Mill’s  formulation  of  tbe
* methods  ’.

^ Mill  does  not  set  out  tbe  symbolization  in  tbis  manner,  nor  does  be  sym-
bolize tbe  relation.  Here  “ — expresses  “is  followed  by’’,  whereas  tbe
straight  line  symbobzes  “is  causally  connected  with  ”,  which  is  supposed  to  be
the  relation  deducible  from  the  instances  of  tbe  former  relation.

* In  each  case  the  example  given  is  taken  from  Mill’s  exposition.


PRINCIPLES  OP  CAUSAL  DETERMINATION  335


L The  Method  of  Concomitant  Variations.

Canon  : (Mill’s  Fifth  Canon)^  ‘ Whatever  phenomenon  varies  in
any  manner  whenever  another  phenomenon  varies  in  some  par-
ticular manner,  is  either  a cause  or  an  effect  of  that  phenomenon,
or  is  connected  with  it  through  some  fact  of  causation.’

Mill  tends  to  regard  this  method  as  primarily  designed  for  dealing
with  phenomena  into  which  enter  ‘indestructible  natural  agents,
which  it  is  impossible  either  to  exclude  or  to  isolate  ; which  we  can
neither  hinder  from  being  present,  nor  contrive  that  they  shall  be
present  alone  Such  indestructible  agents  he  calls  permanent
causes.  As  an  example  he  gives  the  influence  of  the  earth  upon
the  motion  of  a pendulum.  This  influence  can  be  diminished,  but
not  removed.  He  recognizes  that  this  method  might  be  used  to
determine  precise  quantitative  variations  between  causally  dependent
phenomena.  But  his  conception  of  what  precisely  such  a use  would
involve  is  extremely  unclear,  nor  does  he  seem  to  grasp  the  signific-
ance of  quantitative  variation.  It  is  accordingly  not  profitable  to
discuss  further  Mill’s  treatment  of  this  method.

An  examination  of  Mill’s  suggestions  for  the  symbolization  of
his  “methods”  will  enable  us  to  see  more  clearly  what  are  the
assumptions  upon  which  his  formulation  of  the  methods  rests  and
to  determine  more  precisely  the  utility  of  this  formulation.  The
simplest  of  the  methods  is  the  method  of  difference.  Here,  as
always,  Mill  assumes  a one-one  correspondence  of  the  cause-
factors  and  the  effect-factors~  His  symbols  5i^65?a  likeness  between^
cause  and  effect,  since  to  capital  letters  correspond  the  same  small
letters.  There  is  nothing  in  his  symbolism  to  suggest  that  in  every
instance  factors  are  present  which  are  not  present  in  any  other  ^
instance.  Such  factors  are  assumed  to  be  already  hioivn  to  be
irrelevant.  We  have  seen,  however,  that  such  an  assumption  may
be  erroneous.  Again,  a factor  present  in  eviryTEstance'“may
factor^mthout  which  the  effect  would  not  have  occurred  although
this  factor  was  not  recognized  as  being  in  any  way  connected  with
the  occurrence  of  the  effect.  An  example  of  a case  in  which  a given
factor  was  erroneously  assumed  to  be  irrelevant  is  afforded  by  Need-
ham’s use  of  corks  to  seal  the  vases  in  his  experiments  on  putrescible
liquids.  Mill’s  symbolization  of  the  “ method  of  difference  ” would'
be  unobjectionable  if,  and  only  if,  he  had  clearly  recognized  that
this  “ method  ” could  represent  only  a yost-mortem  examination  of
an  accomphshed  investigation.  He,  however,  regardeHTIt  as  a com-l
plefe  mShbd^^  0^  as  well  as  a method  of  proof.  The  sym-1

bolization  will  pass  muster  if  it  be  confined  to  the  representation
of  the  latter.  But  in  that  case  the  ‘ method  ’ cannot  be  regarded
as  being  certainly  exemplified  in  any  empirical  investigation.  That
this  is  so  can  easily  be  seen  from  a consideration  of  the  conditions


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


^ Jiliat  woidd  Lave  to  be  fulfilled  in  order  that  Mill’s  symbolism  should
adequately  represent  the  procedure.  These  conditions  arec-^'(l)  the
total  situation  must  be  capable  of  being  regarded  as  causally  dis-
connected from  other  situations ; ■^)  the  cause-factors  must  be
in  one-one  correspondence  with  the  factors  in  the  efiect-complex ;
^3)  one  factor  must  be  capable  o^eing  withdrawn  (or  added)  without
alteration  of  any  other  factor ; (4)  there  must  be  one,  and  only  one,
factor  present  in  the  one  instance  but  absent  from  the  other  instance.

The  first  condition  is  a condition  of  there  being  any  causal  uni-
formities, It  is  a matter  of  experience  that  there  are  such  uniformities
in  apparent  causal  disconnexion  from  other  occurrences.  This  dis-
connexion, however,  may  be  only  apparent.  Factors  either  assumed
to  be  irrelevant  or  totally  unnoticed  may  be  present.  These  factors
should  be  represented  by  the  sjonbolism.  T]^  second  oondition
is  certainly  not  usually  fulfilled.  It  is  indeed  difficult  to  give
any  precise  would  constitute  such  a one-one

correspondence  between  the  two  sets  of  factors.  In  giving  examfles
Mill  habitually  ignored  this  condition.  Hence,  the  first  respect  inl|
which  the  symbolism  must  be  emended  is  by  the  substitution  of  1 1
a single  letter  for  the  effect-occurrence.  The  third  condition  mayr
be  approximately  realized  but  the  fourth  is  realizable  only  if  by
factor  ” we  understand  relevant  factor

It  is  necessary,  then,  to  substitute  for  a 6 c the  single  letter  E,
and  to  add  symbols  representing  the  factors  which,  though  present,
are  either  unnoticed  or  are  judged  to  be  irrelevant.  Since  not  all
these  factors  would  remain  unaltered,  their  variation  must  be
symbolized.  The  method  ” may  then  be  represented  as  follows :

ABC  {xi,  E (^j,  y^. . .)

B C (V,  non-E  (j//,  .

A ^E

The  x^s  and  y's  in  brackets  symbolize  factors  only  some  of  which
will  have  remained  unaltered ; the  dots  symbolize  unnoticed  factors,
whilst  the  brackets  indicate  that  whatever  is  contained  within  them
is  judged  to  be  irrelevant.  Similar  modifications  of  Mill’s  symboliza-
tion must‘  be  made  with  regard  to  the  other  ‘ methods  ’ if  the
symbolism  is  to  be  in  the  least  adequate.  An  attempt  to  symbolize
the  Joint  Method  along  these  lines  may  make  clearer  the  nature
of  this  ‘ method  ’ which  Mill  tried  with  singular  lack  of  success  to
formulate  in  his  third  canon.  His  defective  formulation  of  this
canon  results  from  the  defects  in  his  formulation  of  the  canon  of
the  ' method  of  agreement  ’,  for  he  regarded  his  third  ‘ method  ’
as  being  a double  application  of  the  ‘ method  of  agreement
Hence  the  Joint  Method  is  intended  to  apply  to  cases  in  which  a
set  of  instances  agreeing  in  the  presence  of  a given  factor  are  to  be
compared  with  a set  of  instances  agreeing  in  &e  absence  of  the  same


PEINCIPLES  OP  CAUSAL  DETEEMINATIOIT  337


factor.  Both,  in  the  first  and  third  canons  Mill  states  that  the  in- ;
stances  must  agree  " in  one  circumstance  only  This  is.  a.hs^d!
even  apart  from  the  fact  that  no  such  instances  could  he  found.|
Constant  conjunction  may  he  a sign  of  causal  connexion  when  such
conjunction  occurs  in  situations  having  a good  deal  in  common.
But  that  this  consideration  represents  only  a part  of  what  Mill  had
in  mind  when  he  formulated  the  ^ method  of  agreement  ’ is  shown
by  his  statement  that  ‘the  method  of  agreement  stands  on  the
ground  that  whatever  can  he  eliminated  is  not  connected  with  the
phenomenon  hy  any  law  This  statement  certainly  suggests  that
the  ‘ method  of  agreement  ’ should  have  been  so  formulated  as  to
require  a single  difference,  not  a single  agreement.  Mill  seems  to
have  fallen  into  the  mistake  that  we  noticed  on  page  329.  The
condition  that  there^  niust.^be  a single  agreement  is  too  obviously
absufd  to  require  discussion,  hut  it  must  he  noticed  that  this  absurdity
is  repeated  Tn  a more  aggravated  form  in  the  third  canon  which
requires  the  negative  instances  to  have  ‘nothing  in  common’
except  the  absence  of  the  factor  in  which  the  positive  instances
agree.  ^ In  spite  of  the  canon,  however,  even  Mill  realized  that  the  ^
two  sets  of  instances  must  be  drawn  from  the  same  field  of  inquiry,
and  that  the  greater  the  resemblance  between  them  in  all  the  respects
save  one,  the  more  plausible  was  the  conclusion  derived  from  them.®
The  negative  instances  must  be  such  that  they  contain  factors  occur-
ring in  the  positive  instances,  although  these  factors  are  not  sufi&cient
to  produce  the  result.  In  this  way  the  negative  instances  afiord
a means  of  testing  hy  exclusions.  Following  the  symbolism  suggested
for  the  “ method  ” of  difference,  Mill’s  Joint  Method  could  be
symbolized  as  follows :

Positive  Instances.

HBJAYCK  {xx,  x^. . .)  — > E («/j,  2/2*  •)

HBALCN  (^/,  X,..)  -->E  {y„  y''..)

HARLYKhTP  {x^,  a;/'..)  ->>E  (v/,  v/--)

HJBYNP  y,'...)

HYLNOMP  {x^,  xff...)  -->E  {y^\  2/2'"...)

HAKPJO  {x^'  ->E  {yff',  y.'...)

H E

1 loc.  cit.,  § 3.

2 Jevons’  symbolization  of  the  Joint  Method  is  instructive  since  it  precisely
corresponds  to  Mill’s  formulation  of  the  canon.  He  gives  for  the  positive
instances  ABC,  ABE,  AEG,  AHK,  and  for  the  negative  instances  PQ,  RS,
TV,  XY.  The  absurdity  of  this  procedure  requires  no  comment.  (See
Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic,  Ch.  XXVIII.)

® See  Logic,  Bk.  Ill,  Chap.  IX,  § 4.  Mill’s  example  here  violates  the  con-
dition that  there  should  be  ‘ nothing  in  common  save  the  absence  of  that  cir-
cumstance although  in  commenting  upon  the  example  he  makes  the  false
statement  that  there  is  agreement  only  in  the  one  circumstance.

22


338


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Negative  Instances.

A Y L 0 E J non-E  (y/,  y,)

A L E S T U {x^'\  x„...)  non-E  y^)

B E J K Q H {x^\  x^", . . . ) iion-E  {y^,  y,')

Assnnaing  ttat  capital  letters  stand  for  factors  in  tte  cause-

complex  tLat  can  be  regarded  as  isolable,  tlien  this  s;^bolism  does
not  wbolly  misrepresent  such,  a process  of  investigation  as  that  of
ascertaining  the  cause  of  an  outbreak  of  typhoid  in  a given  district.
The  student  will  easily  be  able  to  select  factors  occurring  in  the
positive  instances,  such  as  : eating  oysters,  drinking  milk  obtained
from  a certain  dairy,  living  in  a certain  street,  bathing  in  a certain
stream,  etc.  These  factors  will  be  present  in  some  but  not  all  of
the  instances,  or  present  in  all.  Let  it  be  supposed  that  the  factor
represented  by  H is  eating  oysters.  Then  it  is  not  unreasonable  to
suppose  that  the  typhoid  (symbolized  by  E)  is  causally  connected
with  the  patients’  having  eaten  oysters.  If  it  were  already  known
that  typhoid  had  been  so  caused  in  other  cases,  this  would  be  a
reasonable  supposition.  The  probability  that  this  conclusion  was
correct  would  be  strengthened  when  it  was  found  that  other  possible
factors,  such  as  drinking  milk,  living  in  a certain  locality,  etc.,  were
found  in  cases  having  much  in  common  with  the  typhoid  cases
although  typhoid  did  not  result.  It  is  clear  that  the  closer  the
resemblance  between  the  two  sets  of  instances  the  greater  the  prob-
ability that  H,  which  is  present  in  one  set  and  absent  from  the
other  set,  is  the  cause  of  E.  If  there  were  resemblance  in  all  relevant
factors  except  one  there  would  be  no  need  for  the  collection  of  other
instances  since  the  conditions  of  the  Method  of  Difference  would
have  been  fulfilled.  It  is  a mistake  to  regard  the  Joint  Method  as
a more  satisfactory  form  of  the  Method  of  Difference,  although
logicians  not  infrequently  make  this  mistake.  The  Joint  Method
is  to  be  employed  only  when  the  more  stringent  requirements  of  the
Method  of  Difference  cannot  be  secured.  MU  himself  clearly  recog-
nized this.  In  symboliziug  the  Joint  Method  we  must,  then,  avoid
the  selection  of  letters  which  would  suggest  that  the  more  stringent
conditions  were  fulfilled.  To  work  out  a satisfactory  symbolization
of  Mill’s  Methods  all  that  is  required  is  a knowledge  of  the  alphabet
and  an  understanding  of  the  principles  upon  which  the  methods  ”
rest.  By  this  time  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  student  is  in  posses-
sion of  these  two  requisites,  so  that  the  problem  of  symbolization
need  be  no  further  pursued.  At  the  same  time  it  is  weU  to  re-
member that  MiU  himself  suggested  a symbolism  which  is  whoUy
inapplicable  to  the  examples  by  means  of  which  he  iUustrated
his  methods  but  which  faithfuUy  reproduces  the  deficiencies  of  the
canons.


PEINCIPLES  OP  CAUSAL  DETEEMINATIOK  339


§ 5.  MILL’S  CONCEPTION  OE  SCIENTIEIC  METHOD

It  is  important  to  remember  that  Mill  defined  log:ic  as  the  science
of  proof.  He  insisted  that  it  is  ‘ the  business  of  Inductive  Logic
to  provide  rules  and  models  (such  as  the  syllogism  and  its  rules  are
for  ratiocination)  to  which,  if  inductive  arguments  conform,  those
arguments  are  conclusive  and  not  otherwise  He  adds  : ^ This  I
is  what  the  Pour  Methods  profess  to  be^^  Thus  Mill  conceives
the  Methods  as  models,  or  schemata^  comparable  to  the  "ff^es
oTthe  syIIogi5Q7"into  which  inductive  investigations  may  be  j&ttedL
TEe”canon  in  each  case  is~reg'arded  as  standing  to  its  method  as,
for  example,  the  dictum  de  omni  stands  to  the  first  figure  of  the
syllogism.  Owing  to  the  dMculties  arising  from  the  plurality  of
causes  Mill  considered  that  only  the  Method  of  Difference, was  com-,
pletely  cogent,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  according  to  MiU,
were  it  not  for  these  dificulties,  each  Method  would  have  to  be
regarded  as  both  demonstrative  and  complete  in  itself.  Before  we
consider  In  what  way  the  problem  of  plurality  of  causes  is  relevant
to  this  conception  of  the  Methods,  we  must  try  to  see  clearly  the
nature  of  Mill’s  confusion  between  a 'principle  and  a rule.

It  is  apparent  that  Mill’s  Pour  Methods  bear  a resemblance,
although  not  an  exact  resemblance,  to  the  four  principles^^wj^hich  ^
we  have  called  the  special  principles  of  causal_ determination/^
we  saw,  these  special  principles  follow  from  the  nature  of  a causal
connexion.  Since  the  search  for  causes  takes  place  in  accordance
with  these  principles  there  is  one  fundamental  rule  of  experimental
procedure,  namely,  md  obserm  the  result  \

Each  special  prmciptejnddsa^eS^^  of  this  fundamentaTmler
Thus  Principle  J yields  the  rule  : Substitute  in  turn  different  factors  *
for  one  of  the  given  factors  and  observe  the  result.  Principle  II
yields  the  rule : Omit  one  factor  whilst  keeping  the  other  factors
partly  alike,  partly  unlike,  and  observe  the  result.  Principle  III
yields  the  rule  : Omit  one  factor  only  and  observe  the  result.  Pfm-
ciple  IV  yields  the  rule : Increase,  or  decrease,  in  quantity  one  ^
factor  only,  and  observe  the  result.  These  rules  regulate  the  selection^
of  instances,  whether  the  instances  be  provided  by  laboratory  ex-  -
pSimenEUor  not.  No  single  rule  covers  the  whole  procedure  of
scientific  investigation.  Each  rule,  as  well  as  the  special  principle
from  which  it  is  derived,  is  independent  of  the  other  rules  and  special
principles.  These  special  principles  are  relevant  at  different  stages  ^
of  the  investigation,  and  the  special  rules  regulate  the  procedure  at
that  stage.  Eeasoning  in  accordance  with  Principle  I enables  the
investigator  to  determine  whether  a given  factor  is  relevant,  since
i£  different  factors  can  be  substituted  and  yet  no  change  occurs,


HI,  Chap.  IX,  §6.


340


A MODEEN  INTEODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


tliese  factors  cannot  be  relevant.  Such  determination  occurs  at  an
early  stage  of  the  investigation.  Proceeding  in  accordance  with
the  rule  derived  from  Principle  II,  the  investigator  may  be  led  to
suppose  that  there  is  some  causal  connexion  since  the  omission  of
a given  factor  from  a set  of  circumstances  having  much  in  common
with  instances  in  which  the  factor  was  present  is  followed  by  a
change  in  another  factor.  ‘Eule  III  is  applicable  only  when  an
investigator  is  dealing  with  a situation  with  regard  to  which  he
has  already  formulated  a definite  hypothesis  that  two  factors  are
causally  related.  It  is  further  necessary  that  in  this  case  he  should
have  such  control  of  the  situation  that  he  can  omit,  or  introduce  into
it,  a single  factor.  By  reasoning  in  accordance  with  Principle  IT
the  investigator  may  again  be  led  to  formulate  an  hj^pothesis  con-
cerning the  causal  relation  of  two  definite  factors.  The  experimental
application  of  Eule  IT  will  enable  him  to  test  such  an  hypothesis.
It  seems  clear,  then,  that  the  special  principles  and  the  rules  derived
from  them  are  relevant  to  different  stages  of  a scientific  investigation.

We  must  now  consider  the  relation  of  Mill’s  Four  Methods  to
the  four  special  principles.  The  Method  of  Difference  clearly  corre-
sponds to  Principle  III  and  the  Method  of  Concomitant  Variations
to  Principle  IV,  whilst  the  Joint  Method  resembles  Principle  II,
although  the  resemblance  is  far  from  exact  owdng  to  Mill’s  absurd
formulation  of  this  Method.  The  Method  of  Agreement,  however,
does  not  correspond  at  all  to  Principle  I,  owing  to  Mill’s  failure  to
see  that  what  is  required  is  a single  difference  and  not  a single  agree^
ment.  This  Method,  indeed,  corresponds  rather  to  Principle  II  than
to  Principle  I,  since  Principle  II  corresponds  to  some  extent  to  the
Joint  Method,  and  this  Method  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a double  applica-
tion of  the  Method  of  Agreement.  Since  Mill’s  Methods  do  corre-
spond, although  not  exactly,  to  the  four  special  Principles,  and  since,
as  we  have  seen,  these  principles  are  relevant  to  different  stages  of
a causal  investigation,  it  follows  that  Mill’s  Methods  also  are  relevant
at  different  stages.  Mill,  however,  failed  to  see  that  this  was  the
case.  On  the  contrary,  he  believed  his  Methods  to  be  alternative
modes  of  procedure  each  more  or  less  complete  in  itself.  This
mistake  was  due  to  his  failure  to  recognize  that  the  Methods  were
in  fact  not  methods  but  princifles.  That  Mill  was  not  at  all  clear
as  to  what  he  meant  by  a “ method  ” is  indicated  by  the  fact  that
he  sometimes  asserts  that  the  Four  Methods  ‘ reduce  ’ to  two,
namely,  the  Method  of  Agreement  and  the  Method  of  Difference.
He  clearly  intended  to  base  these  two  Methods  on  the  two  funda-
mental principles  of  causal  connexion,  that  Nothing  that  is  absent
when  cm  effect  occurs  can  he  the  cause  of  that  effect^  and  that,  Nothing
that  is  present  when  the  effect  fails  to  occur  cam,  he  the  cause  of  that
effect.  These  two  principles  are  independent  of  each  other;  the


PRINCIPLES  OF  CAUSAL  DETERMINATION  341


four  derivative  special  principles  are  independent  of  eack  other,
Ibut  eack  or  all  conjointly  may  determine  a given  causal  investiga-
tion. Mill,  in  confusing  method  witk  principle,  beUeved  tkat  tkere
were  four  independent  methods.  It  is  clear,  kowever,  tkat  neither
of  the  two  fundamental  principles  nor  any  of  the  four  derivative
special  principles  is  ahne  sufficient  to  constitute  a complete  mode
of  procedure,  tkat  is,  a method.

Mill’s  confusions  do  not  end  here.  In  Ms  anxiety  to  provide
models  to  which  inductive  arguments  should  conform  he  was  led
to  suppose  tkat  his  methods  were  identical  witk  rules  regulating
scientific  investigation,  or,  as  he  expressed  it,  ‘ contrivances  for
unravelling  the  web  Thus  he  tried  so  to  formulate  his  methods
that  they  should  be  at  the  same  time  both  canons,  or  rules  regulating
discovery,  and  methods.

Finally,  Mill  believed  tkat  kis  Methods  were  the  only  instruments
of  ffoof.  We  saw  in  Chapter  XIV  that  Mill  was  aware  that  aU
empirical  knowledge  ultimately  rests  upon  simple  enumeration,  that
is,  on  pure  induction  combined  with  analogy.  Thus  he  defines
induction  as  ^ the  process  by  which  we  conclude  that  what  is  true
of  certain  individuals  of  a class  is  true  of  the  whole  class,  or  that
what  is  true  at  certain  times  wiU  be  true  in  similar  circumstances
at  all  times  ’ But  he  did  not  himself  recognize  that  such  a definition
of  induction  reduces  it  to  simple  enumeration.  On  the  contrary,
he  sought,  as  we  saw,  to  discover  ^ a surer  and  more  potent  instru-
ment This  instrument  was,  he  believed,  provided  by  the  four
Methods.

IMch  of  the  difficulty  in  Mill’s  conception  of  scientific  method
is  due  to  the  fact  that  he  believed  "both  of^t^  mutually  incon-
sistent propositions.  He  believed  both  that  all  our  knowledge  is
derived  in  the  last  resort  from  simple  enumeration,  i.e.^gfineialization
from  particular  instanceSj  and  also  that  propositions  thus  dmv^
‘^re  capable  M being  kno^  to  be  certainly  true.^  Accordingly,
he  believed  that  general  empirical  propositions  could  be  proved.  Hei
conceived  to  be  strictly  inductive.  It  must  be  remembered]
that  Mill  regarded  deduoSoS^ran^^^  in  the  interpretation  of
inductions,  the  rules  of  the  syllogism  being  rules  for  the  process  of
interpretation.  Although  he  admitted  that  induction  must  some-
times be  combined  with  deduction  owing  to  the  complexity  of  the
phenomena  under  investigation,  he  refused  to  admit  that  everyii
scientific  investigation  must  combine  both  deductive  and  inductive
reasoning.  Thus  he  says  : ' If  discoveries  are  ever  made  by  observal  |
tion  and  experiment,  without  Deduction,  the  four  methods  are
methods  of  discovery : but  even  i£  they  were  not  methods  of  dis-
covery, it  would  not  be  the  less  true  that  they  are  the  sole  methods

1 op.  oit„  Bk.  Ill,  Chap.  II,  § 1.  a Of.  Chap.  XV,  § 5 above,


342


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


of  Proof ; and  in  that  character,  even  the  results  of  deduction  are
amenable  to  them.  The  great  generalizations  which  begin  as  Hypo-
theses must  end  by  being  proved,  and  are  in  reality  proved,  by  the
Four  Methods  In  this  statement  can  be  found  the  explanation
of  Mill’s  attitude  to  what  he  calls  the  Hypothetical  Method,  He
refused  to  admit  that  hypothesis  has  an  indispensable  part  to  play
in  scientific  metEdd^  He  accorded  td”hypothesis  a subsidiary  fuhc-
tion  in  the  process  of  discovery ; he  saw  that  a scientific  theory
would  sometimes  have  been  incapable  of  being  established  unless
it  had  first  appeared  in  the  guise  of  an  hypothesis.  But  he  believed
that  this  state  of  affairs  was  exceptional,  and  he  wholly  misconceived
the  relation  of  his  methods  to  hypotheses.  This  misconception  was
[due  to  his  belief  that  scientific  method  is  a process  of  establishing
\laws  that  can  be  known  to  be__cei.tainl¥_._triie.  Mill  saw  that  to
prmiFanTiyp^  necessary  to  show  not  only  that  the  given

hypothesis  is  consistent  with  the  facts  but  also  that  no  other  hypo-
thesis is  consistent  with  them.  He  believed  that  if  the  Method  of
Difference  could  be  used  to  establish  the  negative  iustance,  then  the
hypothesis  could  be  so  proved.  He  gives  as  an  example  Newton’s
law  of  gravitation,  and  asserts  that  it  was  shown  that  no  other
hypothesis  could  accord  with  the  facts,  and  that  in  consequence
the  ^ hypothesis  became  an  inductive  truth  It  is  unfortunate  for
Mill’s  theory  that  Einstein  has  succeeded  NewtonV  MilPs  conception
' of  the  nature  of  a scientific  theory  was~~3epehdent  upon  his  belief
that  the  work  of  the  scientist  was  to  discover  ‘proved  laws  of
natureT  Hence,  he  concluded : ^ It  appears,  then,  to  be  a con-
dition of  the  most  genuinely  scientific  hypothesis  that  it  be  not
destined  always  to  remain  an  hypothesis,  but  be  of  such  a nature
as  to  be  either  proved,  or  disproved,  by  comparison  with  observed
facts  With  the  aid  of  the  law  of  universal  causation  and  with
the  unrecognized  assumption  that  the  constituents  of  natural
phenomena  are  finite  in  number  and  have  the  formal  properties
of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet.  Mill  was  able  to  see  in  the  Method
of  Difference  a ‘ complete  method  ’ of  establishing  true  and  uni-
versal empirical  propositions.  It  was  because  the  Method  of  Agree-  i

^ op.  cit.,  Bk.  Ill,  Ckap.  IX,  § 6.

® ibid..  Chap.  XIV,  § 4.  It  is  in  his  controversy  with  Whewell  with  regard
to  the  nature  and  function  of  the  Methods  that  Mill  showed  most  clearly  his
conception  of  the  nature  of  Induction.  Thus  in  criticizing  Whewell  he  says :

" If  after  assuming  an  hypothesis  and  carefully  collating  it  with  facts,  nothing  is
brought  to  light  inconsistent  with  it,  that  is,  if  eaperience  does  not  disprove  it,
he  is  content ; at  least  until  a simpler  hypothesis,  equally  consistent  with  experi-
ence, presents  itself.  If  this  be  Induction,  doubtless  there  is  no  necessity  for  the
Four  Methods.  But  to  suppose  that  it  is  so  appears  to  me  a radical  miscon-
ception of  the  nature  of  the  evidence  of  physical  truths.’  (Bk.  Ill,  Chap.  IX,


PEINCIPLES  OP  CAUSAL  DETERMINATION  343

ment  could  not  be  relied  upon  to  give  certainty,  owing  to  tie  possi-
bility of  a plurality  of  causes,  that  Mill  regarded  it  as  the  least
valuable  of  the  Methods.  Accordingly  this  Method  must  "be"  rSn-
fofcedTby  W^ad^tiouTUrH  iustances.  This  means  that  the

Method  of  Agreement  must  be  used  twice  over,  or,  in  other  words,
we  must  substitute  for  it  the  Joint  Method.  Mill  saw  clearly  tha1|
the  superior  value  of  the  Joint  Method  consists  in  the  fact  than
the  negative  instances  enable  us  to  eliminate  possible  causes.  I:lf
this  elimination  is  carried  far  enough  only  one  possible  cause  will
remain.  It  is  this  consideration  that  accounts  for  Mill’s  insist-
ence that  the  negative  instances  must  agree  only  in  the  absence
of  the  supposed  cause.^  By  this  means  Mill  supposed  that  the  danger
of  a plurahty  of  causes  would  be  avoided.  But  the  most  that  this
method  could  establish  would  be  that  in  a certain  situation^  X is
a necessary  condition  of  E ; it  could  not  suffice  to  show  that  in  other
situations,  E would  not  be  present  unless  X were.  Mill  also  failed
to  observe  that  this  result  is  secured  only  by  the  combination  of  two
Methods  which  were  intended  to  be  complete  and  independent.

Neither  the  principle  of  the  Method  of  Agreement  nor  the  prin-
ciple of  the  Joint  Method  is  such  that  reasoning  in  accordance  with
it  yields  a certain  conclusion.  Nor  does  the  Method  of  Difference,
which  is  undoubtedly^  the  most  cogent  of  the  Methods,  avoid  the
difficulty  of  a plurSity  ^ causesT^"^  true  ^atifin  a situation
A J3  0 X,^he^f hdrawal  of  A is  followed  by  the  withdrawal  of

X,  then  it  can  be  asserted  that  in  this  situation  A is  the  cause  of
X.  There  may,  however,  be  another  situation  D B C — > X,  such
that  the  withdrawal  of  D is  followed  by  the  withdrawal  of  X,  and
in  that  case  D is  the  cause  of  X.  The  possibility  of  a plurality  of
causes  can  be  avoided  only  by  increasing  the  negative  analogy.  2
Just  as  Mill  failed  to  grasp  the  importance  of  hypothesis  in  inductive
investigation,  so  he  failed  to  grasp  the  logical  nature  of  analogy.  |
This  failure  is  responsible  for  the  incompleteness
scientific  method,  which  hindered  him  torn  reahzing  that  none  of
his  methods  were  either  complete  or  cogent.

^ * In.  the  joint  method,  it  is  supposed  not  only  that  the  instances  in  which
a is,  agree  only  in  containing  A,  but  also  that  the  instances  in  which  a is  not,
agree  only  in  not  containing  A.  Now,  if  this  be  so,  A must  be  not  only  the
cause  of  a,  but  the  only  possible  cause ; for  if  there  were  another,  as,  for  example,
B,  then  in  the  instances  in  which  a is  not,  B must  have  been  absent  as  well  as  A,
and  it  would  not  be  true  that  these  instances  agree  only  in  not  containing  A*
(Bk.  Ill,  Chap.  X,  § 2.)

2 The  assumption  that  the  plurality  of  causes  is  only  apparent  is  the
assumption  that  a given  occurrence  E is  caused  by  one  and  oihy  one  set  of
conditions  which  are  both  jointly  sufficient  and  independently  necessary  for
its  occurrence,  so  that,  if  E appears  to  be  caused  on  one  occasion  by  Ci,  and
on  another  occasion  by  C2,  there  must  be  a factor,  or  set  of  factors,  common
to  Cj  and  0^.  It  is  doubtful  whether  this  assumption  can  be  justified.


CHAPTER  XVIII


DEDUCTIVE  CAUSAL  DETERMINATION  AND
FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS

‘ There  is  a tradition  of  opposition  between  adherents  of  induction  and  of
deduction.  In  my  view  it  would  be  just  as  sensible  for  the  two  ends  of  a worm
to  quarrel’ — A,  N.  Whitehead,

§1.  THE  ANALYSIS  OF  COMPLEX  EFFECTS

modes  of  causal  determination  discussed  in  the  last
I chapter  are  appropriate  to  the  investigation  of  the  cause

JL  of  an  effect  regarded  as  a single  factor,  e.g.  the  cracking

of  a glass,  the  appearance  of  micro-organisms  in  a liquid.  Although
such  effects  may  be  further  analysable  into  constituent  factors,  for
the  purpose  of  the  given  investigation  such  analysis  is  not  required.
What  was  sought  was  an  occurrence  X so  related  to  the  given  occur-
rence A that  whenever  X occurred,  A occurred.  We  have  now  to
consider  the  case  of  effects  recognized  as  resulting  from  the  com-
bination of  two,  or  more  causes.  The  combination  of  causes  must
be  distinguished  from  the  'plurality  of  causes.  The  latter,  as  we  saw,
means  that  the  same  effect  is  on  one  occasion  the  effect  of  Xi,  on
another  occasion  the  effect  of  Xg,  and  so  on.  When  two  causes
are  combined  neither  alone  could  be  properly  said  to  be  the  cause
of  the  given  effect,  since  both  are  necessary  for  its  occurrence.  The
effect  is  thus  complex.  Such  effects  may  be  of  two  kinds.  Two
causes  X,  Y,  may  combine  in  producing  an  effect  similar  in  kind
to  the  effect  that  X alone,  or  that  Y alone,  would  have  produced.
For  example,  the  combined  effect  of  placing  a cardboard  box  and
some  chocolates  on  a scale  pan  is  similar  in  kind  to  the  effect  that
would  result  from  placing  the  cardboard  box  there  alone.  The
combined  effect  of  hitting  a bilbard  ball  simultaneously  with  two
other  balls  is  similar  in  kind  to  the  effect  that  would  have  been
produced  by  hitting  it  with  one  of  them  only.  Such  complex  effects
are  said  to  be  homogeneous.  Mill,  who  described  such  cases  under
the  name  homogeneous  intermixture  of  effects’^,  spoke  of  the
‘^composition  of  causes Mechanical  phenomena  provide^ the
most  striking  examples,  e.g.  the  theorem  of  the  addition  of  veloci-
ties employed  in  classical  mechanics.  Thus  a man  walking  along
a train  that  is  travelling  at  the  rate  of  60  miles  an  hour  traverse§t

344


DEDUCTIVE  CAUSAL  DETERMINATION


345


a distance  compounded  of  his  own  velocity  and  that  of  the  train.
In  the  second  class  of  cases  the  combined  effect  is  not  similar  in
kind  to  the  effect  of  the  two  causes  acting  separately.  For  example,
the  combination  of  the  gas  chlorine  and  the  metal  sodium  is  common
salt,  or  sodium  chloride.  Such  an  effect  was  called  by  Mill ''  hetero-
patldc  ”,  Chemical  compounds  afford  the  most  obvious  examples.

Mill  distinguished  sharply  between  the  methods  required  for
dealing  with  combined  effects  and  for  dealing  with  simple  effects.
The  latter  he  assumed  to  be  capable  of  treatment  by  induction  alone  ;
for  the  former  he  believed  it  necessary  to  appeal  to  deduction  to
‘ umavel  ’ their  complexity.  But  he  misconceived  the  part  played
by  inductive  and  deductive  reasoning  and  assumed  an  absolute
distinction  between  simple  and  compound  effects  that  is  not  in
fact  tenable.  The  distinction  between  homogeneous  and  hetero-
pathic  effects  which  is  of  importance  is  that  the  former  can  be
deduced  from  knowledge  of  the  separate  effects  whereas  the  latter
cannot.  No  knowledge  of  the  properties  of  oxygen  alone  nor  of
the  properties  of  hydrogen  alone  would  enable  us  to  deduce  that
their  combination  under  certain  conditions  would  result  in  a chemical
compound  having  the  properties  known  as  water.  It  is  for  this
reason  that  such  properties  are  often  called  emergent.  But  the
possibility  of  the  deduction  in  the  one  case  and  its  impossibility
in  the  other  may  be  merely  the  result  of  our  ignorance.  That  Mill
himself  is  not  clear  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  he  speaks  of  oxygen
and  hydrogen  as  the  cause  of  water.  But  oxygen  and  hydrogen
may  be  mixed  in  a vessel  and  the  resultant  compound  will  have
the  properties  both  of  oxygen  and  of  hydrogen.  In  order  that
water  may  be  produced  the  compound  must  somehow  or  other  be
fired.  The  fact  that  the  compoimd  chemical  substance  pure  water
can  be  analysed  without  residue  into  the  two  elements  oxygen  and
hydrogen  does  not  justify  our  sajdng  that  these  two  elements  are
the  cause  of  water  in  any  sense  in  which  the  word  ‘‘  cause  ” is  com-
monly used.  Mill  himself  recognized  that  the  relation  between
water  and  its  chemical  components,  HgO,  is  different  from  the
relation  between,  say,  heing  shot  through  the  heart  and  dying,  since
the  former  is  a reciprocal  relation,  so  that,  as  Mill  expresses  it,  the
effect  and  its  cause  are  ‘ mutually  convertible  into  each  other

We  have  now  to  consider  the  investigation  of  a complex  situation
the  analysis  of  which  has  already  been  carried  so  far  that  we  know
that  certain  factors  in  the  causal-occurrence  determine  certain  factors
in  the  effect-occurrence.  Given  that  in  such  a situation  we  dis-
cover a residual  factor  in  the  effect-occurrence  we  seek  for  its  cause ;
if  the  residual  factor  be  in  the  causal-occurrence  we  seek  for  its
effect.  A residual  factor  ” is  a factor  not  yet  taken  into  account
^Jjogic,  Bk.  Ill,  Chap.  X,  §4,


346  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

in  a situation  tliat  is  fairly  well  understood.  Herscliel  expressed
very  clearly  tMs  mode  of  procedure,  and  its  importance  in  scientific
discovery :

* Complicated  phenomena,  in  whioL.  several  causes  concurring,  opposing,  or
quite  independent  of  each  other,  operate  at  once,  so  as  to  produce  a compound
effect,  may  be  simphfied  by  subducting  the  effect  of  all  the  known  causes,  as  well
as  the  nature  of  the  case  pernoits,  either  by  deductive  reasoning  or  by  appeal  to
experience,  and  thus  leaving  as  it  were  a residual  phenomenon  to  be  explained*
It  is  by  this  process,  in  fact,  that  science,  in  its  present  advanced  state,  is  chiefly
promoted.  Most  of  the  phenomena  which  nature  presents  are  very  complicated ;
and  when  the  effects  of  all  known  causes  are  estimated  with  exactness,  and  sub-
ducted, the  residual  facts  are  constantly  appearing  in  the  form  of  phenomena
altogether  new,  and  leading  to  the  most  important  conclusions.’  ^

The  most  famous,  and  the  simplest,  example  of  this  mode  of
causal  determination  is  afforded  by  the  discovery  of  the  planet
Neptune  as  the  cause  of  an  unexplained  residual  factor  in  the  orbit
of  Uranus.  The  planet  Uranus  had  been  discovered  by  Herschel
in  1781.  It  was  subsequently  found  that  Uranus  had  in  fact  been
observed  before  but  had  been  mistaken  for  a star.  By  reference  to
these  earlier  observations  it  was  possible  to  determine  its  orbit  although
its  period  of  revolution  is  eighty-four  years.  But  the  calculated
orbit  did  not  agree  with  the  observed  positions.  It  must  be  noted
that  the  orbit  of  a planet  is  determined  by  the  other  bodies  in  the
solar  system.  Newton  had  shown  how,  given  these  bodies  and  their
positions  and  motions  at  any  time,  to  deduce  by  mathematical
calculation  their  positions  and  motions  at  any  other  time.  When
thus  calculated  the  orbit  of  Uranus  could  not  be  accounted  for  by
the  known  factors.  Thus,  to  quote  Sir  Robert  Ball,  ‘ it  was  perfectly
obvious  that  there  must  be  some  other  influence  at  work  besides
that  which  could  be  attributed  to  the  planets  already  known  He
adds : ^ Astronomers  could  only  recognise  one  solution  of  such  a
diiSculty  There  must  be  some  other  planet.  It  was  clear  that
such  a planet  was  not  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  but  it  might  be
visible  through  a high-powered  telescope.  The  difficutly  was  to
know  in  what  region  of  the  heavens  it  was  to  be  sought.^  The
French  astronomer,  Le  Verrier,  after  many  trials  ‘ ascertained  that,
by  assuming  a certain  size,  shape,  and  position  for  the  unknown
planet’s  orbit,  and  a certain  value  for  the  mass  of  the  h3^othetical
body,  it  would  be  possible  to  account  for  the  observed  disturbances
of  Uranus  He  was  thus  able  to  assign  the  region  of  the  heavens

^ Natural  Philosophy,  § 158.

2 It  is  worth  remarking  tkat  the  error  in  the  orbit  of  Uranus  never  exceeded
2',  a distance  imperceptible  to  the  ordinary  eye,  so  that  were  the  two  stars  side
by  side  in  the  sky,  one  at  the  true  position,  one  at  the  calculated  position,  these
two  stars  would  appear  as  one.


DEDUCTIVE  CAUSAL  DETEEMINATIOX


347


towards  wHcli  the  telescope  should  he  directed.  This  being  done,
the  planet  was  discovered,  and  subsequently  named  Neptune.^

An  analysis  of  this  discovery  brings  out  several  points  of  methodo-
logical importance.  Representing  the  orbit  of  Uranus  as  the  complex
efiect  a,  &,  c,  d,  e,  then  the  effect  of  the  known  bodies  in  the  solar
system,  sun,  planets,  satellites,  can  be  represented  by  a,  6,  c,  d,
leaving  e as  an  unexplained  residual  effect.  Since  a & c d e is  a func-
tion of  the  known  causes  and  some  unknown  cause  it  is  possible
to  determine  the  unknown  cause  by  subtracting  the  known  causal
factors.  It  is  clear  that  such  a procedure  is  essentially  deductive ;
it  involves  no  generalization  of  instances  but  is  wholly  a mathe-
matical calculation  once  the  hypothesis.  The  discrepancy  is  dm  to
an  unknown  planet^  has  been  formulated.  There  is  no  justification
for  Mill’s  inclusion  of  such  a process  of  deductive  reasoning  among
his  Inductive  Methods  The  so-called  “ Method  of  Residues
is  a process  of  conjecturing  a cause  from  the  examination  of  a situa-
tion containing  a single  unexplained  residual  phenomenon.  As
stated  by  Mill  this  method  involves  an  application  of  the  principle
of  difference  from  effect  to  cause.  Thus,  given  that  the  effect  A
is  known  to  be  accounted  for  by  X,  and  that  X has  its  full  effect
in  A,  then,  if  A occurs  in  conjunction  with  B,  it  follows  from  the
principle  of  difference  that  something  other  than  X is  the  cause
of  B.

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  this  method  is  confined  to  the
region  of  mathematical  calculation.  It  is  exemplified  in  the  dis-
covery of  the  cause  of  any  residual  phenomenon.  For  example,
‘ Arago,  having  suspended  a magnetic  needle  by  a silk  thread,  and
set  it  in  vibration,  observed  that  it  came  much  sooner  to  rest  when
suspended  over  a plate  of  copper,  than  when  no  such  plate  was
beneath  it  This  effect  might  have  been  due  to  the  resistance  of
the  air  and  the  nature  of  the  thread  ; but  ‘ the  effect  of  these  causes
being  exactly  known  by  the  observation  made  in  the  absence  of
the  copper,  and  being  thus  allowed  for  and  subducted,  a residual
phenomenon  appeared  in  the  fact  that  a retarding  influence  was
exerted  by  the  copper  itself  This  discovery  is  given  by  Herschel
as  an  example  of  the  method  of  residues.  It  is  obvious  in  this  case
that  the  mduction  consists  in  an  application  of  the  principle  of
difference.  There  seems,  indeed,  no  justification  for  distinguishing
the  method  of  residues from  the  procedure  of  the  hypothetical

^ Tke  quotations  are  from  Sir  Robert  Ball’s  Great  Astronomers  (section  on
Le  Verrier).  The  English  astronomer,  Adams,  also  calculated  the  position  of
Neptune  but  no  telescopic  search  was  made  for  it  by  English  astronomers  until
after  it  had  been  detected  by  Dr.  GaUe  of  Berlin,  who  was  directed  by  Le
Terrier’s  computation.  A full  account  of  this  remarkable  discovery  cannot  be
given  here.  It  has  been  reiated  very  fully  in  many  popular  works  on  astronomy,
s Herschel  : Natural  Philosophyi,


348


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


method.  The  element  of  hypothesis  is  less  olvious  in  such  cases
than  in  the  case  of  an  experimental  investigation  such  as  that  of
Pasteur  discussed  in  the  previous  chapter  but  it  is  none  the  less
present.  The  difference  between  these  two  cases  is  wholly  due  to
the  fact  that  the  investigation  of  residual  phenomena  cannot  take
place  until  the  situation  as  a whole  has  been  very  thoroughly
analysed.  MilTs  formulation  of  the  canon  of  the  Method  of
Residues ''  bring  this  out  very  clearly : ' Subduct  from  any  phe-
nomenon such  part  as  is  known  by  previous  inductions  to  be  the
effect  of  certain  antecedents,  and  the  residue  of  the  phenomenon
is  the  effect  of  the  remaining  antecedents  It  is  here  assumed
that  the  remaining  antecedents  are  known.  In  the  case  of  the
discovery  of  Neptune  the  remaining  antecedent  was  conjectured
to  be  of  such  a kind  as  was  familiar  to  astronomers ; in  the  case
of  Ajago’s  experiment  the  ''  remaining  antecedent  ” was  an  observed
factor.

The  discovery  of  the  compound  effect  of  causes  acting  conjointly
is  not  fundamentally  different.  If  it  be  known  that  a cardboard
box  weighs  3 oz.  and  a quantity  of  chocolate  inside  the  box  weighs
1 lb.,  then  the  compound  effect  of  these  two  quantities  is  1 lb.  3 oz.
Conversely,  given  that  the  total  weight  is  1 lb.  3 oz.  and  it  is  known
that  the  box  weighs  3 oz.,  then  the  weight  of  the  chocolate  can  be
deduced  by  subtraction.  Mill,  however,  distinguishes  these  two
processes,  confining  the  latter  to  the  Method  of  Residues  the
former  to  a special  method  which  he  calls  the  Deductive  Method
He  says,  ‘ The  problem  of  the  Deductive  Method  is  to  find  the  law
of  an  effect  from  the  laws  of  the  different  tendencies  of  which  it  is
the  joint  result  He  divides  the  method  into  three  steps : (1)
ascertaining  the  laws  of  the  several  causes ; (2)  computing  their
conjoint  effect ; (3)  verifying  the  computation  by  appeal  to  experi-
ence. It  is  clear  that  the  discovery  of  the  orbit  of  Uranus  might
have  followed  this  method  had  the  causes  in  operation  all  been
known.  Since,  however,  the  orbit  had  been  calculated  from  ob-
servations, the  second  step  was  accomplished  before  all  the  causes
had  been  ascertained.  Consequently,  there  was  required  a pre-
liminary step,  viz.  conjecturing  an  unknown  cause.  An  example
often  given  to  illustrate  Mill’s  Deductive  Method  brings  out  very
clearly  its  relation  to  the  Method  of  Residues,  viz.  the  'parallelogram
of  forces.  This  may  be  stated  as  follows:

Given  a force  X capable  of  carrying  a particle  P,  from  A to  C,
and  a force  Y capable  of  carrying  P from  A to  B ; the  problem  is
to  compute  the  conjoint. effect  of  X and  Y upon  P.  It  is  clear  that
the  effect  is  a compound  homogeneous  effect,  and  that,  consequently,
provided  no  other  forces  intervene,  the  final  result  will  be  the  same
* op.  oit.,  Rk  III,  Chap.  XI,  § 1,


DEDUCTIVE  CAUSAL  DETERMINATION  349

wEethet  X and  Y operate  in  succession  or  simultaneous^.  The
solution  is  simple.  It  is  given  in  the  diagram,  and  the  reasoning
can  be  left  to  the  reader’s  intelligence.


Y


It  is  to  be  observed  that,  given  the  conjoint  effect  AD  and  the
effect  of  r,  viz.  AB,  then  the  cause  of  the  residual  effect,  viz.  the
difference  between  AD  and  AB,  can  be  deduced,  viz.  AC,  as  the
effect  of  the  unknown  X;  given  the  separate  effects  AB,  AC,  then
the  conjoint  effect  AD  can  be  deduced.  In  both  cases  the  logical
process  is  deductive.  The  former  case  is  an  example  of  precisely
the  same  kind  as  the  example  of  the  discovery  of  Neptune ; they
differ  only  in  complexity.  If  the  forces  X,  Y,  are  equal  and  opposite
in  direction,  then  their  simultaneous  operation  upon  P would  result
in  P’s  being  in  equilibrium.  In  such  a case  X is  said  to  be  counter-
acted by  Y.  Counteraction,  however,  is  only  a mode  of  combination
having  for  its  resultant  in  this  case  the  maintenance  of  equilibrium.
In  dealing  with  the  combination  of  causes  it  is  important  to  take
account  of  all  the  circumstances.  For  instance,  if  a tank  be  fitted
with  two  taps,  it  might  be  supposed  that  the  effect  of  turning  on
both  at  once  would  be  equivalent  to  the  sum  of  their  separate  effects.
This  would  not  be  the  case  if  both  taps  were  supplied  from  the
same  source,  sp  that  when  both  were  on  the  water  flowed  more
slowly  through  the  pipes.  Mill  rightly  insisted  that  what  he  called
the  “ laws  of  the  separate  causes  ” must  be  expressed  as  “ ten-
dencies ”,  since  any  law  is  liable  to  be  coimteracted.  The  notion
of  counteraction  is  a survival  of  the  activity  view  of  causation.
X countemcts  Y when  Y is  what  we  wanted  or  expected  to  produce  ;
every  causal  law  has  its  full  effect  whether  in  isolation  or  in  com-
bination with  other  causal  laws.^  Causal  laws  are  statements  of
uniformities ; there  are  no  exceptions  to  such  uniformities  but  a
mistake  in  the  statement  of  the  uniformity  may  lead  to  the  dis-
appointment of  our  expectations.

The  separate  tendencies  of  combined  causes  can  sometimes  only
be  distinguished  in  thought.  For  instance,  the  motion  of  a cannon
ball  can  be  analysed  into  the  conjoint  effect  of  a tendency  to  travel
in  a straight  line  in  the  direction  of  its  discharge  and  a tendency


iCf.  MiU,  Chap.  X,  §5.


350


k MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


to  fall  in  a straigtt  line  to  tlie  earth.  Such  a theoretical  analysis
is  known  as  the  resolution  of  the  total  effect  into  its  components.
Sometimes  the  separate  tendencies  can  be  isolated,  for  instance,  a
feather  can  be  dropped  in  air,  then  dropped  in  a vacuum.  In  this
case  there  is  physical  elimination  of  the  counteracting  cause.  We
saw  in  the  last  chapter  how  great  a part  is  played  by  elimination
in  the  modes  of  causal  determination.

§2.  CONCOMITANT  VAEIATION  AND  QUANTITATIVE
ANALYSIS

There  is  a great  gain  to  clear  thinking  when  we  know  not  only
such  causal  uniformities  as  that  heavy  bodies  fall  to  the  ground,
that  some  gases  rise,  that  water  rises  in  a pump,  that  planets  move
in  elliptical  orbits,  but  also  that  these  uniformities  can  be  deduced
from  a wider  generalization,  or,  in  other  words,  that  they  can  be
connected  within  a system.  Such  uniformities  as  heavy  bodies  fall
to  the  ground  may  be  called  qualitative.  Heaviness^  falling  to  the
ground  are  perceptible  qualities.  It  is  the  uniform  connexion  be-
tween such  perceptible  qualities  that  is  most  interesting  to  the  plain
man.  But  the  connexion  between  qualities  is  not  intelligible ; it
can  be  observed  but  not  deduced.  There  is  an  immense  variety  of
perceptible  qualities  exhibited  in  physical  objects  such  as  houses,
trees,  earth,  water,  air,  ice.  These  physical  objects  vary  from  time
to  time ; their  position,  temperature,  colour,  shape,  size  change.
How  are  we  to  discover  laws  connecting  these  changes  ? There  is
sufficient  order  in  the  variation  of  perceptible  changes  to  lead  us
to  seek  for  an  order  that  is  not  apparent  and  yet  may  be  the  basis
of  the  order  that  is  observed.  If  this  complex  variety  of  changing
quahties  could  be  regarded  as  regularly  connected  with  a quantitative
arrangement  of  an  unvarying  unit,  then  we  might  be  able  to  discover
comparatively  simple  laws  underlying  the  observable  complexity.
Scientists  have  assumed  that  such  is  in  fact  the  case.  They  have
hit  upon  a principle  called  by  Professor  Whitehead  the  principle
of  convergence  to  simplicity  with  diminution  of  extent.  ^ Take,  for
instance,  the  set  of  perceptible  qualities  presented  ly  meat  when
raw,  slightly  coohed,  overcoohed,  burnt  to  a cinder.  Two  questions
arise : How  are  these  perceptible  changes  related  ? When  does
this  meat  cease  to  be  meat  ” ? It  is  the  fcst  question  that  is  the
concern  of  scientific  method.  The  relations  between  the  raw  meat
and  the  cinder  are  immensely  complex.  At  the  level  of  common
sense  we  shall  account  for  the  observed  change  by  pointing  to  the
fact  that  the  meat  has  been  kept  for  some  time  in  a hot  oven.  If
it  had  been  taken  out  sooner,’*  we  shall  say,  it  would  have  been
properly  cooked  Such  a conclusion  would  be  reached  by  applica-
^ See  The  Aims  af  Educatum,  p.  191.


FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS


351


tions  of  tie  principles  of  agreement  and  difference.  Along  such  a
line  of  investigation  we  could  not  further  analyse  these  changes.
The  scientist  likewise  accounts  for  the  change  from  raw  meat  to
iurnt  cinder  by  referring  to  what  has  happened  in  the  interval.
But  he  splits  up  the  interval  into  shorter  and  shorter  periods  between
any  two  of  which  the  qualitative  variation  is  small.  Further,  he
does  not  take  this  'piece  of  meat  as  the  unit  of  his  investigation ; he
splits  it  up  into  smaller  and  smaller  components  until  he  reaches
units  which  are  exactly  alike  and  are  thus  comparable  in  respect
of  their  quantitative  variations.  The  piece  of  meat  can  be  cut  into
smaller  and  smaller  slices,  each  of  which  would  be  recognizable  as
a piece  of  meat  If  this  piece  were  still  further  subdivided  by  chemical
means,  it  would  be  broken  down  into  its  chemical  constituents :
proteins,  carbohydrates,  fats,  water,  salts.  If  these  were  agaiu
subdivided,  their  components  would  be  a carbon  atom,  a hydrogen
atom,  and  so  on.  These  atoms  can  again  be  subdivided  into  electrons
and  protons.  Now  a hydrogen  atom  is  qualitatively  different  from
a carbon  atom,  but  the  electrons  and  protons  of  which  both  are
composed  are  the  same  whether  they  be  components  of  the  hydrogen
or  of  the  carbon  atom.  The  qualitative  difference  is  due  to  the
arrangement  of  these  electrons  in  a certain  pattern.  Here,  then,
the  scientist  seems  to  have  reached  units  which  are  spatio-temporally
homogeneous  the  arrangement  of  which  in  different  patterns  can  be
stated  in  simple  fundamental  laws.  By  subdividing  the  total  occur-
rence raw  meat  being  burnt  to  a cinder  into  smaller  units  temporally
and  spatially  he  can  connect  these  changes  in  an  intelligible  way.
Thus  any  complex  occurrence  can  be  regarded  as  analysable  into
an  arrangement  of  homogeneous  units  the  laws  of  whose  behaviour
can  be  expressed  quantitatively.  Thus  the  unmanageable  complexity
of  perceptible  objects  is  reduced  to  simple  laws.

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  when  this  stage  has  been  reached
the  common-sense  notion  of  cause  ceases  to  have  application.  Cause
and  effect  themselves  come  to  be  apprehended  as  in  constant  change  ;
causal  laws  are  replaced  by  mathematical  functions  expressing
tendencies.^  Scientific  laws  thus  expressed  are  very  different  from
the  causal  uniformities  of  common-sense  knowledge  and  early  science.
The  generalization  that  heavy  bodies  fall  to  the  ground  seems  very
different  from  the  statement  that  every  particle  of  matter  attracts
every  other  particle  with  a force  directly  proportional  to  their  mass
and  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  their  distance.  Yet
the  latter  statement  is  reached  by  carrying  further  the  anal5rtical
method  employed  in  the  discovery  of  quahtative  uniformities  and

1 Hence  the  laws  of  field  physics  are  expressible  in  differential  equations.
We  are  deliberately  neglecting  the  consideration  of  quantum  phenomena.
Cf.  B.  Russell,  Analysis  of  Matter,  Chap.  XL


352


A MODEER  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


by  applying  it  more  precisely  and  systematically  in  accordance
with  the  principle  of  convergence  to  simplicity  with  diminution  of
extent.  By  this  means  common-sense  analysis  is  replaced  by
functional  analysis.

The  simplest  examples  of  functional  analysis  can  be  expressed
in  conformity  with  Mill’s  canon  of  the  Method  of  Concomitant
Variations.  1 A rough  and  ready  apphcation  of  the  canon  might
have  been  made  in  Pasteur’s  experimental  investigation  discussed
in  the  last  chapter.  The  purer  the  air  he  admitted  into  the  sterilized
liquids  the  fewer  the  micro-organisms  found  in  the  liquids.  But
it  is  clear  that  the  variation  was  not  capable  of  precise  expression.
It  would  be  necessary,  first,  that  the  exact  quantity  of  dust  per
cubic  foot  of  the  atmosphere  in  each  place  should  have  been  deter-
mined ; secondly,  that  there  should  have  been  an  exact  correlation
between  the  quantity  of  dust  introduced  into  the  liquids  and  the
number  of  micro-organisms  developed  in  the  liquids.  It  is  unlikely
that  these  conditions  should  be  fulfilled.  Nor  was  this  necessary
for  the  purpose  of  Pasteur’s  investigation ; he  sought  a ca%m,  not
a functional  correlation.  In  the  more  precise  use  of  the  method  the
notion  of  functional  dependence  replaces  the  notion  of  causal  con-
nexion. It  is  this  notion  that  we  must  now  examine.

X is  said  to  be  a function  of  Y when  variation  in  X is  correlated
with  variation  in  Y according  to  a rule.  That  is  to  say  X and  Y
are  variables  that  can  assume  different  values.  X is  said  to  be  the
independent  variable,  since  change  in  X determines  change  in  Y ; the
latter  is  consequently  called  the  dependent  variable.  Por  example,
the  length  of  the  circumference  of  a circle  is  a function  of  its  radius ;
the  expansion  of  mercury  is  a function  of  its  temperature ; the
area  of  a triangle  is  a function  of  its  base  and  altitude.  In  the  last
example  there  are  two  independent  variables,  the  base  and  the
altitude,  the  values  of  which  must  be  determined  in  order  that  the
value  of  the  dependent  variable,  the  area,  may  be  determined.
The  income  tax  a man  has  to  pay  is  a function  of  the  amount  of
his  income.  It  is  not,  however,  a continuous  function  since  it  is
subject  to  jumps.  Nevertheless  the  amount  of  tax  payable  is  corre-
lated according  to  a rule  with  the  amount  of  income.  This  notion
of  functional  dependence  is,  then,  one  with  which  we  are  perfectly
familiar.  But  we  cannot  use  it  precisely  until  the  values  for  the
variables  are  precisely  determined  and  can  be  stated  in  terms  of  a
repeatable  unit.  We  must  be  able  to  replace  such  qualitative
conceptions  as  heavy,  hotter,  by  exactly  determined  units  which  en-
able us  to  say  how  much  weight,  how  much  heat,  and  so  on.  We  nlust
be  able  to  express  the  relations  between  ice,  water,  steam  in  state-
ments involving  no  reference  to  the  qualitative  properties  of  these
^op.  cit..  Chap.  VIIL


FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS


353


difierent  substances.  The  qualitative  uniformity  Heavy  bodies  fall
to  the  ground  is  defective  for  the  purposes  of  science  in  two  respects  :
it  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  vague  notion  heaviness,  and  the  con-
nexion between  heaviness  miA.  falling  to  the  ground  is  left  unexplained.
This  emphasis  on  qualitative  aspects  led  to  the  belief  that  heavy
bodies  naturally  fall,  light  bodies  naturally  rise,  so  that  heavy  bodies
were  believed  to  fall  faster  than  lighter  ones.  This  belief  was  ex-
plained on  the  assumption  that  the  natural  place  of  a stone,  for
instance,  was  the  earth  ; hence,  a stone  held  in  the  hand  will,  when
released,  fall  downwards  to  its  natural  place,  the  more  rapidly  in
proportion  to  its  weight.  Every  one  now  knows  that  this  belief
is  mistaken.  It  has  some  empirical  evidence  in  its  favour  since  a
body  A that  is  bulky  and  lighter  in  weight  than  B will  offer  less
resistance  to  the  air  and  in  consequence  will  fall  more  slowly  than
B.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  a piece  of  notepaper  and  a penny  be
dropped  from  the  same  height  the  penny  reach  the  ground
jSirst.  If,  however,  Aristotle  and  his  supporters  had  attempted  to
determine  how  fast  bodies  fall  they  would  have  discovered  their
mistake.

It  is  worth  while  to  consider  a little  more  fully  what  was  involved
in  the  advance  from  the  qualitative  uniformity  to  the  functional
statement  which  expresses  the  law  of  freely  falling  bodies.  ^ Galileo
began  by  discovering  a contradiction  in  the  Aristotelian  theory.
If  two  bodies  differing  in  weight  be  taken  then,  if  bodies  fall  in
proportion  to  their  weight,  it  can  be  shown  that  the  heavier  body
will  fall  more  slowly  than  the  lighter.  That  is  to  say,  the  theory  is
self-contradictory.  The  heavier  body  may  be  considered  as  made
up  of  several  bodies  Ai,  Ag,  A3,  A4,  of  which  Ai  As  A3  are  together
equal  in  weight  to  the  lighter  body  B.  Since  Ai,  Ag,  A3  are  equal
in  weight  to  B they  will  faU  at  the  same  rate  as  B,  but  A4  will  fall
more  slowly.  Hence  the  body  composed  of  Ai  As  A3  A4  will  fall
more  slowly  than  B,  since  A4  will  retard  the  motion.  This  is  a
contradiction.^  Accordingly  Galileo  resorted  to  experiment.  Every

Cf.  Chap.  XVI,  p.  303  above.

® Galileo’s  own  statement  of  his  reasoning  is  so  admirably  clear  and  affords
such  an  excellent  example  of  method  that  it  is  worth  quoting  in  full:

‘ Salv.  [i.e.  Gahleo].  It  is  possible  to  prove  clearly,  by  means  of  a short  and
conclusive  argument,  that  a heavier  body  does  not  move  more  rapidly  than  a
lighter  one  provided  that  both  bodies  are  of  the  same  material  and  in  short  such
as  those  mentioned  by  Aristotle.  But  tell  me,  SimpHcio,  whether  you  admt
that  each  falling  body  acquires  a definite  speed  fixed  by  nature,  a velocity  which
cannot  be  increased  or  diminished  except  by  the  use  of  force  or  resistance.

Simp.  [i.e,  the  Aristotelian}.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  one  and  the
same  body  moving  in  a single  medium  has  a fixed  velocity  determined  by  nature
and  which  cannot  be  increased  except  by  the  addition  of  momentum  [impeto]
or  diminished  except  by  some  resistance  which  retards  it,

Salv.  If  then  we  take  two  bodies  whose  natural  speeds  are  different,  it  is
23


354


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


one  knows  tke  famous  story  of  kow  ke  dropped  from  tke  Tower
of  Pisa  two  cannon  kails,  one  weigking  100  lb.,  one  weigking  1 lb.,
wkick  reached  tke  ground  at  approximately  tke  same  time.  But,
as  we  saw  in  Chapter  XVI,  Galileo  was  not  satisfied  with  disproving
tke  Aristotelian  theory ; he  set  to  work  to  determine  tke  rate  o/
fall  It  was  already  known  that  tke  velocity  of  a falling  body
increases.  He  first  supposed  that  tke  velocity  was  proportional  to
tke  distance  fallen,  i.e.  that  tke  speed  of  a body  that  had  fallen  through
two  feet  would  be  twice  as  great  as  tke  speed  of  one  tkat  had  fallen
through  one  foot.  But  he  found  a contradiction  in  this  hypothesis.
He  then  supposed  tkat  tke  acceleration  was  proportional  to  tke  time
taken,  i.e.  tkat  a falling  body  gains  equal  increments  of  velocity
in  equal  increments  of  time.  He  could  not  test  this  supposition
by  experiments  on  freely  falling  bodies  since  tke  fall  is  too  fast
(viz.  more  than  60  feet  in  two  seconds).  He  had  no  clock.  He  was,

clear  that  on  uniting  the  two,  the  more  rapid  one  will  be  partly  retarded  by  the
slower,  and  the  slower  will  be  somewhat  hastened  by  tke  swifter.  Bo  you
not  agree  with  me  in  this  opinion  ?

Simp.  You  are  unquestionably  right.

Salv.  But  if  this  is  true,  and  if  a large  stone  moves  with  a speed  of,  say,
eight,  while  a smaller  moves  with  a speed  of  four,  then  when  they  are  united,  the
system  will  move  with  a speed  less  than  eight ; but  the  two  stones  when  tied
together  make  a stone  larger  than  that  which  before  moved  with  a speed  of
eight.  Hence  the  heavier  body  moves  with  less  speed  than  the  lighter  which  is
contrary  to  your  supposition.  Thus  you  see  how,  from  your  assumption,  that
the  heavier  body  moves  more  rapidly  than  the  lighter  one,  I infer  that  the
heavier  body  moves  more  slowly.

Simp.  I am  aU  at  sea  because  it  appears  to  me  that  the  smaller  stone
when  added  to  the  larger  increases  its  weight  and  by  adding  weight  I do  not
see  how  it  can  fail  to  increase  its  speed  or,  at  least,  not  to  diminish  it.

Salv.  Here  again  you  are  in  error,  Simplicio,  because  it  is  not  true  that  the
smaller  stone  adds  weight  to  the  larger.

Simp.  This  is,  indeed,  quite  beyond  my  comprehension.

Salv,  It  will  not  be  when  I have  once  shown  you  the  mistake  under
which  you  are  labouring.  Note  that  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between
heavy  bodies  in  motion  and  the  same  bodies  at  rest.  A large  stone  placed
in  a balance  not  only  acquires  additional  weight  by  having  another  stone
placed  upon  it,  but  even  by  the  addition  of  a handful  of  hemp  its  weight  is
augmented  six  to  ten  ounces  according  to  the  quantity  of  hemp.  But  if  you
tie  the  hemp  to  the  stone  and  allow  them  to  fall  freely  from  some  height,  do
you  believe  that  the  hemp  will  press  down  upon  the  stone  and  thus  accelerate
its  motion  or  do  you  think  that  the  motion  will  be  retarded  by  a partial  up-
ward pressure  2 One  always  feels  the  pressure  upon  his  shoulders  when  he
prevents  the  motion  of  a load  resting  upon  him ; but  if  one  descends  just  as
rapidly  as  the  load  would  fall  how  can  it  gravitate  or  press  upon  Mm  ? Bo
you  not  see  that  tMs  would  be  the  same  as  trying  to  strike  a man  with  a lance
when  he  is  running  away  from  you  with  a speed  which  is  equal  to,  or  even
greater,  than  that  with  wMch  you  are  following  him  ? You  must  therefore
conclude  that,  during  free  and  natural  fall,  the  small  stone  does  not  press  upon
the  larger  and  consequently  does  not  increase  its  weight  as  it  does  when  at
rest.’  (Dialogues  concerning  the  Two  New  Sciences,  pp.  62-64.)


FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS


355


iowever,  able  to  retard  tbe  motion  sujBSciently  for  exact  measure-
ment by  rolling  balls  down  grooves  on  an  inclined  plane.  He  knew
exactly  wbat  to  expect  since  by  previous  reasoning  be  bad  already
determined  tbe  principle  of  independence  of  motions,  and  tbe  prin-
ciple of  uniform  acceleration  for  a falling  body.  He  saw  that  the
form  of  the  law  would  not  be  modified  in  tbe  case  of  balls  rolling
down  a plane,  and  that  by  varying  tbe  angle  of  inclination  it  would
be  possible  to  exhibit  tbe  special  case  of  90°  as  tbe  limit  of  tbe  general
problem.  In  this  way  be  was  able  to  show  that  tbe  experimental
facts  agreed  with  bis  deduction  that  tbe  distance  was  proportional
to  the  square  of  the  time  taken.  From  this  be  was  able  to  show
that  tbe  velocity  of  a falling  body  is  proportional  to  tbe  time  it
bas  been*  falling  from  rest.^  Tbe  further  development  of  this  result
led  Galileo  to  tbe  conclusion  that  if  a falling  body  Is  suddenly  arrested
at  any  point  and  projected  upward  with  its  velocity  at  that  point,
it  will  rise  to  tbe  level  from  which  it  fell.  He  was  then  able  to
deduce  that,  whatever  tbe  angle  of  descent,  tbe  velocity  will  be
tbe  same  at  any  given  level  parallel  to  tbe  earth’s  surface.  These
mathematical  deductions  led,  then,  to  tbe  discovery  of  tbe  first  law
of  motion,  and  thus  to  tbe  disproof  of  Aristotle’s  classification  of
motions  into  natural  motions  and  violent  motions.  Thus  GaHleo
introduced  tbe  important  conception  of  inertia  and  thus  by  bis
dynamical  principles  prepared  tbe  way  for  Newton’s  explicit  statement
of  tbe  three  laws  of  motion  and  of  the  law  of  gravitation.

It  should  be  noticed  that  Galileo’s  method  was  first  to  formulate
provisional  hypotheses  from  which  be  reasoned  deductively  in  order
to  ascertain  whether  they  led  to  contradictory  conclusions ; then
to  test  these  hypotheses  by  showing  that  tbe  experimental  facts
were  in  conformity  with  them.  ^ This  is  tbe  method  of  exact  scientific
investigation.  The  formulation  of  tbe  hypothesis  in  precise  func-
tional terms  makes  possible  further  deductions  as  to  wbat  will
happen  in  more  complicated  cases.  If  tbe  tests  do  not  confirm  these
further  deductions,  tbe  hypothesis  mayr  need  reformulation.  In
this  way  the  facts  are  co-ordinated  into  a system  capable  of  func-
tional development.  Tbe  statement  of  qualitative  uniformities  is
superseded  by  tbe  functional  correspondence  of  quantitative  units.

§ 3*  COKKELATION  AND  THE  USE  OF  STATISTICAL
METHODS

In  tbe  last  section  we  were  concerned  with  tbe  advance  in  science
brought  about  by  tbe  substitution  of  quantitative  for  qualitative

^ Velocity  is  units  of  space  traversed  in  unit  of  time.  The  law  of  freely  falling
bodies  is  now  expressed  in  the  formula  s ==  | gt\  Galileo  used  cumbersome
geometrical  methods.

* Cf.  p.  300  above,  and  p.  490  below.


356


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


analysis.  By  means  of  such,  analysis  we  are  enabled  to  employ
the  notion  of  functional  correspondence  between  two  or  more  factors.
We  are  thus  able  to  state  their  exact  relationship.  When  a
variation  in  X determines  an  exact  variation  in  Y,  there  is  a func-
tional dependence  of  Y upon  X.  Thus  we  saw  that  the  rate  of
fall  of  a freely  falling  body  is  an  exact  function  of  the  time  it  has
been  falling  from  rest.  In  other  words  its  acceleration  is  constant.
Given  a value  of  the  variable  time  we  can  determine  precisely  a
corresponding  value  of  the  variable  velocity.  This  functional  corre-
spondence replaces,  we  saw,  the  less  precise  notion  of  a causal  con-
nexion. The  notion  of  functional  dependence  is  of  the  highest
importance  in  mathematics.  Upon  its  use  depends  to  a very  con-
siderable extent  the  rapid  advance  of  the  physical  sciences.  It
may  be  said  that  every  scientific  problem  involves  an  attempt  to
determine  the  relationship  between  variables.  A variable,  it  will
be  remembered,  represents  any  one  of  a set  of  values.  The  precise
statement  of  a functional  relation  between  variables  presupposes
that  the  values  for  the  variables  have  been  measured  in  terms  of
some  unit  of  measurement.  The  physical  sciences  are  largely  con-
cerned with  measurement,  so  that  these  sciences  can  employ  the
method  of  functional  analysis.  Consequently,  physical  laws  are
exact  and  invariable.

We  have  now  to  inquire  whether  this  extremely  feuitful  method
of  functional  analysis  can  be  employed  in  dealing  with  occurrences
that  are  usually  but  not  always  connected.  In  the  biological  and
social  sciences  we  are  concerned  with  factors  whose  correlation  is
not  perfect.  For  example,  there  is  not  a constant  relation  between
a man^s  height  and  his  weight,  or  between  his  income  and  the  rent
he  pays  for  his  house  ; there  is  not  a constant  relation  between  the
intelligence  and  the  age  of  children  ; there  is  not  a constant  relation
between  the  month  of  the  year  and  the  rainfall  in  that  month  in
a given  place,  say  London.  Usually,  the  taller  a person  is  the
more  he  weighs  ; but  there  are  stout,  short  people  and  tall,  slender
people.  A very  rich  man  is  likely  to  have  a larger  house  and  to
pay  more  rent  for  it  than  a comparatively  poor  man,  but  the  varia-
tion in  size  of  income  will  not  exactly  correspond  to  variation  in
size  and  rent  of  the  house  occupied.  Again,  a house  in  County
Donegal  will  probably  be  of  a lower  rent  than  a house  of  approxim-
ately equal  size  and  convenience  in  Sussex,  and  a house  in  the  village
of  Midhurst  than  in  the  town  of  Brighton.  In  using  the  expression
win  probably  be  we  are  suggesting  that  there  is  some  correlation
between  the  locality  of  a house  and  its  rent  but  that  the  correlation
is  not  exact.  A great  many  factors  contribute  to  determine  the
rent  of  a given  house.  Now,  the  economist  may  want  to  determine
the  relation  between  density  of  population  and  urban  rent.  In


FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS


357


studying  this  problem  he  will  not  be  able  to  set  to  work  in  the
manner  of  the  physicist.  He  will  not  be  able  to  isolate  the  relevant
from  the  irrelevant  factors ; nor  even  to  ascertain  precisely  what
factors  are  irrelevant.  He  cannot  physically  remove  a factor  and
then  observe  what  happens.  The  physicist,  however,  can  to  a very
considerable  extent  exclude  those  factors  with  the  effect  of  which
he  is  not  at  the  moment  concerned.  Thus  he  is  able  to  perform
controlled  and  repeatable  experiments,  as  Galileo  did  in  the  case
of  his  falling  balls.  The  economist  has  to  deal  with  a complicated
situation.  He  will  recognize  the  relevance  of  such  factors  as  respect-
ability of  the  district,  facilities  of  transport,  amount  of  open  spaces
in  the  neighbourhood,  elevation  of  the  ground,  the  number  of  people
desiring  to  live  in  the  district.  He  must,  therefore,  obtain  records
of  different  urban  districts  with  different  densities  of  population  in
order  to  determine  whether  there  is  any  degree  of  correlation  between
these  two  factors.  The  methods  that  have  been  devised  for  dealing
with  such  problems  are  the  statistical  methods.^  By  means  of
these  methods  it  is  possible  to  deal  with  complex  situations  that
are  capable  of  division  into  distinct  factors  between  which  uniform
connexions  cannot  be  directly  ascertained,  and  with  the  variations
between  characteristics  whose  correlation  is  not  perfect.

Occurrences  which  at  first  sight  would  appear  to  be  disconnected
may  be  found  to  have  some  degree  of  relationship,  whilst  others  that
might  have  been  expected  to  vary  together  may  be  found  to  be  but
slightly  dependent  upon  each  other.  Thus,  for  example,  we  may
wish  to  ascertain  whether  there  is  any  apparent  degree  of  correspond-
ence between  the  number  of  marriages  in  a society  and  the  output
of  the  harvest.  Such  an  investigation  must  deal  with  these  two
items  over  a series  of  years.  The  collection  of  the  statistical  data  in
such  problems  is  often  extremely  laborious.  Further,  it  is  necessary
to  devise  methods  by  means  of  which  these  items  can  be  correlated.

• We  must  now  very  briefl.y  consider  the  nature  of  the  quantitative
investigation  of  the  data  required  for  methods  of  correlation.  It
will  be  sufficient  to  consider  an  extremely  simple  example.  Suppose
a parent  receives  a school  report  on  his  daughter’s  work  during
her  first  term  at  the  school,  in  which  marks  are  assigned  for  the
terminal  examinations.  If  she  has  65  per  cent,  for  History,  how  is
he  to  teU  whether  that  mark  is  a good  mark,  or  not  ? He  will  need
to  know  its  relation  to  marks  gained  by  other  girls  in  the  same  class.

^ Statistical  methods  play  such  an  important  part  in  the  investigations  of
the  social  sciences  that  it  is  not  desirable  wholly  to  omit  them  in  a discussion  of
scientific  method.  But  it  is  not  possible  to  discuss  these  methods  in  detail  in
such  a book  as  this.  I shall  attempt  only  to  indicate  the  logical  nature  of
statistical  methods  and  to  illustrate  their  use.  The  student  should  refer  to
some  of  the  many  excellent  manuals  on  statistical  methods  given  in  the  biblio-
graphy.


358


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


I£  lie  is  told  that  65  per  cent,  is  an  average  mark,  he  will  probably
be  satisfied  ; he  will  feel  that  he  knows  his  daughter’s  ability  with
regard  to  the  rest  of  her  class.  The  conception  of  an  average  is
familiar.  Thus  we  speak  of  the  average  rainfall  of  a district.  We
say  that  the  climate  of  a country  is  its  average  weather.  We  speak
of  the  average  number  of  passengers,  carried  fer  diem  on  the  Metro-
politan Railway.  We  have  now  to  consider  what  exactly  an  average
is,  and  what  is  its  use  in  statistical  investigation.  It  wiE  be  best
to  begin  with  an  example.

Take  the  following  set  of  marks  gained  by  ten  children  in  a
school  test : 66,  44,  55,  20,  36,  52,  61,  62,  22,  30.  The  average  is
determined  by  adding  all  the  marks  and  dividing  the  sum  by  the
number  of  separate  scores.  The  average  mark  is,  then,  43*8.  This
average  is  known  as  the  mean.  There  are  other  forms  of  average,
which  we  shall  consider  in  a moment.  It  should  be  noticed  that
in  this  case  no  number  in  the  set  coincides  with  the  average  mark.
This  is  usually  the  case.  Whether  or  not  there  is  a number  which
is  the  average  number  is  unimportant.  An  average  is  a single
number  representing  a whole  set  of  numbers.  What  it  represents
is  the  central  tendency  of  the  set.  If  the  marks  had  been  71,  42,
36,  58,  41,  60,  57,  12,  18,  53  the  average  mark  would  again  be  43*8.
Eut  the  two  sets  of  marks  differ  with  regard  to  the  number  of  marks
above  and  below  the  average.  Also  the  difference  between  the
highest  and  lowest  mark  gained  is  greater  in  the  second  case  than
in  the  first.  The  low  marks  pull  down  the  average.  This  metaphor
is  instructive.  Suppose  we  had  a ruler,  and  weights  representing
the  number  of  scores  in  a given  interval  placed  appropriately
on  the  ruler  (e.g.  the  three  scores  between  50  and  69  placed  at
the  50  mark  as  weight  3),  then  the  balancing  point  of  the  ruler
would  be  at  the  mean.  The  lowest  mark  would  be  furthest  from
the  fulcrum  on  the  one  side,  the  highest  mark  would  be  furthest
from  the  fulcrum  on  the  other  side.  The  further  a weight  of  the
same  size  is  placed  from  the  fulcrum,  the  more  it  tips  up  the  balance.
This  illustration  may  show  how  it  is  that  a low  mark  pulls  down
the  average,  and  a high  mark  pulls  it  up.  Smaller  variations  near
the  central  tendency  have  less  effect  in  determining  the  mean.  We
can  describe  the  difference  in  the  distribution  of  the  marks  in  the
two  sets  by  stating  the  deviation  of  each  mark  from  the  average.
These  deviations  are  called  errors  ”,  that  is  wanderings  away
from  ” the  average.

Another  form  of  average  is  the  median.  This  is  - the  middle
number  of  a series  of  numbers  arranged  in  order  of  magnitude.  If
the  series  has  an  even  number  of  members,  then  the  number  midway
between  the  two  nearest  the  middle  is  the  median.  This  can  be
illustrated  from  the  two  sets  of  marks  already  given.  We  shall  re-


FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS  359

arrange  them  in  order  of  magnitude,  naming  the  first  set  A,  the  second
set  B,  for  convenience  of  reference.

(A)  66,  62,  55,  52,  51,  44,  36,  30,  22,  20.

(B)  71,  68,  57,  53,  50,  42,  41,  36,  18,  12.

In  (A)  the  median  is  midway  between  51  and  44.  It  is,  therefore,
47-5.

In  (B)  the  median  is  midway  between  50  and  42.  It  is,  therefore,
46.

The  median  in  (B)  is  nearer  the  average  than  the  median  in
(A),  owing  to  the  fact  that  in  (B)  there  are  five  marks  below,  and
five  above  the  average ; whereas  in  (A)  there  are  four  below  and
six  above.

If  we  want  to  determine  whether,  say  62,  is  a high  mark,  or  a
low  mark,  we  need  to  know  how  many  in  the  set  are  above  62,  and
how  many  below  it.  The  mark  taken  in  isolation  has  very  little
significance.  For  example,  in  some  universities  the  pass-mark  for
the  final  examination  is  60  per  cent.,  in  others  it  is  33 J per  cent.
A comparison  of  the  mark  sheets,  giving  only  totals,  of  the  two
university  examinations  might  suggest  that  one  set  of  students
were  much  better  than  the  other  set,  unless  this  difference  of  stan-
dard were  taken  into  account.  In  statistical  investigation  it  is
essential  to  classify  the  data  at  the  outset  in  order  that  the  numerical
results  should  be  significant.  Neglect  of  this  precaution  is  no  doubt
responsible  for  the  popular  belief  that  ‘"you  can  prove  anything
by  statistics  ”,  which — as  is  often  the  case  with  popular  fallacies —
is  counterbalanced  by  the  belief  that  “ figures  never  lie

The  first  step  in  classifying  the  data  is  to  ascertain  what  is  called
the  frequency  distribution,  that  is  the  frequency  of  the  occurrence
of  a given  item.  For  this  purpose  we  must  divide  the  items  into
classes.  For  example,  in  the  illustration  of  the  marks,  we  can
classify  the  marks  in  tens,  putting  together  all  those  between
10  and  19,  20  and  29,  and  so  on.  These  divisions  are  called  class
intervals.  The  frequency  distribution  can  be  conveniently  exhibited
in  a frequency  table  (see  p.  360).

The  table  is  constructed  by  making  a separate  row  for  each  class
interval.  A cross  is  put  for  each  mark  falling  in  a given  class  interval.
The  number  in  the  third  column  is  the  frequency  of  occurrence  in
the  given  class  interval.  Comparing  series  A with  series  B we  can
see  at  a glance  that  the  members  of  A deviate  less  from  the  central
tendency  than  the  members  of  B.  In  a case  as  simple  as  our  illus-
tration it  would  never  be  necessary  to  prepare  a frequency  table.
But  when  we  are  dealing  with  hundreds  of  items,  not  arranged  in
any  order,  such  a table  is  a great  help.  But  it  is  not  necessary  for
our  purpose  to  consider  complicated  examples*


360  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Series  A

Series  B

Mark

Tabulation

Frequency

Mark

Tabulation

Frequency

0-  9

0-  9

10-19

10-19

X X

2

20-29

X X

2

20-29

30-39

X X

2

30-39

X

1

40-49

X

1

40-49

X X

2

60-59

XXX

3

50-59

X X X X

4

60-69

X X

2

60-69

70-79

70-79

X

1

80-89

80-89

90-99

i

90-99

Tlie  difference  between  tbe  maximum  and  minimum  mark  gained
is  called  the  range  of  tke  series.  Thus  the  range  of  (A)  is  46 ; the
range  of  (B)  is  59.  The  range  is  a measure  of  variability.  The
items  in  (B)  are  said  to  scatter  more  than  the  items  in  (A),  that  is
to  say,  there  are  greater  deviations  from  the  mean.

If,  now,  we  consider  the  class  frequency,  we  see  that  in  both
series  the  greatest  frequency  occurs  in  the  class  interval  50-59.
The  mid-point  of  the  class  interval  with  the  greatest  frequency  is
called  the  mode.  This  is  another  form  of  average,  that  is,  a measure
of  central  tendency.  The  mode  represents  that  mark  which  is  most
likely  to  occur.  It  must  not  be  confused  with  the  mean,  which
is  what  we  usually  understand  by  an  average.  This  point  can  be
well  illustrated  by  cricket  scores.  Suppose  a cricketer  who  often
makes  0,  makes,  once  he  has  got  his  eye  in  ”,  say,  70,  or  80,
or  even  a century,  then  his  most  likely  score  will  be  0,  but  his
average  may  be  20,  or  30.  If  the  deviations  are  small,  so  that
small  deviations  are  as  likely  to  occur  as  large  deviations,  then  the
mode,  the  mean,  and  the  median,  tend  to  coincide.^

Since  the  range  depends  only  upon  the  two  extreme  members,
it  is  not  a very  satisfactory  measure  of  variability.  Hence,  it  is
usual  to  calculate  what  is  called  the  mean  deviation.  If  we  arrange
the  members  of  series  (A)  about  the  central  tendency,  we  can  obtain
the  deviation  of  any  member  by  subtracting  it  from  the  mean,  if
it  is  less,  and  by  subtracting  the  mean  from  it,  if  it  is  greater.  These
deviations  will  be  represented  by  -f  and  — signs.  Thus  we  get :

1 See  W.  P.  and  E.  M*  Elderton : Primer  of  Statistics,  pp.  21  and  45.


FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS


331


-23-8;  --21-8;  -13-8;  -7-8;  +*2;  +7-2;  +8*2;  +11*2;
+18-2;  +22-2.

Tie  mean  deviation  will,  then,  be  13*44.  This  is  simply  the
average  of  the  deviations,  neglecting  the  sign.  In  the  same  way
we  can  calculate  the  mean  deviation  of  series  (B).  It  is  14.  Statis-
ticians generally  use  what  is  called  the  standard  deviation.  This  is
the  square  root  of  the  sum  of  the  squared  deviations  divided  by  the
number  of  items.  Hence,  it  differs  from  the  mean  deviation  in  that
the^  deviations  are  squared  before  being  summed,  and  after  the
division  of  the  sum  by  the  number  of  items  the  square  root  is
extracted.  The  standard  deviation  is  S3anbolized  by  a.  It  can  be
expressed  in  the  formula.


where  d represents  deviations  from  the  mean,  and  S means  the
sum  of  ” ; n represents  the  number  of  items.  The  standard  devia-
tion is  generally  used.  If  the  deviation  is  large  it  shows  that  the
members  of  the  series  are  scattered.

We  can  now  sum  up  the  three  forms  of  average : The  mean  is
the  ordinary  average.  It  is  usually  easily  calculated.

The  median  is  the  middle  of  the  series  when  the  series  has  been
arranged  in  order.  Hence,  it  is  such  that  there  are  as  many  items
above  as  below  it.  It  is  important  not  to  suppose  that  the  median
is  the  middle  of  the  range.  This  will  be  the  case  only  when  the
frequency  distribution  is  symmetrical.

The  mode  is  the  most  likely  case.

It  is  important  to  remember  that  every  average  is  a measure
of  central  tendency,  and  thus  represents  a point  on  a scale.  Thus
a frequency  distribution  can  be  graphically  represented  by  a curve
obtained  by  plotting  the  frequencies  of  the  class  intervals  on  the
class  scale.  This  is  undoubtedly  the  simplest  method  of  dealing
with  large  numbers  of  c^-ses.  But  it  cannot  be  pursued  here.^

We  have  now  to  consider  the  relation  between  measured  variables.
If  the  economist  wishes  to  determine  whether  there  is  a relation
between  urban  rent  and  density  of  population,  he  must  first  obtain
statistics  relating  to  these  variables.  He  must  then  ascertain
whether  increase  of  the  values  of  one  variable  is  accompanied  by
increase,  or  decrease,  of  the  other  variable.  From  the  examples
given  at  the  beginning  of  the  section,  we  may  see  that  correlation
means  degree  of  functional  relationship.  If  the  correlation  between
two  variables  is  perfect,  then  there  is  between  them  a relation  of

^ For  further  discussion  of  statistical  methods  see  the  books  given  in  the
bibliography.


362


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


functional  correspondence.  It  is  usual  to  confine  the  word  corre-
lation ” to  imperfect  correspondence.  Thus  the  correlation  between
the  velocity  of  a falling  body  and  the  time  being  perfect  is  called
a relation  of  functional  correspondence.  This  relation  is  positive ;
the  longer  the  body  has  been  falling,  the  faster  it  is  falling.  The
relation  between  the  gravitative  attraction  of  two  bodies  and  the
distance  between  their  centres  is  perfect  and  negative.  The  degree
of  correlation  is  expressed  by  a number  varying  from  + 1 to  — 1.
Thus  a perfect  positive  correlation  would  be  expressed  by  + 1 5 a
perfect  negative  correlation  would  be  expressed  by  — 1.  These  are
functional  relations.  Hence,  we  may  say  that  degree  of  correlation
varies  from  + -99  to  — *99.  This  number  is  called  the  coefficient
of  correlation.  It  is  important  to  remember  that  this  coefiS.cient  is
a pure  number  ; it  does  not  represent  a per  cent,  A correlation  of
+ *5  is  called  ''  five  tenths  ” or  fifty  It  is  not  fifty  per  cent.
It  represents  a degree  of  correlation  half-way  between  a perfect
correlation,  or  functional  relationship,  and  an  entire  absence  of  corre-
lation. An  entire  absence  of  correlation  is  not,  for  instance,  a
negative  correlation ; it  simply  is  absence  of  correlation.  For  ex-
ample, there  is  a negative  correlation  between  pressure  and  volume
of  a gas  at  constant  temperature ; there  is  entire  absence  of  corre-
lation between  the  size  of  a man’s  head  and  the  size  of  his  income.
There  is,  perhaps,  a slight  positive  correlation  between  the  size  of
a man’s  earned  income  and  his  ability  in  some  direction.

A high  degree,  positive  or  negative,  of  correlation  suggests  a
causal,  or  a functional  relation.  For  example,  if  there  were  a high
degree  of  positive  correlation  between  the  number  of  breakages
made  by  Lyons’  waitresses  and  the  amount  of  their  fatigue,  it
would  seem  not  unlikely  that  fatigue  is  a factor  in  causing  the
breakages.

In  order  that  correlation  coefficients  should  be  obtained,  i.e.  that
the  correlation  of  variables  should  be  measured,  it  is  essential  to
find  a quantitative  unit  in  terms  of  which  the  variables  can  be
measured.  In  the  case  of  what  are  called  Vital  statistics,  viz.  those
relating  to  births,  deaths,  marriages,  etc.,  the  urdt  is  easy  to  discover.
But  statistical  methods  are  being  increasingly  used  to  deal  with
characteristics  that  cannot  easily  be  apprehended  as  quantitative
variables.  The  statistics  of  the  results  of  mental  tests  are  based
upon  the  assumption  that  intelligence,  memory,  rapidity  of  thinhing,
can  be  measured  in  quantitative  terms.  The  initial  work  of  ascer-
taining the  quantitative  units  suitable  for  measuring  the  variables  ,
requires  the  greatest  insight  and  skill.  Until  it  has  been  adequately
accomplished  it  is  unlikely  that  e^erimental  psychology  will  make
considerable  advance  in  presenting  interpretable  results.  It  is,
again,  of  fundamental  importance  in  statistical  work  to  determine


FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS


363


precisely  the  field  witMn  which  the  measurements  are  supposed
to  hold.  Unless  this  is  carefully  done  the  interpretation  of  the
results,  which  is  the  most  di6S.cnlt  part  of  statistical  investigation,
is  likely  to  he  misleading  and  even  completely  valueless.  For
example,  recently  two  London  newspapers  undertook  to  investigate
the  question  whether  religious  belief  was  on  the  decline.  A ques-
tionnaire was  printed  in  each  of  the  papers  which  the  readers  were
invited  to  answer.  A statistical  summary  of  the  answers  received
was  published,  and  upon  this  some  dubious  reasoning  with  regard
to  the  decline  of  religious  belief  has  been  based.  The  difficulties
in  the  way  of  reaching  a reliable  inference  from  such  results  should
be  obvious.  Even  if  it  were  granted  that  the  questions  were  so
framed  as  to  permit  of  precise  and  enlightening  answers,  no  attempt
seems  to  have  been  made  to  check  the  results  or  to  determine  the
field  of  the  investigation.  It  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that
only  a certain  type  of  reader  would  answer  the  questionnaire,  so
that  generalizations  with  regard  to  all  the  readers  are  extremely
unreliable.  Eesults  thus  obtained  are  not  capable  of  precise  inter-
pretation owing  to  this  failure  precisely  to  delimit  the  field  of  the
investigation.  The  only  way  to  prevent  such  mistakes  is  to  describe
carefully  what  exactly  the  statistical  investigation  is  intended  to
accomplish.  The  exact  nature  of  the  questions  asked  should  be
stated;  the  field  over  which  the  investigation  has  been  carried
out  should  be  precisely  delimited.  Only  when  this  has  been
accomplished  is  it  possible  to  draw  reliable  inferences  and  to
interpret  the  results  fruitfully.  This  preliminary  work  is  often
very  difficult,  involving  complicated  and  technical  methods.
Consequently,  there  is  a not  unnatural  tendency  to  over-
estimate the  importance  and  the  reliability  of  the  statistical
results  thus  obtained.  As  Professor  Whitehead  has  pointed  out,

^ there  is  no  more  common  error  than  to  assume  that,  because  pro-
longed and  accurate  mathematical  calculations  have  been  made,
the  application  of  the  result  to  some  fact  of  nature  is  absolutely
certain  The  statement  of  the  correlations  is  not  itself  an  inductive
procedure ; inductive  inference  enters  only  when  there  is  generaliza-
tion from  the  observed  correlations  to  unobserved  instances.  Mr.
J.  M.  Keynes  has  pointed  out  the  necessity  of  distinguishmg  between
these  two  parts  of  the  theory  of  statistics.  He  says : ' The  first
function  of  the  theory  is  purely  descriptive.  It  devises  numerical
and  diagrammatic  methods  by  which  certain  salient  characteristics
of  large  groups  of  phenomena  can  be  briefly  described ; and  it  provides
formulae  by  the  aid  of  which  we  can  measure  or  summarize  the
variations  in  some  particular  character  which  we  have  observed
over  a long  series  of  events  or  instances.  The  second  function  of
^Introduction  to  Mathematics,  p.  27.


364  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

tlie  theory  is  inductive.  It  seeks  to  extend  its  description  of  certain
characteristics  of  observed  events  to  the  corresponding  charac-
teristics of  other  events  which  have  not  been  observed.  This  part
of  the  subject  may  be  called  the  Theory  of  Statistical  Inference
The  development  of  the  second  part  is  difficult  and  is  bound  up  with
the  theory  of  probability.  This  cannot  be  discussed  here.  All  that
we  are  concerned  to  point  out  is  that  the  statement  of  a statistical
frequency  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  inductive  generalization.  The
way  in  which  generalizations  may  be  derived  from  statistical  fre-
quencies is  by  means  of  probability  frequencies.  This  raises  difficult
problems  the  discussion  of  which  would  involve  a greater  amount
of  mathematics  than  can  be  introduced  in  such  a book  as  this.

§4.  PKOBABILITY

It  m?y  be  assumed  that  every  one  has  a rough  conception  of
the  meaning  of  probability  ”.  We  oppose  it  on  the  one  hand  to
certainty,  on  the  other  to  impossibility.  Thus,  for  example,  we  say
that  it  will  probably  rain  to-day,  or  that  A will  probably  fail  to
pass  his  examination,  and  so  on.  But  as  thus  used,  probability  is
not  a clear  conception,  it  merely  indicates  lack  of  entire  conviction
that  something  will,  or  will  not,  happen.  In  mathematics  prob-
ability can  be  exactly  defined.  The  theory  of  probability  has  been
worked  out  in  an  elaborate  manner.  In  so  far,  however,  as  the
theory  is  logically  exact,  it  is  a branch  of  mathematics,  and  is  thus
no  more  suitable  for  discussion  in  an  introductory  book  on  logic  than
is  the  theory  of  complex  numbers.  But  it  may  be  worth  while  to
indicate  what  is  meant  by  the  calculation  of  probabilities.

If  in  ordinary  discussion  we  say  The  occurrence  E wiU  probably
happen’’,  we  mean  that  there  are  stronger  reasons  for  supposing  that
it  wffi  happen  than  for  supposing  that  it  will  not.  We  recognize  that
an  occurrence  may  be  more,  or  less,  probable.  There  are  all  degrees
of  probability  between  the  certainty  that  E will  not  happen  and
the  certainty  that  it  will.  If  we  want  to  state  exactly  how  probable
its  occurrence  is,  we  must  count  the  number  of  reasons  favourable
to  the  production  of  E,  and  the  number  of  reasons  that  are  imfavour-
able  and  can  therefore  be  ofiered  against  the  occurrence  of  E.  To
count  the  reasons  for  and  against  means  to  analyse  the  situation
so  as  to  determine  what  factors  are  favourable  and  what  are  not
favourable.  It  is  natural  to  represent  the  probability  of  the  occur-
rence of  E as  the  ratio  of  the  favourable  factors  t(\the  unfavourable
together  with  the  favourable  factors.  Thus  certainty  will  be  repre-
sented by  1,  impossibility  by  0.  If  the  favourable  factors  are  repre-
sented by  r and  the  unfavourable  factors  by  r',  then  the  probabUity

Treatise  on  Probability,  p.  327.


FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS


865


will  be  represented  by  Tbe  odds  in  favour  of  its  happening

is  then  represented  by  ^ ; the  odds  against  by  — •

Since  E will  either  happen  or  not  happen,  the  sum  of  the  prob-
ability of  its  happening  and  the  probability  of  its  not  happening
must  be  1.  That  is  1 = E -j-  E'  (where  E'  expresses  “ not-E
Consequently,  if  p represents  the  probability  that  B will  happen,
then  1 — p represents  the  probability  that  E will  not  happen.

The  principles  involved  in  the  calculation  of  probabilities  may
be  made  clear  by  means  of  very  simple  examples.  We  select  the
familiar  problem  of  throwing  dice,  since  the  factors  involved  are
simple  and  can  be  easily  counted.

(i)  What  is  the  probability  that,  if  one  die  be  thrown,  six  will
turn  up  ?

It  is  clear  that  there  are  six  ways  in  which  a die  may  faU,  and
that  it  must  fall  in  one  or  other  of  these  six  ways.  Of  these,  one
is  favourable,  five  are  not.  Hence  the  requhred  probability  is  J.

(ii)  What  is  the  probability  that,  if  one  die  be  thrown,  six  will
not  turn  up  ?

The  required  probability  is  clearly

(iii)  What  is  the  probability  that,  if  two  dice  are  thrown  together,
both  will  turn  up  six  ?

Since  each  die  has  six  faces,  and  since  each  of  these  faces  may
turn  up  with  any  one  of  the  six  faces  of  the  other  die,  there  are  clearly
thirty-six  possil3le  combinations.  Only  one  of  these  combinations
is  favourable.  Hence  the  required  probability  is

The  probabibty  of  getting  six  with  one  die  is  clearly  not  dependent
upon  the  probability  of  getting  six  with  the  other.  Such  events
are  called  independent.  The  probability  that  both  will  happen  is
the  conjunction  of  their  separate  probabilities,  viz.  (-J-  x -J-)  = -is*
Thus  we  obtain  the  rule  for  calculating  the  conjoint  probability  of
two,  or  more,  independent  events,  as  follows : Multiply  their  separate
prohabilities.

(iv)  What  is  the  probability  that  of  two  dice  thrown  together
neither  will  turn  up”  six  ?

These  are  clearly  independent  events.  The  probability  of  get-
ting not  six  is  in  each  case  f.  Hence,  the  required  probability  is

(f  X f)  ==  11-.

(v)  WTiat  is  the  probability  that  of  two  dice  thrown  together
only  one  will  turn  up  six  ?

Here  it  is  indifferent  whether  six  turns  up  with  the  first  die,  or
with  the  second  die.  Using  subscript  numbers  to  distinguish  one
die  from  the  other,  we  can  represent  the  case  in  which  six  turns
up  by  Si,  or  by  »2,  and  the  case  in  which  six  does  not  turn  up  by  Oi,


366  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

or  by  (Ta.  Then  we  require  either  s^at  or  The  probability  of

s we  have  seen  to  be  ; the  probability  of  a we  have  seen  to  be  I .
Hence,  the  probability  of  Sia^  is  (J  X |) ; the  probability  of  520*2
is  also  (I  X I).  Hence,  the  probability  of  either  or  is

[(i  X I)  + (i  X I)]  = (A  + A-)  = M
The  events  SiCi  and  520’2  are  exclusive,  or  alternative  events.  Hence?
the  probability  of  their  disjunction  is  the  sum  of  their  separate
probabilities.  The  arithmetical  operation  corresponding  to  a logical
sum  is  addition,

(vi)  What  is  the  probability  that  of  two  dice  thrown  together
one  at  least  will  turn  up  six  ?

Since  in  this  case  we  do  not  exclude  hath,  the  only  excluded  case
is  neither.  Hence,  the  required  probability  is  equivalent  to  the  sum
of  (i)  both,  (ii)  only  one,  (iii)  only  the  other,  i.e.

Id  X i)  + (i  X t)  + (i  X I)]  = u
It  should  be  observed  that  the  probability  of  getting  six  with  at
least  one  die  and  the  probability  of  getting  six  with  neither  exhaust
the  possible  cases  ; hence,  we  must  have  either  one  case  or  the  other ;
hence,  the  sum  of  the  two  cases  must  be  equal  to  1.  These  separate
probabilities  are  (by  vi),  and  H (by  iv).  This  yields,

('H  + If)  = ft  — 1

The  happening,  or  not  happening,  of  a given  event,  exhausts  the
possibilities.  This  may  be  expressed  in  the  formula

E 4-  E'  = 1

Thus  we  see  again  (by  the  principle  of  excluded  middle)  that  the
probabihty  of  exclusive  events  is  a logical  sum.  De  Morgan’s
formulae  can  be  applied.  ^ If  we  express  the  probability  that  A
will  happen  by  writing  A,  and  that  B will  happen  by  writing  B,
then  AB  represents  the  probability  that  both  will  occux;  A'  + B'
represents  the  probabihty  that  one  or  the  other  will  not  occur.
Then  we  have,

(i)  (A  + B)'  = A'B'

(ii)  (AB)'  = A'  + B\

These  can  be  expressed :

(i)  The  probabihty  that  neither  A nor  B will  occur  is  equivalent
to  the  product  of  the  probabihty  that  A wiU  not  occur  and  the
probability  that  B will  not  occur.

(ii)  The  probability  that  not  both  A and  B will  occur  is  equivalent
to  the  sum  of  the  probabihty  that  A will  not  occur  and  that  B wiU
not  occur.

^ See  Chap.  X,  p.  191  above.  The  reader  who  has  omitted  Chapter  X should
omit  this  paragraph.


PUNCTiOKAL  AtTALYSIS  367


It  will  be  seen  that  these  formulae  will  3deld  the  results  given
above  in  (iv),  and  in  (vi).

Just  as  de  Morgan’s  formulae  can  be  developed  to  cover  cases
of  any  complexity,  so  the  rules  we  have  given  can  be  applied  to
cover  cases  in  which  many  more  than  two  factors  are  involved.
We  cannot  consider  these  here.  It  must  be  sufficient  to  point  out
that  in  calculating  probabilities,  great  care  must  be  taken  to  deter-
mine whether  the  events  are  independent,  dependent  or  exclusive.
The  fundamental  principle  is  the  same  whether  the  events  are  de-
pendent or  independent.  But  if  the  events  are  independent,  then
in  each  case  all  the  possibilities  occur.  For  example,  the  probability
of  getting  heads  in  one  toss  of  a penny  is  This  probability  remains
unafiected  no  matter  how  often  heads  have  turned  up,  unless  we
are  calculating  the  probability  that  at  least  a certain  number  of  heads
will  turn  up  in  a certain  number  of  throws.  If  one  event  is  dependent
upon  another,  then  its  probability  can  be  calculated  only  after  the
probability  of  the  independent  event  has  been  calculated.  This
means  that  in  the  case  of  dependent  events,  we  have  different  initial
conditions.

It  has  been  usual  to  state  certain  formulae  for  the  calculation  of
the  probability  that  an  occurrence  E will  happen  again.  Two  cases
may  be  distinguished : (i)  the  probability  that  E will  happen  once
more  ; (ii)  the  probability  that  E will  happen  v times  more.  These
may  each  be  subdivided  according  as : {a)  E has  not  been  known
to  fail ; (6)  E has  been  known  to  fail.

(ia)  If  E is  known  to  have  happened  m times  and  is  not  known
to  have  failed,  then  the  ratio  of  the  favourable  cases  to  the  total


number  of  cases  in  the  past  is  represented  by  — On  the  assump-

m

tion  that  E is  equally  likely  to  happen  or  not  to  happen,  2 must
be  added  to  the  denominator  (viz.  the  favourable  and  the  unfavour-
able possibility),  and  1 to  the  numerator  (viz.  the  favourable  pos-
sibility). Hence,  the  required  probability  is  represented  by

(iia)  Using  m as  before,  the  probabihty  that  E will  happen  v

, . . m + 1

times  more  is  — ; — L_— .

1

(i6)  Using  m as  before,  and  representing  the  number  of  times
that  B has  been  known  to  fail  by  m',  the  required  probability  is

KpMented  by

(ii&)  Using  m,  m',  'o  as  before,  the  required  probabihty  can  easily

be  seen  to  be  represented  by  — ^ .

^ ^ m-f  m' 1


36S


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


A consideration  of  these  formulae  will  show  that  (1)  the  larger  m
is  the  nearer  the  fraction  is  to  unity,  hence  the  higher  the  probability
that  E will  happen ; (2)  the  larger  m!  is,  or  the  larger  v is,  the  lower
the  probability  that  E wiU  happen.

The  formula  --4“  is  known  as  Laplace^s  Rule  of  Succession,^

m+2  \

Its  validity  depends  upon  the  assumption  that  the  possible  alterna-
tives are  equally  likely.  This  assumption  is  justified  only  under  very
artificial  conditions,  and  only  when  the  possible  alternatives  are
of  the  same  form.  ^ Failure  to  recognize  this  has  led  to  absurd  results.
For  example,  if  the  happening  or  not  happening  of  an  occurrence,  ‘
with  regard  to  the  conditions  of  which  nothing  is  known,  be  assumed
to  be  equally  likely,  then  the  probability  of  its  occurrence  would
always  be  since  in  such  a case  m would  be  equal  to  0.®  Given
certain  assumptions,  however,  and  with  due  precautions  the  formula
may  be  applied  to  special  cases.^

§5.  MEASUREMENT

Quantitative  analysis  presupposes  measurement.  ‘ The  scope  of
a discussion  on  quantity’,  says  Professor  Whitehead,  ^may  be
defined  by  the  question,  How  is  measurement  possible  ? ’ ® No
attempt  can  be  made  here  to  discuss  this  question  adequately.  All
that  we  can  do  is  to  indicate  the  nature  of  measurement  and  to
point  out  the  main  conditions  that  render  it  possible.®  Every  one
has  some  vague  conception  of  what  is  meant  by  measurement.
We  all  find  it  necessary  on  certain  occasions  to  make  more  or  less
accurate  measurements.  The  cook,  for  instance,  measures  out  the
quantity  of  flour  required  for  a certain  cake ; the  tailor  measures
off  a certain  quantity  of  cloth,  and  takes  his  client’s  measurements  ”
in  order  to  make  a coat  that  fits  him.  In  all  such  cases  a certain
property  of  an  object  is  correlated  with  a number  selected  in  a
certain  way.  The  cook  says  that  the  weight  of  the  flour  is  1 lb.,  the
tailor  says  that  the  length  of  the  cloth  is  4 yards,  and  so  on.  Weight
and  len^h  are  quantities.  To  determine  the  required  quantity  of

^ See  Venn : The  Logic  of  Chance,  Chap.  VIII.

* See  p.  409  below.

® These  absurdities  were  pointed  out  by  C.  S.  Peirce.  (See  Chance,  Love,
and  Logic,  Pt.  I,  Sect.  4.)  These  formulae  have  been  criticized  in  detail  by
Dr.  C.  D.  Broad  and  by  Mr.  J.  M.  Keynes.

^ Students  who  desire  a fuller  treatment  of  the  elementary  rules  for  cal-
culating probability  may  be  referred  to  C.  Smith,  A Treatise  on  Algebra,
Chap.  XXX ; or  to  Welton,  Manual  of  Logic,  Bk.  V,  Chap.  VI.

^ The  Principle  of  Relativity,  p.  40.

« For  a fuller  discussion  of  measurement  see  N.  R.  Campbell,  Physics : The
Elements,  Pt.  II ; Wha;t  is  Science  ? Chaps.  VI-VII ; A.  B,  Ritchie,  Scientific
Method,  Chap.  V.


FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS


369


cloth  the  tailor  uses  a measuring-tape,  or  measuring-rod ; to  deter-
mine the  required  quantity  of  flour  the  cook  uses  a pair  of  kitchen
scales.  In  both  cases  the  making  of  the  measurement  involves  the
physical  manipulation  of  objects,  the  use  of  a measuring  appliance,
and  a direct  judgement  of  comparison.  Each  of  these  points  will
require  further  consideration,  but  before  discussing  them  we  must
notice  a familiar  and  important  characteristic  of  the  operation  of
measurement.  Suppose  we  want  to  stick  a piece  of  baize  on  the
top  of  a card-table.  In  order  to  get  the  right  quantity  of  baize
(viz.  a certain  area)  we  do  not  need  to  take  the  table  to  the  shop.
We  measure  the  top  of  the  table  and  find  its  length  to  be  a yard
each  way.  We  then  ask  for  a yard  of  baize  (assuming  that  the
width  of  the  baize  is  not  less  than  a yard).  The  shopman  measures
ofi  a yard  of  baize  against  a scale  mark  on  the  counter,  or  on  a
measuring-rod.  If  we  find  that  the  baize  measures  a yard  in  width
also,  we  conclude  that  the  baize  will  fit  the  table.  If  we  could
assume  that  these  operations  of  measuring  have  been  correctly
performed,  then  we  could  know  that  the  baize  would  fit  the  top  of
the  table  although  we  have  not  placed  it  on  the  table.  Upon  this
characteristic  depends  the  usefulness  of  measurement  for  practical
purposes.

A consideration  of  these  examples  will  show  that  measurement
involves  the  abstraction  of  certain  properties  of  objects,  and  that  it
depends  upon  certain  conventions  which  are  so  familiar  that  we  are
apt  not  to  recognize  their  conventional  character.  The  possibility
of  getting  the  right  quantity  of  baize  to  fit  the  top  of  the  table,
although  the  table  is  at  home  and  the  baize  is  in  a shop,  depends
upon  the  fact  that  one-one  correlations  have  been  established :
(i)  between  our  measuring-tape  and  the  top  of  the  table  ; (ii)  between
the  shopman’s  measiuring-rod  and  the  baize  ; (iii)  between  our  tape
and  his  rod,  so  that  we  both  mean  the  same  by  one  yard  Now,
it  is  clear  that  (i)  and  (ii)  are  possible  only  in  so  far  as  we  can  directly
compare  the  measuring-tape,  or  rod,  and  the  top  of  the  table,  or
the  baize,  with  respect  to  a certain  property,  and  can  immediately
judge  that  there  is  a match  between  them.  In  assuming  (iii)  we
are  assuming  that,  were  the  tape  and  the  rod  laid  alongside  each
other,  they  would  match  in  the  same  way  as  the  rod  matched  the
baize,  and  the  tape  matched  the  top  of  the  table.  We  can  assume
(iii)  only  because  we  have  adopted  a conventional  system  which
enables  us  to  refer  in  a perfectly  definite  way  to  a standard  measuring
appliance.  We  have  seen  that  in  measuring  the  length  of  the
table  we  were  making  first  of  aU.  a judgement  of  comparison  which
could  be  expressed  by,  ''  This  yard  measure  matches  the  length
of  the  table”.  We  must,  then,  first  consider  this  relation  of
matching.

24


370  A MODERN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

The  statement  A matclies  B is  eUiptical.  Two  pieces  of
clotli  may  matcjh.  with  respect  to  colour,  or  to  size,  or  to  texture,
etc.  Now  the  baize  and  the  measuring-rod  do  not  match  with
respect  to  colour,  or  to  texture,  or  to  hardness,  but  (so  we  are  assum-
ing) they  match  with  respect  to  length.  Length  is  a property  that
can  be  measured,  so  we  say  that  length  is  a quantity.  Thus  the
elliptical  statement  A matches  B ” must  be  expanded  into  A
matches  B with  respect  to  length  Now  the  relation  of  matching
is  symmetrical  and  transitive,  so  that  if  A matches  B,  then  B matches
A ; and  if  A matches  B,  and  B matches  C,  then  A matches  C.  Our
assumption  that  our  tape  and  the  shopman’s  rod  matched  with  resj)ect
to  length  was  based  upon  the  fact  that  matching  is  a transitive  relation,
and  that  both  our  tape  and  the  shopman’s  rod  matched  a standard
rod.  Thus  the  measurement  of  length  involves  reference  to  a stand-
ard measuring-rod  which  our  various  measuring-rods  and  tapes  all
match  with  respect  to  length.  The  fact  that  we  do  not  need  to
take  either  the  table  or  the  tape  to  the  shop  is  due  to  the  fact  that
we  have  adopted  a conventional  system  by  means  of  which  we  affix
definite  numbers  to  represent  difierent  lengths.  Thus,  when  we  say
that  the  baize  is  ""  one  yard  in  length  ” we  mean  that  the  ratio  of
its  length  to  one  yard  is  one.  Given  this  standard  of  reference,
which  is  called  the  unit  of  length,  we  can  describe  all  other  lengths
in  terms  of  the  unit  by  means  of  real  numbers.

These  considerations  suggest  the  following  definition : Measure-
ment is  the  process  of  mampulating  objects  in  order  to  assign  ratios
to  represent  some  property  of  these  objects.  It  is  important  to  dis-
tinguish between  measurement  and  counting,  and  between  measure-
ment and  numbering.  Consider,  for  instance,  a collection  of  books
in  a library.  We  count  the  books  in  order  to  see  how  many  there
are.  The  result  of  this  process  of  counting  is  expressed  by  a cardinal
number.^  We  may  also  wish  to  be  able  to  find  any  book  easily  by
knowing  its  place  on  the  shelves.  For  this  purpose  we  adopt  a
system  of  numbering,  or  of  assigning  pressmarks  That  is  to
say,  we  adopt  some  ordered  arrangement.  We  choose  letters  of  the
alphabet,  or  numerals,  or  a combination  of  the  two,  the  order  of
which  corresponds  to  the  position  of  the  books.  Thus  the  result
of  counting  the  books  supplies  an  answer  to  the  question,  How
many  ? the  result  of  numbering  them  supplies  an  answer  to  the
question,  In  what  position  ? Neither  of  these  processes  is  measure-
ment. But  if  we  wanted  to  know  how  many  books  would  fit  into
a certain  shelf  we  should  need  to  know  the  length  of  the  shelf  and
the  length  of  the  back  of  each  book,  or,  as  we  say,  its  thickness.
Thus  we  should  need  to  measure  the  books  and  to  measure  the  shelf
in  order  to  see  how  the  former  would  match  the  latter  with  respect
^ For  a discussion  of  the  process  of  counting  see  p.  123  above.


FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS


371


to  length.  In  practice  we  should  probably  take  up  some  of  the  books
and  fit  them  in  ; we  certainly  should  not  bother  to  apply  a measuring-
rod.  Judgements  of  matching  with  respect  to  length  can  be  made
with  surprising  accuracy  by  means  of  the  unaided  eye.  We  shall
see  that  all  exact  measurements  ultimately  depend  upon  a direct
judgement  with  regard  to  the  matching  of  two  visual  sense-data.
But  when  the  object  to  be  measured  is  very  large,  or  when  the  mea-
surement is  required  to  be  very  exact,  we  find  it  necessary  to  lay
the  object  alongside  some  object  by  means  of  which  it  is  to  be
measured.  In  this  way  we  can  make  direct  judgements  of  com-
parison. The  result  of  the  operation  of  measuring  is,  then,  expressed
as  a ratio  of  the  measured  object  to  the  measuring  appliance,  and
hence,  ultimately  to  the  standard  unit.  Thus  we  see  that  the
numbers  used  to  express  measurement  are  not  cardinal  numbers
but  ratios.  This  fact  is  obscured  by  our  adoption  of  the  convention
that  the  standard  unit  shall  be  equal  to  one.^

Length  is  measured  by  the  juxtaposition  of  the  object  to  be
measured  with  a measuring-rod,  or,  as  we  shall  henceforth  call  it,
with  a scale.  There  are  other  ways  of  measuring,  but  ultimately
all  measurement  of  length  is  reducible  to  this  process,  since  that
is  the  way  in  which  we  use  the  standard  of  length.  We  can  now
see  how  every  measurement  of  length  depends  upon  the  observation
of  sense-data.  We  see  the  coincidence  of  a mark  on  the  scale  with
the  edge  of  the  object  to  be  measured.  There  is  no  way  of  avoiding
this  direct  judgement  of  coincidence,  although  we  may  use  mechani-
cal devices  which  put  us  in  a more  favourable  position  for  making
accurate  judgements.  But  however  carefully  we  may  observe  there
remains  an  error  in  the  measurement.  This  is  sometimes  called  the
“ inherent  error  ” of  the  measurement.  How^  this  comes  about  may
be  seen  if  we  compare  a rough  process  of  measuring  with  a more  exact
process.  We  might  have  measured  the  table  by  spamiing  along  the
top  with  our  hands.  If  we  place  thumb  and  little  finger,  fully  spread
out,  on  the  table,  then  replace  little  finger  by  thumb,  and  repeat  the
process  until  we  have  gone  the  whole  length  of  the  table,  then  we
could  say  that  the  table  measures  n spans.  If  we  were  to  repeat
this  process  it  is  probable  that  the  result  would  not  yield  n spans,
but  either  a little  more,  or  a little  less.  We  might  represent  this  as
w -f  c.  If  we  cannot  divide  the  span,  then  the  greatest  accuracy
of  the  measurement  will  be  determined  by  the  extent  of  the  span.
If,  now,  we  use  a scale  marked  in  subdivisions  much  smaller  than
the  length  of  the  scale  itself  we  can  obtain  a more  accurate  measure-

^ Thus,  if  we  say  that  the  length  of  a table  is  10  yards  we  mean  that  the
ratio  of  its  length  to  the  yard  measure  is  10.  Since  the  unit  of  measurement
is  chosen  to  be  equal  to  1,  we  get  the  ratio  10 ; 1,  so  that  in  practice  we  fail
to  notice  the  denominator*


372


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


ment.  This  is  wliat  we  do  with  a yard  stick,  for  we  subdivide  it
into  inches,  tenths  of  inches,  and  so  on.  But  however  small  we
make  these  subdivisions  we  cannot  obtain  an  exact  coincidence,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  the  measured  object  may  appear  to  coincide
with  two  marks  of  the  scale.  The  fact  that  there  are  incommensur-
able lengths,  e.g.  the  sides  and  diagonal  of  a square,  shows  that
there  may  not  be  an  exact  numerical  ratio  between  any  two  lengths.
Thus  all  measurement  is  only  an  approximation,  though  we  can
increase  the  degree  of  approximation  as  much  as  we  please.  The
scale  is  a standard  of  straightness  and  a standard  of  rigidity.  It
is  easy  to  see  that  if  we  measure  with  a tape  we  must  not  stretch
the  tape  on  one  occasion,  and  let  it  lie  slackly  on  another.  Eor
this  reason  the  standard  measure  of  length  is  made  of  the  most
rigid  material  that  we  can  find.^

It  should  now  be  clear  that  measurement  involves  the  manipula-
tion of  bodies  ; hence  it  is  experimental,  and  the  rules  of  measure-
ment are  experimental  laws.  If  we  could  not  find  bodies  which  we
judge  to  be  constant  with  respect  to  length  we  could  not  perform
the  ordinary  processes  of  measurement.  We  have  now  to  see  that
measurement  involves  the  addition  of  bodies.  It  is  for  this
reason  that  measurement  is  expressed  by  numbers,  for  the  number
series  has  the  property  that  any  two,  or  more,  numbers  can  be
replaced  by  another  number  which  will  be  equal  to  the  com-
bination of  these  numbers.  Thus  measurement  is  made  in  accord-
ance with  the  laws  of  arithmetic.  Since  matching  in  length  is  a
transitive,  symmetrical  relation  which  can  be  expressed  by  a number,
lengths  can  be  added.  Scales  are  a device  for  the  addition  of  lengths.
As  we  saw,  the  addition  will  be  of  ratios,  but  owing  to  our  con-
vention that  the  imit  equals  one,  these  can  be  expressed  by  numbers.
Now  the  characteristic  of  the  (finite)  number  series  is  that  the  addition
of  a number  to  any  other  number  increases  the  number.  We  find
here  the  characteristic  in  virtue  of  which  some  properties  of  bodies
are  measurable.  This  may  be  stated  precisely  as  follows  : A property
of  a body  is  measurable  if  the  combination  of  bodies  having  that
property  increases  that  property,  just  as  a number  is  increased  by
the  addition  of  other  numbers.  It  is  in  virtue  of  this  fact  that
measured  objects  can  be  arranged  in  an  order.  Hence,  there  enters
into  measurement  a transitive,  asymmetrical  relation  which  sufidces
to  order  the  measured  objects  in  a series.  This  is  clearly  the  case
with  length.  We  have  now  to  see  that  the  same  holds  with  regard
to  weight.

The  weight  of  a body  means  the  force  with  which  it  tends  to

^ It  is  not  possible  here  to  go  into  the  question  of  the  meaning  of  “ rigidity  ”,
nor  its  precise  relation  to  “ length  ”*  For  a discussion  of  this  problem  see
A.  S.  Eddington,  /Space,  Time  and  Gravitation,  “ Prologue  ”•


FUNCTIONAL  ANALYSIS


373


faU.  This  is  called  “absolute  weight”.  It  varies  at  different
places  on  the  earth,  becoming  smaller  the  nearer  the  place  is  to  the
equator.  But  we  know  experimentally  that  all  bodies  are  affectied
in  this  way  in  the  same  proportion.  Consequently,  two  bodies
having  the  same  weight  at  any  place  on  the  earth  have  the  same
weight  at  any  other  point.  Thus  we  replace  absolute  weight  by
what  is  called  relative  weight.  The  relative  weight  of  a body  ex-
presses how  many  times  its  absolute  weight  is  greater  or  smaller
than  the  absolute  weight  of  a standard  body,  called  the  unit  of  weight.
This  standard  unit  is  arbitrarily  chosen,  and  is  a lump  of  platinum-
iridium,  kept  at  Paris.  It  is  called  the  kilogramme-  The  scientific
standard  is  a thousandth  part  of  this  weight,  called  a gramme-  The
weight  of  a body  is  measured  by  placing  it  in  the  pan  of  an  equal-
arm  balance  and  by  adding  known  weights  to  the  other  pan  until
equilibrium  is  obtained.  The  judgement  that  the  pans  are  in
equilibrium  is  made  by  observing  the  coincidence  of  a pointer  with
a line  on  the  scale.  Thus  measurement  of  weight  is  reduced  to
measurement  of  length,  and  is  again  seen  to  be  ultimately  de-
pendent upon  an  immediate  judgement  that  two  visual  sense-data
coincide.

The  fundamental  rules  for  measurement  must  now  be  shortly
stated.  They  are : (1)  Two  bodies  matching  a third  with  respect
to  the  given  property  (length,  weight)  match  each  other ; (2)  The
addition  of  objects  having  the  given  property  increases  that  property
in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  arithmetic  ; (3)  The  addition  of  equals
yields  equals.  That  these  rules  hold  with  regard  to  some  of  the
properties  of  bodies  is  an  experimental  fact.  It  might  have  been
the  case  that  the  addition  of  weights  in  the  pan  of  the  balance  would
not  increase  the  weight.  Had  that  been  the  case  measurement
would  have  been  impossible.  The  only  two  properties  of  bodies
that  fulfil  the  second  rule  directly  are  length  and  weight.  Hence,
the  measurement  of  these  properties  is  the  fundamental  process.
This  can  be  easily  seen  if  we  consider  the  property  of  density.  Density
is  weight  divided  hy  volume.  If  we  add  one  pint  of  water  to  two  pints
we  increase  the  weight,  and  mass,  of  the  water ; but  we  do  not
increase  its  density.  Hence,  density  is  not  directly  measurable.
But  since  weight  divided  by  volume  yields  a number,  and  since
these  nurnbers  can  be  arranged  in  an  order  which  represents
increase  of  density,  density  can  be  indirectly  measured.  This  may
be  summed  up  in  the  statement  that  density  is  proportional  to
weight  per  unit  volume.

The  importance  of  measurement  lies  in  the  fact  that  by  means
of  it  precise  relations  can  be  stated  between  bodies  possessing  measur-
able properties.  Thus  measurement  enables  mathematical  analysis
to  be  applied  to  the  behaviour  of  natural  bodies.  By  measurement


374


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


alone  can  precise  quantitative  analysis  be  carried  out.  Hence,  tbe
value  of  measurement  is  tbe  value  of  the  substitution  of  quantitative
variation  for  qualitative  uniformities.  It  is  by  means  of  measure-
ment that  we  can  employ  the  principle  of  convergence  to  simplicity
by  diminution  of  extent.


CHAPTEE  XIX


THE  CONTKAST  BETWEEN  EXPEEIMENTAL  AND
HISTOEICAL  SCIENCES

‘ It  is  more  certain  that  the  regularity  of  motion  in  the  Solar  System  has
a definite  cause  than  it  is  certain,  to  choose  our  own  instances,  that  the  Greeks
won  the  battle  of  Marathon  or  that  Queen  Anne  is  dead.’ — Sir  James  Jeans,

§1.  THE  ELIMINATION  OF  THE  SUBSTANTIVE

IN  this  chapter  we  must  inquire  into  the  most  fundamental  difier-
ences  between  the  experimental  and  the  historical  sciences.  It
has  already  been  pointed  out  that  the  sciences  are  orderly
branches  of  knowledge.^  Whether  a given  study  may  be  properly
regarded  as  a science  or  not  depends  upon  whether  there  are  con-
ceptions in  terms  of  which  the  facts  studied  can  be  ordered.  We
have  seen  that  mathematics  difiers  from  all  other  sciences  in  that
the  nature  of  mathematical  facts  is  such  that  they  can  be  ordered
in  an  exact  way.  In  mathematics,  and  in  mathematics  alone,
demonstration  is  possible.  Thus  mathematics  is  a pure  science  to
be  contrasted  with  all  other  sciences  which  are  empirical  in  that
they  are  based  upon  the  observation  of  sensible  fact.  But  within
the  empirical  sciences  themselves ’further  distinctions  must  be  made.
These  distinctions  relate  to  the  way  in  which  quantitative  determina-
jjfon  enters  into  the  various  sciences.

We  saw  in  the  last  chapter  that  the  social  sciences  make  use  of
statistical  methods.  Statistics  is  a branch  of  mathematics.  But
these  statistical — quantitative — ^methods  are  methods  only  ; they
' are  used  for  the  purpose  of  suggesting  possible  causal  connexions,
of  testing  supposed  causal  connexions,  and  of  furnishing  data  for
statistical  generalizations.  The  statistical  investigation  is  a means
to  an  end.  Statistical  inquiry  may  suggest  that  there  is  a causal
connexion  between  a certain  kind  of  industrial  occupation  and  a
certain  specific  disease.  The  result  of  the  inquiry  takes  the  form
/of  a qu^htjjjiye.uai^  It  was  the  con^lexity  of  the  subject-

matter*  that  necessitated  the  resort  to  statistical  investigation,  since
this  complexity  rendered  direct  observation  or  experiment  impos-^
^ sible ; the  quantitative  conceptions  involved  drop  out  of  the  final!
result ; they  play  no  part  in  the  final  aim.

1 See  p.  233.


376


A MODEEN  INTEODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


The  case  is  quite  otherwise  with  the  physical  sciences.  The
aim,  here,  is  to  state  ftmctional  correlations.  Eapidity  of  advance
is  dependent  upon  the  extent  to  which  qualitative  uniformities  can
be  replaced  by  precise  quantitative  expressions.  The  change  from
causal  laws  to  laws  of  functional  dependence,  expressed  in  mathe-
matical formulae,  is  a change  of  great  significance.  A law  of  func-
tional dependence  is  not  a more  elaborate  causal  law.  It  is  a totally
; diferent  kind  of  law.  Causal  laws  relate  to  the  modes  of  change
‘ of  things,  or  substantive  particulars  ; laws  of  functional  dependence
relate  to  the  correlation  of  sets  of  properties.  They  relate  to  the
properties  in  the  sense  that  the  variables  occurring  in  the  mathe-
matical expressions  can  be  so  interpreted  as  to  yield  statements
about  these  properties,  and  these  properties  can  be  regarded  as
^'abstracted  from  the  determinate  happenings  which  make  up  the
i world.  The  advance  from  the  discovery  of  causal  Jws.  to  the  dis-
covery of  functional  dependences  involves  the  gradual  elimination
of  any  direct  reference  to  a substantive  thing  or  determinate  occa-
sion.^ There  is  a steady  advance  from  statements  concerning  speci-
fic sorts  of  things  to  statements  concerning  general  properties.  A
science  capable  of  formulating  such  statements  advances  steadily
towards  increasing  abstractness,  and  hence  towards  the  ideal  of
deductive  form.

In  this  section  we  shall  be  concerned  with  the  conditions  essential
to  any  branch  of  science  capable  of  formulating  abstract  functional
laws.  „ We  should  then  be  in  a position  to  consider  in  what  respects
these  sciences  are  to  be  contrasted  with  the  historical  sciences.  The
phrase  ' experimental  sciences  ^ in  terms  of  which  the  contrast  with
the  historical  sciences  has  been  stated  in  the  title  of  this  chapter,
may,  however,  stand  in  some  need  of  preliminary  explanation.  A
science  would  not  be  entitled  to  be  regarded  as  an  experimental
science  unless  its  field  of  investigation  were  such  as  to  permit,  as
'part  of  its  normal  technique,  of  the  arrangjement  of  conditions  in  the
light  of  definite  expectations  as  to  what  will  occur.  ^ The  ability
thus  to  determine  the  conditions  secures  for  the  observer  just  that
occurrence  which  he  needs  to  observe.  He  is  thus  made  to  some
extent  ind^endent  of  the  normal  course  of  natural  occurrences.
He  is  independent,  fiiTst,  of  the  datable  time  at  which  the  occurrence
he  is  observing  takes  place  ; secondly,  of  its  spatially  contiguous
neighbours,  thirdly, — and  as  a direct  consequence  of  the  first  two —

I of  its  uniqueness.  Theoretically,  at  all  events,  the  experiment  is
^ repeatable.  T&e  characteristics  which  make  iMs  occasion

unique  are,  by  the  nature  of  experiment,  just  those  which  are  irrele-
vant to  the  inquiry  of  the  experimentalist.

The  historical  development  of  the  experimental  sciences  from  the
^Cf.  p,  242  above.  *See  p.  302  above.


EXPEEIMENTAL  AND  HISTOEICAL  SCIENCES  377


discovery  of  qualitative  tmiformities  to.tte  statement  of  laws  of
functional  dependence  is  so  familiar  to  every  one  that  the  curious
viiature  of  this  change  has  hardly  received  the  attention  it  deserves.
It  is  worth  while  to  remind  ourselves  of  the  way  in  which  this  change
may  be  brought  about  by  considering  a particular  example.  We
may  select  Ohm’s  Law  to  be  examined  from  this  point  of  view.^

Ohm’s  Law  is  concerned  with  the  relation  between  three  physical
quantities  : electric  current,  electromotive  force,  and  resistivity  (i.e.  the
opposite  of  conductivity).  The  Law  states  a functional  relation
between  these  three  quantities  ; it  is  a precise  mathematical  expres-
sion. When  Ohm  began  his  researches  into  the  flow  of  electricity
along  metallic  conductors,  the  study  of  current  electricity  had  not
advanced  beyond  the  qualitative  stage,  so  that  precise,  numerical
relations  could  hardly  be  applied.  Working,  however,  upon  the
assumption  that  the  flow  of  electricity  along  a metallic  conductor
noight  have  structural  similarities  ^ with  the  flow  of  heat  along
different  materials,  Ohm  began  his  researches  by  experimenting  with
different  particular  pieces  of  metal  wire.  These  particular  instances
of  metal  wire  were  specimens  ; i.e.  instances  of  a certain  sort.  The
differences  between  the  specimens  dealt  with  were  relevant  only  in
so  far  as  they  were  differences,  first,  in  length  and  in  cross-sectional
area  of  instances  of  the  same  sort,  e.g.  of  copper  ; secondly,  differences
in  the  sort  to  which  the  instances  of  the  same  length  and  the  same
cross-sectional  area  belonged,  e.g.  gold,  copper,  zinc.  A certain  stage
of  this  investigation  can  be  represented  in  a formal  manner  in  order
to  bring  out  the  way  in  which  the  reference  to  the  particular  instance,
or  substantive,  is  eliminated  in  the  final  result.

Let  Sq  stand  for  a particular  instance  of  copper  wire,  for  a
particular  instance  of  zinc  wire,  Sq  for  a particular  instance  of  gold
wire.  If  I stands  for  length,  a for  cross-sectional  area,  r for  resis-
tivity, the  following  three  sets  of  statements  give  a schematic  formu-
lation of  Ohm’s  results  :

(1)  Sc  when  li  and  ai  has  r^^

Sq  when  l^  and  a a has  r^^

1 Sq  when  l^  and  has  r^^


^ It  is  here  assumed  that  the  student  has  some  familiarity  with  Ohm’s  Law.
I have  not  attempted  to  give  a detailed  account  of  his  researches,  for  I am  con-
cerned only  to  discuss  the  form  of  Ohm’s  Law.

2 See  p.  309  above.  It  is  noteworthy  that  expressions  such  as  ‘ flow  of
electricity  and  ' current  electricity  ’ are  themselves  due  to  the  recognition
of  a similarity  between  the  behaviour  of  electricity  and  the  behaviour  of  a
fluid.  It  is  in  this  way  that  a science  may  develop.


378


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTIOK  TO  LOGIC


(2)  So  wlien  1 2 and  has
Sq  when  1 2 and  ^2  has
Sc  when  I2  and  has


(3)  Sc  when  1^^  and

S^;  when  and  has

Sq  when  1^^  and  has  Ty


Here  the  subscript  figures  indicate  specific  variations  in  length  and
in  cross-sectional  area ; the  subscript  letters  v,  fi,  with  subscript
figures,  indicate  difierent  degrees  of  resistivity.  In  (3)  the  subscript
capitals  n,  m,  indicate  respectively  specific  lengths  and  cross-sec-
tional areas,  whilst  the  subscripts  a,  y,  to  r indicate  functional
variation  in  r.

An  examination  of  these  sets  of  expressions  reveals  important
consequences.  Set  (1)  shows  that  r is  a function  of  a when  length
is  unvaried ; set  (2)  shows  that  r is  also  dependent  upon  length ;
set  (3)  shows  that  r varies  with  the  specific  metal  although  length
and  cross-sectional  area  remain  the  same.  Thus  sets  (1)  and  (2)
exhibit  r as  a function  of  I and  a.  Thus  we  get

E=/(L,A).

The  specific  characteristics  of  copper  do  not  enter  into  the  statement.

Set  (3)  shows  that,  given  that  the  length  and  cross-sectional  area
remain  the  same,  the  resistivity  of  a metal  wire  is  dependent  upon
the  specific  nature  of  the  metal.  These  variations  can  be  expressed
in  quantitative  terms,  although  such  expressions  would  not  yield  a
continuous  series.  The  effects  of  the  variations  indicated  by  a,  y,
upon  r can  be  expressed  in  quantitative  terms,  and  may  be  expressed
by  the  constant  p.  Thus  the  value  to  be  assigned  to  p varies  with
the  different  specific  metals.  Hence,  E is  a function  of  p,  I,  and  a.
Ohm’s  Law  is,  then,  expressible  by  the  equation  ^

E = pi.

a

In  this  mathematical  expression  all  that  is  left  of  the  specific  char-
acteristics whereby  gold,  copper,  and  zinc,  are  differentiated  from
one  another  is  the  constant  p.  It  would  not  be  unreasonable  to
suppose  that  p could  be  finally  expressed  functionally  in  terms  of
sub-atomic  structure.

^ Thus  we  see  that  the  resistance  of  a metal  wire  to  the  passage  of  an  elootric
current  is  determined  by  three  factors.  It  is,  in  fact,  directly  proportional
to  the  length,  inversely  proportional  to  the  cross-sectional  area,  and  is  further
proportional  to  a constant  p,  the  value  of  which  is  dependent  upon  the  specific
characteristics  of  the  given  metah


EXPEEIMENTAL  AND  HISTORICAL  SCIENCES  379


Ohm’s  Law  makes  it  possible  to  give  precise  definitions  of  the
physical  quantities  concerned.  Thus  electrical  resistance  is  to  be
defined  by  the  above  equation.  In  this  way  the  last  vestige  of
qualitative  characteristics  is  removed  from  the  concept  of  resistivity.

The  most  advanced  sciences  are  those  in  which  reference  to
specific  characteristics — the  connexion  between  which  would  be
expressed  in  qualitative  uniformities — ^has  been  replaced  by  func-
tional expressions  in  which  such  reference  is  confined  to  their  repre-
sentation by  constants.  These  functional  expressions  can  take  values
which  enable  the  scientist  to  apply  the  functional  expression  to
what  is  observable.  The  fundamental  concepts  are,  however,  defined
by  mathematical  formulae,  and  not  in  terms  of  qualitative  char-
acteristics. The  procedure  we  have  illustrated  by  reference  to
Ohm’s  Law  can  be  generalized  in  the  following  way.

Let  and  stand  for  two  different  determinate  things.  Thus
Sa  might  be  a definite  volume  of  oxygen  in  a certain  vessel  in  a
certain  laboratory,  another  volume  of  oxygen  in  another  vessel,
in  the  same  or  a different  laboratory.  Or  Sjj  might  be  a definite
volume  of  hydrogen.  Or,  again,  might  be  a certain  billiard  ball,

another  billiard  ball,  or  a cricket  ball,  or  a small  ivory  sphere  in
a certain  laboratory.  Or  again,  might  be  a certain  piece  of  gold
in  a certain  laboratory,  which  was  being  used  by  a certain  experi-
mentalist at  a certain  date  ; might  be  another  piece  of  gold,  or
a piece  of  platinum,  or  a piece  of  pure  steel.  Examples  need  not
be  elaborated.  Whatever  particular  things  we  choose  to  take
and  Sb  as  standing  for,  they  are  to  be  definite,  particular  things,
i.e.  particular  instances  located  in  a determinate  place  at  a deter-
minate time.  It  is  with  such  particular  instances  as  and  Sb
that  scientific  observation  begins.  But  we  know  that  the  scientist
is  never  interested  in  the  particular  instances  as  particulars.  He
abstracts  from  the  particular  situation  within  which  he  is  working
in  order  to  select  certain  features,  or  characteristics,  which  are  of
interest  to  him  with  regard  to  the  special  problem  he  happens  to
be  investigating.  That  the  given  has  other  characteristics,  and  is
here  now,  is  irrelevant.  He  wants,  we  may  suppose,  to  formulate
a statement  to  the  effect  that  whenever  a billiard  ball  hits  another
billiard  ball  in  a certain  manner  then  that  other  billiard  ball  will
move  in  a certain  manner.  The  reference  to  the  billiard  ball  is
unnecessary ; any  kind  of  material  body  of  similar  volume,  mass,
and  shape,  would  have  done  as  well.  WTien  the  laws  of  mechanics
are  reached,  all  reference  to  balls  drop  out.  In  the  same  way,  when
the  investigator  is  examining  a certain  piece  of  gold,  or  a certain
quantity  of  oxygen,  he  neglects  the  characteristics  present  in  this
Sa  which  differentiate  it  from  this  Sb,  as  being  irrelevant.  If  the
subscripts  a and  b signify  different  sorts  of  things,  for  example,  gold


380


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


and  zinc  respectively,  these  differences  may  be  relevant ; but,  even
so,  advance  consists  in  replacing  any  specific  reference  to  these
differences  by  constants  turning  up  in  functional  expressions  capable
of  being  applied  to  the  behaviour  of  the  S’s.  To  refer  to  " the  S's  ’
is  already  to  regard  this  in  abstraction  from  the  determinate
situation  which  makes  the  ‘ this  ’ significant.

The  formulation  of  an  expression  such  as  Ohm’s  Law  is  only  the
completion  of  a process  which  is  present  even  in  the  beginnings  of
scientific  inquiry,  namely,  the  gradual  elimination  of  the  substantive.
This  elimination  is  effected,  first,  by  the  replacement  of  statements
concerning  this  Sa  by  statements  about  every  Sa  ; secondly  by
statements  about  every  Sa  and  every  ; finally  by  statements  in
which  even  the  subscripts  A and  b no  longer  denote  qualitative
characteristics.  Such  statements  will  be  laws  of  fxmctional  corre-
lation, in  which  A and  B will  enter  only  as  constants  definable  in
terms  of  imperceptibles  which  are  not  substantives.

Th§  point  to  be  stressed  is  jijeL«jelimination  of  the  substantive
thing, in. those  sciences  which  exhibit  the  most  exact  typg^^oLorder.
At  this  point  it  is  necessary  to  guard  against  a possible  misunder-
standing. As  we  saw  in  Chapter  XV,  every  causal  law  is  abstract
to  some  extent.^  It  is  a statement  to  the  effect  that  a change  occur-
ring in  a thing  of  the  sort  Ki  is  connected  with  a change  occurring
»ni  a thing  of  the  sort  Ka-  This  reference  to  sorts  of  things  shows
that  Acausal  law  does  not  state  what  is  happening  in  this  determinate  i
causal  situation ; it  states  what  will  happen  in  every  determinate ,
I situation  pf  a^.certain  kind.  To  speak  of  this  determinate  situation  i
* as  a causal  situation  is  already  to  say  something  which  would  be;’
non-significant  if  this  determinate  situation  were  regarded  as  unique.
As  we  saw,  the  particular  causal  proposition  This  shot  through  this
man^s  heart  caused  his  death  derives  its  significance  from  the  causal
law  Whenemr  nm^njs  shot  through  his  heart,  he  dies.  Consequently,
in  contrasting  cauagil  Jaws  with  laws  of  functional  dependence,  on
the  ground  that  the  former  do  not,  but  the  latter  do,  involve  the
elimination  of  the  substantive  thing,  we  must  not  be  supposed  to
be  maintaining  that  causal  laws  are  statements  about  unique  occa-
sions. The  point  is  that  the  causal  law  is  a law  concerning  quali-
tative changes  in  things,  or  concerning  quantitative  variations  in
the  qualitative  characteristics  of  things.  There  is  thus  involved  a
reference  to  things  having  qualitative  characteristics.  It  is

this  reference  which  distinguishes  caiisalJtes  feom  laws  of  functional
dependence.

lii 'might  be  objected  that  this  distinction  results  from  paying  too
much  attention  to  the  common-sense  use  of  causal  laws.  "V^en  the
plain  man  says  ‘ I killed  this  man  by  shooting  him  through  the

pp,  274-6  above.


EXPERIMENTAL  AND  HISTORICAL  SCIENCES  381


heart  he  is  stating  a particular  causal  proposition,  for  killed  ’’
is  equivalent  to  caused  to  die  It  may  he  contended  that
the  reference  to  the  qualitative  characteristics  of  living  organisms
here  involved  could  be  eliminated  if  the  statement  were  made  more
precise,  in  a way  comparable  to  the  way  in  which  statements  con-
cerning the  mode  of  a man’s  dying  is  made  more  precise  in  the  course
of  a Coroner’s  inquiry.  But  this  contention  misses  the  point.  The
greater  precision  here  secured  is  greater  precision  with  regard  to  the  *
kind  of  factors  involved.  If  quantitative  considerations  enter  at  all
(e.g,  the  range  at  which  the  shot  was  fired,  the  calibre  of  the  revolver,
etc.),  they  enter  only  as  aids  to  the  determination  of  the  precise
causal  situation  involved ; they  do  not  replace  the  reference  to
qualitative  characteristics.  What  this  contention  misses  is  the
si^ihcance  of  the  change  in  standpomt  involved  when  we  turn  from
the  consideration  of  laws  of  recurrent  modes  of  change  in.  the  be-
haviour of  things  to  laws  of  fimctional  variation  which  transcend
in  exactness  anything  that  could  possibly  he  observed.'^  The  experi-
mental sciences  advance  by  formulating  hypotheses  in  terms  of
concepts  wholly  and  precisely  defined  by  quantitative  expressions.
Ohm’s  Law  is  a case  in  point.  These  quantitatively  de&ied  con-
cepts are  elements  in  an  ordered  system  whose  exactness  of  structure
transcends  the  exactness  of  physical  measurements.  The  order-
sys“tem  is  abstract  in  a high  degree  ; its  significance  is  independent
of  what  there  happens  to  be  in  the  world.  Sciences  which  can  be
brought  within  such  an  order-system  become  increasingly  mathe-
matical in  the  expression  and  the  verification  of  them  hypotheses.
These  are  commonly  regarded  as  " the  advanced  sciences  ’.  In  the
next  section  we  shall  be  concerned'  with*  the  significance  of  this
advance.  Here,  the  point  to  be  stressed  is  that  the  contrast  between
v^jausal  laws  and  functional  laws  is  dependent  upon  the  region  of  fact
to  which  these  two  kinds  of  laws  are  respectively  appropriate.

It  was  pointed  out  at  the  beginning  of  this  section  that  the
differences  between  the  empirical  sciences  is  determined  by  the  part
played  m them  by  quantitative  determination.  These  differences
may  now  be  summed  up  in  the  following  way.  In  the  experimental
sciences  quantitative  determination  has  for  its  purpose  the  state-

^ In  a recent  paper  on  ‘ Hume’s  Doctrine  of  Causality  ’ (Proc.  Arist.  /S'oc.,
32),  Mr.  0.  A.  Mace  has  contended  that  functional  dependence  ‘ is  a part
of  the  analysis  of  ’ causation.  He  admits  that  when  a bullet  causes  death  we
cannot  formulate  an  expression  of  precise  fimctional  variation,  but  he  main-
tains that  the  significance  of  causation  is  bound  up  with  the  notion  of  func-
tional dependence.  I agree  with  him  that  causation  concerns  variation  in
properties  of  the  second  order,  although  I have  not  used  this  language  (see
p.  266,  above).  But  it  seems  to  me  that  Mr.  Mace  fails  to  realize  the  sigmfi-
cance  of  what  I have  called  the  elimination  of  the  substantive,  and  accordingly
neglects  the  reference  of  causal  laws  to  modes  of  change  in  the  behaviour  of
things  (see  Appendix  B).


382


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


ment  of  exact  laws  of  functional  dependence,  and  this  statement  is
rendered  possible  because  tbe  fundamental  concepts  can  be  precisely
defined  in  mathematical  terms.  This  result  is  achieved  only  by  the
elimination  of  the  substantive  thing.  In  the  social  sciences  the
purpose  of  quantitative  determination  is  to  discover  statistical
generalizations  leading  to  causal  laws.  These  causal  laws  state
modes  of  behaviour  of  substantive  things.  It  is  precisely  these  laws
with  which  the  social  sciences  are  concerned.  In  the  historical
sciences  quantitative  determination  either  does  not  occur  at  all,  or,
if  it  does  occur,  it  does  so  only  to  permit  a deduction  with  regard
to  some  fact  about  a substantive  thing.  The  problem  of  determining
the  age  of  the  earth  would  be  a case  in  point.  Accordingly,  in  the
historical  sciences  the  substantive  thing  is  all  important.

§2.  THE  AIM  OF  THE  HISTORICAL  SCIENCES
The  experimental  sciences,  especially  physics  and  physical
chemistry  are  frequently  spoken  of  as  ' the  most  advanced  sciences  h
The  word  “ advanced  however,  requires  scrutiny  in  this  con-
nexion. A science  is  the  work  of  men.  As  is  the  case  with  all  works
of  men,  a science  passes  through  stages ; it  develops,  or,  at  least,
it  changes.  When  we  say  that  a science  is  ' advancing  ’,  we  may
merely  mean  that  it  has  been  studied  for  some  time,  that  it  is  not
a new  study.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  we  may  say  that  eugenics  is
a young  science.  One  generation  of  scientific  thinkers  advances  on
f previous  generations  by  adding  the  discovery  of  new  facts  or  by
gradually  clarifying  the  fundamental  concepts  in  terms  of  which
these  facts  are  to  be  ordered.  Unleis  there  be  advance  of  this  kind
‘ the  science  is  at  a standstill,  as  was  long  the  case  with  the  science
of  Jiogic.  Such  an  advance  is  usually  also  an  orderly  development.  .
. Fresh  discoveries  bring  successive  generations  of  scientists  nearer  to
the  ideal  of  their  investigation.  We  can  then  say  that  the  science
is  ‘ advanced  ’ in  a different  sense.  We  do  not  now  mean  merely
that  it  continues  to  be  studied,  but  that  it  approaches  nearer  to  an
icjeal  which  is  the  goal  of  its  development.  Now  those  sciences  whose
ordering  conceptions  are  capable  of  mathematical  expression  will,  -
at  the  later  stages  of  their  development,  be  able  to  employ  all  the
resources  of  mathematical  technique  both  in  the  statement  and  in
the  solution  of  their  problems.  Their  advance  in  the  first  sense
will  be  unquestionable ; their  advance  in  the  second  sense  will  be
striking.  This  is  the  case  with  mathematical  physics.  It  is  not
surprising  that  the  rapidity  with  which  mathematical  physics  is
advancing  (i.e.  approximating  to  the  goal  of  its  development)  has
led  many  to  suppose  that  physics  sets  the  ideal  in  terms  of  which
anf  science  is  to  be  judged  ^ advanced  ’ or  ‘ backward  ’.
hqwwer,  is  a This  advance  of  physics  is  inti-


EXPEEIMENTAL  AKD  HISTORICAL  SCIENCES  383

mately  bound  up  with  tbe  fact  tliat  its  subject-matter  permits  of
precise  experiments  yielding  remarkably  exact  measurements  capable
of  formulation  as  approximations  to  matbematical  expressions.  We
have  already  seen  that  the  discovery  of  the  appropriate  mathematical
expression,  in  terms  of  which  a mass  of  experimental  data  can  be
formulated,  leads  to  precise  definition  of  the  fundamental  concepts.
It  was  in  this  way  that  Ohm’s  Law  marks  so  considerable  an  advance
in  electrokinetics.  But  the  conditions  present  in  the  physical  sciences
are  lacking  in  other  sciences,  not  because  they  are  less  advanced —
although  this  is  true  in  both  senses  of  ^ advanced  ’ — ^but  b.ecause  the
nature  of  theic  problems  is  different  owing  to  the  difference  in  the
region  of  fact  studied.  In  the  case  of  these  other  sciences,  to  seek
the  goal  of  development  set  before  the  physical  scientist  is  to  follow
a wrong  path,  tinder  these  other  sciences  must  be  included  the
' historical^  sciences.

Those  sciences  may  be  called  ‘ historical  ’ in  which  either  the
data  relate  to  that  which,  though  not  intrinsically  unobservable
/could  not  now  be  observed,  or  the  problems  concern  datable  occur-
rences. In  this  sense  geology  is  an  historical  science.  Some  of
the  problems  with  which  the  biological  sciences  are  concerned  are
historical  problems.  The  ‘ sciences  of  man  e.g.  anthropology,
ethnology,  sociology,  are,  in  the  sense  defined,  historical  sciences.
But  to  say  that  these  sciences  are  ‘ historical  ’ is  not  to  say  that
in  studying  them  we  are  studying  history:  The  study  of  history  is
concerned  with  a determinate  occasion  as  a xmique  datable  occur-
rence ; it  is  concerned  with  this  occasion  in  its  uniqueness.

Whenever  we  can  significantly  speak  of  ' the  date  of  A then
A is  determinate  with  respect  both  to  place  and  time,  however
position  in  space  and  time  may  be  determined.  It  follows  that  the
notion  of  r^etition  is  non-significant  with  reference  to  A.  This  that
is  dated,  viz.  A,  may  be  said  to  be,  in  a strict  sense  of  the  word,  a
particular}  But  A,  i.e.  this  that  is  dated,  is  an  instance  of  some
sort ; it  could,  from  some  point  of  view,  be  regarded  as  a specimen^.
We,  in  fact,  both  in  everyday  life  and  in  scientific  inquiry  do  tend
to  regard  A as  a specimen.  In  thinking  of  A as  a specimen  w;e
can  significantly  think  of  A as  occurring  at  different  times  and  in
different  places.  So  to  think  of  A is  no  longer  to  think  of  A as  a
datable  this.  If  A recurs,  then  what  recurs  is  not  this  datable  A,
which  is  numerically  one  ; what  recurs  must  be  a set  of  properties,
or  characteristics,  capable  of  belonging  to  more  than  one  thing.  2

^ It  would  sometimes  be  said  that  in  such  a case,  A is  a ‘ bare  particular
or  a ‘ particular  taken  in  its  particularity  ’ (Minmaliglceit),  But  I do  not  think
that  this  language  is  very  convenient.

* In  this  discussion  we  are  not  at  all  concerned  with  substantival  per-
sistence, but  with  recurrence.  The  problem  of  the  nature  of  persisting  sub-
stances, or  continuants — ^to  use  Johnson’s  term — ^is  not  here  relevant.


384


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Whenever  we  are  concerned  with  the  particular  as  such,  date  ia
relevant.  We  may  say,  conversely,  that  whenever  date  is  relevant
we  are  concerned  with  that  which  cannot  as  such  be  repeated.
This  datable  A is  unique,  not  in  the  sense  that  this  A has  properties
which  do  not  jointly  belong  to  any  other  particular — ^though  this
may  well  be  so  ; it  is  unique  because  it  is  located  in  a determinate
time  in  a determinate  place.^  It  follows  that  any  problem  into  which
date  enters  as  an  integral  element  cannot  be  solved  by  methods
which  depend  upon,  and  are  suitable  to,  repeatable  occurrences.

§ 3.  METHOD  IN  HISTORY

History  is  the  record  of  what  has  happemd;  it  is  concerned
with  datable  occurrences.  The  primary  aim  of  the  historian  is  to
ascertain  what  exactly  did  happen.  The  historian  cannot  observe
what  has  happened.  His  data  are  records — ^monuments,  oral
tradition,  documents — ^from  which  he  has  to  construct  his  primary
fact.  This  point  has  been  well  put  by  Langlois  : ' The  facts  of  the
past  are  only  known  to  us  by  the  traces  of  them  which  have  been
preserved.  These  traces,  it  is  true,  are  directly  observed  by  the
historian,  but  after  that,  he  has  nothing  more  to  observe ; what
remains  is  the  work  of  reasoning,  in  which  he  endeavours  to  infer,
with  the  greatest  possible  exactness,  the  facts  from  the  traces.  The
document  is  his  starting-point,  the  fact  is  his  goal.’  ^ Our  knowledge
of  historical  fact  is  thus  indirect ; it  is  the  distinguishing  character-
istic of  historical  knowledge  that  its  primary  facts  are  npt  observed
but  inferred.  What  is  directly  observed  are  written  documents  or
archaeological  remains.  Using  the  word  documents  ” to  cover
manuscripts,  monuments,  and  other  visible  remains  of  the  past,
we  may  accept  the  dictum  of  Langlois  and  Seignobos : ‘ No  docu-
ments, no  history  There  must,  then,  always  be  ^immense"  gaps  in
our  knowledge  of  the  past.  Some  lucky  find,  as  in  the  case  of
TutanMiamen’s  tomb,  may  suddenly  provide  us  with  unexpected
data.  But,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  such  discoveries  are  rare.
The  first  stage  of  historical  inquiry  is  the  search  for  documents.
The  historian  has  to  ascertain  whether  there  are  any  documents,
and  then  to  collect  and  classify  those  he  can  find.  A cl^^sffied
collection  of  documents  constitutes  an  annotated  and  indexed
catalogue.®  The  work  of  making  such  a catalogue  is  laborious  in

^ The  physical  theory  of  relativity  is  irrelevant  here.  All  that  is  required
is  a given  system  of  reference.

2 Langlois  Seignobos,  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  History  (trans.
York  Powell),  p^BT.  In  writing  this  section  I have  made  considerable  use  ol
this  book ; it  is  the  best  short  account  of  historical  methodology  available  to  |
the  English  reader.  P

® The  Earleian  coUection  of  MS.  in  the  British  Museum  affords  a good
example.


EXPERIMENTAL  AND  HISTORICAL  SCIENCES  385

the  extreme  ; it  may  require  the  co-operation  of  many  people  extend-
ing over  a considerable  period  of  time.  Yet  it  is  only  the  first  stage,
a preliminary  to  the  ascertainment  of  fact.  It  is  not  suj0S.cient  to
be  in  possession  of  the  document ; it  is  further  necessary  to  under-
stand  it  and  to  evaluate  it  as  a record  of  fact.  This  process  of  inter-
pretation is  never  easy,  and  may  be  excessively  difficult.  We  may
consider  briefly  the  difficult  case  of  written  documents.  Suppose,
for  instance,  that  the  document  is  written  in  an  ancient  hieroglyphic.
It  will  be  useless  unless  the  hieroglyphics  can  be  deciphered  and
understood.^  Suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  document  is
written  in  a language  that  is  understood ; still,  before  it  can  be
accepted  as  a record  of  fact,  various  questions  must  be  satisfactorily
answered.  In  other  words,  the  document  must  be  subjected  to
critical  examination.  This  critical  examination  falls  into  two  parts
distiuguished  as  External  Criticism  and  Internal  Criticism.  The
former  is  concerned  with  the  caligraphy,  the  language,  the  form,
and  the  source  of  the  document;  the  latter  with  the . conditions
under  which  it  was  written  and  particularly  with  the  nature  and
circumstances  of  the  author,  or  the  alleged  author,  should  the  docu-
ment not  happen  to  be  anonymous.  In  every  stage  of  this  process,
the  historian  is  forced  to  go  beyond  what  is  directly  presented  to
him  and  to  infer  the  most  likely  conclusion  from  what  he  directly
observes.

It  m not  possible  here  to  do  more  than  indicate  very  briefly
the  nature  and  difficulties  of  external  criticism.  In  the  case  of
ancient  documents  it  seldom  happens  that  the  original  manuscript
has  been  preserved.  The  historian’s  text  is  a copy  of  a copy  of  a
copy,  and  so  on.  Often  these  copies  have  been  made  by  scribes
who  understood  not  at  all,  or  at  least  but  imperfectly,  what  they
were  copying.  It  is  not,  therefore,  surprising  that  these  manuscripts
are  of  ten  unintelligible  or  inaccurate.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  the
correction  of  these  errors  and  the  preparation  of  a ‘ sound  text  ’ requires
the  highest  development  of  critical  scholarship.^  “ The  ability  to
suggest  a satisfactory  emendation  of  a corrupt  text  is  rare.  An
example  will  show  most  clearly  the  nature  of  critical  emendation.
In  the  text  of  Seneca’s  Letters  ^ there  occurred  a reading  which  did
not  make  sense  ; the  classical  scholar  Madvig  suggested  an  emenda-
tion which  was  at  once  accepted  as  obviously  correct.  It  must  be
remembered  that  ancient  manuscripts  were  written  entirely  in

^ The  way  in  which  Champollion  succeeded  in  deciphering  Egyptian  hiero-
glyphics affords  an  instructive  example  of  method.  A simple  account  of  his
discovery  is  given  by  F.  H.  Breasted,  Ancient  Times,  §§  12  and  68.

® It  is  not  possible  here  to  do  more  than  indicate  the  nature  of  these  diffi-
culties. A full  discussion  will  be  found  in  the  book  of  Langlois  and  Seignobos
to  which  reference  has  already  been  made.

* See  Langlois  and  Seignobos,  op.  cit.,  p.  78  et  seq.


386


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


capitals,  tlie  words  not  separated  nor  the  sentences  punctuated.
The  reader  may  form  some  conception  of  the  nature  of  textual
emendation  if  he  examines  the  following  passage  given  in  a form
approximating  to  that  of  the  original  text ; ^ PHILOSOPHIAUKDE
DICTASITAPPAEETIPSOENIMNOMINEFATETUEQUIDAMET
SAPIENTIAMITAQUIDAMEINIEEUNTUTDICEEENTDIVINOR
IMETHUMANOEIMSAPIENTIAM  . . The  transcription  of
this  passage  ^ as  originally  made  ran : ^ Philosophia  unde  dicta  sit,
apparet ; ipso  enim  nomine  fatetur.  Quidam  et  sapientiam  ita
quidam  finierunt,  ut  dicerent  divinorum  et  humanorum  sapientiam.’
This  does  not  make  sense.  It  would  be  possible  to  suppose  that
some  words  had  been  omitted  in  transcription,  for  instance,  between
ita  and  quidam,  Madvig,  however,  starting  again  from  the  un-
separated script,  considered  whether  sense  might  not  be  obtained
by  dividing  the  words  differently.  He  was  thus  led  to  suggest  the
emendation : ^ . ipso  enim  nomine  fatetur  quid  amet.  Sapien-

tiam . . Such  conjectural  emendations  are  the  fruit  of  a long
training  in  classical  scholarship,  of  a knowledge  of  palaeography,  and
of  a fine  sense  of  the  niceties  of  the  language.

Often  it  happens  that  the  original  document  has  been  lost  and
that  there  are  several  copies  differing  from  each  other.  It  would
not  be  safe  to  conclude  that  the  most  frequent  reading  is  the  correct
one,  for  several  copies  may  have  been  made  from  the  same  copy
which  contained  a mistaken  reading.  Hence,  it  is  necessary  to
determine  the  relation  in  which  the  various  copies  stand  |p,  ,^.ach
other.  It  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  ^ all  the  copies  which  contain
the  same  mistakes  in  the  same  passages  must  have  been  either  copied
from  each  other  or  all  derived  foom  a copy  containing  those  mistakes.
It  is  inconceivable  that  several  copyists,  independently  reproducing
an  original  free  from  all  errors,  should  all  introduce  exactly  the
same  ; identity  of  e^ors,  attests  community  of  origin.’  ^ It
'follows  that  numerous  copies  of  a document  the  original  of  which
has  been  preserved  are_^  valueless.  Only  independent  copies  of  the
original,  or  copies  taken  directly  from  a first  copy  now  lost,  are  of
use  in  the  collation  of  texts.  By  the  method  of  comparison  of
errors  it  is  possible  to  draw  up  a table  {sterm;^  cgdicum)  showing

1 The  student  who  reads  Latin  would  find  it  a good  exercise  to  attempt,
before  reading  further,  to  (i)  split  this  passage  into  its  constituent  words;
(ii)  to  state  explicitly  the  principles  which  guided  the  division.  He  should
then  compare  his  result  with  Madvig’s  emendation.

p.  81.  Such  errors  are  of  two  kinds : accidental  errors  and  fraudu-
lent alterations.  The  former  are  due  to  mistakes  in  copying  or  in  writing
from  dictation ; they  tend  to  take  regular  forms  such  as  the  transposition  of
letters  or  of  words,  the  repetition  or  omission  of  "i^ords,  incorrect  divisions
between  words,  substitution  of  wrong  words  due  to  confusions  of  sense ; the
latter  can  be  corrected  only  by  inferences  from  sources  other  than  the  text
in  question*


EXPERIMENTAL  AND  HISTORICAL  SCIENCES  387


tlie  relative  importance  of  the  preserved  copies.  Such  textual
criticism  is  laborious  and  calls  for  the  highest  gifts  of  scholarship
and  imagination.  Yet  its  results  are  purely  negative  ; the  purpose
of  such  criticism  is  merely  to  avoid  possible  sources  of  error.  It  is
clear  that  ^ the  text  of  a document  which  has  been  restored  at  the
cost  of  infinite  pains  is  not  worth  more  than  that  of  a document
whose  original  has  been  preserved ; on  the  contrary,  it  is  worth
less.  If  the  autograph  manuscript  of  the  Aeneid  had  not  been
destroyed,  centuries  of  collation  and  conjecture  would  have  been
saved,  and  the  text  of  the  Aeneid  would  have  been  better  than  it  is.’  ^

When,  by  means  of  such  textual  criticism,  a satisfactory  text
has  been  established,  it  is  necessary  to  ascertain  the  date  and  the
authorship.  If  it  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  authorship,  it  is
at  least  necessary  to  ascertain  the  circumstances  under  which  it
w^s  ^Y^^itten.  A document  purporting  to  record  a set  of  occurrences
is^  valueless  if  it  can  be  shown  to  have  been  written  by  some  one
'i  /^ho  could  not  have  had  first-hand  knowledge  of  those  occurrences.
' Suppose,  for  instance,  that  a document  is  asserted  to  have  been
written  in  the  thirteenth  century.  It  may  be  shown  to  be  a forgery
if  a copy  of  the  document  is  in  handwriting  belonging  to  eleventh-
century  style.  Or  again,  the  document  may  appear  to  belong  to
the  eleventh  century,  but  on  examination  it  may  be  found  to  con-
tain words  and  phrases  not  in  use  until  two  centuries  later.  Many
forgeries  have  been  detected  in  this  way.  Official  documents  often
contain  characteristic  formulae  which  provide  a test  of  the  genuine-
ness of  the  document,  e.g.  Merovingian  charters.  By  the  use  of
, such  tests  the  authenticity  of  a document  may  be  decided.  The
^problem  is  more  difficult,  though  not  essentially  different  in  principle,
Iwhen  the  document  is  the  work  of  several  authors.

Given  that  the  question  of  authorship  has  been  satisfactorily
settled,  it  still  remains  to  determine  the  circumstances  imder  which
the  document  was  written.  Had  the  author  (or  authors)  an  oppor-
tunity of  witnessing  the  events  which  he  professes  to  record  at  first
hand  ? Had  he  any  motive  for  falsifying  his  record  1 Had  he  the
ability  to  set  down  accurately  what  he  observed  ? The  English
historiaiLEroude  provides  a striking  example  of  a writer  who  seemed
^to  be  temperamentally  incapable  of  accuracy.  With  no  desire  to
falsify  he  nevertheless  habitually  misstated  the  facts,  even  when
he  was  simply  recording  a journey  he  had  taken.  His  is  an  extreme
case,  but  any  one  who  has  compared  the  records  of  eye-witnesses
of  the  same  occurrence  must  have  been  struck  by  the  divergence
*in  detail,  a divergence  that  is  often  important  and  misleading.
|fhis  difficulty  is  increased  when  the  document  contains  not  only
k record  of  what  the  author  believed  himself  to  have  observed  but

^ p.  84


388


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


also  an  interpretation  of  tlie  observed  occurrences.  Here,  as  always,
the  temptation  is  to  twist  the  facts  to  suit  some  preconceived  tKeory.
This  source  of  error  is  not  confined  to  tbe  original  writer  of  tbe
document;  it  besets  the  reader  who  attempts  an  interpretative
criticism  of  it.  As  Fustel  de  Goulanges  well  says  : ' Some  students
begin  by  forming  an  opinion  . . . and  it  is  not  till  afterwards  that
they  begin  to  read  the  texts.  They  run  a great  risk  of  not  under-
standing them  at  all,  or  of  imderstanding  them  wrongly.  What
happens  is  that  a kind  of  tacit  contest  goes  on  between  the  text
and  the  preconceived  opinions  of  the  reader ; the  mind  refuses  to
grasp  what  is  contrary  to  its  idea,  and  the  issue  of  the  contest  com-
monly is,  not  that  the  mind  surrenders  to  the  evidence  of  the  text
but  that  the  text  yields,  bends,  and  accommodates  itself  to  the
preconceived  opinion.’  ^ No  doubt  the  experimental  scientist  may
sometimes  be  tempted  to  a like  bending  of  the  facts,  but  the  possi-
bility of  verification  of  his  statements  by  reference  to  other  observers
and  to  subsequent  deductions  from  his  theory  are  safeguards  which
the  historian  lacks.

A document  need  not  be  accepted  or  rejected  en  bloc.  While
some  parts  of  the  record  may  be  unquestionably  accurate,  others
may  be  unreliable  owing  to  the  personal  peculiarities  of  the  author,
or  to  the  fact  that  whilst  he  was  in  a position  to  observe  some  part
of  the  occurrences  which  he  records,  this  was  not  the  case  with
others.  It  is  thus  necessary  that  the  document  should  be  analysed
into  its  constituent  statements  so  that  each  can  be  examined  and
tested  separately.  With  practice  these  operations  can  be  performed
swiftly,  but  they  are  none  the  less  logically  important.  With  regard
to  every  statement  it  is  necessary  to  ask  whether  the  writer  had
any  incentive  to  misrepresent  the  facts,  and  if  not,  whether  he  was
in  a position  to  know  them.  Avih^nticity  must  not  be  taken  for
sincerity.  The  Memoirs  of  statesmen,  who  were  in  a position  accu-
rately to  know  the  facts,  may  nevertheless  be  inaccurate  owing  to
the  vanity  of  the  author.  2 There  may  be  sometimes  a further  aonjce
of  error  owing  to  the  fondness  of  the  author  for  dramatic  incidents
lacking  to  the  actual  occasions  he  describes.

Just  as  the  empirical  sciences  have  grown  out  of  common-sense
knowledge,  so  history  has  grown  out  of..,tradition.  There  is  no
sudden  break.  But  just  as  science  in  its  developed  form  is  some-
thing more  than  O'Cganized  common  sense,  so  history  is  something
more  than  tradition  that  has  become  conscious  of  itself  and,  therefore,
Critical.

^ Monarchie  franque,  p.  31.  See  also  Lan^ois^  ^d  Seignobos,  op.  cit.,

p.  14471.

^ The  Memoirs  of  Mettemich  provide  a case  in  point.


CHAPTER  XX

THE  NATURE  OE  SCIENTIFIC  THEORIES


‘ I have  no  doubt  whatever  that  our  ultimate  aim  must  be  to  describe  the
sensible  in  terms  of  the  sensible.’ — J.  H.  Poynting.

’ § 1.  EXPLANATION  AT  THE  LEVEL  OF  COMMON-SENSE

THINKING

The  demand  for  an  explanation  of  a situation  or  fact  is  a
demand  that  it  be  made  intelligible.  Scientific  method  is  the
means  wherebj  intelligibility  is  achieved  so  that  throughout
our  discussion  of  method  we  have  been  concerned  with  the  conditions
involved  in  explanation.  But  we  have  so  far  considered  these
conditions  only  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  discovery  of  the  type
of  order  appropriate  to  what  is  observed.  We  have  now  to  consider
the  use  of  these  discoveries  to  explain  the  facts.  To  explain  is  to
ofier  an  answer  to  a definite  question.  The  satisfaotoriness  of  the
answer  will  be  partly  dependent  upon  the  knowledge  possessed  by
the  questioner.  In  seeking  ai;  explanation  he  is  seeking  to  discover
a connexion  between  what  is  to  be  explained  and  something  that
he  already  understands.  What  is  familiar  is  usually  taken  to  be
understood,  so  that  in  its  simplest  form  the  answer  to  the  question
consists  in  pointing  out  a connexion  between  the  fact  to  be  explained
and  something  that  is  familiar.  When,  for  instance,  the  plain  man
asks  an  expert  to  explain  some  fact,  the  expert  will  probably  reply
by  draVing  an  analogy  between  some  familiar  set  of  facts  and  the
fac’os  to  be  explained.  Such  explanations  by  analogy  are  very  com-
mon in  popular  expositions  of  science.  For  example.  Professor
Andrade  explains  the  way  in  which  light  is  analysed  by  the  spectro-
scope by  the  following  analogy : ‘ The  way  to  analyse  a light,  as
it  is  called,  is  to  use  an  instrument  which  separates  out  the  difierent
colours  and  sorts  each  into  a different  place.  To  get  a rough  illus-
tration of  what  is  meant  suppose  the  tickets  to  different  parts  of
a theatre  were  printed  in  different  colours.  . . . Outside  the  theatre
we  have  a mixed  crowd  passing  in,  corresponding  to  the  beam  of
mixed  light,  but  inside  the  various  colours  arc  sorted  out,  and  we
know  by  the  position  in  which  people  sit  down  what  colour  their
tickets  were.  A sorting-out  instrument  for  light  is  called  a spectro-
scope, or,  if  it  is  suitable  for  photographic  recording,  a spectrograph.

389


390


A MODEEN  INTEODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


Tte  ligM  wMck  enters  is  spread  out  into  a band,  in  wHch  eacb  wave
length,  has  its  own  position,  and  even  a colour-blind  man  could  tell
the  colours  present  in  the  light  by  the  places  in  which  light  appears.’  ^
The  utility  of  such  explanations  clearly  depends  upon  the  accuracy
of  the  analogy.  If  it  arouses  erroneous  associations  it  will  be  mis-
leading. Many  popular  explanations  of  the  principle  of  relativity
are  marred  by  such  defects.  ^

Illustrative  analogies  have  been  extremely  useful  to  the  expert
himself  in  enabling  him  to  apprehend  a set  of  facts  as  constituting
a system  he  can  understand.  For  instance,  the  theory  of  the  atomic
structure  of  matter  makes  intelligible  such  facts  as  the  contraction
and  expansion  of  gases  and  solids.  Thus  Professor  Poynting  says :
" I have  no  doubt  that  the  atomic  hypothesis  was  first  imagined  to
escape  the  necessity  of  taking  the  expansion  and  contraction  of  solid
and  liquid  matter  as  simple,  inexplicable,  ultimate  facts.  Were
matter  continuous,  they  would  have  to  be  so  taken.  But  imagine
that  matter  consists  of  separated  atoms,  and  contraction  is  merely
a drawing  together  of  the  members  of  the  group,  expansion  is  merely
a separating  out.  We  have  explained  them  by  likening  them  to
what  we  observe  every  day  in  a crowd  of  men  or  a fl.ock  of  birds.’
The  explanation  here  consists  in  likening  the  movements  of  atoms
to  the  movements  of  people  in  a crowd,  who  may  be  pressed  more
or  less  closely  together.  The  movement  within  a crowd  being  familiar
is  intelligible.^  The  discovery  of  likeness  is  the  beginning  of  ex-
planation. It  is  the  isolated,  irreducible,  ultimate  fact  that  is  un-
intelligible. We  seek  connexions.  Hence,  the  mere  statement  that
such  and  such  is  always  the  case  may  be  accepted  as  an  explanation.*^
For  example,  a new  young  voter  may  ask  why  a given  politician
has  devoted  most  of  his  election  speeches  to  decrying  his  opponents.
She  may  be  satisfied  with  the  reply  that  politicians  always  behave
like  that.  In  so  far  as  this  answer  appears  satisfactory  it  is  because
it  relates  the  given  fact  to  the  general  fact  of  the  characteristics

^The  Atom,  p.  56.  [BenrCs  Sixpenny  Library.)

® e.g.  B.  Bussell,  The  A BG  of  Rdativity : ‘ Every  one  knows  that  if  you  are
on  an  escalator  you  reach  the  top  sooner  if  you  walk  up  than  if  you  stand  still.
But  if  the  escalator  moved  with  the  velocity  of  light  (which  it  does  not  do  even  in
New  York)  you  would  reach  the  top  at  exactly  the  same  moment  whether  you
walked  up  or  stood  still  ’ (p.  36).  This  illustration  is  misleading,  since  a material
object  such  as  an  escalator  could  not  move  with  the  velocity  of  light.  The
illustration  arouses  misleading  associations.

® The  scientist’s  use  of  models  is  an  extension  of  such  explanation  by  analogy.
It  is  a step  towards  abstract,  formal  description.  Cf.  p,  310  above,  and  p.  399
below.

♦ Such  a reply  is  called  by  Br.  Venn  ‘ that  scandal  to  the  budding  science  of
the  nursery  but,  he  adds,  ‘ even  this  statement  is  a help.  The  answer  does  not
merely  repeat  the  observed  phenomenon ; it  to  a certain  extent  generalizes  what
to  the  child  seemed  new  to  experience  (Empirical  Logic,  p,  499.)


THE  NATURE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  THEORIES  391

possessed  by  politicians.  Tbe  fact  is  no  longer  isolated  and,  as
such,  unintelligible  ; it  is  now  recognized  as  an  instance  of  a unifornx
connexion.  If  tbe  questioner  were  to  pursue  ber  inquiries  demanding
why  politicians  so  bebave,  sbe  would  be  answered  if  it  were  pointed
out  that  tbe  efiect  of  sucb  bebaviour  is  to  decrease  tbe  bearer’s
confidence  in  tbe  speaker’s  opponents  and  tbus  to  secure  votes  for
bimself.  Sucb  an  explanation  takes  tbe  form  of  a reference  to  pur-
pose. If  tbe  questioner  understands  tbe  nature  of  tbis  purpose  and
is  familiar  with  tbe  mental  cbaracteristics  of  tbe  electorate,  tbe
explanation  will  be  complete.  We  are  so  familiar  with  purposive
action  that  an  explanation  in  terms  of  purpose  is  always  acceptable,
whilst  tbe  appeal  to  tbe  value  implicit  in  tbe  purpose  is  recognized
as  final.  It  was  for  tbis  reason  that  tbe  medieval  conception  of
teleological  order  bad  sucb  explanatory  power  that  it  tended  to
check  further  inquiry.^  From  tbis  point  of  view  explanation
answers  tbe  question  why  and  finds  its  natural  termination  in  tbe
statement  of  purpose.  Where  we  are  not  seeking  purpose,  ex-
planation takes  tbe  form  of  exhibiting  connexions  and  terminates
in  tbe  widest  co-ordination  of  facts  possible  at  the  given  stage
of  knowledge.

We  may  say,  then,  that  tbe  occurrence  of  X is  explained  when
it  is  shown  that  whenever  A occurs,  X occurs,  and  that  A has  occurred.
Sucb  explanation  consists  in  showing  that  X is  an  instance  of  a uni-
form connexion.  It  is  tbe  uniformity  of  tbe  connexion  that  is  im-
portant. If  bnen  dipped  into  oil  sometimes  became  semi-transparent,
sometimes  remained  opaque,  we  could  not  explain  tbe  transparent
appearance  by  reference  to  tbe  immersion  in  oil.  Since  common
sense  is  familiar  with  tbe  notion  of  causal  uniformities,  and  since
common-sense  thinking  moves  mainly  upon  tbe  level  of  causal
determination,  explanation  that  takes  tbis  form  will  be  acceptable.
To  explain  tbe  causal  uniformity  itself,  we  look  for  a wider  uni-
formity of  which  tbe  given  uniformity  is  an  instance.  Tbus  tbe
rise  of  water  in  a pump  is  explained  by  showing  that  it  is  an  instance
of  tbe  laws  of  atmospheric  pressure.  The  less  general  is  tbus  ex-
plained by  being  deduced  from  the  more  general,  Tbe  wider,  i.e.
the  more  comprehensive,  tbe  generalization,  the  greater  is  its  ex-
planatory power.  From  tbe  point  of  view  of  explanation  it  is  usual
to  distinguish  uniformities,  or  laws,  into  three  kinds  : (i)  ultimate
laws ; (ii)  derivative  laws,  i.e.  laws  which  are  instances  of  more
general  laws,  from  which  they  can  be  deduced;  (iii)  -empirical
laws,  i.e.  uniformities  that  have  not  been  shown  to  be  instances
of  more  general  laws.  Sucb  empirical  laws  remained  unrelated
general  facts.


1 Of.  Chap.  Xin  above.


392


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


§ 2.  THE  AIM  OE  SCIENCE

Before  we  can  decide  whether  a scientific  theory  is  explanatory
we  must  attempt  to  ascertain  the  aim  of  science.  If  explanation
be  the  object  the  scientist  sets  out  to  achieve,  what  form  does  this
explanation  take  ? If  he  does  not  seek  explanation,  what  is  his
aim  ? Just  as  common  sense  has  but  a vague  idea  as  to  what  science
is,  so  it  misconceives  the  aim  of  the  scientist.  Eor  the  plain  man,
who  is  essentially  practical,  the  importance  of  science  can  be  summed
up  in  Bacon’s  aphorism  ^Knowledge  is  power’.  Accordingly  the
purpose  of  science  is  often  taken  to  be  to  gain  control  over  the  forces
of  nature.  Hence,  millionaires  not  infrequently  endow  research
fellowships  in  science.  But,  as  every  student  of  science  knows,
the  practical  control  of  nature  is  a by-product  of  scientific  inquiry.
The  aim  of  the  scientist  is  simply  to  understand ; he  seeks  to  render
tEe  sensible  facts  that  constitute  his  primary  datum  intelligible.
Accordingly,  i£  by  ''  explanation  ” be  meant  the  attainment  of  such
understanding,  then  every  scientific  theory  is  explanatory.  Scien-
tists, however,  are  fond  of  asserting  that  science  does  not  explain
but  describe.  They  are  apt  to  elucidate  this  remark  by  the  statement
that  explanation  answers  the  question  why,  science  answers  the
question  how.  This  is  to  assume  that  explanation  necessarily  takes
the  form  of  exhibiting  purpose.  If  this  w^ere  so,  science  certainly  could
not  explain.  But  explanation  that  consists  in  assigning  purpose  and
a well-constructed  scientific  theory  have  in  common  that  they  satisfy
the  questioner.^  An  explanation  that  assigns  a purpose  is  intellectu-
ally satisfying  just  in  so  far  as  there  is  reference  to  a value  taken  as
ultimate.  In  this  case  no  further  questions  can  be  asked.  In  the
case  of  explanation  that  takes  the  causal  form  there  is  no  deter-
minate linnt.  It  is  always  possible  to  ask  another  question  of  the
sarm  hind  about  the  explanatory  answer.  Consequently,  as  science
develops,  the  form  of  the  question  changes.  Causal  explanation  is
confined  to  the  early  stages  of  a science ; it  is  satisfactory  only  at
the  level  of  organized  common-sense  knowledge.  There  is  then
good  reason  for  distinguishing  between  common-sense  explanation,
whether  purposive  or  causal,  and  the  explanation  afforded  by  a scien-
tific theory.  The  latter  takes  the  form  of  constructive  description.^

Those  scientists  who  have  been  most  anxious  to  insist  that  science
merely  describes  have  been  mainly  interested  in  the  chemical  and

^ It  is  perhaps  this  common  element  of  intellectual  satisfaction  that  accounts
for  the  frequent  use  of  expressions  such  as  **  this  phenomenon  is  explained  by
so-and-so  ” even  by  those  scientists  who  most  hotly  repudiate  the  suffffestion
that  science  explains.  '

am  aware  that  it  may  seem  contradictory  to  speak  of  a constructive
description,  but  I do  not  know  otherwise  how  to  distinguish  the  view  that  seems
to  me  to  be  correct  from  the  view  that  science  “ merely  describes


THE  NATUEB  OF  SCIENTIFIC  THEOEIES  393


physical  sciences.  This  descriptive  view  of  science  seems  to  have
originated  in  a reaction  against  the  view  that  science  gives  us  know-
ledge of  a more  ultimate  reality  than  is  given  in  our  sensible  experi-
ence of  the  external  world.  There  is  no  point  in  pursuing  this
question.  Scientists  resemble  the  plain  man  in  using  the  words
reality  ’’  and  real  ” so  vaguely  and  unclearly  as  to  empty  them
of  all  significance.  We  are  concerned  only  with  the  bearing  of  this
descriptive  view  upon  the  procedure  of  the  scientist  in  constructing
theories.  It  will  be  remembered  that  Galileo  praised  those  men
whose  sprightliness  of  judgement  enabled  them  to  prefer  the  dictates
of  their  reason  to  the  evidence  of  their  senses,  whilst  he  at  the  same
time  condemned  the  Aristotelian  professors  for  refusing  to  test  his
discoveries  by  using  their  eyes.  There  is  here  an  apparent  con-
tradiction the  consideration  of  which  is  suggestive.  The  contradic-
tion is  only  apparent  since  Galileo’s  insistence  upon  reason  was  in
the  interests  of  a mathematical  construction  which  led  back  to  the
sensible  facts.  Galileo’s  trust  in  his  mathematical  deductions  was,
however,  so  great  that  he  was  apt  to  regard  experimental  confirma-
tion as  necessary  only  to  convince  stupid  objectors.  Chemistry  has
developed  rapidly  as  a science  in  consequence  of  its  use  of  imper-
ceptible entities.  There  is,  then,  the  curious  situation  that  the
experimental  sciences  are  advancing  rapidly  as  a result  of  construct-
ing imperceptible,  hypothetical  entities  the  relations  between  which
enable  the  scientist  to  connect  sensible  facts.  Thus  the  primary
datum  is  to  be  rendered  intelligible  by  means  of  mathematical
deductions  concerning  entities  that  are  not  observed.  Unquestion-
ably this  procedure  has  been  of  the  greatest  value  for  the  advance-
ment of  science.  It  has,  however,  had  the  drawback  of  suggesting
an  opposition  between  the  scientific  reality  ” — ^the  world  of  im-
perceptibles,  and  the  sensible  reality  ” — ^the  world  given  in  our
sensible  experience.  Accordingly  scientists  such  as  Mach,  Ostwald,
and  Karl  Pearson  have  insisted  that  the  only  real  world  is  the
sensible  world,  and  that  scientific  theories  are  merely  descriptions
of  the  sensible  world.  The  suggestion  of  this  view  is  often  attributed
to  the  great  German  physicist,  Kirchhoff,  from  whom  Karl  Pearson
quotes  the  famous  definition  of  mechanics  : — ‘ Mechanics  is  the  science
of  motion ; we  define  as  its  object  the  complete  description  in  the
simplest  possible  manner  of  such  motions  as  occur  in  nature  In
any  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  description  ”,  Kirchhoff  s
definition  of  mechanics  would  be  absurd.  A complete  description
of  natural  motions  is  impossible,  and  if  it  were  not  impossible  it
would  be  useless,  for  the  aim  of  science  is,  we  have  insisted,  to  make
the  primary  data  intelligible  by  exhibiting  their  mode  of  connexion.
Without  abstraction  this  would  be,  impossible,  but  a complete  des-
^ The  Qrammar  of  Science^  p*  115*


394


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTIOE'  TO  LOGIC


cription  would  not  permit  of  abstraction.  Macb  admits  tbe  necessity
of  abstraction,  but  lie  bases  this  necessity  upon  tbe  need  to  economize
thought.  He  insists  that  the  aim  of  science  is  ' to  replace,  or  save^
experiences,  by  the  reproduction  and  anticipation  of  facts  in  thought.
Memory  is  handier  than  experience,  and  often  answers  the  same
purpose.  This  economical  ojBS.ce  of  science,  which  fills  its  whole
life,  is  apparent  at  first  glance  He  concludes  that  ^ in  the  repro-
duction of  facts  in  thought,  we  never  reproduce  the  facts  in  Ml,
but  only  that  side  of  them  which  is  important  to  us,  moved  to  this
directly  or  indirectly  by  a practical  interest.  Our  reproductions
are  invariably  abstractions.  Here  again  is  an  economical  tendency  ’ . ^
• Certainly  a complete  description,  whatever  else  it  might  be,  would
not  be  economical.  Accordingly  Mach  is  led  to  stress  not  complete-
ness but  economy.  He  urges  that  it  must  be  admitted  ‘ that  there
is  no  result  of  science  which  in  point  of  principle  could  not  have
been  arrived  at  wholly  without  methods.  But,  as  a matter  of  fact,
within  the  short  span  of  a human  life  and  with  man’s  limited  powers  of
memory,  any  stock  of  knowledge  worthy  of  the  name  is  unattainable
except  by  the  greatest  mental  economy.  Science  itseK,  therefore,  may
be  regarded  as  a minimal  problem,  consisting  of  the  completest  possible
presentment  of  facts  with  the  least  possible  expenditure  of  thought
This  conception  of  the  aim  of  science  misses  the  essential  point.
Scientific  theories  are  not  memory-saving  devices,  nor  is  the  primary
function  of  abstraction  to  economize  thought.  The  aim  of  these
theories  is  understanding ; the  function  of  abstraction  is  to  reveal
general  characters.  The  scientist  seeks  form ; such  economy  of
thought  as  results  from  the  discovery  of  form  is  a by-product  of  the
scientist’s  activity.  Mach’s  attitude  appears  to  rest  upon  a funda-
mental misconception.  The  descriptionists  appear  anxious  to  main-
tain that  whatever  else  a scientific  theory  may  be,  at  least  it  is  not
an  explanation.  But  their  conception  of  explanation  is  somewhat
crude.  Karl  Pearson  seems  to  suppose  that  explaining  is  always
answering  the  question  why,  and  that  the  rejection  of  the  conception
of  a scientific  law  as  a command  is  tantamount  to  conceiving  it  as  a
description.  Thus  he  says,  ^ the  scientific  law  is  a description,  not
a prescription’.^  Certainly  it  is  not  a prescription.  No  one  now
thinks  of  scientific  laws  as  commands.  Whether  they  are  to  be
regarded  as  descriptions  depends  upon  the  meaning  given  to
“description”.  The  scientists  we  have  been  considering  seem
to  wish  mainly  to  oppose  description  to  explanation,  having  first
misconceived  the  nature  of  explanation.  It  is  not  worth  while
disputing  about  a word.  But  there  is  a sense  of  “ descriptive  ” —
and  that  the  most  usual  sense — ^in  which  some  scientific  theories

^ The,  Science  of  Mechanics  (Eng.  Trans.),  pp.  481-2.

^ibid,,  p.  490.  ^The  dammar  of  Science,  p.  87*


THE  NATURE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  THEORIES


395


are  descriptive.  But  an  examination  of  tkese  theories  shows
that  they  fail  to  fulfil  the  ideal  of  the  scientist.  A satisfactory
theory  is  not  merely  descriptive ; it  is  also  constructive.  To  the
consideration  of  such  theories  the  next  section  will  be  devoted.

§3.  CONSTRUCTIVE  DESCRIPTIONS
In  saying  that  the  aim  of  the  scientist  is  to  provide  a constructive
description  we  wish  to  distinguish  between  a merely  descriptive  theory
and  one  that  is  something  more  than  description.  An  example  may
make  this  distinction  clearer.  For  this  purpose  we  shall  consider
the  theories  of  Ptolemy  and  Copernicus,  mentioned  in  Chapter  XVI,
with  reference  to  the  subsequent  development  of  astronomical  theory.
We  pointed  out  that  the  Copernican  theory  is  preferable  to  the
Ptolemaic  on  account  both  of  its  greater  simplicity  and  its  capacity
for  more  fruitful  development.  It  wiU  be  remembered  that  the
Ptolemaic  theory  provided  a mathematical  description  of  planetary
motions  into  which  newly-discovered  celestial  bodies  could  be  fitted
provided  that  new  epicycles  were  introduced.  It  would  be  possible
on  this  system  to  estimate  the  relative  positions  of  sun,  moon,  and
planets  at  future  dates  and  thus  to  predict  eclipses  more  or  less
accurately.  But  this  descriptive  scheme  could  yield  only  what  had
previously  been  put  into  it.  For  example,  it  would  be  powerless
to  predict  the  movements  of  any  stray  comets  that  might  appear.
Thus  the  possibility  of  its  development  was  extremely  limited.  The
Copernican  heliocentric  theory  not  only  permitted  of  deductive
development ; it  connected  all  the  various  cyclical  motions  com-
pleted in  a single  year  by  showing  them  to  be  dependent  upon  a
single  occurrence — ^the  motion  of  the  earth.  Thus  the  Copernican
theory  as  contrasted  with  the  Ptolemaic  is  constructive  ; it  renders
these  motions  intelligible  by  exhibiting  them  as  inter-related.  On
the  basis  of  the  Copernican  theory  Kepler  was  led  to  his  discovery
of  the  three  laws  of  planetary  motion,  now  called  Kepler’s  laws.
He  compared  the  observed  positions  of  Mars  (as  recqrded  by  the
great  astronomical  observer  Tycho  Brahe)  with  their  predicted
positions  in  the  Copernican  almanacs.  He  found  a discrepancy
that  could  not  be  accounted  for  on  the  received  scheme.  He  there-
fore questioned  the  assumption,  common  to  Ptolemy  and  Copernicus,
that  the  planetary  orbits  were  circular.  It  is  well  known  that,'
having  tried  nineteen  possible  curves,  Kepler  found  that  all  the
observed  positions  could  be  fitted  into  an  ellipse,  which  is  not  only
the  simplest  possible  curve  but  also  suggests  further  discoveries.
It  is  important  to  notice  that  this  is  a constructive  description.  It
is  descriptive,  for  it  is  dependent  upon,  and  checked  at  every  stage
by,  exact  observation ; it  is  cmstructive  since  it  renders  these  motions
intelligible.


396  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

We  have  not  space  to  follow  Kepler’s  discoveries  here.  It  is
sufidcient  to  point  out  that  Kepler’s  first  law  led  him  to  the  discovery
of  the  second.  He  did  not,  hovrever,  see  that  the  third  law  is  con-
nected with  the  other  two.  He  regarded  it  as  an  independent
numerical  relation.  The  great  importance  of  Kepler’s  laws  is  that
they  made  possible  the  discovery  of  Newton’s  law  of  gravitation.  ^
From  the  point  of  view  from  which  we  are  concerned  with  these
discoveries  the  importance  of  Newton’s  law  of  the  inverse  square
can  be  summed  up  in  the  statement  that  it  succeeded  in  formulating
a single  rule  that  would  account  completely  for  the  planetary  motions.
From  this  law  Kepler’s  laws  can  be  deduced.  Further,  it  could  be
shown  that  ellipses  are  not  the  only  possible  orbits ; they  may,
under  other  circumstances,  be  parabolas  or  hyperbolas.  Thus  the
motions  of  comets  could  be  brought  within  the  same  descriptive
scheme.  This  scheme  is  in  fact  a constructive  synthesis.  All  the
facts  included  in  Ptolemy’s  mathematical  description,  in  Copernicus’
heliocentric  scheme  and  in  Kepler’s  three  laws  were  fitted  into  the
Newtonian  system.  But  they  were  not  merely  fitted  in ; they  could
be  deduced  from  it,  and,  theoretically,  could  have  been  deduced
before  they  had  been  observed.

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  Newton’s  theory  is  a constructive
description.  It  is  possible  here  only  to  enumerate  some  of  the
facts  that  are  connected  in  the  Newtonian  system  in  a way  that
renders  their  connexion  intelligible.  In  accordance  with  it  the  orbit
of  a comet  can  be  deduced,  given  that  we  know  an  instantaneous
position  of  the  comet  and  its  velocity  relative  to  the  sun.  The

1 This  development  may  be  briefly  summarized  here.  Kepler’s  Laws  are :

(1)  The  orbit  of  a planet  around  the  sun  is  an  ellipse  with  the  sun  at  a focus  ;

(2)  The  straight  line  joining  the  planet  to  the  sun  sweeps  out  equal  areas  in
equal  times,  i.e.  planetary  motions  are  in  conformity  with  the  law  of  areas ;

(3)  The  square  of  the  time  required  by  any  planet  to  describe  its  orbit  is  pro-
portional to  the  cube  of  the  major  axis  of  the  ellipse  described.  The  second  law
suggests  that  there  is  a force  at  all  times  directed  along  the  line  joining  the  sun
and  the  planet.  This  force  must  be  directed  towards  the  sun  since  the  orbit  is  a
closed  curve.  Newton,  by  considering  the  fi:rst  and  third  laws  together,  was
able  to  determine  the  precise  numerical  law  of  the  sun’s  attraction.  Since  the
elliptical  motion  is  referred  to  the  sun,  it  was  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  a
similar  attraction  existed  between  the  moon  and  the  earth.  In  a like  manner
Newton  was  able  to  show  that  the  weight  of,  for  example,  a cricket  ball,  is  due
to  the  attraction  of  the  earth.  He  further  showed  that  every  particle  of  matter
in  the  earth  attracts  every  particle  of  matter  in  the  ball.  Thus  the  phenomenon
of  weight  is  accounted  for  on  the  supposition  that  every  particle  of  matter  attracts
every  other  particle  of  matter.  Hence,  Newton  was  led  to  formulate  his  law  of
universal  attraction  as  follows : ‘ Every  particle  of  matter  attracts  every  other
particle  with  a force  varying  directly  as  the  product  of  their  masses  and  inversely
as  the  square  of  the  distance  that  separates  them.’  It  is  not  necessary  for  our
purpose,  nor  have  we  space,  to  refer  to  Newton’s  laws  of  motion,  or  to  show  their
connexion  with  his  theory.


THE  NATUHE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  THEORIES  397


precession  of  tlie  equinoxes  is  shown  to  be  a consequence  of  the
earth’s  radially  unsymmetrical  shape  and  the  law  of  the  inverse
square.  Such  apparently  independent,  disconnected  facts  as  the
phenomenon  of  the  tides,  planetary  motions,  the  precession  of  the
equinoxes,  the  phenomenon  of  weight,  the  motions  of  cyclones,  are
all  seen  to  be  consequences  of  the  law  of  universal  attraction.  Such
deductive  power  is  the  mark  of  a constructive  description.  It
matters  little  whether  we  use  the  word  explanatory  ” of  such  a
theory.  What  is  important  is  that  by  its  comprehensiveness,  by
its  fruitfulness  in  leading  to  new  discoveries,  in  suggesting  fresh
experiments  and  in  connecting  what  was  hitherto  disconnected  it
achieves  the  aim  of  science  in  making  the  multiplicity  of  sensible
fact  intelligible.  Such  a theory  may  be  said  to  explain  the  sensible
facts  that  constitute  its  data  since  it  is  not  only  based  upon  them
but  leads  deductively  back  to  them.  Further,  as  we  have  seen,
it  leads  on  to  other  sensible  facts,  which  were  not  known  and  thus
did  not  form  part  of  the  original  data.

The  mark  of  a constructive  description  is  its  simplicity  and  its
consequent  lack  of  unverified  assumptions.  All  the  facts  must  be
deducible  from  it.  A single  discrepancy  between  the  theory  and
a sensible  fact  is  hable  to  lead  to  its  rejection.  This  point  deserves
consideration.  It  can  be  illustrated  by  a simple  example.  It  will
be  remembered  that  an  irregularity  was  observed  in  the  orbit  of
Uranus  as  calculated  in  accordance  with  Newton’s  theory.  This
irregularity  constituted  a discrepant  fact  that  must  be  accounted
for.  There  were  two  ways  of  avoiding  the  discrepancy.  The  first
was  to  reject  the  theory  (viz.  Newton’s  law)  with  ■which  the  fact
is  discrepant.  The  second  was  to  introduce  an  ad  hoc  hypothesis
which  would  account  for  the  regularity  in  such  a way  as  to  remove
the  discrepancy.  The  Newtonian  theory  was  so  well  attested,  it
had  led  to  such  great  triumphs  that  it  was  then  unthinkable  that
it  should  be  abandoned.  It  is  well  known  that  the  second  alternative
was  adopted.  But— and  this  is  the  point  with  which  we  are  now
concerned — ^the  hypothesis  that  these  disturbances  were  due  to
another  planet  was  an  ad  hoc  hypothesis.  An  ad  hoc  hypothesis
is  an  hypothesis  introduced  in  order  to  explain  a single  fact  that
will  not  fit  in.  It  is  not  one  suggested  by  the  development  of  the
theory  itself.  If  we  can  appeal  to  an  ad  hoc  h3q)othesis  whenever
there  is  a discrepancy  between  theory  and  fact,  then  we  can  explain
everything  and  foretell  nothing.  An  ad  hoc  hypothesis  necessarily
explains  the  given  discrepant  fact,  since  it  has  been  introduced
solely  for  that  purpose.  But  its  explanatory  power  is  limited  ; it
is  usually  confined  to  the  single  fact  for  which  it  was  invoked.  In
the  case  of  the  Ncf  tune-hypothesis  tHs  objection  did  not  hold,  since
Neptune  was  subsequently  observed.  Thus  the  hypothesis  was  con-


398


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


firmed,  and  tlie  discrepant  fact  was  shown  to  he  in  accordance  with
Newton’s  theory.  This  confirmation  affords  another  striking  example
of  the  constructiveness  of  this  theory.  It  may  be  noted  that  Le
Terrier  subsequently  suggested  another  ad  hoc  hypothesis,  namely,
that  the  irregularities  in  the  orbit  of  Mercury  were  due  to  an  interior
planet,  which  he  forenamed  Vulcan.  But  careful  observation  has
failed  to  reveal  any  such  planet,  so  that  the  h3^othesis  is  discredited.  ^

The  other  alternative  mentioned  above  for  dealing  with  a fact
discrepant  with  a theory  was  to  reject  the  fundamental  assumptions
upon  which  the  theory  was  based.  This  was  the  course  followed
by  Einstein  to  account  for  the  negative  result  of  the  Michelson-
Morley  experiment  to  detect  the  earth’s  velocity  relative  to  the
ether.  2 In  spite  of  its  enormous  interest  for  students  of  scientific
method,  we  cannot  here  follow  the  development  of  Einstein’s  theory
of  relativity.  All  that  is  possible  is  to  call  attention  to  two  points
of  great  methodological  significance.  There  is  first  the  fact  that
the  discrepancy  was  extremely  minute ; nevertheless,  it  entailed
either  a multiplication  of  ad  hoc  hypotheses,  or  a radical  alteration
of  fundamental  assumptions.  That  an  extremely  delicate  experi-
ment should  necessitate  such  a result  is  possible  only  at  an  advanced
stage  of  a scientific  theory,  that  is,  ordy  when  the  theory  is  both
a comprehensive  co-ordination  of  facts  and  is  itself  a guide  to  further
experimental  inquiry ; in  other  words,  only  where  such  a scientific
theory  is  a constructive  description.  The  second  point  of  methodo-
logical significance  is  that  it  was  the  second  of  the  two  alternatives
that  was  preferable.  In  spite  of  the  success  and  immense  prestige  of
Newton’s  constructive  description  it  had  to  be  rejected  under  the
pressure  of  experimental  fact  unless  it  were  saved  by  the  assumption
of  ad  hoc  hypotheses.  A consideration  of  Einstein’s  procedure
illustrates  the  conditions  under  which  ad  hoc  hypotheses  may  be
admissible  in  a constructive  description.  This  may  be  brought  out
by  a comparison  with  the  Ne^yiune-hyfo thesis.  When,  as  in  this
case,  the  ad  hoc  hypothesis  is  verifiable,  and  suggests  an  explanation
of  the  discrepancy  which  is  of  a kind  already  familiar,  then  the
hypothesis  is  not  objectionable.  It  does  not  conflict  with  the  aim
of  science.  When,  however,  it  is  essentially  unverifiable  since  it
suggests  what  transcends  observation,  or  appeals  to  effects  which
neutrahze  pch  other  (as  was  the  case  with  the  LorenU-Fitzgerald
contraction),  then  it  is  not  admissible  except  as  a fis  alhr.  A
multiplication  of  ad  hoc  hypotheses  is  contrary  to  the  aim  of  science,

^The  irregularities  in  the  orbit  of  Mercury  have  now  been  explained  by
Einstein’s  bypothesis.

® The  negative  result  showed  experimentally  that  the  motion  of  the  earth  has
no  influence  upon  the  propagation  of  light  over  the  earth’s  surface.  (See  Max
Bom:  EinsUirCs  Theory  of  Relativity^  Chap.  V,  §14.)


THE  NATURE  OP  SCIENTIFIC  THEORIES  399


wHcli  seeks  the  greatest  possible  co-ordination  of  facts.  Every
additional  ad  hoc  hypothesis  marks  a breakdown  of  the  co-ordination.
Suppose,  for  instance,  a theory  X,  with  which  a given  fact  / is  dis-
crepant. We  may  assume  that  there  is  some  influence  A (mysterious
or  otherwise)  which  accounts  for  /—as  in  the  case  of  the  Neptmie-
hypothesis.  But,  in  subsequent  investigation,  A must  now  be  taken
into  account.  X combined  with  A will  lead  deductively  to  /,  since
A was  invoked  for  this  purpose  ; but  the  combination  XA  may  yield
other  results  different  from  those  that  would  be  yielded  by  X alone.
These  results  may  be  discrepant  with  XA,  although  they  would  not
have  been  discrepant  with  X alone,  or  with  a modification  of  X
other  than  its  combination  with  A.  It  will  then  be  necessary  to
introduce  another  ad  hoc  hypothesis,  B.  This  procedure  may  go
on  indefinitely.  The  theory  combined  with  these  ad  hoc  hypotheses
will  have  ceased  to  be  a constructive  description.  It  will  no  longer
permit  anticipation  of  the  facts  and  will  thus  not  be  a guide  to
experimental  investigation.  If,  now,  the  initial  assumptions  upon
which  X was  based  can  be  so  modified  that  the  discrepancies  dis-
appear without  the  postulation  of  ad  hoc  hypotheses,  this  modification
will  be  in  accordance  with  the  aim  of  science.  Such  a modification
may  be  slight,  or  it  may  be  so  great  as  to  constitute  a total  rejection
6i  X,  as  was  the  case  with  the  phlogiston  theory.

It  is  clear  that  the  greater  the  degree  of  co-ordination  achieved
by  a theory,  the  more  it  is  liable  to  be  upset  by  a small  discrepancy.
A constructive  description  possesses  a high  degree  of  co-ordination ;
it  is  coherent  with  respect  to  a comprehensive  range  of  facts.  It
follows  that  a constructive  description  is  more  fragile  than  a des-
cription eked  out  by  ad  hoc  hypotheses ; nevertheless,  in  spite  of
its  fragility,  it  is  more  satisfactory  to  the  scientist  who  aims  at
achieving  a comprehensive  theory  capable  of  anticipating  experi-
ment and  foretelling  what  will  be  observed.  A merely  descriptive
theory  has  no  need  to  reject  ad  hoc  hypotheses ; a theory  that  is  a
constructive  description  must  reject  them.


CHAPTER  XXI

THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION

‘We  do  seem  to  have  Kit  on  the  general  ground-plan  of  the  material  world,
however  inadequate  may  be  our  knowledge  of  the  details.  And  that  ground-
plan,  suggested  to  us  even  by  a superficial  observation  of  nature,  has  shown
itself  to  be  capable  of  statement  in  a more  and  more  rigid  and  exacting  form
as  we  have  investigated  nature  more  and  more  carefully.’ — (7.  D.  Broad.

§ 1.  THE  EAITH  OE  THE  SCIENTIST

SINCE  the  aim  of  the  scientist  is  so  to  co-ordinate  the  facts
of  sensible  experience  that  he  may  be  able  to  understand
them,  it  follows  that  he  believes  that  these  facts  are  sus-
ceptible of  such  co-ordination,  however  difficult  its  discovery  may
be.  The  scientist,  then,  believes  that  careful  search  conducted
along  the  right  lines  will  reveal  an  order  in  nature  that  is  intelligible.
He  admits  that  this  order  is  not  apparent ; that  he  constantly
finds  a multiformity  where  he  was  expecting  a uniformity.  He  sees
what  appears  to  be  the  same  cause  producing  different  effects,  and
what  appears  to  be  the  same  effect  being  produced  by  different
causes.  But  he  maintains  that  this  is  only  an  appearance,  and
that,  if  he  looks  more  closely,  he  will  find,  in  the  first  case,  partial
difference  in  the  alleged  cause,  and  in  the  second  case,  partial  differ-
ence in  the  alleged  effect.  It  is  upt  only  that  he  refuses  to  use
the  words  cause  and  effect  imless  this  be  so  ; he  beheves  that
one  occurrence  is  so  related  to  another  that  the  occurring  of  the
one  justifies  him  in  expecting  the  other  to  occur.  If  this  be  a
jcorrect  account  of  the  scientist’s  attitude,  we  may  agree  with  Pro-
cessor Whitehead  that  ^ there  can  be  no  living  science  unless  there'
fis  a widespread  instinctive  conviction  in  the  existence  of  an  Order
of  Things y and  in  particular,  of  an  Order  of  Nature  If  the  scientist
were  to  believe  that  everything  happened  chaotically,  that  natural
occurrences  were  not  susceptible  of  any  type  of  order  which  he
would  be  capable  of  discovering,  he  would  feel  powerless  in  the
face  of  Nature,  and  would  have  no  motive  to  research.  That  there
are  discoverable  uniformities  in  Nature  is  a belief-  essential  to  the
work  of  the  scientist.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  science
does  not  begin  until  men  have  discovered,  or  beheye  tliemsetves
^Science  and  the  Modern  World,  p.  6*

400


THE  PEOBLEM  OF  INDUCTION  401

to  have  discovered,  what  in  Chapter  XV  we  called  the  "minor
uniformities  of  natum Professor  Whitehead  goes  so  far  as  to
say  that  " the  incredible  labours  of  the  scientists  would  be  without
hope  ’ were  it  not  for  " the  inexpugnable  belief  that  every  detailed
occurrence  can  be  correlated  with  its  antecedents  in  a perfectly
definite  manner  exeinplifying  general  principlesj.^  This  is,  perhaps,
an  overstatement.  The  scientist  is  quite  ready  to  leave  out  of
account  a number  of  details  which  do  not  fit  into  his  scheme.  Thus
the  physic^  ignores  the  qualitative  aspects  of  experience,  such  as
colour,  warmth,  sound ; the  physiologist  is  ready  to  ignore  mind.
But  it  is  .true  that  the  scientist  seeks  so  to  correlate  one  occurrence
with  another  that  their  connexion  shall  be  intelligible.  This  desire
to  understand  what  happens  leads  to  the  procedure  which  we  des-
!j  cribed  in  Chapter  XVIII,  whereby  for  qualitative  variety  the  scientist
i|  substitutes  guantitative.,  variation.  The  purpose  of  this  substitu-
tion is  to  eimibit  what  happens  as  exemplif3dng  general  principles,
that  is  to  say,  as  obeying  laws.  Thus  the  faith  of  the  scientist
can  be  summed  up  in  the  statement : What  happens  happens  in
accordance  with  laws,  and  these  laws  are  such  that  we  can  discover
[ them.

It  is  important  to  observe  that  both  these  articles  of  faith  j-re
necessary  to  science.  It  is  not  sufficient  that  nature  should  be
or'dered ; it  is  further  necessary  that  this  order  should  be  discoverable
by  us.  Science,  indeed,  is  nothing  but  the  search  for  an  order  that
is  not  apparent.^  But  if  nature  exhibited  a t]^e  of  order  of  un-
imaginable complexity,  finite  minds  could  not  discover  it.  Accord-
ingly, the  second  article  of  the  faith  of  the  scientist  demands  that
certain  conditions  must  be  fulfilled.  This  point  has  been  so  well
put  by  Dr.  Broad  that  his  statement  of  it  rnay  be  quoted  in  full :

‘ The  intelligibility  of  the  existent  world  does  imply  that  it  and  every
part  of  it  obeys  the  laws  of  logic : but  it  requires  more  than  this.  Nature
might  obey  thejawanf  logic ; but,  unless  at  least  two  further  conditions  were
fulfilled,  it  would  still  be  an  unintelligible  chaos  to  the  scientific  investigator.
The  first  condition  is  that  changes  shall  be  subject  to  general  laws,  such  as
the  laws  of  motion,  gravitation,  etc.  This  is  in  no  way  implied  by  the  fact
that  nature  obeys  the  laws  of  logic.  But  this  is  not  enough.  Nature  might
obey  the  laws  of  logic,  and  every  change  in  the  existent  might  be  subject  to
* general  laws,  and  yet  nature  might  be  utterly  unintelligible.  The  laws  might
be  too  numerous  or  too  complex  for  us  to  unravel ; they  might  be  such  that
it  was  practically  impossible  for  us  to  isolate  any  one  phenomenon  from  all
the  rest  even  to  a first  degree  of  approximation ; or  again,  our  situation  in
nature  might  be  so  unfortunate  that  our  sensations  came  to  us  in  such  an
order  that  they  failed  to  reveal  the  laws  which  really  are  present  in  natmre.
The  scientist  who  assumes  that  nature  is  and  will  always  remain  intelligible
must  therefore  assunm  that  nature  obeys  other  laws  in  addition  to  those  of
[logic ; that  these  are  of  such  a kind  that  we  shall  be  able  to  disentangle  them

1 loc.  cit.,  p.  17.  * ® Cf.  Chap.  XIII,  § 1 abova

26


402


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


if  we  try  patiently ; and  that  we  are  not  fixed  in  such  an  exceptional  corner  of
nature  or  so  badly  provided  with  sense-organs  that  all  our  efforts  will  be  in
vain.’  ^

Tlie  procedure  of  science  is  based  upon  tbe  assumption  that
the  existent  world  satisfies  these  conditions.  The  scientist  has  faith
in  the  competence  of  his  sensory  experience  to  reveal  an  order  in
nature  which  extends  beyond  the  limits  of  his  own  experience.
Rnifipfift  involves  abstraction.  The  scientist  needs  to  isolate  to
some  extent  thepEenomenon  which  he  is  investigating.  He  believes
that  this  abstraction  does  not  involve  distortion.  He  believes  also
that  his  situation  in  nature  is  not  so  peculiar  that  he  cannot  generalize
beyond  the  limits  of  human  experience.

There  is  another  article  in  the  faith  of  the  scientist.  He  believes
in  the  simplicity  of  nature.  In  so  far  as  some  degree  of  simplicity
is  necessary  in  order  that  natural  laws  should  be  discovered,  the
belief  in  simplicity  follows  from  the  belief  that  nature  is  intelligible.
This  may  be  called  methodological  simplicity.  But,  as  we  have  seen,
the  scientist  goes  beyond  thisj fmFe  accepts  simplicity  as  a critenon ^
to  enable  him  to  choose  between  different  types  of  conceivable
order  which  may  be  alike  appropriate  to  the  sensible  facts.  He
believes  in  an  ideal  simplicity.  This  preference  for  simplicity  is  no
doubt  aesthetic,  but  he  usually  does  not  hesitate  to  assert  that  nature
is  really  simple  Thus  the  scientist  believes  that  nature  is  not
only  intelligible^  Jbu^k  beautiful.®

§ 2.  THE  PROBLEM  OF  JUSTIFICATION

The  beliefs  that  constitute  the  faith  of  the  scientist  are  not  all
of  the  same  kind  but  t^y  are  alike  in  being  unprovable.  We  must
distinguish  between  two  kinds.  On  the^one  hand,  are  3ie  assump-
tions which  follow  from  the  belief  in  the  intelligibility  of  nature,  j
Since  the  first  condition  of  science  is  that  scientific  method  should

^ The  Mind  and  its  Place  in  Nature,  pp.  509-10.

® See  Chap.  XX,  § 3 above.

® Cf.  Poincard : Science  and  Method : ‘ The  scientist  does  not  study  nature
because  it  is  useful  to  do  so.  HM  studies  it  because  he  takes  pleasure  in  it,
and  he  takes  pleasure  in  it  because  it  is  beautiful.  If  nature  were  not  beauti-
ful it  would  not  be  worth  knowing,  and  life  would  not  be  worth  living.  I
am  not  speaking,  of  course,  of  that  beauty  which  strikes  the  senses,  of  the
beauties  of  qualities  and  appearances.  . . . What  I mean  is  that  more
intimate  beauty  which  comes  from  the  harmonious  order  of  its  parts,  and  which
a pure  intelligence  can  grasp.  . . . Intellectual  beauty  is  self-sufficing,  and
it  is  for  it,  more  perhaps  than  for  the  future  good  of  humanity,  that  the  scientist
condemns  himself  to  long  and  painful  labours.  It  is,  then,  the  search  for
this  special  beauty,  the  sense  of  the  harmony  of^he  world,  that  makes  us
select  the  facts  best  suited  to  contribute  to  this  harmony ; just  as  the  artist
selects  those  features  of  his  sitter  which  complete  the  portrait  and  give  it
character  and  I’fe.’  (Eng.  Trans.,  p.  22.)  ’


THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION


403


be  possible,  these  assumptions  may  be  described  as  the  postulates
of  scientific  method’’.  The  discussion  of  these  postulates  raises
the  special  problem  of  inductive  method,  which  will  be  considered
in  the  next  section.  On  the  other  hand  are  those  beliefs  that  go
beyond  the  nainimum  requirements  of  scientific  method.  These  we
must  now  discuss.

, These  beliefs  take  the  form  of  demands  that  nature  must  conform
to  certain  conditions.  The  description  of  them  as  demands  ” is
due  to  Professor  L.  J.  Russell.  He  speaks  of  them  as  constituting
a ‘ ^et  of  generalizations  which  guida  the  investigator  ’ which  are
‘ so 'widelETEOT  in  their  nature,  so  tenaciously

held  to  in  the  face  of  contrary  evidence,  that  they  seem  to  express
something  in  naan’s  attitude  to  the  facts  rather  than  to  express
the  mere  facts  themselves  ’.  He  points  out  that  these  demands
resemble  h3q)otheses  in  being  anticipations  of  experience,  but  ^ are
distinguished  from  hjrpotheses  in  being  more  truculent.  They  are
challenges.  They  insist  that  things  must  lae  so,  and  challenge  aU
coipaers  to  show,  if  things  are  not  so,  how  this  is  possible  There
^ perhaps  a further  characteristic,  not  mentioned  by  Professor
^Russell,  that  distinguishes  such  demands  from  postulates  of  scien-
tiSc  method.  These  demands,  save  for  the  one  important  exception
'^of  the  demand  for  intelligibility,  do  not  seem  to  be  involved  in  the
possibility  of  there  being  any  science  at  all.  They  assert  rather
that  certain  very  general  characteristics  are  true  of  the  universe.
The  justification  of  these  demands  is  consequently  a problem  for
metaphysics.  The  discussion  of  such  a problem  lies  outside  the
scope  of  this  book.  Nevertheless,  the  student  of  scientific  method
must  take  note  of  these  demands,  since  they  have  in  fact  to  a not
inconsiderable  extent  influenced  the  procedure  of  the  scientist.  Nor
are  they  always  clearly  seen  to  be  different  in  kind  from  methodo-
logical postulates.  They  have  influenced  scientific  thought  by
shaping  the  scientific  ideal  of  explanation  and  by  leading  the  scien-
tist to  the  discovery  of  fruitful  ideas.  From  this  point  of  view
these  demands  might  be  described  as  regulative  principles  guiding
the  process  of  scientific  research.  If  it  be  granted,  as  surely  it  must,
that  such  regulative  principles  are  operative  in  the  development
of  scientific  inquiry,  then  no  pure^  empirical  logic  is  adequate  to
the  nature  of  scientific  iflethod.  (The  main  defect  of  Mill’s  con-
ception of  scientific  method  lies  in  his  failure  to  do  justice  to  the
importance  of  hypothesis.^  The  history  of  science  shows  clearly

1 Proc.  Arist  Soc,,  N.S.,  XXIV,  “ Science  and  PMlosopliy  Professor
^ Russell  includes  in  these  demands  the  demand  for  consistency  and  for  non-
coutradiotion.  It  seems  to  me,  however,  that  these  purely  logical  demands
stMicroii  aT  different  footing  from  the  rest,  since  they  involve  principles  that
are  presupposed  in  all  thinking.  Cf.  Chap.  XXIV  below.


404


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


tliat  tie  great  discoverers  are  those  who  have  viewed  the  facts  in
the  light  of  a guiding  h3rpothesis.^  No  doubt  a preconceived  idea
as  to  what  the  facts  must  be  may  hinder  the  investigator  in  ascer-
taining what  the  facts  are.  But  to  ^me  to  the  facts  wMLmjpie-
conceived  idea  is  to  prosecute  a directionless  inquiry.  The  successful
invesSpioFworE^^  the  dSecSon^  a guiShg  idea  but  does
not  force  the  facts  to  fit  into  it.  To  belittle  the  part  played  by]
hypothesis  in  scientific  inquiry  is  to  make  the  stupid  mistake  of
forgetting  that  “ the  facts  ” do  not  simply  present  themsdves  and
that  the  order  which  the  scientist  seeks  is  not  apparent.  (^An  em-^
pirical  logic  which  depreciates  the  value  of  hypotheses  would  pay
but  scant  consideration  to  the  importance  of  regulative  principles."]
We  shall,  however,  make  the  assumption — ^which  the  history  of
science  would  appear  abundantly  to  justify — ^that  regulative  prin-
ciples (or,  as  Professor  Russell  calls  them, ' demands  ’)  are  an  essential
element  in  scientific  method.

It  is  perhaps  impossible  to  enumerate  all  the  demands,  or  regu-
lative principles,  that  have  guided  scientific  thinking.  We  shall
consider  only  two  groups,  namely,  demands  for  identity,  jersistence
^d  continuity,  and  the  demand  for  simplicity.

There  seems  to  be  a deep-rooted  tendency  in  the  human  mind
to  seek  what  is  identical,  in  the  sense  of  something  that  persists
through  change.  Consequently,  the  desire  for  explanation  seems
to  be  satisfied  only  by  the  discovery  that  what  appears  to  be  new
and  difierent  was  there  all  the  time.  Hence  the  search  for  an  under-
lying identity,  a persistent  stuff,  a substance  that  is  conserved  in
spite  of  qualitative  changes  and  in  terms  of  which  these  changes
can  be  explained.  Idejxfcity,  as  applied  to  objects,  involves  dis-
creteness. This  remains  identical  and  is  thereby  distinguishable
Simi  The  influence  of  this  demand  can  be  seen  in  the  history
of  atomic  theories  of  matter  and  in  the  abortive  theory  of  phlogiston.^
The  biological  theory  of  Mendelism  may  afiord  another  example.
It  is  because  they  satisfy  this  demand  that  principles  of  conservation
are  so  plausible.  The  quantitative  persistence  represented  by  the
concept  of  energy  has  not  infrequently  been  regarded  as  persistence
of  stuff  through  change.  What  is  conserved  is  differently  conceived  |
at  different  stages  of  scientific  thought ; so  long  as  something  remains
identical  it  does  not  seem  to  matter  much  what  it  is.  To  the  influence
of  this  demand  may  perhaps  be  attributed  the  scientific  ideal  of
mathematical  description.  The  relations  between  occurrences  can
be  expressed  in  mathematical  terms  only  when  they  can  be  measured.
But  measurement  is  possible  only  when  what  is  measured  can  be
reduced  to  qualitative  homogeneity  with  only  quantitative  differences.

1 Cf.  Chap.  XVI,  § 2 above.

* See  Meyerson : Identity  and  Reality,  Chaps.  IV-VL


THE  PROBLEM  OF  INDUCTION


405


It  tlien  becomes  natural  to  suppose  that  these  quantitative  differences
are  differences  in  the  quantity  of  the  same  stuff.  Hence,  the  popu-
larity of  substance  theories  in  science.  Such  theories  as  those  we
have  mentioned  not  only  go  beyond  an3d}hing  that  is  observable ;
they  are  noi^even  suggested  by  what  is  observed.  The  demand  for
continuity  is  closely  bound  up  with  the  demand  for  persistence  and
identity.  There  must  be  no  sudden  breaks,  no  arbitrary  discon-
tinuities. The  appearance  of  such  discontinuities  presents  a problem  ;
the  discovery  that,  in  spite  of  appearances,  something  identical  is
conserved  is  felt  to  be  an  acceptable  solution.

The  demand  for  simplicity  in  so  far  as  it  is  a demand  for  sim-
plicity of  stuff  takes  the  form  of  the  demand  for  identity.  But
the  demand  for  simplicity  takes  another  form  in  which  it  appears
as  the  fundamental  regulative  principle.  We  have  already  spoken
of  this  principle  of  simplicity  as  guiding  thinkers  to  the  choice  of
an  order.  1 From  the  point  of  view  from  which  we  are  now  con-
cerned with  this  principle  it  might  better  be  named  the  principle
of  unitii,  since  it  expresses  the  regulative  ideal  of  what  MaxPlanck
has  called  ^ the  unity  of  the  world  picture  A completely  coherent
constructive  description  would  realize  this  ideal  if,  and  only  if,  it
^were  completely  comprehensive.  This  is  the  ideal  that  has  inspired
those  thinkers  who  have  hoped  ultimately  to  reduce  all  the
sciences  to  physics  : their  work  is  controlled  by  the  principle  of
unity.  Planck  has  pointed  out  that  this  ideal  is  attainable  only
byJbiLjelun^  ..element  from  science.

Each  of  the  sciences  has  grown  out  of  the  study  of  a particular  range
of  sense-perceptions.  The  physical  sciences  are  obviously  associated
with  special  senses,  heat,  light,  sound.  But  in  their  development
they  have  been  so  completely  freed  from  their  original  associations
that  ^ the  physical  definitions  of  sound,  colour,  and  temperature  are
to-day  in  no  way  associated  with  immediate  perceptions  due  to  the
special  senses,  but  sound  and  colour  are  defined  respectively  by  the
frequency  and  wave-length  of  oscillations,  and  temperature  is  mea-
sured theoretically  on  an  absolute  temperature  scale  corresponding
to  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics,  or,  in  the  kinetic  theory  of
gases,  as  the  kinetic  energy  of  molecular  motion.  ...  It  is  in  no
way  described  as  a feeling  of  warmth  In  this  way  unity,  with
the  simplification  that  results  from  unity,  is  achieved  throughout
the  domain  of  the  physical  sciences.  This  development  cannot  be
discussed  here.  Its  importance  is  summed  up  by  Planck  in  the
statement : ‘ we  may  say  briefly  that  the  feature  of  the  whole

^ See  Chap.  XVI,  § 1 above.

2 A Survey  of  Physics,  Chap.  I.  Cf.  also  Max  Born,  Einstein^ s Theory  of
Relativity,  Introduction,  especially  pp.  2-3f

5*  Planck,  op.  cit.,  p.  5,


406


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


I developmeiit  of  theoretical  physics,  up  to  the.  present^  is  tte  uni-
Ificatiou  of  its  systems  wMcli  has  been,  obtained  by  a certain  elixmiia-
Itibh"  of  the  anthropomorphous  elements,  particularly  the  specific
Isense^perceptipns  In  accordance  with  the  principle  of  unity,
or  simplicity,  the  complex  has  been  reduced  to  the  simple.  The
^extraordinary  success  of  this  procedure  has  strengthened  the  belief
that  everything  that  happens  in  the  universe  must  be  capable  of
being  comprehended  in  a few  principles  of  great  comprehensiveness
and  simplicity,  such,  for  example,  as  the  inverse  square  law  of  force,
or  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics.  The  belief  that  ^ every
detailed  occurrence  can  be  correlated  with  its  antecedents  in  a
perfectly  definite  manner  exemplifying  general  principles  ’ appears
to  find  its  justification  as  physics  develops.  Professor  H.  Lamb,
speaking  of  the  development  of  theoretical  physics  from  Euler  and
Lagrange  to  Kelvin  and  Eayleigh,  says :

* From  the  mathematical  point  of  view  its  most  striking  achievement  is
the  wide-embracing  scheme  of  relations,  which  can  be  applied  to  so  many
diverse  subjects,  with  hardly  more  than  a change  in  the  names  of  the  various
concepts.  . . . That  such  generality  should  have  been  attained  is  an  instance
of  the  constant  endeavour  of  mathematics  to  reduce  to  simple  laws  the  infinite
variety  of  nature.’  ^

Thus  the  infinite  variety  of  nature  is  reduced  to  order  and  is  rendered
intelligible  by  abandoning  the  common-sense  form  of  explanation.

' The  explanation  of  the  complex  in  terms  of  the  simple  involves,  as
Professor  Eddington  has  pointed  out,  ' the  paradox  of  explaining
the  familiar  in  terms  of  the  Unfamiliar  What  is  sought  is  not
familiarity  but  the  recognition  of  an  order  which  makes  possible
detailed  and  verifiable  deductions.  Whether  the  principle  of  unity
can  be  safely  taken  as  a gmde  throughout  the  whole  domain  of  the
natural  sciences  may  well  be  doubted.  The  scientist  does  not  seem^
able  to  avoid  having  faith  in  the  ultimate  simplicity  and  unity  of
nature.  He  believes  that  nature  is  an  extremely  coherent  system
whose  structure  can  be  expressed  in  very  simple,  and  consequently,
very  general,  laws.  Quantum  phenomena  serve  to  remind  us  of
the  dangers  of  this  belief.  The  search  for  unity  might  mislead  the
scientist  as  it  has  so  often  misled  the  metaphysician.^  The  safeguard
of  the  scientist  lies  in  his  experimental  habit  of  mind.

§3.  THE  SPECIAL  PBOBLEM  OE  SCIENTIFIC  METHOD

We  have  seen  that  the  demand  that  the  existent  world  should
be  intelligible  involves  the  assumption  that  certain  conditions  hold
with  regard  to  the  way  things  happen  and  with  regard  to  the  relation

^ loc.  cifc.  ® The  Evolution  of  Mathematical  Physics  (1924).

® Mind^  April,  1920,  p.  145.

‘We  need  to  remember  Whitehead’s  dictum : * Seek  simplicity,  and  distrust  it/


THE  PROBLEM  OP  INDUCTION


407


of  tie  scientist  to  nature.  Unless  tiese  conditions  are  fulfilled  the
scientist  will  not  be  able  to  discover  the  order  appropriate  to  natural
occurrences.  Accordingly  he  postulates  the  fulfilment  of  these
conditions.  That  these  conditions  must  be  fulfilled  is  neither  self-
evident  nor  deducible  from  premisses  that  are  self-evident.  Equally,
however,  their  fulfilment  is  incapable  of  disproof.  Hence,  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  scientist  the  sufficient  justification  for  postulating
these  conditions  is  that  he  would  not  otherwise  be  moved  to  in-
vestigate nature.  It  is  enough  for  him  that  their  assumption  leads
to  interesting  and  verifiable  conclusions.  The  logician,  however,
is  concerned  to  ask  whether  the  method  whereby  these  conclusions
are  obtained  is  valid.  The  special  problem  of  scientific  method
consists,  first,  in  ascertaining  what  exactly  we  should  need  to  know
with  regard  to  the  constitution  of  the  existent  world  if  scientific
method  is  to  yield  valid  conclusions;  secondly,  in  attempting  to
ascertain  whether  or  not  we  can  have  such  knowledge.  It  is  im-
portant to  be  quite  clear  as  to  what  exactly  this  problem  \b.  No
one  denies  that  we  all  do  in  fact  believe  many  general  propositions
with  regard  to  the  existent  world.  Thus  we  believe,  for  instance,
that  arsenic  is  poisonous,  that  fire  warms,  that  water  quenches
thirst,  that  lions  are  tawny,  and  so  on.  We  believe  that  Newton’s
law  of  gravitation  is  approximately  true  within  the  limits  of  the
solar  system,  and  that  Einstein’s  law  of  gravitation  is  a more  exact
formulation  of  what  happens.  To  say  that  we  believe  these  proposi-  • '
tions  is  to  say  that  wefeel  certain  that  they  are  true.  But  certainty
is  an  attitude  of  ^ a.  t^lihiker  to  a given  proposition.  ReSection
will  convince  us  that  we  have  often  felt  certain  with  regard  to  a
given  proposition,  but  that  later  we  have  felt  doubtful,  or  have  come
to  be  certain  in  the  opposite  direction.  Now  this  change  of  attitude
is  never  experienced  with  regard  to  propositions  that  have  been
validly  deduced  from  propositions  accepted  as  axiomatic.  Every
one  would  admit  that  his  certainty  with  regard  to  a proposition
such  as  2 + 2 = 4,  or  a proposition  such  as  The  diagonals  of  a square
bisect  one  another ^ is  different  from  his  certainty  with  regard  to  pro-
positions such  as  Mre  warms,  or  All  crows  are  black,  or  Metals  expand
when  heated,  or  Rhubarb  leaves  contain  poisonous  acids.  Probably
no  one  would  deny  that  the  latter  four  propositions  might  be  false
even  though  every  one  does  in  fact  believe  them  to  be  true.  We
might  come  to  feel  less  certain  of  their  truth.  It  is  only  with  regard
! to  propositions  that  assert  maybters^of  fact  that  we  have  these  chang-  ^
, ing  attitudes.  Such  propositions  are  those  with  regard  to  the  existent
world ; they  include,  therefore,  all  the  propositions  asserted  in  the
natural  sciences.  These  are  the  propositions  reached  by  inductive
reasoning.

Now  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  all  induction  rests  upon  simple


408


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


enumeration  and  tlie  method  of  hypothesis.  In  using  hypotheses
to  establish  inductive  conclusions  deductive  reasoning  is  employed.
Mr.  Russell  has  asserted  that  ^ in  the  final  form  of  a perfected  science,
it  would  seem  that  everjrbhing  ought  to  be  deductive  Even  were
this  the  case,  which  seems  unlikely,  the  ‘ final  form  of  a perfected
science  ’ could  not  be  reached  without  the  aid  of  inductive  inference.
Unless  this  inductive  inference  can  be  assumed  to  be  valid,  the
^perfected  science’  would  reduce  to  a deductive  system  which
might,  or  might  not,  have  application  to  the  existent  world.  Thus
Dr.  Broad  appears  to  be  right  in  saying  that  ^ whilst  the  inductions
of  all  advanced  sciences  make  great  use  of  deduction,  they  can  never
be  reduced  without  residue  to  that  process It  follows,  then,
•that  the  validity  of  scientific  method  rests  upon  the  validity  of
I induction.

Induction  by  simple  enumeration  is  of  the  form : All  observed
S^s  have  been  P,  therefore  all  S^s  are  P.  Since  the  observed  S^s  are
supposed  not  to  be  all  the  S^s  there  are,  this  inference  proceeds
from  a premiss  with  regard  to  some  S^s  to  a conclusion  with  regard
to  all  S's,  It  is  consequently  formally  invalid.  A formal  fallacy
is  also  involved  in  the  inference  that  a given  hypothesis  is  true
because  all  the  consequences  deduced  from  it  have  been  verified.
In  this  case  the  inference  is  of  the  form : If  H,  then  Cj  . . . ;

but  Cj  . . . Cn ; therefore  H [H  stands  for  the  hypothesis,  Ci  . . .
for  the  consequences).  This  inference  clearly  commits  the  fallacy
/of  affirming  the  consequent  (or  implicate). '^Induction  is  thus
not  a formally  valid  mode  of  inference.  The  most  we  can  say
is  that  since  do  occur,  and  since  these  are  consequences

of  H,  it  is  at  least  probable  that  H is  true.  The  plain  man  is  likely
to  assent  to  this  statement  with  certain  reservations.  He  recognizes
that  conclusions  derived  from  simple  enumeration  are  precarious,
and  he  knows  that  some  hjTpotheses  have  been  rejected  even  though
they  led  to  verified  consequences.^  Hence,  on  reflection,  he  is  likely
i to  admit  that  conclusions  derived  from  simple  enumeration  or  from
• the  use  of  hj^potheses  cannot  be  more  than  probable  however  strong
^may  be  his  belief  in  them.  With  regard  to  some  inductive  conclu-
sions he  will  continue  to  feel  certainty  because  in  inferring  them  he
makes  assumptions  that  do  not  enter  explicitly  into  the  reasoning.

^ Our  Knowledge  of  the  Eternal  World,  p.  36.

2 Mind,  Oct.,  1918,  p.  389.  The  two  articles  “ On  the  Kelation  between
Induction  and  Probability  ” (from  the  first  of  which  this  quotation  is  taken)
contain  by  far  the  clearest  and  shortest  account  of  the  problem  of  induction.
The  more  advanced  student  should  refer  to  Dr.  Broad’s  paper  on  “ Principles
of  Problematic  Induction”  in  Proc,  Arist  Soc.,  N.S.,  XXVIII.  To  these
three  articles  I owe  most  of  what  I have  to  say  with  regard  to  the  special
problem  of  scientific  method.

®§ee  Chap.  XVJ  abov^.


THE  PEOBLEM  OF  INDUCTION


409


We  shall  see  later  the  importance  of  this  distinction  between  those
inductive  conclusions  which  we  regard  as  certain  and  those  which
we  admit  to  be  only  probable.

If  an  inductive  conclusion  be  stated  in  terms  of  probability  no
logical  fallacy  is  involved,  since  it  is  not  invalid  to  pass  from  the
premiss  All  observed  S^s  are  P to  the  conclusion  That  all  S^s  are  P’s
is  {more  or  less)  'probable?-  This  argument  will  require  as  a premiss
some  proposition  concerning  probability.  Since  probability  is  a
relation  holding  between  propositions,  assertions  of  probability  are
logical  principles  which  are  independent  of  matters  of  fact.  But
modern  logicians  have  shown  that  it  is  not  possible  to  state  any
principles  of  probability  which  would  enable  us  to  assign  any  iSnite
probability  to  an  inductive  conclusion  unless  certain  assumptions
are  made  with  regard  to  the  constitution  of  the  existent  world.  ^
This  contention  cannot  be  established  here,  but  it  may  be  possible
to  indicate  the  sort  of  difficulty  that  arises  when  an  attempt
is  made  to  say  what  degree  of  probability  attaches  to  a given
inductive  conclusion.  For  this  purpose  we  may  consider  con-
clusions derived  from  simple  enumeration,  taking  xmcomplicated
cases.

Given  the  premiss  All  observed  S’s  are  P we  may  wish  to  con-
clude either  (1)  The  next  S to  he  observed  will  be  P,  or  (2)  All  S’s
whatever  will  be  P.^  It  has  been  usual  to  express  the  probability


of  the  conclusion  in  case  (1)  by  the  fraction


m + 1
w + 2’


where  m stands


for  the  number  of  S’s  that  have  been  observed  to  be  P.  This  frac-


tion has  been  reached  on  the  assumption  that  being  P and  being
not  P are  equally  likely  alternatives.  But  it  is  easy  to  see  that
this  assumption  is  not  usually  justified.  If  we  are  evaluating  the
probability  that  a penny  thrown  up  in  the  air  will  fall  down  with
heads  up,  then  the  probability  can  be  represented  by  |,  for  it  is
assumed  that  only  two  alternatives  are  possible  since  the  penny  wiU
not  remain  balanced  on  its  edge.  The  alternatives  (a)  It  is  heads,
(b)  It  is  tails,  are  of  the  same  form  and  are  equally  likely.  But  the
alternatives  (a)  S is  P,  (b)  S is  not  P,  are  not  of  the  same  form,
since  there  may  be  an  infinite  number  of  ways  in  which  S is  not  P.


Hence,  in  such  cases,  it  is  impossible  to  evaluate  the  fraction


m + 1
m “4“


In  case  (2)  a further  difficulty  arises,  since,  if  m represents  the  ob-
served, and  n the  total  number  of  observed  and  unobserved  instances


^ In  this  conclusion  the  subject  is  not  All  8^s  but  All  S^s  are  P,  hence  there
is  no  illicit  distribution.  (See  Br.  Broad’s  article,  p.  391.)

^ See  J.  M.  Keynes,  Treatise  on  Probability ; 0.  B.  &oad,  loo.  oit. ; J.  Mcod,
Geometry  and  Induction,

»gi  0.  B.  Broad^  Proc,  Arist  8oc.^  N.S.,  XXVIII,  § 1,


410


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


of  S,  tlie  probability  fraction  would  be  and  if  n is  not  known,

tbe  fraction  cannot  ba  evaluated.  Moreover,  in  tbe  case  of  all  in-
ductions with  regard  to  natural  kinds,  or  with  regard  to  occurrences
in  nature,  the  number  of  unobserved  cases  will  be  immensely  greater
than  the  number  of  observed  cases.  It  is  clear  that  the  greater  the
amount  by  which  n exceeds  m the  smaller  the  fraction  will  be,
hence  the  less  the  probability.  Even,  therefore,  if  we  assume  that
the  alternatives  are  equally  likely  we  shall  not  be  able  to  obtain
a conclusion  having  more  than  a very  low  degree  of  probability.
The  assumption  that  the  alternatives  are  equally  likely  is  an  assump-
tion with  regard  to  the  constitution  of  the  existent  world,  namely,
that  we  are  situated  in  a region  of  nature  that  is  not  exceptional.
Granted  this  assumption  we  may  get  a low  degree  of  probability
that  a given  number  of  the  observed  S's  wiU  be  P,  but  we  cannot
get  more  than  a low  degree  of  probability.

This  may  be  made  clearer  by  taking  as  an  example  the  inductive
conclusion  All  crows  are  blach.  The  probability  of  this  conclusion

m } X

can  be  represented,  as  before,  by  The  number  of  unobserved

crows  must  greatly  exceed  the  number  of  observed  crows,  so  that
the  fraction  must  be  very  small  since  n includes  both  the  observed
and  the  unobserved  instances.  Moreover,  the  same  crow  may  have
been  observed  more  than  once,  in  which  case  m will  be  assumed  to
be  greater  than  it  in  fact  is.  Nor  is  it  true  that  any  crow  is  as  likely
to  be  observed  as  any  other ^ owing  to  the  fact  that  the  observations
are  confined  to  certain  regions  of  space,  and  that  crows  not  yet  born
cannot  be  observed.  Thus  it  does  not  seem  plausible  to  maintain
that  the  selection  of  instances  can  be  regarded  as  a fair  selection,
that  is  a selection  of  typical  instances,  taken  at  random.  But,  as
Dr.  Broad  has  shown,  ' when  we  know  that  a fair  selection  ” has
not  been  observed  the  probability  of  a general  law  must  fall  below

and  can  never  rise  above  the  value  ^ ^


^ which  it  reaches  if  the
n + l

observed  selection  be  a fair  one.’  ^ Nor  is  the  case  better  if  we
are  concerned  with  occurrences  instead  of  with  substances  such  as
crows.  Hence,  we  must  admit  that  the  principles  of  probability
alone  cannot  enable  us  to  reach  inductive  conclusions  that  have
any  considerable  degree  of  probability.

It  is  then  necessary  to  inquire  what  must  be  assumed  with
regard  to  the  constitution  of  the  existent  world  if  inductive  generahza-
tions  are  to  have  any  considerable  degree  of  probability.  The
problem  of  induction  may  be  reduced  to  the  following  statement :

^loo.  oit.,  p.  396,


THE  PEOBLEM  OF  INDUCTION


411


We  observe  m instances  having  in  common  the  properties  . 0^

and  W.  We  desire  to  conclud^e  that  everything  which  possesses  the
selection  of  properties  0^  ...  0g  possesses  also  the  property  W,
There  are  also  a set  of  properties  /i  . . . /^  such  that  each  of  these
properties  belong  to  some,  but  none  to  aU,  of  the  m instances.  The
0 properties  with  W constitute  the  positive  analogy  ; the /properties
constitute  the  negative  analogy.  In  both  cases  the  total  analogy
may  be  assumed  to  exceed  the  known  analogy.  It  is  clear  that
not  all  the  0 properties  can  be  relevant  to  the  generalization,  since
all  the  m instances  agree  in  having  been  observed,  and  occurring
within  certain  limits  of  space  and  time,  whereas  the  generalization
Everything  which  has  0^  ...  0^  has  W refers  to  unobserved  instances
occurring  at  different  places  and  times  from  the  m observed  instances.
Thus  we  must  know  that  certain  properties  in  the  known  positive
analogy  are  irrelevant.  But  the  only  properties  known  to  be  irrelevant
are  properties  in  the  known  negative  analogy.  By  increasing  the
known  negative  analogy  we  can  increase  the  number  of  properties
known  to  be  irrelevant.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  variation  of
conditions  is  so  important  in  scientific  investigation.  We  saw  in
Chapter  XIV  that  generalizations  concerning  instances  of  a natural
kind  are  more  plausible  than  generalizations  concerning  a class  the
members  of  which  have  few  properties  in  common.  This  greater
plausibility  arises  from  the  fact  that  we  tacitly  assume  that  there
are  sets  of  properties  connected  in  a certain  way,  namely,  in  such  a
way  that  anything  which  possesses  this  set  of  properties  is  an  instance
of  what  we  have  called  a natural  kind.^  According  to  this  assump-
tion, if  . . . 0^.1  are  properties  defining  a natural  kind,  and  if
every  observed  instance  of  this  kind  has  the  property  then  there  is
at  least  some  probability  that  every  instance  defined  by  . . . 0^.^
has  W.  But  if  any  property  can  be  connected  with  any  other  property,
there  are  an  infinite  number  of  ways  in  which  sets  of  properties
may  arise.  In  this  case  every  generalization  of  the  form  'Whatever
has  0 has  W might  be  false.  If,  then,  this  greater  plausibility  may
be  taken  as  an  indication  of  the  greater  probability  that  generaliza-
tions concerning  natural  kinds  are  true,  we  require  some  limitation
of  the  way  in  which  sets  of  properties  may  occur.

Now  experience  undoubtedly  suggests  to  us  that  the  immense
variety  of  perceptible  objects  can  be  regarded  as  dependent  upon
the  mode  of  arrangement  of  a comparatively  small  number  of  quali-
tatively different  factors.  We  saw  in  Chapter  XVII  that  the  scientist
attempts  to  express  the  perceptible  difference  between  raw  meat^
perceived  at  a given  time,  and  a cinder,  perceived  at  a later  time,
by  differences  in  the  arrangement  of  electrons  and  protons.  A
piece  of  meat  is  a thing  having  states  which  possess  recognizable
^ See  p.  248  abovet


412


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


primary  characteristics.  These  primary  characteristics  vary  within
certain  limits  imder  certain  conditions,  these  conditions  being  deter-
mined by  the  presence  of  other  things  in  the  neighbourhood.  Thus
the  scientist  distinguishes  between  a chemical  element,  e.g.  carbon,
a chemical  compound,  e.g.  sugar,  and  a natural  kind,  e.g.  a cow.
A natural  kind  consists  of  instances  of  chemical  compounds  arranged
in  a certain  way.  A chemical  compound  consists  of  instances  of
chemical  elements  arranged  in  a certain  way.  The  scientist  assumes
that  the  properties  of  a chemical  compound  depend  upon  the  ele-
ments (of  which  it  is  chemically  composed)  being  arranged  in  a
certain  way ; he  assumes  that  the  properties  of  a natural  kind  are
likewise  dependent  upon  the  chemical  compounds  into  which  it  can
be  chemically  analysed.  In  saying  that  the  properties  depend
upon”  the  compounds,  or  the  elements,  the  scientist  means  that
these  compounds,  or  these  elements,  sufi&ce  to  generate  the  properties
of  natural  kinds  and  of  chemical  compounds  respectively.  Working
upon  this  assumption,  scientists  have  in  fact  discovered  that  the
properties  of  natural  kinds  can  be  regarded  as  connected  with  the
properties  of  chemical  compounds,  and  that  the  properties  of  the
latter  can  be  regarded  as  connected  with  the  properties  of  chemical
elements.  That  is  to  say,  the  advance  of  science  suggests  that  the
immense  variety  of  perceptible  objects  is  generated  by  the  com-
bination of  a comparatively  small  number  of  perceptibly  different
I objects.  It  is  clear  that  if  this  suggestion  could  be  justified  we
should  have  reason  to  suppose  that  some  generalizations  with  regard
to  nature  are  true.

Mr.  J.  M.  Keynes  has  stated  clearly  what  exactly  is  the  assump-
tion which  the  procedure  of  the  scientist  suggests.  He  calls  it  the
Princi'ple  of  Limited  Independent  Variety,  He  points  out  that
inductive  generalizations  can  be  justified  on  the  assumption  ^ that
the  objects  in  the  field,  over  which  our  generalizations  extend,  do
not  have  an  infinite  number  of  independent  qualities;  that,  in
other  words,  their  characteristics,  however  numerous,  cohere  together
in  groups  of  invariable  connexion,  which  are  finite  in  number
He  points  out  that  such  a limitation  of  independent  variety  ^ does
not  limit  the  number  of  entities  which  are  only  numerically  distinct
The  principle  may  be  more  precisely  formulated  as  the  assumption
Hhat  the  amount  of  variety  in  the  universe  is  limited  in  such  a
way  that  there  is  no  one  object  so  complex  that  its  qualities  fall
into  an  infinite  number  of  independent  groups  (i.e.  groups  which
might  exist  independently  as  well  as  in  conjunction) ; or  rather,
that  none  of  the  objects  about  which  we  generalize  are  as  complex
as  this ; or  at  least  that,  though  some  objects  may  be  infinitely
complex,  we  sometimes  have  a finite  probability  that  an  object
Treatise  on  Probability » p.  25a»


THE  PEOBLEM  OE  INDUCTION


413


about  which  we  seek  to  generalize  is  not  infinitely  complex  Mr.
Keynes  suggests  that  a further  assumption  is  required,  which  he
calls  the  Principle  of  Atomic  Uniformity,  This  is  the  assumption
that  natural  occurrences  can  be  regarded  as  compounded  of  small
changes  taking  place  in  accordance  with  mathematical  laws.  ^ The
system  of  the  material  universe  Mr.  Keynes  says,  ' must  consist,
if  this  kind  of  assumption  is  warranted,  of  bodies  which  we  may
term  (without  any  implication  as  to  their  size  being  conveyed  there-
by)  legal  atoms^  such  that  each  of  them  exercises  its  own  separate,
independent,  and  invariable  effect,  a change  of  total  state  being
compoimded  of  a number  of  separate  changes  each  of  which  is
solely  due  to  a separate  portion  of  the  preceding  state This
assumption  is  to  the  effect  that  the  laws  of  organic  combinations
are  not  different  in  kind  from  the  laws  which  express  less  complex
modes  of  combination.  This  principle  exactly  expresses  the  assump-
tion made  in  scientific  investigation  that  proceeds  in  accordance
with  the  principle  of  convergence  to  simplicity  with  diminution  of
extent.  Unless  such  atomic  uniformity  is  assumed,  the  principle
of  convergence  to  simplicity  could  not  be  usefully  employed  in  the
manner  explained  in  Chapter  XVII.

These  two  principles  of  the  limitation  of  independent  variety
and  of  atomic  uniformity  express  assumptions  with  regard  to  the
constitution  of  the  existent  world.  They  are  not  logically  necessary,  ^
nor  are  they  in  any  sense  self-evident.  The  working  scientist,
especially  if  he  happens  to  be  unphilosophically  minded,  may  regard
these  principles  as  too  obvious  to  need  discussion.  But,  as  we
have  seen,  obviousness  is  no  guarantee  of  truth.  We  have,  therefore,
to  inquire  what  justification  we  have  for  assuming  these  principles.

It  is  clear  that  they  work  in  practice,  since  it  is  in  accordance  with
these  principles  that  the  body  of  knowledge  that  we  call  science  ’’
has  been  built  up.  Mr.  Keynes  asserts  that  inductive  inference  can
be  practically  useful  only  ' if  the  universe  does  in  fact  present  those
peculiar  characteristics  of  atomism  and  limited  variety  which  appear
more  and  more  clearly  as  the  ultimate  result  to  which  material
science  is  tending The  problem  remains  whether  we  have  any
justification  for  making  these  assumptions.  It  should  be  observed
vthat  they  amount  to  the  assumption  that  nature  is  fundamentally  '
finite.  This  assumption  Mr.  Keynes  calls  the  inductive  hypothesis.

It  cannot  be  known  to  be  certainly  true.  If,  however,  it  ever  had
a finite  probability,  then  it  can  certainly  be  admitted  that  experi-

^ ihid,i  p.  258.  This  might  be  expressed  more  simply  in  the  form : There  are
sets  of  a finite  number  of  properties  which  are  such  that  no  one  member  of  the
set  ever  occurs  without  the  other  members  of  the  set.  (See  C.  D.  Broad,  Proc*
Arist,  Soc,,  N.S.,  XXVIII,  § 6*5.)

®op,  cit.,  p.  249.


p.  427.


414


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


ence  lias  increased  this  probability,  since  our  interpretation  of  what
happens  is  based  upon  the  assumption  of  its  truth.  If  the  principles
of  atomic  uniformity  and  of  the  limitation  of  independent  variety
do  apply  to  the  constitution  of  the  existent  world,  then  we  should
expect  to  find  repetition  and  regularity  in  it.  This  is  what  we  do
find.  The  more  we  seek  such  regularity,  the  more  we  find  it,  even
in  regions  where  at  first  sight  the  search  for  such  regularity  appears
most  unpromising.  It  is  clear  that  to  suppose  that  this  argument
affords  a proof  of  the  inductive  hjrpothesis  would  involve  a fallacy
of  affirming  the  consequent.  But,  if  the  inductive  h3q)othesis  has
{some  degree  of  probability,  then  inductive  conclusions  reached  in
Wcordance  with  it  would  strengthen  the  initial  probability.  Mr.
Reynes  has  shown  that  such  a procedure  is  not  circular.^  It  follows,
that  the  one  fundamental  assumption  that  must  be  made  if  scientific
method  is  to  yield  conclusions  having  some  degree  of  probability  is  that
there  is  a finite  probability  that  the  constitution  of  the  existent  world
conforms  to  the  principles  of  atomic  uniformity  and  the  limitation  of
independent  variety.  This  is  equivalent  to  the  assertion  that  there  is  a
finite  probability  that  the  system  of  nature  is  not  infinitely  complex.
I This  assertion  may  be  false,  but  if  it  is  false,  then  there  is  no  logical
Wound  for  believing  that  any  generalization  with  regard  to  the
Existent  world  is  more  likely  to  be  true  than  to  be  false.  Accordingly,
science  as  a system  of  knowledge  rests  upon  this  assumption.

§ 4.  HUME’S  PROBLEM  AND  ITS  CRITICS

The  special  problem  which  we  discussed  in  the  last  section  was
raised  in  its  clearest  form  by  Hume.  He  distinguished  sharply
between  propositions  with  regard  to  matters  of  fact  and  propositions
with  regard  to  abstract  concepts  such  as  those  of  mathematics.

I We  saw  in  the  last  section  that  the  certainty  that  we  feel  with  regard
I to  these  two  kinds  of  propositions  is  very  different,  '^he  distinction
drawn  by  Hume  may  be  stated  in  modern  terminology  with  sufficient
accuracy  as  follows.  Propositions  concerning  matters  of  fact  may
be  denied  without  contradiction.  Thus,  Hume  says,  the  proposi-
tion ^ That  the  sun  will  not  rise  to-morrow  is  no  less  intelligible  than
the  afiirmation  that  it  will  rise.  We  should  in  vain,  therefore,
attempt  to  demonstrate  its  falsehood  Such  propositions  must

^op.  oit.,  p.  260.  Tlie  procedure  is  not  circular,  granted  the  assumption
that  the  Inductive  Hypothesis  started  with  a finite  probability,  since  the  con-
firmation is  derived  from  evidence  relative  to  a less  far-reaching  assumption.

® Inquiry  concerning  Human  Understanding,  § 21.  Hume  considered  that
|all  reasonings  concerning  matters  of  fact  seem  to  be  founded  on  the  relation  of
Vause  and  Effect  \ Consequently  his  treatment  of  the  problem  seems  to  be
confined  to  the  problem  of  causation.  This,  however,  is  accidentaL  The
problem  with  which  he  was  really  concerned  was  the  problem  of  the  validity
of  Inference  from  past  to  future  generalizations.


THE  PEOBLEM  OP  INDUCTION


415


be  distinguislied  from  those  which  are  not  assertions  with  regard
to  existent  objects,  such  as,  to  quote  Hume’s  examples,
That  the  square  of  the  hypothenuse  is  equal  to  the  square  of  the
two  sides,  or  That  three  times  five  is  equal  to  the  half  of  thirty,
since  these  propositions  are  true  no  matter  what  the  constitution
of  the  existent  world  may  be.  Hume  says  that  the  demaL^of
such  propositions  ^ involves  a contradiction  We  may  accept  this
statSneht  if  we  interp  accordance  with  modern  views  of

deductive  systems,  as  meaning  that  these prqppsh}ion3^_^^^^^

from  j^e  imtial  concepts  and  the  axioms, ^or  prinutive  propositions,
which  determine  a"  given  abstract  system.  To  assert  that  they  are
^ true  is  to  assert  that  they  are  validly  deduced.  But  to  assert  that
propositions  concerning  matters  3f  fact  h^re  true  is  to  assert  that
they  express  facts  with  regard  to  what  exists.  Such  propositions
cannot  be  deduced  from  initial  concepts  and  axioms  with  regard
to  the  relations  of  such  concepts.  Hence,  the  denial  of  such  pro-
I positions  cannot  be  demonstrated  to  be  false;  hence,  either  of  two
f contradictory  propositions  with  regard  to  matters  of  fact  might  be
^ true.  The  question  therefore  arises  as  to  what  justification  we  have
for  believing  that  general  propositions  with  regard  to  matters  of
fact  are  true.  Consequently,  Hume  asks,  ‘ What  is  the  nature  of
that  evidence  which  assures  us  of  any  real  existence  and  matter
of  fact,  beyond  the  present  testimony  of  our  senses,  or  the  records
of  our  memory  ?

Hume’s  answer  to  his  own  question  was  that  there  is  no  evidence
capable  of  giving  us  such  assurance,  and  that  ‘ if  we  believe  that
fire  warms,  or  water  refreshes,  ’tis  duly  because  it  costs  us  too  much
pains  to  think  otherwise  He  did  not  deny  that  we  have  such
beliefs ; he  even  asserted,  with  some  measure  of  inconsistency,  that
such  beliefs  were  useful.  It  is,  therefore,  no  answer  to  Hume  to  v
assert  that  we  all  do  in  fact  believe  that  the^  sun  will  rise  to-morrow,
that  water  quencms  thirst,  and  thaV  arsenic  is  poisonous.  The
question  for  which  he  sought  an  answer  was  by  what  right  we  hold
such  beliefs,  what  is  their  logical  justification.  He  did  not  deny
that  inductive  methods  may  lead  to  true  conclusions,  but  he
I maintained  that  it  had  not  been  shown  that  they  could  do  so.^
This,  it  will  be  observed,  is  the  special  problem  of  inductive
method.

Philosophers  since  Hume  have  attempted  to  avoid  the  scepticism
implicit  in  Hume’s  answer.  They  have  sought  to  show  that  some
principle  of  causal  determination,  suflicient  to  warrant  inferences  going

^ A Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  Bk.  I,  Pt.  IV,  § 7.

* Of.  J.  M.  Keynes,  op.  cit.,  p.  272,  * Hume  skowed,  not  that  inductive

methods  were  false,  but  that  their  validity  had  never  been  established  and  that
all  possible  lines  of  proof  seemed  equally  unpromising,’


416  A MODERN  INTRODUpTION  Tp  LOQIC  ^

IL&aL  ^ gJLi  P

Deyond  ‘ the  present  testimony  of  our  senses,  or  the  records  of  our
memory  is  a necessary  precondition  of  onr  thinl^ing,  or  is  itself
deducible  feom  some  such  principle,  as,  for  example,  the  Law  of
Identity.  The  first  answer  may  he  attributed  to  Kant,  the  second  to
Mr.  Joseph.  Kant’s  ‘ answer  to  Hume  ’ need  not  be  considered  here
^for  the  very  good  reason  that  it  evades  the  difficulty  and  solves
I Hume’s  problem  only  by  denying  that  there  is  a problem  to  solve.
[We  may,  however,  consider  briefly  those  answers  to  Hume  which
itake  the  form  of  asserting  that  the  principle  of  the  Uniformity  of
Nature  and  the  Law  of  Universal  Causation  are  sufficient  to  give
us  that  assurance  of  which  Hume  was  in  search.

It  is  not  easy  to  ascertain  what  exactly  logicians  have  under-
stood to  be  meant  by  the  “ Uniformity  of  Nature  ”.  It  must  be
so  interpreted  as  to  be  compatible  with  what  Mill  calls  ^ the  infinite
variety  of  Nature  ’.  To  deny  that  there  is  variety  in  Nature  would
not  only  be  inconsistent  with  observable  facts  but  also  with  the
procedure  of  science,  smce,  unless  there  are  multiformities  there  is
nothing  for  the  scientist  to  discover.  Mr.  Joseph  takes  ‘ the  Uni-
formity of  Nature  ’ to  be  equivalent  to  ' the  unbroken  reign  of
^ law  No  doubt  this  is  the  correct  interpretation.  In  this  case
the  principle  will  not  do  the  work  required  of  it.  As  Mr.  Bertrand
Russell  has  pointed  out,  what  is  requfied.Ais.nQt  the
but  the  reign  of  simple  la^TT”^ Whatever  the  constitution  of  the
existent  wofld"  may  be,  it  would  be  theoretically  possible  to  exhibit
natural  occurrences  as  exemplifying  laws,  provided  that  these  laws
may  be  of  any  degree  of  complexity.  However  the  Uniformity
of  Nature  ” be  interpreted  it  would  not  enable  us  to  see  how  there
can  be  laws  of  nature  simple  enough  for  us  to  discover.  Thus  such
a principle  would  not  be  suflicient  to  justify  the  inductive  inferences
which  we  do  all  of  us  make  and  in  the  truth  of  which  we  believe.
What  we  want  is  not  a principle  which  merely  asserts  that  there
are  natural  laws  but  one  which  justifies  the  assertion  that  some
generalizations  with  regard  to  some  given  region  of  facts  are  more
likely  to  be  true  than  to  be  false.  ‘ It  is  sometimes  supposed  that
all  that  is  required  is  to  supplement  the  principle  of  the  Uniformity
of  Nature  by  the  Law  of  Universal  Causation,  Tor  the  purpose  of
the  present  discussion  this  Law  may  be  expressed  in  the  form:
Given  any  occurrence  uniquely  described  by  Y ”,  there  is  some
other  occurrence  capable  of  being  uniquely  described  by  X ”,
which  is  so  related  to  Y that  the  occurrence  of  X justifies  us  in
inferring  the  occurrence  of  Y.  This  Law,  or  Prmciple^  cannot  J^e
regarded  as  self-evident.  We  saw  in  Chapter  that  MrT  Joseph^*
^ coiiSiderpSLat  to  deny  the  necessity  of  the  causal  relation  is  equivalent
Ito  denying  the  Law  of  Identity,  but  we  saw  reason  to  reject  this

1 Introduction,  p.  402.  a Analysis  of  MaUer,  p.  232.


THE  TEOBLEM  OF  IHDUOTIOK


417


view.  If  tlie  connexioix  between  X and  Y could  be  seen  to  be  neces-
sary, no  problem  would  arise.  To  the  question  with  wbat  right
do  we  assume  tbe  Law  of  Universal  Causation,  it  is  no  answer
to  reply,  as  Mr.  JosepL.  does,  that  ‘to  deny  it  is  to  resolve
tbe  universe  into  items  that  have  no  intelligible  connexion
since  the  point  at  issue  is  whether  they  have  such  an  intelligible
connexion.

The  empiricist  logician.  Mill,  no  less  than  the  rationalist  logician,
Mr.  Joseph,  assumes  that  the  Law  of  Universal  Causation  „pro„vidfiP
us  with  a sirffi-cient  answer  to  Hume^s  problem.  ^ It  is  true  that
Sill  does  not  regard  this  Law  either  as  self-evident  or  as  a principle
that  we  must  accept.  He  denies  that  there  is  any  ‘ principle,  which, •*
antecedently,  to  any  verification  by  experience,  we  are  compelled
by  the  constitution  of  our  thinking  faculty  to  assume  as  true
On  the  contrary  he  maintains  that  the  Law  of  jJmyersal  Causation
is  j.tself^  an  induction  from^  e^  ‘by  no  means  onejof

the  earliesV  any  qf^jis  can  have  made’. ^ He  argues  that
experience  Ted  us  to  make  generalizations  from  experience,  which
assumed  the  causal  form,  and  that  ultimately  we  were  led  to  the
generalization  that  every  event  has  a cause.  Thus  he  says  : ‘ The
t£uth_i^ Jhat ,tbia„.gre^t  generalization  i§.. itself  founded  on. prior
generahzations.  The  obscurer  laws  of  nature  were  discovered  by
means  ol  it,  but  the  more  obvious  ones  must  have  been  understood
and  assented  to  as  general  truths  before  it  was  ever  heard  of
For  our  purpose  it  is  not  necessary  to  inquire  as  to  what  extent
this  argument  is  circular.  Mill’s  point  is  that  experience  suggests
that  there  are  causal  uniformities^  and  that  the  discovery  of  the
least  apparent  uniformities  rests  upon  the  assumption  that  every
occurrence  can  be  exhibited  as  an  instance  of  a causal  uniformity.
The  discovery  of  these  later  generalizations  is  then  taken  to  afford
increasmg  evidence  for  the  kuth  of  the  Law' of  Universal  Causation
so  that  it  may  finalTy  Le  regarded  as  proved.  He  pointed  out  that
there  is  no  paradox  in  supposing  that  the  Law  of  Causation  is  assumed
in  all  inductive  investigation  and  yet  is  itself  an  instance  of  induction
provided  that  his  theory  of  syllogistic  inference  be  accepted.®  This  ;
may  be  granted.

It  is  worth  observing  that  both  Joseph  and  Mill  regard  scientific
method  as  essentially  consisting  in  the  elimination  of  possible  alter-
native causes  until  only  one  possible  cause  is  left.  Then,  by  using
the  Law  of  Universal  Causation  in  the  fashion  of  a major  premiss,
it  is  concluded  that  the  uneliminated  alternative  is  the  cause.  In

^ Introduction,  p.  424.  * Logic,  Bk.  Ill,  Chap.  Ill,  § 1.

^ibiL,  Chap.  XXI,  §2.  -^loo.  cit.

® See  Chap.  XII,  § 3 above.  See  Logic,  Bk.  HI,  Chap.  XXI,  § 4.  Bor  a
hostile  criticism  of  MiU’s  -view,  see  Joseph,  op.  oit.,  pp.  421,  443.

27


418  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

thus  exhibiting  scientific  method  as  essentially  based  upon  elimina-
tion the  real  difficulty  is  evaded.  Either  inductioB^is.  reducedLto
deductioji,  in  which  case  its  validity  Ts  purely  formal,  so  that  it
becomes  difficult  to  see  how  generalizations  concerning  matters  of
fact  are  possible ; or  deduction  is  reduced  to  induction,  in  which
.case  it  still  remains  that  the  Law  of  Universal  Causation  must  be
Iprpyed.  The  first  alternative  is  that  taken  by  Mr.  Joseph  and  other
rationalist  logicians  ; the  second  alternative  is  that  taken  by  Mill.
There  seems  no  doubt  that  for  Mill  the  solution  of  Hume’s  problem
should  have  been  especially  urgent,  since,  in  his  view,  all  reasoning
is  based  upon  induction  and  ultimately  upon  induction  by  simple
^enumeration.  That  Mill  failed  to  appreciate  the  problem  is  due  to
the  fact  that  he  tacitly  assumed  that  every  natural  occurrence  is
ultimately  analysable  into  a limited  number  of  elements,  and  that,
in  consequence,  the  variety  of  nature  is  due  to  the  various  modes
of  combination  of  these  elements.  This  assumption  Avhen  precisely
stated  is  equivalent  to  the  principle  of  theiimltatiQn  .of  independent
v^H^iL  the  principle  of  atomic  -uniformity.  Thus  Mill  tacitly
assumed  what  Mr.  Keynes  calls  ‘ the  inductive  hypothesis  ’.  He
did  not,  however,  recognize  that  he  was  making  an  assumption,
and  accordingly  he  supposed  that  inductive  method  required  no
assumptions  that  could  not  be  proved  It  is  no  doubt  for  this  reason
that  Mill  believed  that  induction  could  yield  certainty.  But  without
this  unrecognized  assumption  Mill’s  use  of  the  Law  of  Universal
Causation  would  not  have  enabled  him  to  validate  inductive  pro-
cedure. The  important  criticism  to  be  urged  against  , Mill  is.  Mt  SO
na^h  that  he  failed  to  provide  an  answer  to  Hume’s  .question^^but
that  he  scarcely  appeared  to  be  aware  that  there  is  any  qnestiQnw,b>
be  answered.  As  this  objection  may  be  made  against  all  the  critics
of  Hume,  there  is  no  point  in  pursuing  Mill’s  theory  further.  It
would  be  more  profitable  to  ask  whether  granted  that  we  are  justified
in  assuming  the  Law  of  Universal  Causation,  we  are  provided  with
a solution  of  Hume’s  problem.  This  we  have  seen  not  to  be  the
case.

We  have  seen  also  that  the  interpretation  of  the  Uniformity
of  Nature  as  equivalent  to  the  unbroken  reign  of  Law  is  also  useless
|for  inductive  method.  Mr,  Keynes  interprets  the  principle  of  uni-
formity as  equivalent  to  a generalized  judgement  of  the  irrelevance
of  r^e  differences  of  tinaT^^^IaBer^^^’fe  makes

tEe“”^mciple  of  uniformity  equally  useless,  since  no  two  things  or
occurrences  differ  merely  with  respect  to  time  and  place.  These
spatio-temporal  differences  are  connected  with  their  being  in  the
neighbourhood  of  different  sets  of  occurrences  or  things,  and  we
require  to  make  judgements  of  irrelevance  with  respect  to  these
differences.  To  justify  scientific  method  it  is  necessary  that  we


THE  PEOBLEM  OE  INDUCTION


419


should  be  able  to  justify  the  assumption  of  the  inductive  hypo-
thesis, which  can  alone  permit  us  to  conclude  that  the  laws  of  nature
are  simple  enough  for  us  to  discover  them,  so  that  we  may  regard
nature  as  ultimately  intelligible.  Meanwhile  the  scientist  continues
to  assume  that  the  laws  of  nature  are  ultimately  simple,  and  it  is
in  fact  the  case  that  in  the  more  advanced  sciences  many  simple
laws  have  been  discovered  whilst  many  laws  that  appeared  complex
and  disconnected  from  other  laws  have  been  shown  to  be  capable
of  reduction  to  simpler  and  more  comprehensive  laws.  Nevertheless,
as  Mr.  Bussell  has  pointed  out,  ‘ it  ^wgidd^^Jbe^  fallacious  to  argue
inductively  from  the  state  of  the  advanced  sciences  to  the  futme
: state  of  the  others,  for  it  may  well  be  that  the  advanced  sciences
are  advanced  simply  because,  hitherto,  their  subject-matter  has
^obeyed  sirnple^  and  ascertainable  lawst,  while  the  .subject-matter  of
other  sciences  has  not  done  so  With  this  consideration  we  are
brought  again  to  the  demand  for  simplicity,  which  is  thus  seen  to
be  not  unconnected  with  the  assumptions  that  are  required  to
justify  our  attaching  any  considerable  degree  of  probability  to
generalizations  with  regard  to  the  existent  world.

^ Mysticism  and  Logic,  p.  205.


PART  III


CHAPTER  XXII

THE  THEORY  OE  DEFINITION

‘ At  present  we  are  only  agreed  about  the  name.  I daresay  that  we  may
both  of  us  have  the  thing  in  our  minds,  but  we  ought  always  to  come  to  an
understanding  about  the  thing  in  terms  of  a definition,  and  not  merely  about
the  name  minus  the  definition.’ — Plato,

§ 1.  THE  HATUEl  OE  DEEINITION

Definition  is  an  aid  to  dear  thinking  and,  tterefore,
to  the  communication  of  thought.  Sometimes  when  we
are  confronted  with  a problem,  either  theoretical  or  prac-
tical, or  are  trying — as  we  say — to  ^ think  out  ’ a subject,  we  find
that  we  are  thoroughly  muddled.  Our  muddle  may  be  due  to  the
fact  that  either  we  do  not  see  clearly  what  are  the  premisses  involved
or  we  do  not  know  what  exactly  it  is  we  are  thinking  about.  In
the  latter  case  we  may  succeed  in  thinking  more  clearly  i£  we  can
define  the  words  by  means  of  which  we  are  attempting  to  express
our  thought.  We  can  define  words  only  when  we  understand  them.
We  understand  a word  when  we  know  what  it  is  to  which  the  word
refers  or  when  we  can  use  it  significantly  in  combination  with  other
words.

We  may  best  approach  the  problem  of  definition  by  asking  under
what  circumstances  in  ordinary  discourse  we  should  need  to  ask
for  a definition.  Suppose  A and  B were  discussing  a topic  with
which  both  are  fairly  familiar  but  that  B does  not  understand  some
word  used  by  A,  for  example,  sonnet  B will  ask  A what  he  means
by  sonnet  The  question  is  equivalent  to  asking : ‘ What  is
sonnet  ” being  used  to  express  ? ’ A’s  reply  might  take  various
forms.  We  shall  now  consider  three  of  these.

(1)  ‘^^You  know  Wordsworth^s  Earth  has  not  anything  to  show
more  fair,  and  Shakespeare’s  Shall  I com'pare  thee  to  a summer* s day  ?
and  Keats’s  Much  have  1 travelled  in  the  realms  of  gold  ? Well,
these  are  sonnets.”

(2)  A sonnet  is  a short  poem  of  a fixed  length,  expressmg  a
single  experience.”

(3)  ‘‘A  sonnet  is  a verse  form  consisting  of  fourteen  iambic

421


422  k MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

pentameters,  having  a fixed  rime  scheme  of  one  or  other  of  two
forms.’’

Any  one  of  these  statements  might  enable  B to  understand  what
“ sonnet  ” means.  The  second  is  an  inadequate  description  of

sonnet  ”.  It  might  serve  the  purpose  but  it  could  not  be  called
a definition.  We  are  frequently  content  with  a description,  more
or  less  adequate,  of  the  meaning  of  a word.  Thus  we  might  describe
a bass  viol  as  an  instrument  very  like  a ’cello  but  much  larger
Any  one  who  knew  what  “ ’ceUo  ” means  would  understand  this
description  and  would  probably  be  able  to  apply  “bass  viol”
correctly.  1 Only  the  third  answer  gives  a definition  of  “ sonnet  ”.
In  this  statement  two  expressions  are  used,  so  related  that  the  one
is  equivalent  to  the  other.  Definition  always  involves  two  expres-
sions : the  expression  (which  may  be  a single  word)  to  be  defined
and  the  defining  expression  (which  must  contain  more  than  one  word).
The  former  is  called  the  definienduniy  the  latter  the  definiens.

We  have  now  to  consider  the  fikst  answer.  This  explains  the
meaning  of  “ sonnet  ” by  giving  examples  of  sonnets.  If  B knows
these  poems  he  is  likely  to  understand  what  “ sonnet  ” means.
Some  logicians  recognize  a kind  of  definition  of  which  this  first
answer  would  be  an  example,  viz.  so-called  extensive  definition,  or
definition  by  examples.  It  may,  however,  be  doubted  whether  the
giving  of  typical  examples  can  be  rightly  regarded  as  a process  of
defining.  2 B must  be  acquainted  with  the  examples  given  if  he  is
to  understand  “ sonnet  ” by  means  of  them.  He  would  then  know
more  or  less  how  to  apply  the  word  “ sonnet  ” but  it  seems  doubtful
whether  he  would  know  what  “ sonnet  ” expresses.  Definition  is
only  one  of  the  means  through  which  we  come  to  understand  words.
We  must  be  careful  not  to  use  “ defiboition  ” so  widely  that  it  comes
to  stand  for  any  process  enabling  us  to  learn  the  application  of
words.  These  processes  are  so  different  that  to  call  them  by  the
same  name  leads  to  confusion.  We  saw  in  Chapter  II  that  we  under-
stand a demonstrative  symbol  through  being  acquainted  with  its
referend.  The  process  of  pointing  (whether  metaphorically  or  other-

^ See  Chap,  II,  § 2,  above.

®Dr.  Keynes  gives  a more  subtle  account  of  extensive  definition,  (See
22.)  He  suggests  that  a chemist  might  be  able  ‘ from  the  full  denotation
of  metal  to  make  a selection  of  a limited  number  of  metals  which  would  be
precisely  typical  of  the  whole  class ; that  is  to  say,  his  selected  list  would
possess  in  common  only  such  properties  as  are  common  to  the  whole  class
He  points  out  that  the  chemist  would  take  metals  ‘ as  different  from  one
another  as  possible,  such  as  aluminium,  antimony,  copper,  gold,  iron,  mercury,
sodium,  zinc’.  These  selected  metals  define  the  class  metal  by  example.
It  seems  to  me  extremely  doubtful  whether  this  process  has  anything  in  com-
mon with  what  would  ordinarily  be  called  deiMtion.  It  is  certainly  not,
as  Keynes  calls  it,  a primitive  type  of  definition ; it  could  be  achieved  only  by
someone  able  to  select  such  typical  metals.


THE  THEORY  OF  DEEINITIOH


423


wise)  to  the  referend  is  not  a process  of  defining  since  the  referend
is  not  another  expression  equivalent  to  the  defined  expression ; it
is  what  the  expression  (in  this  case  the  demonstrative  sjmbol)
expresses.  In  other  words,  to  learn  the  application  of  a word  is
not  equivalent  to  learning  its  definition.  We  must,  then,  refuse
to  admit  extensive  definition.  Thus  we  cannot  agree  with  Mr,  John-
son that  proper  names  can  be  defined.  He  recognizes  a form  of
definition  which  consists  in  Hhe  act  of  indicating,  presenting,  or
introducing  the  object  to  which  the  name  is  to  apply  to  which
he  gives  the  name  ostensive  definition.  This  is  open  even  more
strongly  to  the  objections  urged  against  extensive  definition.  The
latter  at  least  involves  the  selection  of  typical  examples  of  a class
having  characteristics  through  which  the  class  might  be  distinguished
from  other  classes ; in  the  case  of  proper  names,  however,  and  of
words  such  as  “ red  ’’ — ^which  Mr.  Johnson  also  regards  as  ostensively
definable — ^the  names  simply  demonstrate.  That  is  their  sole  func-
tion. To  regard  them  as  definable  is  to  confuse  understanding  a
symbol  with  defining  it

The  same  mistake  occurs  with  regard  to  what  Mr.  Johnson  calls
hiverhal  definition.  An  example  would  be  tai)ferheit  means  courage
or  mhur  means  courage  This  is  translation  of  one  word  by
another.  It  is  undoubtedly  a useful  process ; but  it  is  not  definition.
It  is  perhaps  because  he  has  included  such  forms  that  Mr.  Johnson
has  been  led  to  the  extraordinary  view  that  definition  is  nothing
hut  substitution  of  verbal  phrases.  Thus  he  says : ‘ our  problem
is  how  to  define  a given  verbal  phrase ; and  the  answer  is  to  sub-
stitute for  it  another  verbal  phrase.  This  is  the  complete  and
quite  universal  account  of  the  'procedure  of  definition,  which  justifies
our  restriction  of  the  topic  to  biverbal  definition ; its  obvious  pur-
pose is  fulfilled  if  the  substituted  phrase  is  understood  But  in
defining  we  do  not  substitute  one  expression  (or  verbal  phrase)  for
another.  We  use  t'wo  expressions  related  as  we  have  explained.
It  is  true  that  since  the  expressions  are  equivalent  it  is  permissible
to  substitute  one  for  the  other  on  any  occasion  of  its  use.  But  the
definition  is  not  a statement  that  the  one  can  be  substituted  for  the
other,  although  from  the  fact  that  it  is  a definition  it  follows  that
such  substitution  is  possible.  It  is  extremely  misleading  to  suggest
that  definition  is  merely  substitution.

We  conclude,  then,  that  to  define  an  expression  (verbal  or  other-
wise) we  must  use  two  expressions,  the  defibadng  expression  and  the
expression  to  be  defined ; that  these  expressions  must  be  asserted
to  be  equivalent ; that,  finally,  the  defibaing  expression  must  contain
more  words  (or  symbols)  than  the  defined  expression.  That  the
last  condition  is  required  for  what  is  ordinarily  meant  by  “ definition  ”
1 W.  E.  J,  Pt.  I,  p.  104


4:24


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


becomes  clear  if  we  consider  that  no  one  would  say  plane  figure
bounded  by  three  straight  lines”  is  defined  by  ^Hriangle”.  On  the
contrary,  the  first  expression  defines  ''  triangle

In  the  definition  just  given  of  “ triangle  ” we  see  that  the  defining
expression  refers  to  a wider  class  plane  figures  within  which  triangles
are  distinguished  as  having  the  property  of  being  bounded  by  three
straight  lines.  This  form  of  definition  is  of  great  importance.  It
is  traditionally  known  as  definition  per  genus  et  differentiam.  This
technical  name  will  be  explained  and  this  form  of  definition  will
be  discussed  in  the  next  section.  Here  it  is  sujB&cient  to  regard  the
genus  as  a wider  class  from  which  the  smaller  class  (viz.  triangle)
is  difierentiated  by  means  of  a distinguishing  characteristic.

There  is  another  form  of  definition  of  great  importance  in  mathe-
matics, which  will  be  discussed  in  the  last  section  of  this  chapter.
It  may  be  briefly  mentioned  now.  This  is  analytic  definition  of  an
expression  (verbal  or  symbolic).  An  example  of  this  form  of  definition
is  the  following  definition  of  second  cousins  ”.

‘‘  Second  Cousins  ” are  ‘‘  those  whose  parents  are  first  cousins  ”.

‘^rirst  Cousins”  are  males  or  females  of  which  one  parent
of  the  one  is  brother  or  sister  of  one  parent  of  the  other

It  is  possible  to  define  by  definite  description^  e.g.  A circle  is
the  figure  whose  perimeter  encloses  the  largest  area.”  It  is  not
uncommon  to  find  another  form  of  definition  in  geometry,  which
is  called  genetic  definition.  This  consists  in  stating  how  the  figure
may  be  constructed.  Thus  a cycloid  ” may  be  defined  as  “ the
path  traced  out  by  a point  on  or  within  or  without  the  circum-
ference of  a circle,  as  the  circle  rolls  along  a straight  line  ”,  This
is  in  fact  also  an  example  of  definition  by  definite  description ; it
is  called  genetic  because  the  description  describes  the  mode  of  tracing
a cycloid.  An  analyi}ic  definition  of  a cycloid  was  achieved  only
late  in  the  development  of  mathematical  theory.

The  traditional  Logicians  have  formulated  certain  rules  for  fram-
ing definitions,  which  may  be  stated  here.  These  rules  as  traditionally
stated  are  defective  in  form ; they  are  not  equally  ultimate  and  they
fail  to  distinguish  between  the  nature  of  a definition  and  the  purpose
of  framing  definitions.  We  shall  distinguish  them  into  two  sets :
A.  Rules  concerned  with  the  nature  of  definition.

1.  The  definiens  must  be  equivalent  to  the  definiendum.  From
this  rule  there  follow  two  corollaries ;

1'1.2  The  definiens  must  not  be  wider  than  the  defiboiendum.

1*2.  The  definiens  must  not  be  narrower  than  the  definiendum.

^ See  § 4 below.

^ The  corollaries  are  nurabered  in  this  way  to  show  that  they  are  immediate
consequences  of  rule  1.  The  decimal  point  enables  us  to  distinguish  between
the  two  corollaries.


THE  THEOEY  OF  DEFINITION  425

It  is  clear  that  violation  of  either  of  these  corollaries  is  inconsistent
with  the  nature  of  definition.  If  the  definition  be  per  genus  et
differentiam  these  rules  will  be  observed.  It  has  been  customary
to  give  as  the  first  rule  that  definition  must  be  per  genus  et  differentiam.
This,  however,  involves  an  unduly  narrow  conception  of  the  nature
of  definition.  It  is,  however,  one  mode  of  securing  the  equivalence
required  by  our  first  rule.^

B,  Buies  concerned  with  the  purpose  of  definition.

2.  The  definiens  should  not  include  any  expression  that  occurs
in  the  definiendum,  or  that  could  be  defined  only  in  terms  of  it.

3.  The  definiens  should  not  be  expressed  in  obscure  or  figurative
language.

4.  The  definiens  should  not  be  expressed  negatively  unless  the
definiendum  is  negative.  ^

Since  the  purpose  of  a definition  is  to  make  clear  the  meaning
of  an  expression,  it  follows  that  this  purpose  would  be  frustrated
if  any  of  these  rules  were  violated.  If  the  expression  to  be  defined
occurs  in  the  defining  expression,  then  this  latter  expression  will
equally  stand  in  need  of  definition.^  Failure  to  observe  this  rule
results  in  what  has  been  called  the  fallacy  of  circular  definition.
The  purpose  would  also  be  frustrated  if  the  defining  expression
were  obscure  or  figurative.  What  is  obscure  is  relative  to  the
knowledge  of  the  person  who  asks  for  the  definition.  A biologist's
definition  of  hornet  ” would  not  be  enlightening  to  the  layman
unless  he  were  to  follow  out  all  the  expressions  used  in  the  definiens.
In  this  case  he  would  doubtless  acquire  clearer  ideas  at  some  ex-
penditure of  trouble,  but  his  purpose  would  probably  be  more  easily
satisfied  by  a description.  The  rule  to  avoid  negative  expressions
also  follows  from  the  fact  that  the  purpose  of  a definition  is  to  state
the  meaning  of  some  expression.  We  do  not,  as  a rule,  learn  what
an  expression  means  by  being  told  what  it  does  not  mean.  If,
however,  the  expression  to  be  defined  is  purely  negative,  then  the
definiens  may  be  negative.  For  example,  we  may  define  spinster  "
as  an  unmarried  woman

We  have  constantly  spoken  of  defining  one  expression  by  an-
other expression.  At  this  point  we  may  ask  a question  the  answer

^ Mr.  Joseph,  whose  treatment  of  definition  is  the  most  satisfactory  from
the  traditional  point  of  view,  includes  this  rule.  Accordingly,  two  of  Ms  first
three  rules  are  clearly  redundant.

^ As  examples  of  the  violation  of  these  rules  we  may  give :

1*1.  A politician  is  a person  interested  in  public  affairs.

1-2.  A politician  is  a member  of  parliament.

2.  Life  is  the  sum-total  of  the  forces  that  resist  death.

3.  A horse  is  the  noble  animal  that  is  the  friend  of  man.

4.  A matinee  is  not  a morning  performance.

* There  is  an  apparent  exception  to  tMs  icule,  wMoh  will  be  discussed  in  § 4*


426  A MODEEN  INTRODUOTIOIT  TO  LOGIC

to  which  has  occasioned  considerable  controversy.  Do  we  define
expressions  or  what  the  expressions  stand  for  ? Many  logicians  hold
that  it  is  the  latter  that  is  defined.  This,  however,  is  a mistake.
Mill  stated  the  correct  view  when  he  said ' All  definitions  are  of  names,
and  of  names  only The  contrary  view  is  mainly  based  npon  two
considerations  both  of  which  are  important  but  which  do  not  involve
the  conclusion  that  definitions  are  not  of  words.  The  first  is  the
close  connexion  between  words  and  what  they  express.  This  has
made  it  difficult  to  determine  what  it  is  that  is  defined.  The  second
is  the  belief  that  language  consists  of  arbitrary  verbal  sjonbols  so
that,  if  definition  is  of  words,  then  aU  definition  is  arbitrary.  We
shah,  discuss  the  second  point  first.  It  is  true  that  there  is  an  arbi-
trary element  in  language  in  so  far  as  there  is  no  essential  connexion
between  a word  and  what  it  expresses,  except  in  the  case  of  onoma-
topoeic words.  The  existence  of  difierent  languages  shows  this.

Moon  ’’  is  not  a more  suitable  symbol  than  luna  ” to  express
what  both  ''  moon  ” and  luna  ” stand  for.  What  is  meant  by
saying  that  the  expression  of  moon  by  “ moon  ’’  is  arbitrary  would
perhaps  be  more  properly  expressed  by  saying  that  it  is  conventional.
The  question  how  a given  word  has  come  to  be  used  to  express
what  it  expresses  is  an  historical  question.  It  usually  admits  of
no  answer,  except  in  the  case  of  consciously  devised  terminology,
such  as  "^oxygen’’,  “volt”,  “vitamin”,  “hoover”.  To  give  an
etymological  derivation  of  a word  merely  pushes  the  question  back
a stage  further.  Had  all  words  been  onomatopoeic  it  is  unlikely
that  the  question  whether  definition  is  of  words  or  of  what  they
express  would  ever  have  arisen.  Fortunately,  they  are  not.

The  conventional  element  in  language  does  not  render  the  defini-
tion of  words  arbitrary.  However  a particular  word  (or  sound)
may  have  originally  come  to  be  associated  with  what  it  expresses,
its  meaning  now  depends  upon  its  use.  It  follows  that  the  definition
of  words  is  concerned  with  the  way  in  which  they  are  used.  It  is
sometimes  maintained,  especially  by  those  who  hold  that  all  definition
is  arbitrary,  that  defiLoitions  are  not  true  or  false,  but  merely  correct
or  incorrect.  This  is  a mistake.  A definition  is  true  if  the  defining
expression  is  equivalent  to  the  correct  usage  of  the  definiendum.
It  is  not  always  easy  to  determine  what  is  the  correct  usage  of  a
word.  ^ The  simplest  case  is  provided  by  technical  terms  used  by
specialists  who  have  taken  the  trouble  expHcitly  to  define  them.
At  the  other  extreme  are  the  everyday  words  that  we  aU  use  more
or  less  correctly,  but  which  few  of  us  could  define.  For  the  purposes
of  ordinary  discussion  we  generally  use  words  with  regard  to  which
we  know  fairly  well  what  is  their  correct  usage.  What  is  called  a

^ Logic,  Bk,  I,  CJiap.  VIH,  §6,  Mill  uses  ‘name’  where  I have  used
‘ word  ’ or  ‘ symbol  ’ or  ‘ expression  ’r  '


THE  THEOEY  OF  DEFINITION


427


serial  dispute  is  a dispute  about  a matter  of  fact,  namely,  as  to
how  a word  is  used  by  those  who  use  it  correctly.  It  is  assumed
that  there  is  a correct  and  an  incorrect  use.  Since  the  function  of
words  is  to  communicate  thought,  they  would  fail  of  their  purpose
if  their  meanings  were  not  fixed.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  any
serious  disputes  are  purely  verbal^  When  A and  B use  the  same
words  with  different  meanings  they  generally  have  different  con-
ceptions with  regard  to  the  facts  which  they  use  the  words  to  express.
With  regard  to  such  topics  as  religion,  art,  and  politics,  which  we  all
believe  ourselves  competent  to  (fiscuss,  what  appear  to  be  verbal
disputes  may  arise.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  A asserts  that
Epstein’s  Night  is  a work  of  art  and  B asserts  that  it  is  not.  It  is
unlikely  that  their  dispute  concerns  the  meaning  of  the  words  ‘‘  a
work  of  art  It  probably  arises  from  the  fact  that  they  have
different  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  art.  If  it  were  purely  verbal
it  could  be  properly  terminated  by  the  agreement  Oh  ! well,  what
you  call  a work  of  art  is  not  what  I call  ' a work  of  art  Such
disputes  do  not  usually  end  thus.  Something  more  is  felt  to  be  at
stake  than  an  arbitrary  difference  in  the  use  of  words.

Definitions  may,  indeed,  be  arbitrary.  In  discussing  a topic  a
speaker  (or  writer)  may  assert,  I am  going  to  use  ^ X ’ to  mean
so-and-so”.  For  example,  he  may  say,  "‘What  I call  "safeguarding
duties  ’ are  usually  called  " protective  duties  His  assertion  will
be  true  if  he  so  uses  the  word ; if  not,  it  will  be  false.  Most  definitions,
however,  are  not  arbitrary.

It  is  because  definitions  are  not  arbitrary  that  they  are  useful.
Consider,  for  example,  the  two  words  " star  ’ and  " planet  ’.  The
word  " star  ’ was  used  to  stand  for  shining  spots  visible  at  night  in
the  sky.  Astronomers  were  led  to  distinguish  these  shining  spots
into  two  different  sets,  calHng  one  set " stars  ’,  the  other  set " wander-
ing stars’.  Later  the  descriptive  adjective  “wandering”  was  seen
to  be  a more  important  designation  than  " stars  so  that  they  were
called  “ planets  ” ("  wanderers  ’).  Those  who  now  use  " star  ’
correctly  do  not  use  it  to  express  what  are  called  " planets  The
recognition  of  a distinguishing  set  of  characteristics  led  to  the  use
of  a new  word.  We  see  then  the  importance  of  the  first  consider-
ation mentioned  above,  viz.  the  close  connexion  between  words
and  what  they  express.  The  usage  of  “ planet  ” is  determined  by  the
characteristics  which  people  want  to  talk  about.  Hence,  it  does  not
seem  absurd  to  suppose  that  in  defining  “ planet  ” we  are  defining
what  are  called  planets.  Nevertheless,  this  supposition  is  mistaken.
We  define  the  word,  but  there  is  a word  to  define  only  because  we
want  to  talk  about  what  it  expresses.

1 Cf.  Locke : An  Essay  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  Bk.  IV,  Chap.


428


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION-  TO  LOGIC


§ 2.  THE  THEOEY  OF  THE  PEEDI0ABLB8  AED  ITS  EELA-
TION  TO  THE  TEADITIONAL  THEOEY  OF  DEFINITION

In  tMs  section  we  shall  be  concerned  with  an  Aristotelian  doctrine
of  great  historical  importance.  It  is  thus  introduced  by  Aristotle  :
‘ Now  every  proposition  and  every  problem  indicates  either  a genus
or  a pecuharity  or  an  accident — ^for  the  differentia  too,  applying  as
it  does  to  a class  (or  genus),  should  be  ranked  together  with  the
genus.  Since,  however,  of  what  is  peculiar  to  anything  part  signifies
its  essence,  while  part  does  not,  let  us  divide  the  “ peculiar  ” into
both  the  aforesaid  parts,  and  call  that  part  which  indicates  the
essence  a “definition”,  while  of  the  remainder  let  us  adopt  the
terminology  which  is  generally  current  about  these  things,  and  speak
of  it  as  a “ property  What  we  have  said,  then,  makes  it  clear
that  according  to  our  present  division,  the  elements  turn  out  to  be
four,  aU  told,  namely  either  property  or  definition  or  genus  or
accident.’  i The  doctrine  indicated  in  this  passage  has  been  of
enormous  importance  in  the  subsequent  development  of  logical
theory.  In  order  to  imderstand  Aristotle’s  statement  of  the  doctrine
it  is  important  to  take  into  account  his  climate  of  thought  and  to
remember  that  his  work  consisted  chiefly  in  systematizing  and
developing  doctrines  originated,  or  at  least  suggested,  by  Socrates
and  Plato.®

The  art  of  argumentative  discussion,  or  debate,  was  a favourite
intellectual  pastime  of  the  Greeks,  who  carried  it  to  a high  degree
of  excellence.  In  this  art  Socrates  was  an  acknowledged  master.
He  was  not  himself  mainly  interested  in  logical  theory  but  he  enor-
mously influenced  its  subsequent  development  by  his  disciples,
chiefly  Plato  and  Aristotle.  The  interest  of  Socrates  was  centred  in
moral  problems  about  which  he  strove  continuously  to  t.bmk  clearly.
He  thought  that  if  we  only  hiew  what  justice,  holiness,  courage,  etc.,
were,  we  should  act  justly,  courageously,  and  so  on.  That  is  to
say,  he  wanted  to  know  what  things  are.  He  saw  that  most  men
who  praise  an  act  as  just,  or  condemn  it  as  unjust,  have  but  a vague,
unclear  conception  as  to  the  grounds  of  their  judgement.  His  pur-
pose was  to  discover  these  grounds,  to  find  the  primiple,  or  formula,
in  accordance  with  which  we  can  judge  “ This  act  is  just  ”,  “ This
act  is  holy  ”,  and  so  on.  Thus  he  was  led  to  search  for  what  may
be  called  “ the  definition  ” of  justice,  of  holiness,  and  so  on.  As
a preliminary  he  examined  acts  called  “ just  ” m order  to  take
mto  account  cases  which  might  seem  to  be  exceptional  so  that  he
might  see  what  characteristics  an  act  must  have  if  it  is  to  be  judged
just.^  The  application  of  the  definition  would  then  take  the  form :
An  act  of  such  a kind  is  just ; this  act  is  of  such  a kind ; therefore,

^To-pica,  101&,  17-25.  _ *C!f.  Chap.  XXV,  § 2 below.

* See,  for  inatanoe,  BepMic.


THE  THEOEY  OF  DEFINITION


42S


this  act  is  just.  It  will  be  seen  that  this  reasoning  is  of  tbe  forn
subsequently  called  by  Aristotle  tbe  Scientific  Syllogism  Tbt
minor  premiss  is  of  tbe  form : This  A is  B;  tbe  major  premiss  is  o:
tbe  form ; Every  B is  0.  Tbe  inference  consists  in  bringing  tbe  act
stated  in  tbe  minor,  under  tbe  principle,  stated  in  tbe  major  premiss
This  principle,  or  formula,  exhibits  wbat  justice  essentially  is,  Tbe
itabcized  words  are  of  great  importance.  It  is  worth  while  to  take
some  trouble  to  attempt  to  understand  them.  We  are  all  familial
with  tbe  distinction  between  wbat  things  essentially  are  and  wbai
they  are  only,  as  it  were,  hy  accident.  We  may  observe  various
just  acts  on  different  occasions  and  in  different  circumstances
Some  of  these  characteristics,  present  on  some  occasions  but  not  or
others,  will  be  seen  not  to  he  essential.  To  say  that  they  are  nol
essential  is  to  say  that  they  are  not  indispensable  to  tbe  act’s  hein^
just  Those  characteristics  that  are  indispensable  to  an  act’s  being
just  are  tbe  characteristics  which  make  the  act  a just  act.  It  is
these  characteristics  that  Socrates  sought  to  express  in  the  formula :
Justice  is  that  which  has  such  and  such  characteristics.

Many  of  the  dialogues  of  Plato  are  concerned  with  the  search
for  de&iitions.  The  method  is  the  method  of  Socrates.  Now
Aristotle  was  profoundly  interested  in  the  logical  aspect  of  this
method.  He  wrote  a lengthy  treatise,  the  Topica,  on  the  principles
of  argumentative  discussion.  The  passage  from  this  work  quoted
at  the  beginning  of  this  section  occurs  in  his  discussion  of  the
premisses  of  argument.  He  wanted  to  distinguish  the  various  ways
in  which  predicates  may  be  related  to  the  same  subject,  this  subject
being  a general  term,  e.g.  Every  just  act,  or  a concept,  e.g.  justice.
Since  Aristotle  took  Socrates’  mode  of  inquiry  as  his  model  of  reason-
ing, and  not,  as  might  have  been  expected,  mathematical  reasoning,
Ms  question  naturally  took  the  form  ‘‘  What  is  it  that  such  and  such
is  ? ” In  answering  this  question  he  took  the  distinction  between
essential  and  non-essential  characteristics  as  fundamental.  What  is
essential  is  necessarily  related  to  the  subject,  what  is  non-essential
is  accidentally  related  to  it.  These  distinctions  are  common  to
Socrates  and  Axistotle  but  the  terminology  is  that  of  Aristotle,  foi
he  was  the  first  to  attempt  to  make  the  distinction  precise.

We  saw  that  the  definition  of  justice  states  what  justice  essentially
is.  Wherever  these  essential  characteristics  are,  there  justice  is.
In  such  cases,  Aristotle  says,  subject  and  predicate  are  convertible,
or,  as  he  also  puts  it,  commensurate.  At  this  point  Aristotle  made
a distinction,  not  explicitly  recognized  by  Socrates,  which  may  have
been  suggested  by  reflection  on  mathematical  reasoning,  or  demon-
stration. He  distinguished  the  essential  characteristics  into  essence
and  non-essence,  Anstotle’s  notion  of  essence  is  difl&cult  to  under-
stand. He  nowhere  clearly  explains  it,  but  seems  to  take  essence  ”


430


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


as  a technical  term  to  be  left  undefined  and  by  means  of  which  he
defines  those  predicables  that  are  to  be  contrasted  with  it.  It  is
important  not  to  confuse  the  essence  of  A,  in  Aristotle’s  technical
sense,  with  what  A essentially  is.  The  latter  is  what  Aristotle  calls,
in  the  passage  quoted  above,  a peculiarity  ” of  A.  That  part  of
the  ‘^peculiarity”  of  A that  is  not  essence  Aristotle  calls  by  his
new  technical  term  “property”.  A 'property  is  to  be  contrasted
with  the  definition^  for  a definition  of  A expresses  the  essence  of  A,
and  property  is  not  essence.  Finally,  those  characteristics  of  A
which  are  not  part  of  its  “ peculiarity  ” (or  which  are  not  what  A
essentially  is)  Aristotle  calls  by  his  technical  term  “ accidents  ”.
An  example  may  make  these  distinctions  clearer.  Given  the  sub-
ject circle^,  we  may  assert  the  following  propositions : (1)  A circle
is  a plane  curve  every  point  of  which  is  equidistant  from  a given
point ; (2)  a circle  is  a plane  curve ; (3)  a circle  is  such  that  the
angle  in  the  segment  subtending  a diameter  is  a right  angle  ; (4)  a
circle  may  have  a diameter  of  four  inches.  The  first  proposition
asserts  the  essence  ; it  is  a definition  of  circle.  A plane  curve  is  the
genus  of  circle ; it  is  the  sort,  or  kind,  of  geometrical  figure  that
a ciccle  is.  The  third  proposition  asserts  what  Aristotle  calls  a
“ property  ”,  which  is  now  usually  called  by  the  Latin  name  pro-
prium^  The  fourth  proposition  asserts  a characteristic  which  a
circle  may  have,  but  which  not  all  circles  have.  This  is  an  accident.

Aristotle  gives  the  following  definitions  of  these  four  predicables  :

1.  ‘ A “ definition  ” is  a phrase  signifying  a thing’s  essence.’

2.  ‘ A “ property  ” is  a predicate  which  does  not  indicate  the
essence  of  a thing,  but  yet  belongs  to  that  thing  alone,  and  is  predi-
cated convertibly  of  it.’

3.  ‘ A “ genus  ” is  what  is  predicated  in  the  category  of  essence
of  a number  of  things  exhibiting  differences  in  kind.’

4.  ‘ An  “ accident  ” is  something  which  may  possibly  belong
or  not  belong  to  any  one  and  the  self-same  thing.’ ^

The  most  difficult  to  understand  of  these  distinctions  is  that
between  definition  and  property.  Aristotle  distinguishes  two  elements
in  the  definition,  the  genus  and  the  differentia.  The  nature  of  this
distinction  can  only  be  understood  if  it  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
subject  defined,  which  Aristotle  constantly  calls  ‘ a thing  is  a
species,  that  is,  ‘ things  of  a certain  sort  or  ‘ a kind  ’.  A species
is  e:^ressed  by  what  we  have  called  a ‘ class-name  ’.  Two  or  more
species  may  have  characteristics  in  common  which  make  it  possible
to  regard  them  as  together  constituting  a kind.  Such  a kind  is  a

^ We  shall  henceforth  write  ‘ proprium  ’ for  ‘ property  in  Aristotle’s  sense
in  order  to  avoid  confusion  with  the  wider  use  of  ‘ property  ’ as  a synonym  for
‘ characteristic  which  is  now  common.

^ Topica,  Bk.  I,  Chap.  5,  102a.


THE  THEORY  OF  DEFINITION


431


gems^  One  species  of  a genus  is  differentiated  froni  anotlier  species
by  a cbaracteristic  difference.  Tbis  characteristic  is  what  Aristotle
meant  by  a ‘ differentia  as  the  word  differentiated  ’’  which  has
passed  into  common  speech  suggests.  Thus  a differentia  seems  to
be  what  we  have  elsewhere  called  the  defining  property  of  a class.
But  Aristotle  did  not  regard  a species,  or  a genus,  as  a class  in  the
sense  of  a collection  of  members.  He  insists  that  the  parts  of
a definition  are  one^  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  definition
expresses  the  essence,^  This  conception  of  the  genus  as  a unity
capable  of  being  comprehended  in  the  single  formula  that  constitutes
or  is  expressed  by  the  definition  is  in  accordance  with  Aristotle’s
belief  that  things  have  fixed,  unalterable  essences.  The  search
for  a definition  was  the  search  to  determine  this  essence,  and
thus  to  apprehend  in  one  notion  the  characteristics  that  belong
to  the  thing  as  such.  The  essence  is  somethiag  given ; it  is  primary
and  underivable.  The  proprium  is  what  is  derivable  from  the
essence.  Like  the  essence  the  proprium  is  essential  to  the  subject
and  convertible  with  it.  Yet  it  is  not  part  of  the  essence.  The
connexion  between  them  seems  to  be  that  the  proprium  is  what
follows  fro7n  the  essence.  Whilst  the  essence  is  given,  or  assumed,
propria  are  demonstrated.  This  distinction  between  essence  as
given  and  propria  as  demonstrated  is  the  basis  of  Aristotle’s  theory
of  scientific  knowledge.  ^ It  would  be  difficult  to  apply  this  dis-
tinction to  moral  concepts,  or  to  biological  concepts,  although  there
is  a sense  in  which  it  can  be  applied  to  the  concepts  of  geometry.
What  follows  by  demonstration  from  the  definition  of  circle  are
propria  of  the  circle.  Aristotle  himself  gives  the  example,  ^ it  is
a property  of  man  to  be  capable  of  learning  grammar ; for  if  A
be  a man,  then  he  is  capable  of  learning  grammar,  and  if  he  be
capable  of  learning  grammar  he  is  a man  But  he  does  not  show
hoio  this  property  could  be  demonstrated  to  follow  from  the  essence
of  man.  Nor  is  it  the  case  even  with  mathematical  definitions  that
propria  can  be  demonstrated  from  them  alone.  Moreover,  the  dis-
tinction between  propria  and  definition  would  appear  to  be  relative,
depending  upon  what  definition  is  selected.  This  adnaission  would
be  in  accordance  with  modern  views  of  mathematics.  But  Aristotle
did  not  regard  the  distinction  as  relative,  since  essence  is  fixgd  and

^ Aristotle’s  definition  of  ‘ genus  ’ is  very  unsatisfactory  and  seems  to  b©
circular.  His  statements  with  regard  to  ‘ differentia  ’ are  disconnected  and
unclear.  In  one  place  he  says : ‘ A thing’s  differentia  never  signifies  its  essence,
but  rather  some  quality,  as  do  “walking”  and  “biped”.’  (122&,  17.)

®Cf.  Aristotle,  Met  Z.,  XII.

® See  Post  Anal,,  Bk.  n,  passim,  especially  Chaps.  4-9.  Of.  also  906,  30 :
‘ definition  is  of  essential  nature  or  being  of  something,  and  all  demonstrations
evidently  posit  and  assume  the  essential  nature/

*'Topica,  102a,  20.


432


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


unalterable.  We  may  conclude,  then,  that  whilst  the  distinction
between  essential  and  accidental  characteristics  is  of  fundamental
importance,  the  distinction  between  definition  as  expressing  essence
and  propria  as  leing  demonstrable  cannot  be  drawn  in  exactly  the
way  in  which  Aristotle  drew  it.

Aristotle’s  theory  of  the  predicables  is  a theory  of  the  way  in
which  predicates  may  be  related  to  one  another.  Thus  the  genus,
the  definition,  the  propria,  the  accidents  are  predicable  of  the  species
which  is  itself  a possible  predicate,  or  universal,  being  predicable
of  individuals.  The  traditional  classification  of  the  predicables  is
not  Aristotelian.  It  was  derived  from  Porphyry,^  who  unfortun-
ately substituted  species  for  definition,  thereby  abandoning  Aristotle’s
point  of  view.  Porphyry’s  five  predicables  are : genus,  species,
differentia,  proprium,  accident.  His  classification  is  based  upon
the  relations  which  a predicate  may  have  to  an  individual  subject,
i.e.  an  individual  qua  individual,  not  an  individual  of  a certain  sort.
Thus,  for  instance,  the  subject  will  be  not  man  but  Socrates.  This
change  introduced  fresh  difficulties,  since  it  raises  the  question  as
to  what  is  really  a species  and  what  is  a genus  within  a genus.  Is
the  species  of  Socrates  Greek  or  man  ? This  might  seem  to  be  an
advance  on  the  view  of  Aristotle,  but  it  in  fact  confuses  the  basis
of  the  Aristotelian  classification  in  which  the  distinction  between
species  and  genus  is  not  relative  but  absolute.  Further,  the  difficulty
of  distinguishing  between  what  is  an  accident  and  what  is  a proprium
of  an  individual  led  Porphjnry  to  distinguish  between  separable  and
inseparable  accidents.  An  accident  of  a species,  for  example,  blue-
eyed, is  an  inseparable  accident  of  the  blue-eyed  individual ; but
his  height  is  a separable  accident  since  it  varies  at  different  periods
of  his  hfe.  It  is  obvious  that  this  distinction  is  not  clearly  based.
An  ‘ inseparable  accident  ’ is  a contradiction  in  terms.

The  traditional  theory  of  definition  is  based  upon  the  theory  of
the  predicables.  It  can  be  summed  up  in  the  rule : definition  should
be  per  genus  et  differentmm  (i.e.  by  assigning  the  genus  and  the
distinguishing  characteristic).  This  rule  express'es  Auistotle’s  view
that  definition  states  the  essence  of  what  is  defined.  Accordingly
the  traditional  Logicians  regarded  definition  as  being  of  things  of
a certain  sort,  i.e.  species,  or  concepts,  not  of  names.  ^ Everything,
it  is  assumed,  has  a determinate  essence  and  there  is  one  and  only
one  definition  appropriate  to  it,  viz.  that  which  expresses  the  essence.
From  this  point  of  view  definition  may  well  seem  to  be  the  culmina-
tion of  scientific  inquiry.  Definitions  will  be  in  no  sense  arbitrary ;

^ Porphyry  lived  in  the  third  century  a.d.  His  Introduction  to  the  Categories
(the  Eixfaymyrj)  was  more  carefully  studied  in  the  Middle  Ages  than  were
Aristotle’s  own  works.

*Ci  Aristotle,  Anal.  Post,  926,  25-35.


THE  THEORY  Of  DEEINITIOK


433


they  will  be  determined  by  the  nature  of  things.  The  traditional
conception  of  geometry  supported  this  view  since  geometrical  figures
were  regarded  as  given  in  intuition  by  construction  of  the  figure.
The  definition  of  triangle  as  plane  figure  hounded  hy  three  straight  lines
seemed  to  express  the  essence  as  no  other  definition  would.  Hence
the  acceptance  of  Aristotle^s  view  that  the  distinction  between
essence  and  proprium  is  absolute.  So  long,  too,  as  there  was  belief
in  the  fixity  of  organic  species,  it  would  seem  that  each  species  had
an  essence  which  must  be  stated  in  the  definition.  Modern  theories
of  organic  evolution  have  combined  with  modern  theories  of  mathe-
matics to  destroy  the  basis  of  the  Aristotelian  conception  of  essence,
and  hence  to  throw  doubt  upon  the  traditional  theory  of  definition.

§ 3.  CLASSIFICATION  AND  DIVISION  IN  RELATION  TO
DEFINITION

The  definition  of  a species  per  genus  et  differentiam  exhibits  it
in  relation  to  other  species  co-ordinate  with  it  in  the  same  genus.
For  example,  the  definition  of  triangle  given  above  co-ordinates  it
with  other  species  of  plane  figures  which  are  differentiated  from
triangles  by  being  bounded  by  more  than  three  straight  lines.  If
the  genus  can  again  be  defined  it  is  a species  relatively  to  some  other
genus,  and  so  on.  Such  an  ordered  arrangement  of  species  under
wider  and  wider  genera  provides  a classification,  or  classificatory
system.  1 Classification  presupposes  the  operation  of  classing,  i.e.
grouping  individuals  together  on  account  of  their  resemblances.
It  is  useful  only  when  the  classes  to  be  arranged  have  important
characteristics  in  common.  ^ Thus  classes  are  recognized  by  definite
class-names.  The  ordered  arrangement  of  such  classes  affords  a
useful  basis  for  inference  as  well  as  sometimes  providing  a useful
conspectus  of  what  is  known  about  a given  subject-matter.

Suppose,  for  instance,  that  a Minister  of  Transport  were  con-
fronted with  the  problem  of  street  traflS.c  in  London.  He  would
have  at  his  disposal  at  the  outset  a set  of  class-names  distinguish-
ing the  different  kinds,  or  species,  of  vehicles,  e.g.  buses,  trams,
taxis,  private  motor-cars,  lorries,  horse-drays,  etc.  If,  now,  he
wanted  to  lessen  the  pressure  of  trafidc  in  Holborn,  he  would  have
to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  trams  cannot  alter  their  routes,
since  they  run  on  fixed  metal  hues.  This  would  provide  him  with
a differentia  to  distinguish  trams  from  the  other  vehicles.  Then
again,  buses  as  contrasted  with  taxis,  have  less  flexible  routes.  He
might  decide  to  confine  certain  streets  to  trams  and  buses,  making
taxis,  private  motor-cars,  lorries  and  horse-vehicles  go  round  an-
other way ; or  he  might  decide  to  adopt  the  system  of  one-way
streets,  so  planned  as  not  to  interfere  with  tram  routes.  If  he
1 See  Chap.  HI,  § 3.  * See  Ckap.  XIV,  § 2.


28


434:


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


adopted  the  latter  alternatiye  he  would  Eot  need  to  take  account
of  the  differences  between  any  of  the  vehicles  that  were  not
trains.  Or  again,  he  might  decide  that  the  most  important
difference  between  vehicles  was  that  between  slow-moving  and
fast-moving.  In  that  case  he  might  conjSne  horse- vehicles  to
certain  routes,  leaving  trams  and  motors  free  to  use  any  routes.
Or  he  might  recognize  that  bulk  and  weight  were  important  factors
in  the  rate  of  movement  so  that  heavily  laden  lorries  and  pantech-
nicons would  be  classed  with  horse-vehicles.

This  rough  example  will  enable  us  to  see  the  utility  of  arranging
classes  in  a certain  order.  What  order  is  selected  will  depend  upon
the  purpose  for  which  the  classification  is  undertaken.  If  the
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  were  to  classify  vehicles  from  the  point
of  view  of  imposing  taxes,  he  would  adopt  a different  principle  of
arrangement  from  that  adopted  by  the  Minister  of  Transport.  Thus
he  might  consider  whether  vehicles  were  run  for  public  or  private  pur-
poses ; what  style  of  vehicle  was  being  used,  distinguishing  motor-cars
according  to  their  initial  cost,  horse-power,  and  so  on.  He  would
thus  obtain  a different  arrangement  of  classes  of  vehicles  suited  to
his  different  purpose.  Vehicles  are  susceptible  of  any  order  that
the  practical  man  or  the  logician  may  impose  upon  them.  The
logician  is  interested  in  the  principles  that  any  satisfactory  classi-
fication must  exhibit.  These  principles  can  be  most  easily  appre-
hended by  considering  a completed  classification  from  the  reverse
point  of  view.  Instead  of  begmning  with  a set  of  classes  that  have
to  be  grouped  under  wider  classes  we  may  start  with  the  widest
class  and  consider  how  this  class  can  be  successively  distinguished
into  smaller  classes.  This  process  of  splitting  a class  into  its  con-
stituent sub-classes  is  known  as  logical  division.  Thus,  to  revert
to  our  example,  the  Minister  of  Transport  may  begin  his  investigation
by  considering  the  class  vehicles  and  askiug  how  vehicles  can  be
differentiated  into  different  hinds  of  vehicles.  In  this  way  he  may
obtain  the  following  division  :

VeMoies


Running  on  alterable  routes  Running  on  unalterable  routes

I (trams)


Running  on  fixed  routes  Running  on  variable  routes

(duses)  I


Plying  for  hire  Not  plying  for  hire


Travelling  on  business


Not  travelling  on  business


THE  THEORY  OF  DEFINITION


435


He  could  then  see  at  a glance  that  regulations  proposing  altera-
tions of  routes  must  be  confined  to  those  vehicles  included  in  the
classes  on  the  left-hand  side ; that  the  group  included  in  the  class
running  on  variable  routes  could  be  the  most  easily  interfered  with
by  means  of  street  regulations.

It  is  clear  that  to  achieve  such  an  ordered  arrangement  of  classes
it  is  first  necessary  to  have  a considerable  knowledge  of  the  char-
acteristics of  each  class.  Nor  are  the  obvious  characteristics
always  the  most  important  for  the  purpose  of  classification.
For  example,  the  landlady  who  undertakes  to  arrange  a student’s
books  is  almost  certain  to  be  guided  by  such  characteristics  as  size,
style  of  binding,  colour,  etc.  A classification  of  books  based  upon
such  characteristics  would  be  thoroughly  unscientific,  and  would
never  occur  to  any  one  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  books  from
the  inside.  The  old  botanical  division  into  trees,  shrubs,  herbs,
though  suggested  by  obvious  characteristics,  has  been  found  not  to
be  based  upon  important  differences.  A definition  of  a species,  'per
genus  et  differentiam  suggests  the  basis  upon  which  the  division
should  proceed.  The  basis  of  division  (i.e.  the  differentiating  char-
acteristic) is  often  called  by  the  Latin  name  fundamentum  divi-
sionis  The  principles  regulating  a logical  division  are  usually
summed  up  in  the  following  rules :

1.  There  must  be  only  one  fundamentum  divisionis  at  each  step.

2.  The  division  must  be  e:^austive.

3.  The  successive  steps  of  the  division  (if  there  be  more  than
one)  must  proceed  by  gradual  stages.

From  Rule  1 there  follows  the  corollary  that  the  classes  must
be  mutually  exclusive.  Violation  of  this  rule  results  in  the  fallacy
of  cross-division,  or  overlapping  classes.  For  example,  if  vehicles
were  divided  into  public  vehicles,  private  vehicles,  motor-cars  and  lorries,
there  would  be  more  than  one  basis  of  division,  with  the  result  that
the  classes  would  overlap.

Rule  2 secures  that  no  class  be  omitted,  so  that  the  sum  of  the
sub-classes  shall  equal  the  whole  class  divided  or  classified.

Rule  3 secures  that  each  stage  of  the  subdivision  should  be  in
accordance  with  the  original  fundamentum  divisionis*  If,  for  ex-
ample, in  dividing  vehicles  we  had  further  divided  vehicles  running
on  variable  routes  plying  for  hire  into  those  driven  by  owner  and  those
not  driven  by  owner,  we  should  have  introduced  a characteristic  that
had  no  relevance  to  the  purpose  of  the  ordered  arrangement.

An  examination  of  our  example  will  show  that  at  each  stage
the  division  was  into  two  and  only  two  classes  distinguished  by
possessing  or  not  possessing  the  same  differentia.  Such  a division
is  division  by  dichotomy.  It  possesses  the  advantages  that

the  division  is  always  formally  valid  since  it  proceeds  on  the  prin-


4B6


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  lOGIO


ciple  that  every  class  must  either  possess  a given  characteristic  or
not  possess  it.  It  was  a natural  mode  of  procedure  in  this  case
since  the  purpose  of  the  division  was  to  contrast  vehicles  according
to  whether  their  usual  routes  could,  or  could  not,  be  easily  varied.
It  would  be  possible  to  exhibit  each  of  the  two  classes  in  the  suc-
cessive stages  as  the  formal  negative  of  the  other.  But  it  is  the
positive  characteristic  running  on  variable  routes  that  would  be  the
natural  one  to  select.  As  an  example  of  a formal  dichotomous
division  we  may  give :

Members  of  a University


Teachers  Non-Teachers


Professors  Non-Professors


Readers  Non-Readers


Lecturers  Non-Lecturers


Demonstrators  Non-Demonstrators

The  formal  validity  of  the  division  does  not  ensure  that  the
sub-classes  exist.  Thus  the  class  of  Teachers  who  are  non-Professors,
non-Readers,  non-Lecturers  and  non-Demonstrators  is  probably
null.

In  the  natural  sciences  dichotomous  division  would  be  of  little
utility.  The  scientist  would  proceed  by  classification,  not  division,
and  would  arrange  his  classes  on  the  basis  of  positive  characteristics.
Classificatory  schemes  in  the  biological  sciences  have  been  profoundly
affected  by  the  theory  of  organic  evolution.  Such  schemes  are  now
based  upon  the  principle  of  continuity  of  descent,  so  that  co-ordinate
species  are  blood-relations.  Hence,  a biological  classification  re-
sembles a genealogical  tree.  Obvious  resemblances  may  be  quite
unimportant.  For  example,  the  unsophisticated  person  would
naturally  classify  animals  on  the  ba^sis  of  the  ^ element  ’ they  live
in.  But  the  bat  has  more  affinity  with  quadrupeds  than  with  birds  ;
the  whale,  seal,  and  porpoise  with  mammals  than  with  fishes,  and
so  on.  Still,  for  some  purposes  the  whale  might  be  grouped  with
fishes,  e.g.  we  speak  of  the  whale  fi.shery,  because  of  the  mode  of
catching  whales.

A classification  of  species  enables  us  to  obtain  easily  a definition
of  any  species.  jBu|^we  must  not  suppose  that  classification  is
prior  to  definition.  The  two  processes  proceed  pari  passu.  This


THE  THEORY  OF  DEFINITION


437


becomes  obvious  as  soon  as  we  reflect  upon  the  difficulties  in  the
way  of  obtaining  a good  classification.  We  must  know  the  pro-
perties of  a species  before  we  can  know  with  what  species  it  can
be  co-ordinated  and  under  what  genus.  On  the  other  hand,  we
may  reach  more  determinate  knowledge  of  the  characteristics  of
the  species  through  the  process  of  comparing  and  contrasting  it
with  the  other  species  entering  into  the  classification.  Plato,  who
made  considerable  use  of  the  processes  of  classification  and  division
in  bis  attempt  to  think  clearly,  showed  both  that  classification  is
an  aid  to  definition  and  that  by  means  of  definition  we  apprehend
the  relation  of  classes.  An  example  taken  from  Plato  will  illustrate
this  point.

In  the  dialogue  The  Sophist  Plato  attempts  to  discover  what
exactly  are  the  characteristics  of  a sophist.  He  suggests  that  as
the  ''  method  of  discovery  ” is  difficult,  it  would  be  well  to  try  it
first  upon  an  easier  subject  than  a sophist  He  accordingly  takes
the  class  angler,  and  attempts  to  determine  its  characteristics.  We
have  not  space  to  follow  the  subtle  and  amusing  way  in  which  Plato
develops  his  method.^  We  can  but  sketch  the  method  and  condense
Plato’s  delightful  discussion  into  a bald  table.  He  suggests  that
the  most  obvious  characteristic  of  the  angler  is  that  he  practises
an  art.  In  order  to  determine  what  art  we  must  subdivide  the  class
art  The  result  of  the  subdivision  is  exhibited  in  the  table  on
the  next  page.

Plato,  having  made  his  subdivision  of  arts,  perceives  that  the
angler  is  ''  cousin  to  the  sophist  The  angler  will  be  found  in  a
subdivision  of  the  class  marked  by  of  water  animals  ” ; the  sophist
will  be  the  sole  occupant  of  the  first  of  the  two  final  classes  into
which  the  class  By  forcible  exchange  of  land  animals  is  divided.  Hence
Plato  reaches  the  required  definition  of  the  sophist,  which  he  sums
up  as  follows : ' His  art  may  be  traced  as  a branch  of  the  appro-
priative,  acquisitive  family — ^which  hunts  Hving  animals — ^land
animals, — ^tame  animals, — ^which  hunts  man, — ^which  hunts  private
individuals — ^for  hire, — ^taking  money  on  exchange — Shaving  the
semblance  of  education ; and  this  is  termed  Sophistry,  and  is  a
hunt  after  the  souls  of  rich  young  men  of  good  repute.’^

As  this  definition  shows,  the  generic  characteristics  are  present
in  every  successive  subdivision  of  the  genus.  A glance  at  any  of
the  examples  of  division  wiU  show  that  each  class,  except  the  first

^ The  student  could  not  do  better  than  read  the  Sofhist  It  provides  an
admirable  exercise  in  clear  thinMng.  Perhaps  the  earnest  student  should  be
warned  that  the  following  example  of  division  does  not  obviously  conform  to  the
requirements  of  the  textbook  in  Logic,  Its  interpretation,  however,  may  be
left  to  his  ingenuity,

* Jewett’s  translation*


438


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Arts  ^


Creative  or  Acquisitive

Productive  I


By  non- voluntary  exchange


Open  ( = fighting)  Secret

( ==  hunting)


Of  living  creatures  Of  lifeless  creatures

I {=  diving)


Of  land  animals  Of  water  animals


Of  tame  animals  Of  wild  animals
(men)


By  force  By  persuasion


In  public  ' In  private


For  hire  With  gifts

and  the  last,  is  a genus  to  those  that  succeed  it  and  a species  to
those  that  precede  it.  The  class  from  which  the  division  starts  is
called  a summum  genus,  or  highest  class  ; the  classes  with  which  the
division  ends  are  called  infimae  s'pecies,  or  lowest  species.  Any  inter-
mediate genus  which  is  subdivided  is  called  the  proximum  genus  of
its  constituent  species.  These  names  are  not  of  great  importance.
What  is  of  importance  is  to  recognize  that  the  distinction  between
genus  and  species  is  relative.  ^

We  have  treated  classification  and  division  as  fundamentally  the
same  process  approached  from  opposite  ends,  the  one  proceeding
from  the  unordered  classes  to  an  orderly  arrangement,  the  other
proceeding  from  a given  class  to  the  analysis  of  its  constituent
sub-classes.  From  the  logical  point  of  view  this  is  unquestionably
correct.  But  no  scientific  classification  achieves  the  ideal  of  logical
division.  Natural  species  are  not  demarcated  one  from  another  in
a way  analogous  to  the  division^of  classes  in  the  examples  we  have

^ “ Art  ” is  here  used  in  the  sense  of  **  a capacity  to  do  something

® Aristotle  would  not,  of  course,  have  admitted  that  the  distinction  is
relative.


By  voluntary  exchange


By  gifts  By  hire  By  purchase


THE  THEORY  OF  DEFINITION


439


given.  It  is  by  no  means  always  possible  to  discover  specific  cbar-
acteristics  differentiating  one  set  of  individuals  from  another  set.
One  species  is  connected  witb  another  by  intermediate  links.  Thus,
as  Professor  Goodrich  says  : ^ It  is  the  universal  experience  of  natur-
alists engaged  in  the  classification  of  quite  modern  closely  allied

species  ”,  that  the  great  difificulty  of  the  work  is  due  to  the  fact
that  it  is  usually  scarcely  possible  to  find  any  character  at  all  suffici-
ently conspicuous  and  constant  to  distinguish  them  from  each
other.  . . . What  we  commonly  call  a species  is,  then,  an  assem-
blage of  closely  allied  and  interbreeding  races  differing  from  each
other  by  small  factorial  differences,  and  representing  as  a whole
its  present  phase  of  evolution  This  being  the  case,  it  follows  that
a biological  classification  cannot  strictly  conform  to  the  rule  that
classes  should  not  overlap.  Nor  can  it  secure  an  exhaustive  division,
since  there  are  many  gaps  in  the  series  of  living  organisms,  some
of  which  may  perhaps  be  filled  in  by  fossil  animals  but  many  of
which  could  be  at  best  conjectured.  But  although  the  mode  of
classification  has  been  profoundly  affected  by  the  thoroughgoing
acceptance  of  the  principle  of  continuity  of  descent,  the  aim  of
classification  remains  unaffected,  namely,  so  to  arrange  classes  that
their  relations  may  be  exhibited  in  accordance  with  the  principles
of  hierarchical  order.

§ 4.  DEFINITION  AND  ANALYSIS

In  the  first  section  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that  definition
is  always  of  symbols,  verbal  or  otherwise.  We  saw  also  that  there
is  an  important  connexion  between  the  defined  symbol  and  the
properties  of  that  which  the  symbol  e3q)resses.  We  have  now  to
consider  what  exactly  is  the  relation  between  the  analytic  definition
of  a symbol  and  the  analysis  of  a concept.  The  discussion  of  this
relation  is  difficult  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  analysis  of  a concept
must  be  expressed  in  words,  or  other  symbols,  so  that  it  is  extremely
easy  to  confuse  the  symbols  with  what  they  express.  By  concepts
we  mean  abstracta,  or  universal  notions,  such  as  causality,  substance,
space,  time,  fatherhood,  number.  We  use  such  concepts  and  in  using
them  we  know  more  or  less  vaguely  what  they  mean.  But  we  do
not  know  their  precise  meanings,  which  involve  their  relations  to
other  concepts.  The  analysis  of  concepts  consists  in  determining
precisely  what  are  the  properties  present  in  objects  which  fall  under
these  concepts.  This  analysis  is  sometimes  extremely  difficult ; it
is  never  possible  until  after  we  have  used  the  concepts  correctly.

^ Living  Organisms  : An  Account  of  fheir  Origin  and  Evolution,  1924  It
may  be  observed  here  that  in  botany  the  name  “ species  ” is  reserved  for  the
lowest  natural  kind ; the  one  next  above  this,  which  includes  it,  is  called  a
genus ; then  comes  the  family ; finally  the  order.


440


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Tlie  Mstory  of  tte  development  of  mathematics  shows  this  very
clearly.  Mathematicians  used  the  concepts  continuity,  infinity,
number,  multiplication,  etc,,  and  by  means  of  them  discovered  im-
portant theorems  long  before  they  knew  what  exactly  these  concepts
meant.  Similarly,  the  special  scientists  used  the  concepts  substance,
cause,  space,  etc.,  before  they  were  clearly  aware  of  what  exactly
these  concepts  meant.  The  analysis  of  these  concepts  is  the  work
of  philosophy.  The  plain  man  likewise  uses  concepts  without
bothering  about  their  analysis.

The  difficulty  of  avoiding  the  confusion  between  an  expression
and  what  is  expressed  is  illustrated  by  Mr.  EusselFs  discussion  of
dej&nitions  in  the  Introduction  to  Principia  Maihematica.  He  says,
‘ A definition  is  a declaration  that  a certain  newly-introduced  symbol
or  combination  of  S3mibols  is  to  mean  the  same  as  a certain  other
combination  of  symbols  of  which  the  meaning  is  already  known.’
He  adds,  ‘ a definition  is,  strictly  speaking,  no  part  of  the  subject
in  which  it  occurs.  For  a definition  is  concerned  wholly  with  the
symbols,  not  with  what  they  symbohze.  Moreover  it  is  not  true
or  false,  being  the  expression  of  a volition,  not  of  a proposition  ’.
This  latter  statement  is  certainly  false.  If  a definition  expresses
a volition,  it  must  be  of  the  form,  I am  going  to  use  ‘ X ’ to
express  what  'Y’  expresses”.  This  is  a proposition  which  will
be  true  if  the  speaker  does  so  use  " X false  if  he  does  not.
As  we  saw  in  section  1,  the  fact  that  a definition  is  arbitrary
does  not  involve  that  it  is  neither  true  nor  false.  Mr.  RusseU
emphasizes  the  view  that  definitions  are  merely  ‘typographical
conveniences  ’,  introduced  to  shorten  our  formulae,  since  the
definiendum  (which  is  always  shorter  than  the  definiens)  can
always  replace  the  definiens  in  any  formula.  This  is  in  agreement
with  what  we  have  said  about  definition.  But  Mr.  Russell  goes
on  to  say,  ‘ In  spite  of  the  fact  that  definitions  are  theoretically
superfluous,  it  is  nevertheless  true  that  they  often  convey  more
important  information  than  is  contained  in  the  propositions  in
which  they  are  used.’  Their  importance,  he  says,  is  due,  fixst,  to
the  fact  that  the  introduction  of  a definition  shows  that  the  definiens
is  worth  consideration ; secondly,  to  the  fact  that  ‘ when  what  is
defined  is  (as  often  occurs)  something  already  familiar,  such  as
cardinal  or  ordinal  numbers,  the  definition  contains  an  analysis  of
a common  idea,  and  may  therefore  express  a notable  advance
This  last  statement  clearly  contradicts  his  previous  assertion  that
‘ definition  is  concerned  wholly  with  symbols  ’.  Nor  could  the  ex-
pression of  the  volition  of  the  mathematician  constitute  an  important
advance  in  knowledge.  It  is  obvious  that  Mr.  EusseU.  has  been  led
into  contradiction  because  he  wanted  to  do  two  things  at  once,
viz.  to  die^m.%'defimition  as  concerned  wdth  symbols,  and  to  point  out


THE  THEOEY  OF  DEFINITION


441


ttat  tlie  analysis  of  a concept,  which  may  be  most  suitably  expressed
in  a definition,  constitutes  an  advance  in  knowledge.

The  analytic  definition  of  a symbol  does  indeed  entail  the  analysis
of  the  concept  which  the  symbol  expresses.  A definition  is  an  equa-
tion ; it  asserts  that  a given  set  of  symbols  is  equivalent  to  some
other  symbol,  or  set  of  symbols.  Both  the  definiendum  and  the
definiens  express  the  same  referend,  the  latter  being  an  analysis  of
the  former.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  an  analysis  of  a symbolic
expression  may  constitute  an  advance  in  knowledge.  The  definition
enables  us  to  see  what  it  was  we  were  meaning  when  we  used  the
expression  that  is  now  defined.  We  sometimes  use  words  to  refer
to  a referend  with  regard  to  which  we  have  no  clear  idea.  Then
we  may  come  to  see  that  another  set  of  words,  or  symbols,  much
more  clearly  expresses  what  the  referend  is.  It  is  in  this  way  that
the  analytic  definition  of  a symbol  entails  an  analysis  of  what  is
expressed  by  both  sets  of  symbols,  although  the  analytic  definition
is  of  the  symbol,  not  of  the  concept  which  the  symbol  expresses.
This  point  may  be  made  clearer  by  contrasting  logical  analysis  with
chemical  analysis.  In  the  case  of  chemical  analysis  there  is  both
an  unanalysed  whole,  which  is  one  thing,  and  then  the  set  of  con-
stituents into  which  it  is  analysed.  But  in  logical  analysis  there
are  not  two  things  but  two  expressions  which  mean  the  same.  For
example,  in  the  definition  ‘ danger  ’ is  ‘ exposure  to  harm
there  is  not  a complex  property  expressed  by  ^ danger  ’ as  well  as
the  set  of  properties  expressed  by  ‘ exposure  to  bodily  harm  On
the  contrary,  there  is  one  set  of  properties  which  both  ^ danger  ’ and
^ exposure  to  harm  ’ express.  The  correct  analysis  of  a symbolic
expression  is  enlightening  since  it  shows  what  we  m^ant  when  we
used  the  defined  expression.  When,  for  instance,  Mr.  Russell  suc-
ceeded in  defining  the  expression  “ the  author  of  Waverley  ” by  the
expression  one  and  only  one  man  wrote  Waverley  ”,  he  made  clear
to  us  what  we  had  all  the  time  been  meaning  to  express  by  “ the
author  of  Waverley  ”.  A correct  analytic  definition  is  apt  to  produce
the  response,  ' Why,  of  course,  that’s  what  I meant  all  the  time.’
Such  a definition  marks  an  advance  in  knowledge  by  making  our
ideas  clearer  and  in  thus  revealing  the  implications  of  the  expressions
we  use.  It  enables  us  to  see  what  follows  from  the  analysis.

We  can  now  consider  Mr.  Russell’s  definition  of  ^‘definition”.
Two  points  are  important : (1)  the  definition  must  be  expressed
in  terms  of  other  expressions  already  defined ; (2)  which  are  the
terms  to  be  previously  defined  is  dependent  to  some  extent  upon
the  choice  of  the  person  who  offers  the  definition.  The  first  point
emphasizes  the  important  fact  that  there  must  be  terms  which
either  are  indefinable  or  are  taken  as  undefmed.  The  second  point
emphasizes  the  fact  that  there  is  some  choice  in  the  selection  of  the


442


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


tULdefined  terms.  In  the  case  of  expressions  in  common  use  this
choice  is  never  conscious ; it  results  from  the  development  of  lan-
guage under  the  stress  of  practical  needs.  In  the  case  of  deductive
systems  the  choice  is  determined  by  considerations  of  logical,  i.e.
deductive  power,  simplicity  and  elegance.  Which  expressions  the
mathematician  takes  as  undefined  will  be  largely  determined  by  his
climate  of  opinion  and  by  the  development  of  the  subject  by  his
predecessors.  The  choice  of  the  initial  concepts  will  determine  the
form  of  the  system.  ^

The  dependence  of  an  analytic  definition  upon  previously  defined
symbols  is  illustrated  by  the  definition  of  second  cousins  ’’  given
in  the  first  section.  ^ This  definition  presupposed  that  first  cousins  ”
was  already  defined.  The  definition  of  hrst  cousins  ” presupposed
that  parent  of  ” had  been  defined.  If  we  deshed  to  defc.e  parent
of  ” we  might  do  so  in  terms  of  ''  begetting  The  familiarity  of  the
concept  parent  of  makes  such  a definition  seem  artificial.  The  unde-
fined symbols  are  less  familiar  than  those  which  they  help  to  define.
But  to  be  familiar  with  a concept  and  to  know  its  analysis  are  quite
different ; similarly  to  be  familiar  with  a symbol  and  to  know  how
to  analyse  it  are  quite  different.  The  purpose  of  an  analjdiic  definition
is  not  to  explain  the  meaning  of  a symbol  which  we  already  under-
stand, but  to  give  an  analysis  of  it  in  terms  of  more  primitive  symbols.

As  another  example  of  analytic  definition  we  may  take  the
Frege-Russell  definition  of  cardinal  number  ”,  which,  Mr.  Eussell
says,  ' Marks  a notable  advance  This  definition  is  given  in  words
by  Russell  in  his  Introduction  to  Mathematical  Philosophy,  It  is
convenient  to  consider  it  in  this  form,

A number  is  anything  which  is  the  number  of  some  class  This
presupposes  the  definition :

The  number  of  a class  is  the  class  of  all  those  classes  that  are
similar  to  itJ^

This  presupposes  the  definition:

One  class  is  similar  to  another  when  there  is  a one-one  relation
of  which  the  one  class  is  the  domain,  while  the  other  is  the  converse
domain,^'

This  presupposes  the  definitions  of : domain  of  a relation  ”,
“ converse  domain  ”,  one-one  relation  ”.  These  need  not  be  given
here.®  W'e  have  said  enough  to  show  that  the  analytic  definition
of  a symbol  in  terms  of  previously  defined  symbols,  and  ultimately
in  terms  of  a very  few  initial  undefined  symbols,  will  give  important
information  if  the  initial  undefined  symbols  express  concepts  which
are  of  importance  in  the  analysis  of  other  concepts.

^See  above,  Chap.  X,  §5.

^In  Chap.  IX  we  gave  various  examples  of  analytic  definition,  e.g.

E!(ia;)(?Pa;)  See  p.  137t  ®Se©  above,  Chap.  X,  §2,


OHAPTER  XXIII

ABSTRACTION  AND  GENERALIZATION


‘The  paradox  is  now  fully  established  that  the  utmost  abstractions  are
the  true  weapon  with  which  to  control  our  thought  of  concrete  fact.* — A»  N.
Whitehead,

§1,  THE  ABSTEACTNESS  OE  SCIENCE

Thought  as  sucL.  involves  abstraction.  To  think  about  a
given  situation  is  to  view  it  in  at  least  partial  disconnexion
from  other  situations  with  which  it  is  in  fact  connected.
Moreover,  within  the  given  situation  itself  some  only  of  its  char-
acteristics will  be  attended  to,  namely  those  that  are  apparently
relevant  to  the  problem  that  is  the  occasion  of  the  thinking.  A
comparison  of  the  process  of  idle  reverie  with  Mrs.  Nickleby’s  dis-
course, and  of  both  with  thinl^ing  controlled  with  regard  to  a deter-
minate problem,  brings  out  the  element  of  abstraction  involved  in
all  thinking.  Each  of  these  processes  involves  abstraction  but  as
we  pass  from  the  first  to  the  third  we  can  discern  a progressive
increase  in  abstractness  required  by  the  increasing  selectiveness  of
thought.  Thinking  involves  both  analytic  and  synthetic  selection.
There  is  analysis  in  so  far  as  a character  is  separated  from  that  with
which  it  is  in  fact  conjoined ; there  is  synthesis  in  so  far  as  there
is  a combination  of  characters  that  are  in  fact  disjoined.  The
thinker  is  at  any  given  moment  in  a situation  that  is  concrete  in
the  quite  precise  sense  that  no  communicable  description  can  be
adequate  to  it  in  all  its  details.  Whatever  can  be  communicated
is  abstract.  ^ To  be  abstract  says  Professor  Whitehead,  ^ is  to
transcend  particular  concrete  occasions  of  actual  happenings?  ^
The  particular  concrete  occasion  is  transcended  because  what  is
abstract  has  relevance  to  other  occasions  than  the  given  occasion.
For  example,  a man  seated  on  a rock  watches  a sea-gull  a few  feet
away  from  him.  He  is  situated  within  a particular  concrete  occa-
sion— ^to  use  Professor  Whitehead’s  phrase.  In  being  sensibly
aware  of  the  colour,  or  of  the  shape,  of  the  sea-gull,  or  of  its  sharp
cry  as  it  waits  for  more  crumbs  to  be  thrown  to  it,  he  is  seeing  an

^ Science  and  the  Modern  World,  p.  221.  I am  conscious  of  owing  more  to
Professor  Whitehead  in  this  chapter  than  usual  But  it  is  probable  that  I
have  not  always  understood  him.


443


444


A MODEEK  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


absolutely  specific  shade  of  white  and  an  absolutely  specific  shade
of  grey ; he  is  seeing  an  absolutely  specific  shape,  and  hearing  an
absolutely  specific  sound.  There  are  no  names  for  such  absolutely
specific  properties.  Again,  the  reader  of  this  book  can  be  sensibly
aware  of  the  blue  colour  of  its  cover ; what  he  is  aware  of  is  an
absolutely  specific  shade  of  blue.  But  he  wiU  unhesitatingly  and
correctly  use  the  name  blue  ’’  to  describe  the  colour  of  other
surfaces  which  are  obviously  not  exactly  similar  in  colour.  Thus
blue  is  not  an  absolutely  specific  characteristic ; nor  is  white^  nor
any  other  colour  for  which  we  have  a name.^  But  the  same  person
maybe  sensibly  aware  of  the  same  absolutely  specific  shade  of  colour
in  two  different  situations.  Thus  the  man  watching  the  sea-gull
may  notice  a second  sea-gull,  and  it  is  possible  that  he  should  be
sensibly  aware  of  the  same  specific  shade  of  whiteness  in  the  throat
of  each  of  them,  although  he  cannot  name  this  shade.  The  par-
ticular occasion,  then,  is  irrelevant  to  what  is  meant  by  the  “ abso-
lutely specific  shade  of  white  ”,  since  it  can  be  within  more  than
one  particular  occasion.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  absolutely  spec%fic
shade  of  white  is  abstract.  Similarly,  the  absolutely  specific  shade  of
grey,  the  absolutely  specific  sound  of  the  sea-gulFs  cry,  the  abso-
lutely specific  shape  of  the  particular  bird  from  the  position  in
which  the  man  is  seeing  it,  are  abstract.  He  need  not  be  aware
of  them  as  abstract,  but  since  he  can  be  aware  of  the  same  abso-
lutely specific  characteristic  of  colour,  or  of  shape,  or  of  sound,  as
present  on  different  occasions,  it  follows  that  these  absolutely
specific  characteristics  are  abstract.  Similarly  less  specific  char-
acteristics, for  example,  coloured  as  contrasted  with  red,  are  abstract.
A characteristic,  then,  is  to  be  contrasted  with  any  given  particular
occasions  to  which  it  may  be  relevant  although  these  particular
occasions  are  not  relevant  to  its  being  what  it  is.  The  point  that
we  are  concerned  to  emphasize  is  that  characteristics  (which  include
qualities  and  relations)  are  abstract  in  the  quite  precise  sense  that
they  are  what  they  are  independently  of  the  particular  occasions
in  which  they  may  be  present.  It  is  this  irrelevance  of  the  par-
ticular occasion  to  the  characteristic  that  makes  it  possible  for  any
simple  characteristic  to  be  predicated  of  more  than  one  thing.

These  considerations  bring  out  clearly  the  fundamental  distinction
between  the  relation  of  blue  to  coloured  and  the  relation  of  blue  to
this  blue  sense-datum.  The  absolutely  specific  shade  of  blue,  which
we  see  if  we  look  at  the  cover  of  this  book,  is  determinate,  but  it  is
not  particular,  yhe  sense-datum  is  a particular ; it  cannot  recur,
although  the  same  absolutely  specific  shade  of  blue  may  recur.

^ Cf.  E.  M.  Whetnall : ‘ Symbol-Situations,’  Froc,  Arist  Soc,,  N.S.,  XXIX,
pp.  214-16,  and  G.  E,  Moore;  Froo^  Arist,  JSoc.^  SuffUmentary  Yolunie  III,
p.  102,


ABSTEACTION  AM)  GENERALIZATIOIT


445


Thus  to  be  paiticular  and  to  be  determinate  are  quite,  different.
This  difference  has  sometimes  been  obscured  by  the  common  habit
of  speaking  of  a specific  shade  of  blue  as  an  instance  of  a less  specific
shade,  and  also  of  the  sense-datum  as  an  instance  of  the  most  specific
shade  of  blue  that  characterizes  the  sense-datum.  This  double  use
of  instance  of  ’’  is  unfortunate.  The  confusion  is  further  en-
couraged by  the  failure  to  recognize  that  the  relation  of  the  members
of  a class  to  the  members  of  a sub-class  is  quite  different  from  the
relation  of  a less  specific  to  a more  specific  characteristic.  For
this  reason  Mr.  Johnson’s  expressions  determinable  ” and  deter-
minate ” are  convenient.  If  we  adopt  this  phraseology  we  shall  say
that  characteristics  may  be  more,  or  less,  determinate,  whereas
classes  may  be  wider,  or  narrower.  A set  of  objects  is  to  be  regarded
as  a class  when  each  of  them  possesses  a certain  more  or  less  deter-
minate characteristic  or  set  of  characteristics.  The  number  of  objects
contained  in  the  set  is  in  no  way  dependent  upon  the  nature  of
the  determinate  characteristic  which  constitutes  this  set  a class.  ^
It  follows  feom  what  we  have  been  saying  that  classing  and
classification  involve  abstraction.  Crow,  bird,  table,  heather,  etc.,
are  what  they  are  independently  of  any  particular  which  is  a
crow,  or  is  a table,  and  so  on.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  it  is
impossible  to  deduce  from  the  defining  characteristics  of  crow  ”,
the  number  of  crows  that  have  been,  and  are,  and  will  be.
Thus  in  classing  a presented  object  as  a crow  disconnexion  from
the  particular  occasion  and  apprehension  of  relevance  to  other
occasions  are  involved.  In  the  classification  of  crow  there  is  involved
relations  with  other  classes.  The  ordered  relations  of  classes  that
constitutes  classification  involves  propositions  such  as  Grows  are
birds.  This  is  a general  proposition.  We  have  seen  that  such  a
proposition  expresses  a relation  between  characters.  Hence  gener-
ality involves  abstraction.  Consequently,  science  takes  notice
of  particular  occasions  only  in  order  to  verify  general  propositions.
In  so  far  as  history  is  concerned  with  given  particular  occasions
it  is  not  science.  History  involves  abstraction,  fox  whatever  can
be  communicated  is  abstract.  But  the  historian  who  is  concerned
with  what  has  haffcned  may  be  said  in  a sense  to  avoid  this  inevit-
able abstraction  by  a description  which  accumulates  details  so  as  to
be  relevant  to  one  given  occasion  only.  Thus  history  is  the  least
abstract  form  of  knowledge.  A science  in  the  classificatory  stage
involves,  as  we  have  seen,  abstractions  that  axe  expressible  in  general
propositions.  The  constituents  of  such  propositions  may  be  said
to  be  material  constituents  in  that  the  characters  related  are  given
in  sensible  experience.  When  there  is  complete  abstraction  from
all  material  constituents  the  proposition  is  completely  formal.

1 See  W.  E.  J.,  Ft.  I,  Chap.  XL


446


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


It  is  formal  because  its  significance  is  entirely  independent  of  any
reference  to  wbat  is  given  in  experience.

As  the  abstraction  becomes  more  complete,  thereby  achieving
greater  disconnexion  from  any  given  set  of  particular  occasions,
the  method  of  science  passes  from  classification  to  causal  investiga-
tion, and  from  causal  investigation  to  measurement.  The  most
complete  abstraction  is  achieved  in  mathematics  which  involves
complete  disconnexion  from  any  particular  occasions.  It  follows
that  no  reference  to  the  actual  world  is  involved  in  any  mathe-
matical proposition.  The  consequences  of  this  complete  disconnexion
from  what  is  actual  in  determining  the  nature  of  mathematics  will
be  discussed  in  the  last  section  of  this  chapter.  Here  it  is  sujB&cient
to  point  out  that  the  fundamental  distinction  between  mathe-
matics, on  the  one  hand,  and  all  other  sciences,  on  the  other  hand,
is  due  to  the  fact  that  only  in  mathematics  is  abstraction  com-
plete. The  sciences  in  which  classification  plays  an  important  part
are  at  the  other  extreme ; they  have  achieved  the  least  complete
abstractions.  That  this  should  be  the  case  results  from  the  nature
of  the  subject-matter  of  the  social  and  biological  sciences.  A science
that  has  reference  to  historical  processes,  to  growth  and  decay,  to
living  organisms,  cannot  be  completely  disconnected  from  the  par-
ticular occasions  in  which  these  processes  are  exemplified.  It
follows  that  in  these  sciences  there  must  be  departments  to  which
specifically  mathematical  conceptions  are  inappropriate.

§2.  THE  METHOD  OF  EXTENSIVE  ABSTEACTION

In  Chapter  XVIII  we  saw  that  the  scientist  in  attempting  to
make  intelhgible  the  changes  involved  in  the  total  occurrence  raw
meat  being  burnt  to  a cinder  was  forced  to  split  up  this  occurrence
into  smaller  and  smaller  pieces  and  smaller  and  smaller  durations
of  time  and  to  connect  its  qualitative  changes  with  variations  in
spatio-temporal  arrangement.  We  pointed  out  that  this  procedure
is  in  accordance  with  what  Professor  Whitehead  has  called  the
principle  of  convergence  to  simplicity  with  diminution  of  extent.
We  have  now  to  consider  in  more  detail  what  this  principle  is  and
how  it  can  be  applied  so  as  to  exhibit  the  connexion  between  the
abstractions  with  which  science  ends  and  the  sensible  facts  with
which  it  begins.  This  problem  is  of  great  importance  in  the  dis-
cussion of  scientific  method.  The  difficulty  is  to  see  how  the  exact
conceptions  yielded  by  mathematical  abstractions  can  be  applied
to  the  perceptible  objects  of  the  sensible  world.  That  their  connexion
requires  to  be  exhibited  in  detail  follows  from  the  fact  that  what
we  are  sensibly  aware  of  always  has  some  volume,  however  small,
and  some  duration,  however  brief,  whereas  the  application  of  mathe-
matics to  explain  the  connexions  of  sensible  occurrences  involves


ABSTRACTION  AND  GENERALIZATION


447


the  use  of  points,  which  have  no  size,  and  of  moments,  which  have
no  durations.  Moreover,  the  construction  with  which  the  scientist
ends  (which  we  sometimes  call  the  physicist’s  world)  has  a neat-
ness and  orderliness  that  is  quite  unlike  the  untidy  and  multiform
world  of  common  sense.  Yet,  since  science  grows  out  of,  and
returns  to,  the  world  of  common  sense,  there  must  be  a precise
coimexion  between  the  ‘ neat,  trim,  tidy,  exact  world  which  is  the
goal  of  science  ’ ^ and  the  untidy  ficagmentary  world  of  common
sense.  Professor  Whitehead  has  shown  in  detail  that  the  principle
of  convergence  to  simplicity  provides  a method  of  effecting  this
connexion.  He  calls  it  the  method  of  extensive  abstraction.  A
detailed  exposition  of  this  method  would  necessitate  proceeding
further  in  mathematical  logic  than  is  possible  in  an  elementary
book.  But  we  may  be  able  to  indicate  roughly  the  nature  of  the
method  and  to  suggest  its  importance  for  science.

We  must  keep  fcmly  in  mind  what  precisely  is  the  nature  of  the
problem  which  the  method  of  extensive  abstraction  is  required  to
solve.  The  problem  is  to  exhibit  mathematical  concepts,  e.g.  points,
instants,  particles,  momentary  configurations,  etc.,  as  logical  functions
of  what  is  given  in  sense.  We  have  seen  that  in  the  progressive
diminution  of  extent  which  is  to  yield  relations  of  the  logical  sim-
plicity required  by  the  scientist,  we  finally  reach  points  and  moments.
Let  us,  at  present,  confine  ourselves  to  the  problem  of  points.  The
plain  man,  apart  from  his  ability  to  quote  Euclid’s  definition  of  a
point  without  understanding  it,  probably  takes  a point  to  be  the
limit  of  a line,  or  of  an  area.  He  is  familiar  with  the  notion  of
distance  in  its  everyday  use.  He  is  aware,  for  instance,  that  the
table  and  the  door  are  at  different  sensible  distances  from  the  fire-
place. But  if  he  were  asked  what  precisely  is  the  distance  of  the
table  from  the  fireplace,  he  might  recognize  that  the  answer  depends
upon  whether  he  is  to  take  any  part  of  the  table  or  the  mid-point
of  the  table ; similarly  with  the  fireplace.  If  he  were  to  measure
the  distance,  he  would  take  the  distance  between  two  given  points.
This  point  would  be  a small  area  in  contact  with  a foot  rule.  It
would  clearly  only  be  an  approximate  measurement.  Thus  the
notion  of  sensible  distances  is  vague,  but  the  smaller  the  objects
taken,  the  less  inaccurate  will  be  the  notion  of  the  distance  between
them.  But  however  small  the  objects  may  be,  they  will  always
have  some  size.  The  plain  man,  who  knows  that  points  have  no
magnitude,  rests  content  with  the  view  that  a point  is  a limit,  viz.
the  limit  of  aline  that  is  said  to  end  at  the  point.  But  we  are  never
sensibly  aware  of  the  point.  If  we  divide  a line  into  smaller  and
smaller  fines,  each  fine  will  have  a length,  however  small  it  may
be ; it  will  still  be  part  of  the  fine.  Any  fine  can  be  split  up  into  a
^ See  Whitehead ; Froc.  Arist.  jSoc.,  JSf.S.,  XVII,  p.  61.


448


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


finite  number  of  smaller  lines.  But  as  tbe  plain  man  would  admit,
there  are  an  infinite  number  of  points  in  a line.  A point  cannot
be  thought  of  as  an  infinitesimal  line  ; it  is  something  of  a different
kind,  and  is  not  a 'part  of  the  line  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the
smaller  lines  into  which  it  is  divided  are  parts  of  the  line.

We  must  now  consider  the  relation  wliole-to-part.  This  is  a
temporal  or  a spatial  relation.  It  is  directly  apprehended.  Thus
we  can  see  that  the  space  between  the  first  and  the  last  line  of
print  on  this  page  is  a part  of  the  whole  page.  The  time  taken  to
read  one  paragraph  is  a part  of  the  time  taken  to  read  that  para-
graph and  the  next,  provided  that  the  two  paragraphs  are  read
continuously.  Or  a day  in  a person’s  life  is  a part  of  the  whole
period  of  time  during  which  he  lives.  Thus  there  is  no  difficulty
in  apprehending  what  is  meant  by  the  relation  whole-to-parL  We
have  now  to  consider  the  logical  properties  of  this  relation.  Let
us  consider  a line  AB  divided  into  parts  at  C,  D,  E.


The  parts  AC,  CD,  DE,  EB  together  make  up  the  whole  of  AB.
Also  AO  is  a part  of  AD,  AD  is  a part  of  AE,  AE  is  a part  of  AB,
It  is  clear  that  this  relation  of  whole-to-part  is  transitive  and
asymmetrical.  We  may  observe  that  if  A is  a part  of  X implies
that  X is  not  a part  of  A (i.e.  that  the  relation  is  asymmetrical),
then  A is  said  to  be  a proper  part  ’’  of  X.  In  this  sense  of  part  ”
A cannot  be  a part  of  itself.

Now  we  saw  that  a point,  e.g.  on  AB,  is  not  a part  of  AB  in  the
sense  in  which  AC  is  a part.  But  it  is  possible  to  define  a point
in  terms  of  the  whole-to-part  relation  considered  as  holding  between
volumes.  For  this  purpose  let  us  take  a set  of  volumes  one  of  which
is  enclosed  by  all  the  other  members  of  the  set.  Professor  White-
head  uses  the  illustration  of  a nest  of  Chinese  boxes.  Suppose,
for  instance,  that  these  boxes  are  spherical.  Then  we  have  a set
of  concentric  spheres.  On  opening  the  set  of  boxes  we  find  that
each  box  is  smaller  than  the  one  before  it  and  larger  than  the  one
after  it.  We  soon  reach  the  smallest  box,  and  this  box  is  a volume.
However  small  the  smallest  box  may  be,  it  is  still  a volume,  viz.
a sphere.  Nevertheless,  the  consideration  of  these  concentric
spheres  will  help  us  to  reach  a clearer  conception  of  a point.  We
shall  say  that  a larger  sphere  encloses  a smaller  sphere.  This  rela-
tion of  enclosure  is  a whoh-to-part  relation.  It  is  (i)  transitive,
(ii)  asymmetrical.  Now  suppose  that  the  set  of  spheres  contains,
as  we  progress  further  and  further  to  its  smaller  end,  a sphere  as
small  as  we  please.  Then  we  have  a third  property  of  the  enclosure


ABSTRACTION  AND  GENERALIZATION


449


relation,  viz.  (iii)  its  domain  includes  its  converse  domain.  If  we
symbolize  encloses  by  E,  and  tbe  spheres  by  a,  h,  c,  etc.,  respectively,
then  these  three  properties  can  be  formally  expressed  as  follows :
(i)  oEib  and  6Ec  always  imply  aEc ; (ii)  aW)  always  implies
notQMa) ; (iii)  oMb  always  implies  that  there  is  a c such  that  6Ec.

In  our  illustration  the  set  of  volumes  were  spheres  ; they  might
equally  well  have  been  cubes ; or  alternate  spheres  and  cubes,  so
that  a sphere  encloses  a cube  which  encloses  a sphere  which  encloses
a cube,  and  so  on.  The  logical  relations  would  be  exactly  the
same  in  these  two  cases  as  in  the  first  case.  Hence,  we  shall  find
it  convenient  not  to  specify  the  volumes  as  spheres,  and  shall  accord-
ingly speak  of  any  such  a set  of  volumes  as  a set  of  enclosure-volumes.
Now,  a set  of  enclosure-volumes  related  by  a relation  of  enclosure
having  the  three  properties  laid  down  above  is  such  that  (1)  of  any
two  of  its  members  one  encloses  the  other,  and  (2)  there  is  no  mem-
ber which  is  enclosed  by  all  the  others,  and  (3)  there  is  no  member
not  a member  of  the  set  which  is  enclosed  by  every  member  of  the
set.  As  we  progress  down  this  set  of  enclosure-volumes  we  approxi-
mate to  a volume  as  small  as  we  please.  That  is  to  say,  we  converge
to  an  ideal  simplicity  to  any  degree  of  approximation  we  please.
Such  a set  of  enclosure- volumes  is  called  hj  Professor  Whitehead
a ‘ convergent  set  ’.  In  no  case  do  we  reach  a volume  than  which
no  volume  could  be  smaller.  In  other  words,  we  do  not  reach  an
absolute  minimum.  But  this  is  what  we  need  if  a point  is  to  be  with-
out parts  and  without  magnitude.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that
Euclid’s  definition  expressed  the  general  idea  of  a point,  although
he  did  not  say  how  such  an  idea  is  possible.  If,  now,  we  consider
the  three  properties  of  the  set  of  enclosure-volumes,  we  see  that
this  set  is  a route  of  approximation  to  a point ; it  converges  to  a point
in  virtue  of  these  three  properties.  The  relations  of  these  enclosure-
volumes  have  all  the  logical  properties  required  of  points  for  their
use  in  mathematics.  Hence,  we  reach  a provisional  definition  of
a point  as  a series  of  volumes  that  would  be  commonly  said  to  con-
verge to  a point.  This  definition  certainly  seems  queer  at  first
sight,  and  must  be  further  discussed.  But  it  is  first  necessary  to
show  that  this  definition  is  not  quite  correct,  and  must  be  emended.

We  saw  that  our  set  of  enclosure-volumes  might  be  spheres,  or
cubes,  or  alternate  spheres  and  cubes.  Any  such  set  will  be  a con-
vergent set  providing  a route  of  approximation.  But  we  cannot
define  a point  in  terms  of  one  route  rather  than  of  another.  Con-
sider, for  instance,  a set  of  alternate  concentric  cubes  and  spheres.
Let  us  call  the  set  consisting  only  of  the  cubes,  the  set  C,  and  the
set  consisting  only  of  the  spheres,  the  set  S.  Then  every  member
of  C mU  enclose  some  members  of  S,  and  every  member  of  S will
enclose  some  members  of  C.  Such  sets  are  said  to  cover  each  other,
29


460  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

and  to  be  equal.  It  is  clear  that  these  sets  converge  to  the  same
point.  We  cannot,  therefore,  define  a point  in  terms  of  the  one
set  rather  than  the  other  set.  Thus  we  must  so  frame  the  definition
as  to  be  neutral  between  them.  This  is  done  as  follows.  Let  a be
any  convergent  set  of  enclosure- volumes  ; then,  the  point  to  which
O'  is  a route  of  approximation  can  be  defined  as  the  class  of  all  the
enclosure-volumes  belonging  either  to  a or  to  any  convergent  set
equal  to  o'.  Thus,  finally,  we  emend  the  provisional  definition
given  above  and  reach  the  required  definition,  viz.  a point  is  the
class  of  all  the  enclosure-volumes  that  converge  to  a foint.  The  point
thus  defined  has  the  properties  required  by  mathematicians.  It
is  important  to  realize  that,  although  the  convergent  set  converges
to  nothing,  the  quantitative  expressions  of  the  enclosure-volumes
do  converge  to  a hmit.^  Thus  the  set  indicates  the  ideal  simplicity
required  of  a point  although  this  simplicity  is  not  found  in  any
member  of  the  convergent  set.  The  fact  that  the  enclosure  relation
determines  this  simple  intrinsic  character  reveals  the  significance
and  the  precise  meaning  of  the  principle  of  convergence  to  simplicity
by  diminution  of  extent.

Two  difliculties  may  occur  to  the  student  in  connexion  with  this
definition.  It  has  been  objected  that  the  definition  is  circular.
Most  students  meeting  this  definition  for  the  first  time  are  likely  to
concur  in  this  objection.  The  second  diflGlcultyis  that  points  do  not
seem  to  be  in  the  least  like  a class  of  volumes,  however  the  relations
between  these  volumes  may  be  defined.  We  shall  consider  these
difiSiculties  in  order.

The  definition  af 'pears  to  be  circular  because  the  word  point  ’’
appears  in  the  defining  expression.  But  we  must  notice  that  the
expression  ''  converge  to  a point ''  must  be  taken  as  a whole.  Now,
converging  to  a point  was  defined  in  terms  of  convergent-sets,  and  this
definition  made  no  use  of  point  at  aU ; it  was  defined  wholly  in  terms  of
the  relation  of  enclosure-volumes.  This  being  so,  it  is  quite  correct
to  define  point  in  terms  of  converging  to  a point There
is  no  circularity.  This  may  be  shown  more  clearly  if  we  consider
that  there  are  sets  of  enclosure- volumes  which  do  not  converge
to  a point.  Consider,  for  instance,  a rectangular  box.  Let  its  height
be  hy  its  breadth  6,  and  its  depth  d.  If  we  keep  h and  h constant,
and  let  the  central  plane  perpendicular  to  d be  fixed,  and  then
dimmish  d continuously  and  indefinitely ; then  we  have  a convergent
set  of  boxes  which  converge  to  a central  plane.  Such  a set  will
not  sufiice  to  define  a point.  Now,  it  is  clear  that  we  are  sensibly
aware  of  volumes  having  such  relations  as  the  convergent  set  that
defines  a point,  and  of  volumes  havmg  such  relations  as  the  convergent
set  that  defines  a plane.  We  are  also  sensibly  aware  of  the  differ-
^ See  Whitehead,  Concept  of  Nature^  pp.  80-L


AESTRACTION  AOT)  GENERALIZATION


451


ence  between  these  two  types  of  convergence,  which  we  should
naturally  express  by  saying  that  the  first  set  converges  to  a point,
while  the  second  set  does  not.  But  we  are  not  sensibly  aware  of
points.  If  we  were,  there  would  be  no  need  to  define  a point  by
the  method  of  extensive  abstraction.  Hence,  what  is  meant  by
converging  to  a point  ” cannot  involve  the  notion  of  a foint
Thus  the  definition  is  not  circular.

The  second  difficulty  mentioned  above  is  more  important,  and
raises  the  question  of  the  significance  of  extensive  abstraction.
What  we  sought  in  defining  a point  was  to  define  a point  as  used
in  geometry,  for  a point  is  a geometrical  conception.  Now  points
are  used  in  geometry  to  define  a unique  relation  between  any  pair
of  points,  viz.  the  straight  line  joining  the  points.  This  relation
has  certain  very  simple  formal  properties.  Now  if  the  definition
yields  this  relation,  then  the  point  has  been  so  defined  as  to  have
the  required  properties.  This  is  the  case.  It  does  not  matter
that  a point  should  prove  to  be  a complicated  structure  provided
that  its  logical  relations  are  simple  and  have  the  necessary  formal
properties.  It  is  clear  that  what  a point  seemed  to  be  was  very  vague.
The  clearest  statement  we  could  make  about  it  without  the  help
of  the  method  of  extensive  abstraction  was  that  it  was  a limit  of
lines,  areas,  or  volumes.  The  defiLnition  derived  from  the  method
of  extensive  abstraction  shows  that  this  statement  was  only  an
approximation.  In  other  words,  we  now  see  what  exactly  was  meant
by  saying  that  a point  is  an  ideal  limit.  The  definition  also  makes
clear  in  what  sense  precisely  a volume  or  an  area  can  be  said  to
consist  of  a set  of  points.  It  explains  how  it  is  that  a point  is  not
a fart  of  an  area,  or  a volume,  and  yet  is  contained  in  an  area  or  a
volume.  The  complexity  of  its  internal  structure  is  irrelevant.
All  that  matters  in  deduction  are  the  purely  formal,  or  logical,
properties  of  the  terms  that  enter  into  the  deduction ; the  nature
of  the  term  itself  has  no  relevance.

Moments  can  be  defined  by  the  same  method.  Instead  of
volumes  we  have  durations.  One  duration  will  be  said  to  extend
over  another  duration,  if  the  second  is  a proper  part  of  the  first.
This  relation  of  extension  has  the  same  formal  properties  as  enclosure.
We  will  use  the  expression  extensive-durations  ’’  analogously  to
enclosure-volumes  We  require  a set  of  extensive-durations
such  that  (1)  of  any  two  members  of  the  set  one  extends  over  the
other,  and  (2)  there  is  no  duration  which  is  extended  over  by  every
member  of  the  set.  There  are  certain  technical  difficulties  concerned
with  the  different  routes  of  approximation  to  the  same  moment.
These  cannot  be  discussed  here.  We  must  be  content  to  assert
that  these  difficulties  have  been  overcome,  so  that  converging
to  the  same  moment  ” can  be  defined  analogously  to  converging


m


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


to  the  same  point  We  then  obtain  the  required  definition,  viz.
A moment  is  the  class  of  all  convergent  sets  converging  to  the  same
moment'^

It  must  not  he  supposed  that  the  method  of  extensive  abstrac-
tion is  confined  to  what  has  the  'part-whole  relation.  On  the  con-
trary, it  is  used  frequently  in  the  theory  of  number.  Thus  an
irrational  number,  for  example,  can  be  defined  in  this  way.

Thus  '\/~2  is  the  series  of  all  rational  numbers  whose  squares  are  less
than  2.  ^ It  is  not  necessary  for  our  purpose  to  discuss  this  defini-
tion. The  examples  we  have  given  suffice  to  indicate  the  nature
of  the  method,  so  far  as  that  is  possible  without  technical  details
that  would  be  unsuitable  in  a book  of  this  kind.

The  question  that  we  have  now  to  consider  is  what  is  the  value
of  this  method.  Its  value  consists  in  showing  how  it  is  possible
to  proceed  from  the  world  of  common  sense  to  the  world  of  the
physicist  and  back  again.  Thus  Professor  Whitehead  referring  to
the  extensive  definition  of  a moment  says : ‘ The  difficulty  is  to
express  our  meaning  in  terms  of  the  immediate  dehverance  of  sense-
awareness,  and  I ofier  the  above  explanation  as  a complete  solution
of  the  problem.’  ^

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  remember  that  physics  is  an
empirical  science  which  has  been  extraordinarily  successful  in
elaborating  constructive  descriptions  which  guide  experiment  and
permit  the  prediction  of  what  will  be  observable  under  certain
conditions.  This  success  of  physics  in  dealing  with  the  sensible
world  is  inexplicable  unless  such  expressions  as  “ point  “ line  ”,
moment  ”,  instantaneous  space  ”,  momentary  configurations  ”
can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  what  is  sensible.  For  this  purpose
it  is  necessary  to  exhibit  in  detail  how  the  exact  and  tidy  world  of
the  physicist  is  connected  with  the  fragmentary  and  untidy  world
of  common  sense.  To  do  this  is  to  demonstrate  the  apphcability
of  abstract  deductive  systems  to  the  world  given  in  sense-experi-
ence. There  is  no  necessity  to  be  found  within  the  abstract  system
itself  that  would  guarantee  its  applicability.  The  value  of  the
method  of  extensive  abstraction  can  be  gauged  by  the  fact  that  it
shows  how  abstract  deductive  systems  can  be  applied  to  the  world
presented  in  sense.  Hence  its  importance  for  the  student  of  scientific
method.

^ For  a detailed  discussion  see  Whitehead,  Concept  of  Nature,  Chap.  Ill ; and
cf.  N.  Wiener,  “ A Contribution  to  the  Theory  of  Relative  Position  ” {Proc,
Camk  PM.  Soc,,  XVH,  6).

^For  a discussion  of  this  definition  see  0.  B.  Broad,  Scientific  Thought,
pp.  39“M.

*op.  oit.,  p.  62,


ABSTRACTION  AND  GENERALIZATION


453


§3.  ABSTRACTION  AND  OCCAM’S  RAZOR

In  this  section  we  shall  be  concerned  with  a question  that  is
strictly  philosophical  rather  than  logical.  Nevertheless,  it  may
usefully  be  considered  by  the  student  of  logic  since  it  indicates
the  importance  of  logical  method  for  the  solution  of  philosophical
problems.  Moreover,  this  question  raises  a problem  that  is  likely
to  have  occurred  to  the  student  whilst  reading  the  last  section.
The  question  is : Do  'points,  moments,  irrational  numbers,  etc.,
exist  ? It  will  be  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  consider  the  case  of
points,  since  what  is  said  about  them  will  apply,  mutatis  mutandis,
to  other  entities  defined  by  means  of  extensive  abstraction.

The  simplest  way  of  answering  this  question  will  be  to  ascertain
what  hind  of  entity  a point  is  supposed  to  be  if  it  is  not  necessary
that  it  should  be  defined  by  extensive  abstraction.  Consider,  for
instance,  the  view  taken  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  points  by  a
philosopher  who  accepts  a theory  of  absolute  space.  He  will  regard
a point  as  a particular,  or  individual,  of  the  same  hind  as  a finite
volume,  for  example,  a Chinese  box,  difiering  from  it  only  because
it  is  imperceptible.  But  this  difference  is  very  difficult  to  under-
stand. The  point,  on  this  view,  will  be  imperceptible,  not  only
because  it  is  very  small,  but  also  because  it  is  unextended  and
utterly  unlike  anything  that  we  cm  perceive.  Hence,  what  it  is,
as  well  as  its  existence,  remains  hypothetical.  Consequently,
many  philosophers  have  refused  to  admit  that  points  exist.  The
difficulty  of  denying  the  existence  of  points  is  that  such  a view
renders  inconceivable  the  success  of  physics  which  uses  points  in
the  formation  of  constructive  descriptions  of  what  is  perceptible.
We  have  now  to  ask  whether  the  definition  of  points  obtained  by
the  method  of  extensive  abstraction,  which,  as  we  saw,  resolves
this  difficulty,  justifies  us  in  saying  that  points  exist.  Before  attempt-
ing to  answer  this  question  we  must  consider  an  alternative  way  of
dealing  with  the  problem,  which  is  much  favoured  by  Mr.  Russell.

It  is  granted  that  points  can  be  defined  by  extensive  abstraction.
Suppose,  now,  that  points  exist  They  will  have  the  properties
laid  down  in  the  definition,  since  the  definition  was  constructed  to
secure  these  properties.  Suppose,  again,  that  points  do  not  exist.
Then  the  definition  provides  us  with  the  same  set  of  logical  properties.
On  either  hypothesis,  then,  the  defiboition  yields  everj^hing  for
which  points  are  required  in  mathematics.  ’ Hence,  no  reasoning
into  which  a point  enters  would  be  invalidated  if  there  were  no
points.  We  shall  then  be  safer  if  we  neither  assert  nor  deny  that
points  exist,  and  we  shall  gain  no  advantage  by  assuming  their
existence.  It  seems  reasonable,  it  is  urged,  to  refrain  from  making
any  assertion.


454


A MODEEN  INTEODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


This  cautious  procedure  is  in  accordance  with  a time-honoured
maxim,  commonly,  though  erroneously,  attributed  to  William  of
Occam,  after  whom  it  is  named  ^ Occam’s  Eazor  The  maxim
is : Entities  must  not  he  multiplied  without  necessity.  As  it  stands'
this  advice  is  not  very  helpful.  All  depends  upon  how  ' without
necessity  ’ is  to  be  interpreted.  In  some  cases  it  is  by  no  means
easy  to  ascertain  whether  an  entity  is,  or  is  not,  necessary.  In  the
particular  case  under  consideration  it  is  admitted  that  points,  in
some  sense,  are  necessary.  The  reluctance  to  admit  their  existence
springs  from  a desire  to  admit  nothing  except  what  is  observable.
For  this  reason,  presumably,  Mr.  Eussell  is  fond  of  calling  entities,
such  as  points,  * convenient  fictions  But  what  is  a fiction  ? It
is  something  invented,  or  made  by  some  one,  which  corresponds
to  nothing.  But  in  that  case,  as  Professor  Whitehead  suggests,  it
is  di£S.cult  to  see  how  fictions  can  be  of  any  use  in  science.

We  can  now  return  to  the  consideration  of  the  answer  which
the  method  of  extensive  abstraction  enables  us  to  give  to  this  ques-
tion. In  the  exposition  of  this  method  in  the  last  section  we  con-
sidered the  example  of  a point  in  the  timeless  space  of  physics,  since
this  example  is  the  easiest  to  deal  with  in  an  elementary  manner.
Professor  Whitehead’s  own  exposition  begins  with  a particle,  which
is  a four-dimensional  event,  and  is  less  abstract  than  a point  of
space  or  an  instant  of  time.  But  the  method  is  exactly  the  same
in  all  these  cases,  and  with  certain  refinements  of  technical  detail,
into  which  we  need  not  enter,  the  same  answer  can  be  given  in  every
case.  The  answer  to  our  question  is  that  points  do  exist,  but  that
they  are  not  simple  particulars,  as  believers  in  absolute  space  have
supposed,  but  complex  structures.  The  set  of  convergent  volumes
which  serve  to  defime  a point  certainly  exist  in  nature  and  stand  in
the  required  relations.  It  follows  that,  since  points  are  classes  of
such  volumes,  they  exist  in  the  sense  that  these  classes  have  members
which  are  particular  events  actually  existing  in  nature.  It  is  clear
that  points  are  not  entities  of  the  same  type  as  volumes,  since  these
are  particular  events ; nevertheless,  points  are  in  no  sense  fictions.
They  may  be  said  to  be  convenient  structures,  with  the  proviso  that
these  structures  are  to  be  found  in  nature.  Professor  Whitehead
did  not  invent,  or  create,  points ; he  showed  how  they  could  be
constructed,  and  in  so  doing  discovered  what  exactly  a point  is.
Other  mathematicians  had  come  near  to  this  discovery,  but  they
did  not  quite  succeed  in  achieving  it.  They  failed  just  as  Amerigo
Vespucci  failed  to  discover  America.  In  this  illustration  Professor
Whitehead  plays  the  role  of  Columbus.  The  point  which  he  dis-
covered was  found  not  to  be  the  simple  particular  it  had  been  taken
to  be  but  a complex  structure.

Mf.EusseU  has  made  extensive  use  of  Occam’s  razor  to  cut  away


ABSTRACTION  AND  GENERALIZATION  455

not  only  points  regarded  as  simple  particulars — ^wLicli  certainly  need
not  be  assumed  to  exist — but  also  classes,  tbe  tables  and  cbairs  of
everyday  life,  the  self,  and  most  of  the  things  that  the  plain  man
unhesitatingly  assumes  to  exist.  Only  his  treatment  of  classes  can
be  considered  here.  We  saw  in  Chapter  IX  that  Mr.  Russell  defines
a class  as  the  extension  of  a propositional  function.  A class,  then,
is  to  be  regarded  as  the  set  of  individuals  satisfying  the  propositional
function  that  defines  the  class.  Mr.  Russell  concludes  both  that  a
class  is  a convenient  symbolic  device  and  also  a convenient  fiction.
To  assume  that  there  is  a class  over  and  above  the  set  of  individuals
is  to  fall  into  the  absurdity  of  the  Chinese  philosopher.  It  must,
however,  be  observed,  that  the  set  of  individuals  are  distinguished
as  ‘ members  of  this  class  ’ by  means  of  the  defining  property  given
in  the  propositional  function.  Thus  <I>x  defines  the  class  of  members
which  satisfies  the  function  ^x.  If  the  class  is  the  class  of  red  things
then  0x  means  ^ x is  red  and  the  set  of  individuals  satisfying
‘ X is  red  ’ is  the  class  in  question.  Now  this  set  is  not  a fiction,
nor  is  red.  Hence,  there  seems  no  good  reason  for  supposing  that
the  class  is  Bj  fiction.  What  we  are  calling  “ the  class  ’’  is  not,  how-
ever, another  individual,  or  object,  of  the  same  type  as  its  members,
nor  a 'property ; it  is  the  set  of  things  which  have  the  property.
There  is,  then,  no  one  object  to  which  the  class-name  applies  ; thus
the  class-name  does  not  na'tne  any  constituent  of  the  proposition
in  whose  verbal  expression  the  class-name  appears.  Thus  the  class
is  a logical  construction.  But  a logical  construction  is  not  a fiction.

Although  there  may  be  some  danger  of  too  hasty  a use  of  Occam’s
razor,  it  nevertheless  suggests  a useful  methodological  principle
which  Mr.  RusseU  has  sometimes  called  the  principle  of  ‘ construc-
tions versus  inferences  This  may  be  stated  shortly.  When  to
account  for  a set  of  facts  we  have  to  assume  an  imperceivable  entity,
we  should  not  infer  that  the  entity  in  question  exists  but  should
seek  for  something  having  the  required  properties.  This  is  what
has  been  done  by  the  definition  of  points  by  extensive  abstraction.
In  this  case  we  found  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  assume  simple
particulars  which  were  points  since  we  could  replace  them  by  a com-
plex structure  having  the  required  properties.  As  we  saw,  this  did
not  mean  that  we  cut  out  points,  but  that  we  showed  more  clearly
what  exactly  points  are.  The  principle  of  ^ constructions  versus
inferences  ’ may  be  said  to  embody  the  advice  : Carry  your  analysis
as  far  as  possible  until  every  concept  is  shown  to  be  a logical  function
of  what  is  sensibly  perceived.

§ 4.  LOGIC  AND  MATHEMATICS

It  has  always  been  recognized  that  mathematical  reasoning  is
logical,  and  that  in  consequence  there  is  a peculiarly  close  connexion


m


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


between  logic  and  mathematics.  But  although  every  one  grants
that  logic  is  necessary  to  mathematics  only  in  quite  recent  times
has  it  been  seen  to  be  sufficient  Mathematics  has  been  traditionally
defined  as  the  science  of  discrete  and  continuous  magnitude
or  as  “ the  science  of  quantity  Even  Leibniz,  who  saw  in  the
theory  of  the  syllogism  'a  kmd  of  universal  mathematics',  fol-
lowed the  tradition  in  confining  what  was  properly  to  be  called
mathematics  ’’  to  the  science  of  quantity.  Nor  is  it  surprising
that  this  definition  of  mathematics  should  for  so  long  have  seemed
satisfactory.  Arithmetic  and  algebra  regarded  as  sciences  con-
cerned with  number^  geometry  regarded  as  a science  concerned
with  'points^  lines,  planes,  and  volumes,  would  all  appear  to  be  exactly
described  as  concerned  with  discrete  and  continuous  quantity.
It  is  true  that  points  are  not  quantities,  but,  since  the  relations
between  points  can  be  expressed  by  means  of  geometrical  quan-
tities, the  case  of  points  did  not  appear  to  make  the  definition  un-
suitable ; it  merely  caused  trouble  with  regard  to  the  nature  of
points.  When,  however,  projective  geometry,  the  theory  of  abstract
groups,  and  the  algebra  of  logic— to  mention  only  a few  departments
of  mathematics — were  developed,  it  became  obvious  that  there  is
aio  essential  relation  between  mathematics  and  quantity.

The  study  of  mathematics,  as  in  the  case  of  the  other  sciences,
had  its  origin  in  the  attempt  to  render  sensible  experience  orderly.
We  saw  in  Chapter  VIII  how  difficult  must  have  been  the  advance
in  abstractness  of  thinking  when  it  was  first  realized  that  a set  of
days,  a set  of  fish,  and  a set  of  apples,  might  all  have  the  same  number.
This  degree  of  abstraction  is  now  so  familiar  to  us  that  we  take  it
for  granted,  and  believe  that  we  know  what  number  is.  It  is  possible
that  we  mistake  familiarity  for  understanding.  Since  the  numbers
with  which  we  are  familiar  are  the  finite,  or  inductive  numbers,
to  which  the  process  of  counting  is  applicable,  the  common-sense
notion  of  number  is  to  a considerable  extent  based  on  intuitions
derived  from  counting,  whilst  the  operation  of  counting  remains
unanalysed.  Consequently  our  conception  of  number  is  unduly
restricted  and  unclear.  We  have  seen  that  counting  consists  in
establishing  a one-one  correlation,  the  objects  counted  being  taken
in  a certain  order.  Counting,  therefore,  presupposes  the  notion  of
similarity,  and  is  less  logically  simple,  since  counting  requires  an
order  but  similarity  does  not.  Hence,  the  definition  of  number
by  means  of  similarity  leads  to  greater  generality.  In  this  way
arithmetic  is  freed  from  its  dependence  upon  intuition.  In  spite  of
unclear  ideas  with  regard  to  the  relation  between  number  and
counting,  most  educated  people  would  probably  admit  that  the
properties  of  number  which  yield  the  rules  of  arithmetic  are  inde-
pendent of  what  actually  exists.  This  is  to  admit  that  the  pro-


ABSTRACTION  AND  GENERALIZATION


457


positions  of  aritlinietic  are  a priori,  i.e.  capable  of  being  Imown
independently  of  any  given  subject-matter.  It  is  likely  that  there
would  be  some  hesitation  in  admitting  that  there  is  a science,  rightly
called  geometry,  which  is  equally  independent  of  intuitions  given  in
experience.  There  is  some  justification  for  such  hesitation.  What
is  ordinarily  called  geometry  is  to  be  sharply  distinguished  from
arithmetic,  since  it  is  a science  as  entirely  empirical  as  dynamics
and  is  thus  a branch  of  natural  science.  This  branch  of  natural
science — which, for  convenience,  we  may  call  empirical  geometry  ” —
has  been  traditionally  confused  with  geometry  as  pure  mathe-
matics. To  this  confusion  was  due  the  belief  that  geometry  was
a science  of  quantity,  concerned  with  the  properties  of  space.  ^ It
was  assumed  that  the  axioms  of  geometry  were  descriptive  of  our
space  and  that  the  theorems  of  geometry  were  necessarily  true,
since  they  were  taken  to  be  demonstrated  by  means  of  the  axioms
alone.  This  view,  as  we  saw  in  Chapter  X,  is  now  known  to  be
mistaken.  We  have  seen  that  the  attempt  to  deduce  Euclid’s
theorems  from  his  axioms  showed  that  his  deductions  were  lacking  in
logical  rigour,  since  they  required  assumptions  which  were  not  in-
cluded in  the  axioms  but  which  were  in  conformity  with  our  spatial
intuitions.  2 The  axiom  of  parallels  was  recognized  to  belesspkt(5-
ihle  than  Euclid’s  other  axioms,  so  that  many  attempts  were  made
to  derive  the  parallel  axiom  from  the  others.  These  attempts
failed,  and  mathematicians  began  to  construct  geometrical  systems
based  upon  the  denial  of  Euclid’s  axiom.  In  this  way  arose  the
non-Euchdean  geometries  which  have  played  so  great  a part  in
the  development  of  mathematics  and  mathematical  physics.  This
development  cannot  be  followed  here.^  It  must  be  sufficient  to
observe  that  the  result  of  this  development  was  to  establish  the
fact  that  every  geometry  is  rigidly  deductive,  and  does  not  employ
any  form  of  reasoning  that  is  not  found  in  arithmetic.  That  is
to  say,  a pure  geometry  is  a deductive  system  constructed  by  means
of  primitive  concepts  and  primitive  propositions  in  the  manner
explained  in  Chapter  X.

Every  branch  of  mathematics  consists  of  assertions  that  such
and  such  primitive  propositions  imply  such  and  such  consequences.
Thus  a mathematical  proposition  is  of  the  form  : If  a set  of  elements
X,  y,  z,  , , , satisfy  such  and  such  conditions,  then  these  elements  will

^ Thus,  for  example,  de  Morgan,  having  asserted  that  ‘ space  and  time  are
the  only  necessary  matters  of  thought  adds,  ‘ and  these  form  the  subject-
matter  of  the  mathematics  (Proc,  London  Mathematical  Society,  Vol.  I,  p.  L)

® The  theorem  that  the  sum  of  the  angles  of  a triangle  is  equal  to  two  right
angles  follows  from  the  parallel  postulate,  and  is  conformable  to  our  ordinary
spatial  intuitions.  The  denial  of  the  postulate  led  on  the  one  hand  to  hyperbolic,
on  the  other  to  elliptic  geometry.

* See  Cajori : History  of  Mathematics,


4S8  A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

aho  satisfy  such  and  such  other  conditions.  Tlie  specification  of  the
conditions  deterndnes  the  branch  of  mathematics  that  is  being
investigated  ; for  example,  arithmetic,  projective  geometry,  descrip-
tive geometry,  etc.  Thus  every  branch  of  mathematics  can  be
shown  to  consist  entirely  of  propositions  with  regard  to  the  pro-
perties of  certain  relations,  such  as  being  in  a straight  line  with,  or
being  the  product  of,  which  hold  between  certain  entities,  such  as
points,  or  numbers.  It  noight  be  supposed  that  we  must  first  know
what  the  entities  are  between  which  the  relations  asserted  in  the
primitive  propositions  hold.  That,  however,  would  be  a mistake.
All  that  is  required  is  that  the  primitive  propositions  should  be
mutually  consistent.  If  objects  having  the  required  properties
can  be  found,  then  the  deductive  system  can  be  interpreted.  For
example,  we  might  be  given  a set  of  undefined  objects,  which  we
may  call  arbitrarily  X-objects  and  F-obyecfe  and  an  undefined  relation
R,  and  a primitive  proposition : If  any  two  X-objects  are  given,
then  there  is  one  and  only  one  Y -object  to  which  both  the  X-objects
stand  in  the  relation  R.  We  could  interpret  the  X-objects  as  points,
the  Y -objects  as  straight  lines,  and  the  relation  R as  lies  on.  This
gives  the  fundamental  theorem  of  plane  geometry : If  two  points
are  given,  there  is  one  and  only  one  line  on  which  both  the  points  lie.
Other  interpretations  would  be  possible.  So  long  as  we  are  concerned
with  pure  geometry,  i.e.  geometry  as  a branch  of  mathematics,
we  are  not  concerned  with  any  particular  meaning  of  point
or  line  ’h  Thus  mathematics  may  be  said  to  be  concerned  with
aU  possible  meanings,  that  is  with  all  the  objects  by  means  of  which
the  theorems  may  be  interpreted ; or  it  may  be  said  to  be  concerned
with  no  meanings.^  Which  is  the  preferable  way  of  putting  the
matter  cannot  be  discussed  here.  We  are  concerned  only  to  observe
that  a mathematical  science  is  a deductive  system  consisting  of
primitive  concepts,  primitive  propositions  and  deductions  from  these.
jl/  Mathematics  appears,  then,  as  the  science  of  formal  proof,  or
logical  demonstration.  Sixty  years  ago  an  American  mathematician,
benjamin  Peirce,  defined  mathematics  as  ^ the  science  which  draws
Wcessary  conclusions  This  was  the  first  explicit  recognition
that  mathematics  is  independent  of  any  given  subject-matter.
Peirce  indeed  goes  on  to  assert  that  ^mathematics,  under  this
definition,  belongs  to  every  inquiry,  moral  as  well  as  physical’.

- ^ This  latter  view  has  been  attributed  to  Hilbert  and  Ms  followers,  who
constitute  what  is  known  as  the  Formalist  School  of  Mathematicians.  See
further  Appendix  C.  Reference  may  also  be  made  to  two  articles  by
F.  P,  Ramsey,  “ Mathematical  Logic  ” in  the  Mathematical  Gazette  (Oct.,
1926) ; “ The  Foundations  of  Mathematics  ” in  Froc.  London  Mathematical
Society  (Aug.,  1926) ; and  to  C.  I.  Lewis,  Survey  of  Symbolic  Logic,  Chap.  VI,  § 3,

® Linear  Associative  Algebra,  § 1 (pub.  1870,  reprinted  in  American  Journal
of  Mathematics,  VoL  IV,  1881).


ABSTRACTION  AND  GENERALIZATION


459


Thus  mathematics  becomes  the  science  of  exact  reasoning.  This
marks '^’notable  advance  in  ^e  xmderstanding  of  the  nature  of
mathematics.  Peirce’s  definition  is,  however,  not  quite  complete ;
it  leaves  unexplained  what  can  be  meant  by  ‘ necessary  conclusions
The  standard  of  exactness,  of  the  logical  rigour  of  a demonstration
has  changed.  This  change  is  due  to  the  fact  that  mathematicians
have  been  trying  to  make  aU  their  assumptions  explicit,  owing  to
the  fact  that  they  have  abandoned  the  appeal  to  intuition.^  Whether
the  ideal  of  exactness  has  been  attained  we  must  consider  in  a
moment.  Mr.  Bertrand  Russell  has  provided  a more  satisfactory
definition,  completing  Peirce’s  definition.  According  to  his  view
aU  the  concepts  of  mathematics  can  be  defined  in  terms  involved
in  comuhcated  reasoning  of  any  Icind.  and  all  mathematical  pro-
positTons  can  be^^^^d^^^^  propositions  of  formarTdSc^^''^tos,i

mathematics  may  be  defined  as  the  science  comceme.(Lwith  ‘ deduc- 1
tjon  bv  logical  principles  from  logical  principles  ’ . ® .These  logical  |
priTiciplejLJimJ^h£L_^  of  all  reasoning.  It  follows  from  this

definition  that  mathematics,  is.  jndigtins!uisJb.able„J  Ipgc.

In  discussing  the  structure  of  deductive  systems  we  were  discussing
the  structure  of  mathematics.  That  this  view  of  mathematics  is
justified  has  been  shown  in  detail  by  modern  logicians.  Peano
succeeded  in  deriving  the  arithmetic  of  the  inductive  numbers,
i.e.  finite  cardinal  numbers,  from  five  primitive  propositions  and
three  primitive  concepts.^  These  concepts  are  Zero,  number,
successor  of,  Frege  and  Russell  independently  showed  that  these
concepts  could^Be  defined  in  terms  of  the  purely  logical  notions  of
a class^  belonging  to  a class,  and  similarity . Arithmetic  was  thus
shown  to  be  a branch  of  pure  logic.  It  had  been  previously  shown
that  geometrical  systems  could  be  interpreted  as  applying  to  num-
bers. Thus  the  analysis  of  mathematics  in  terms  of  fundamental
logical  concepts  has  been  achieved.  The  mathematical  system  of
Principia  Maihematica  has  demonstrated  the  equivalence  of  mathe-
matics and  log^ic,  since,  setting  out  from  premisses  which  every
one  must  admit  to  be  purely  logical,  results  are  deduced  which  ^
every  one  must  admit  to  belong  to  what  is  ordinarily  called  mathe-

^ Even  Gatiss,  one  of  the  greatest  mathematicians,  published  proofs  which
would  not  now  be  considered  sufficiently  rigorous.  For  example,  his  first  proof
of  the  theorem  that  every  algebraic  equation  has  a root  affords  an  example  of
the  use  of  intuition  in  what  was  offered  as  an  absolutely  rigorous  proof.

2 Mr.  Russell’s  exact  definition  is : ‘ Pure  mathematics  is  the  class  of  all
propositions  of  the  form  “ p implies  q ”,  where  f and  q are  propositions,  and
neither  p nor  q contains  any  constants  except  logical  constants.’  (Principles
oj  Mathematics,  p.  3.)

® Russell,  loo.  cit.

*For  an  account  of  Peano’s  procedure,  see  B.  Russell,  Int,  Math,  Phil,,
Chaps.  I-in.


460


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


matics.  BIr.  Russell  asserts : ^ If  there  are  still  those  left  who  do
not  adniit  the  identity  of  logic  and  mathematics,  we  may  chal-
lenge them  to  indicate  at  what  point,  in  the  successive  definitions
and  deductions  of  Principia  Mathematica,  they  consider  that  logic
ends  and  mathematics  begins.  It  will  then  be  obvious  that  any
answer  must  be  quite  arbitrary.’  ^ This  must  be  granted.  ^

We  must  now  consider  to  what  extent  the  ideal  of  logical
rigour  has  been  attained.  A difliiculty  arises  with  regard  to  the
concept  of  a class.  In  the  attempt  to  carry  out  a strictly  rigorous
deduction  of  the  general  properties  of  classes  and  relations  from  the
fundamental  logical  premisses  certain  contradictions  became
apparent.  We  shall  begin  by  considering  Mr.  Russell’s  contra-
diction with 'regard  to  classes  that  are  not  members  of  themselves.
Ordinarily  we  should  not  suppose  that  a class  is  a member  of  itself.
For  example,  the  class  of  all  tables  would  not  itself  be  regarded  as  a
table,  nor  the  class  of  all  men  as  a member  of  itself,  that  is,  a man.
But  it  might  be  natural  to  suppose  that  the  class  of  all  things  that
are  not  men  is  itself  not  a man  and,  therefore,  a member  of  itself.
This  supposition,  however,  leads  to  contradiction.  This  contra-
diction may  be  easily  shown  if  we  call  a class  which  does  not  contain
itself  as  a member  an  ordinary  class.  Then  let  0 be  the  class  con-
sisting of  all  ordinary  classes.  We  have  now  to  consider  whether
0 is  a member  of  itself,  or  not.  If  0 is  a member  of  0,  it  follows
Jrom  the  hypothesis  that  0 is  an  ordinary  class  that  0 is  not  a member
of  0 ; if  0 is  not  a member  of  0,  it  follows /rom  the  hypothesis  that
0 is  a member  of  0,  Thus  either  supposition,  viz.  that  0 is  a mem-
ber of  itself,  and  that  it  is  not  a member  of  itself,  leads  to  contra-
diction. Mr.  Russell  met  this  contradiction  by  distinguishing  differ-
ent logical  types.  We  saw  in  Chapter  IX  that  a class  consisting
of  individuals  is  not  itself  an  individual.  If  we  were  to  say  that
both  the  class  and  the  individuals  are  “ entities  ” we  should  be
using  the  word  entity  ” in  two  different  senses.  Thus  we  have

lop.  cit.,  p.  194.

® It  should  be  observed  that  what  is  required  for  mathematics  is  that  the
axioms  should  be  consistent.  We  saw  in  Chapter  X that  consistency  could  be
established  only  by  finding  an  interpretation  for  which  the  axioms  are  true.
These  objects  cannot  be  taken  from  the  real  world,  since  that  would  leave
the  method  open  to  the  uncertainties  of  the  experimental  method ; they  must
therefore  be  taken  from  other  branches  of  mathematics.  So  far  as  geometry
is  concerned,  it  is  possible  to  take  the  real  numbers  and  show  that  they
satisfy  the  axioms.  For  example,  “ point  ” may  be  interpreted  as  applying
to  an  ordered  triad  of  numbers  (a?,  y,  z);  “ plane  ” may  be  interpreted  as
applying  to  the  set  of  such  ordered  triads  satisfying  a linear  equation,  and  so
on.  But  when  we  attempt  to  investigate  the  consistency  of  the  axioms  formu-
lated by  Beano  for  real  numbers,  we  can  find  no  simpler  branch  of  mathematics
which  could  provide  an  interpretation.  Hence  the  necessity  for  the  reduction
of  these  concepts  to  logic.


ABSTRACTION  AND  GENERALIZATION  461

to  recognize  that  objects  are  of  different  logical  types,  and  that  any
given  predicate  can  be  significantly  asserted  only  of  one  ty^e  of
subject.  For  example,  it  is  significant  to  assert  that  ^ “ Socrates
is  a man  but  it  is  meaningless  to  assert  that  A class  is  a man  .
Accordingly  we  must  recognize  that  propositions  about  individuals
are  not  of  the  same  form  as  propositions  about  classes  of  individuals.
Similarly  we  must  recognize  that  propositions  about  classes  are
not  of  the  same  form  as  propositions  about  classes  of  classes ^ and
so  on.  These  various  propositions  wiU  be  of  different  orders,  the
order  depending  upon  the  ty'pe.  Thus,  if  we  say  that  propositions
about  individuals  are  of  the  first  order,  then  propositions  about
classes  of  individuals  will  be  of  the  second  order,  and  so  on.  In
accordance  with  this  theory  of  logical  types  we  must  admit  that
both  the  statements  A class  is  a member  of  itself  ” and  A class
is  not  a member  of  itself  ’’  are  strictly  meaningless.  Our  failure
to  realize  that  such  statements  are  not  false  but  meaningless  is  due
to  our  inveterate  habit  of  supposing  that  every  grammatically
correct  sentence  must  be  significant.

We  have  further  to  distinguish  between  different  orders  of  pro-
perties applicable  to  the  same  ty^e  of  subject.  On  Mr.  Russell’s
view  propositions  about  classes  are  propositions  about  the  properties
which  define  the  classes.  Thus  a proposition  about  a class  (e.g.
great  poets)  will  be  a proposition  about  all  the  properties  which
define  the  class.  We  must  then  consider  whether  there  are  any
difficulties  with  regard  to  propositions  about  all  pro'perties.  It  is
clear  that  there  are.  For  example,  given  an  object  A,  we  can  ask
whether  A has  any  property  of  the  kind  0.  If  A has  such  a pro-
perty, then  that  A has  this  property  will  be  another  property  of
A.  Call  this  property  F.  Then  we  can  ask  whether  F can  be  a
property  of  the  kind  0.  It  seems  clear  that  it  cannot.  For  example,
if  we  say  “ Shakespeare  had  aU  the  characteristics  which  belong
to  a great  poet  ”,  then  characteristics  ” must  not  be  understood
in  such  a way  that  it  could  include  such  a property  as  having  all
the  characteristics  of  a great  poet ; since  this  property  presupposes
the  totality  of  such  characteristics.  Thus,  if  A has  a property
of  the  kind  0,  then  the  property  F,  viz.  Jwiving  a property  of  the
hind  0^  cannot  itself  be  a property  of  the  kind  0.  Thus  F is  a
property  of  a higher  order  than  0.  Any  property  which  is  defined
by  means  of  all  properties  of  a certain  order  must  then  be  a property
of  a higher  order.  ^

This  theory  of  types  enables  us  to  avoid  the  contradiction  with

- ^ The  principle  involved  in  the  theory  of  types  is  called  “ the  vioions-cirole
principle  ”,  and  is  thus  stated  by  Mr.  Bussell : ‘ Whatever  involves  all  of  a col-
lection must  not  be  one  of  the  collection.’  Violation  of  this  principle  results  in
illegitimate  totalities.  (See  Prmcipia  Mathematical  Iniroducimn^  Chap.  II,


462  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

regard  to  classes  and  with  regard  to  statements  about  all  the  pro-
perties of  a certain  kind.  The  theory  has,  however,  unfortunate
consequences.  The  distinction  of  types  renders  invalid  some  of
the  most  fundamental  theorems  of  analysis.^  To  avoid  this  diffi-
culty Russell  introduced  the  Axiom  of  Reducibility^  This  axiom
asserts  that  to  any  property  of  a higher  order  there  is  an  equivalent
property  of  the  lowest  order.  This  equivalence  is  not  an  equivalence
of  meaning  but  of  extension.  That  is  to  say,  whatever  has  the  one
property  has  the  other,  so  that  the  two  properties  define  the  same
class  in  the  sense  that  they  have  the  same  extension.  Thus  the
properties  are  formally  eguivalent.  Thus  this  axiom  asserts  that
given  any  property  of  higher  order  there  is  a property  of  the  lowest
order  which  has  the  same  extension  (i.e.  applies  to  the  same  objects)
as  the  property  of  a higher  order.  This  axiom  implies  that  any
class  which  is  defined  as  the  extension  of  a higher  order  property
win  also  be  the  extension  of  a lowest  order  property.  It  follows
from  the  axiom  that  the  totality  of  classes  the  members  of  which
are  of  a given  type  can  be  obtained  from  the  totality  of  lowest
order  properties  that  are  applicable  to  that  type.  The  totality
thus  obtained  will  be  a legitimate  totality.  The  acceptance  of

p.  37.  Cf.  also  F.  P.  Ramsey,  The  Foundation  of  Mathematics^  p.  356.  Ramsey
has  pointed  out  that  the  Theory  of  Types  falls  into  two  distinct  parts  which  are
respectively  concerned  with  two  difierent  groups  of  contradictions.  This
point  cannot  be  pursued  here.)

^ Thus,  for  example,  it  renders  invalid  the  theorem  that  any  aggregate  of
numbers  has  an  upper  bound.  This  theorem  is  deduced  from  the  principle  of
Dedekindian  section,  which  is  as  follows  : If  the  real  numbers  are  divided  into
two  classes  Ai  and  Ag  in  such  a way  that  (i)  every  number  belongs  either  to
Ai  or  to  A2 ; (ii)  each  class  contains  at  least  one  member ; (iii)  any  member
of  Ai  is  less  than  any  member  of  Ag ; then  there  is  a number  n which  has  the
property  that  any  number  less  than  n belongs  to  Aj  and  any  number  greater
than  n belongs  to  Ag.  The  number  n may  belong  either  to  Ai  or  to  Ag,  since  n
is  the  greatest  number  of  Ai  or  the  least  number  of  Ag.  Thus  the  real  numbers
are  divided  into  two  mutually  exclusive  classes,  an  upper  and  a lower,  and  there
must  be  a number  dividing  these  two  classes,  which  is  either  the  least  of  the
upper  or  the  greatest  of  the  lower  class.  This  proof  depends  upon  defining
real  numbers  as  sections  of  rationals.  Sections  of  rationals  are  a special  kind
oficlasses  of  rationals ; hence  propositions  about  real  numbers  will  be  propositions
about  a kind  of  classes  of  rationals.  We  can  now  see  how  the  invalidity  arises.
Suppose  there  is  a set  A of  real  numbers;  U,  the  upper  bound  of  A,  is  defined
as  the  class  of  rationals  which  are  members  of  any  member  of  A.  Thus  U is
all  those  rationals  which  have  the  characteristic  of  having  any  of  the  character-
istics which  define  the  members  of  A.  Thus  the  defining  characteristic  of  U
involves  a reference  to  all  the  defining  characteristics  of  the  members  of  the  set
of  real  numbers,  so  that  U will  not  be  a real  number,  since  it  is  a section  of
rationals  defined  by  characteristics  of  a higher  order.  Thus  this  proof  breaks
down  if  the  theory  of  types  be  accepted.  (See  G.  H.  Hardy,  Pure  Mathematics,
§18.)

® See  Princi'pia  Mathematica,  Introd.,  Chap.  II,  §§  C,  7,  and  -^12.  Cf.  also
Int.  Math,  Phil.,  Chap.  XVII,  and  Ramsey,  loc.  cit.


ABSTEACTION  AKD  GENEEALIZATION  463


this  axiom,  then,  suflaces  to  insure  the  validity  of  theorems  in
analysis.

It  cannot,  however,  be  maintained  that  this  axiom  of  reducibility
is  seK-evident.  It  is  not  purely  logical  as  are  the  other  primitive
propositions  of  Principia  Maihematica,  Consequently  this  system
does  not  succeed  in  attaining  complete  logical  rigour.  Eecent  work
by  Mr.  L.  Wittgenstein  and  F.  P.  Eamsey  has  shown  that  the  diffi-
culties  due  to  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  the  axiom  of  reducibility
can  be  overcome.  Eamsey  has  suggested  a reconstruction  of  the
system  of  Principia  Maihematica  in  which  the  axiom  of  reducibility
is  no  longer  required.  It  is  not  possible  to  discuss  this  development
here.^  Enough  has  been  said  to  indicate  the  extreme  difficulty  of
carrying  out  a complete  analysis  of  mathematical  concepts  in  terms
of  purely  logical  concepts,  and  of  constructing  a completely  rigorous
deductive  system  comprising  aU  the  branches  of  what  is  ordinarily
called  mathematics.  But  in  spite  of  the  difficulties  that  arise  in
completing  the  construction  it  must  be  admitted  that  it  has  been
shown  that  mathematics  is  identical  with  logic  as  the  science  of


pure  form.

The  achievement  of  the  ideal  of  pure  form  is  also  the  achieve-j
ment~of  comnlete  abstractness  and  comnlete-^generahty.  Th^


ment  of  complete  abstractness  and  cQmplete_._generahty.  Thar
ffiis  is  so  s^  no^furth^  discussion.  It  may,  however,

be  worth  while  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  the  fact  that  demon-
stration is  independent  of  subject-matter.  To  recognize  this  inde- .
pendence  of  subject-matter  is  to  recognize  that  all  logical  proof  is  ^
formal.  The  word  proof  ’’  is  sometimes  used  in  a sense  in  which )
it^has  to  be  distinguished  from  demonstration  ”,  i.e.  logical
proof  ”.  The  former  use  may  be  made  clear  by  contrasting  the
purpose  of  such  proof,  which  is  to  produce  conviction, the
purpose  of  logical  proof.  We  saw  in  Chapter  X that  we  do
not  become  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  commutative  law  m X n


= n X m when  we  follow  its  deduction  in  Principict  Mathe-,
matica»  The  purpose  of  the  deduction  is  demonstration,  not"^
conviction^  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  constructing  oF  such
a system  seems,  as  a matter  of  psychological  fact,  to  require  that  a
branch  of  mathematics  should  have  already  been  developed  a con-
siderable way  before  the  method  of  analysis  can  be  applied.  If
this  method  is  not  primarily  a method  for  producing  conviction,


still  less  is  it  a method  of  discovery.  Its  ideal  is  not  discovery  but
demonstration.  It  is  indeed  desirable  to  guard  ourselves  against  a
possiBIe^misunderstanding.  In  saying  that  mathematics  is  reduced


to  logic  we  are  saying  that  mathematics  can  be  exhibited  as  a com-
pletely logical  structure,  so  that  no  element  of  intuition  enters
into  a mathematical  proof.  But  to  say  this  is  not  to  "say  that  the


^ See  articles  by  F.  F.  "Eamsey  previously  cited,  and  see  also  Appendix  C.


464


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


process  of  mathematical  discovery  is  confined  to  deductive  reason-
ing. On  the  contrary,  the  mathematician  uses  all  the  resources  of
scientific  insight.  He  imagines,  he  relies  on  analogies,  he  is  guided
by  geometrical  intuition  and  by  a feeling  for  pure  form  that  leads
him  to  important  discoveries.  But  mathematical  theorems,  how-
ever they  may  have  been  discovered,  must  be  capable  of  being
formulated  abstractly  and  demonstrated  by  purely  logical  methods.
A branch  of  mathematics  is  a set  of  propositions  capable  of  abstract
formulation  in  such  a way  that  every  proposition  can  be  demonstrated
to  follow  from  the  primitive  concepts  and  the  primitive  propositions.
Mathematics  may  then  be  regarded  as  consisting  of  all  completely
abstract  deductive  systems.


CHAPTEE  XXIV

.yTHE  CHARACTEEISTICS  OF  LOGICAL  THINKING


‘ If  a man  can  play  the  true  logician,  and  have  as  well  judgement  as  invention,
he  may  do  great  matters.’ — Francis  Bacon.

§ 1.  PERSUASION  AND  CONVICTION

purpose  of  logical  tMnking  is  to  reach  conclusions.
I The  process  of  reaching  conclusions  is  reasoning.  Ordin-
JL  arily  we  reason  from  something  we  Mf5V**fysometH
which,  prior  to  our  reasoning,  we  did  not  know,  but  which  we  now
know  as  the  result  of  our  reasoning.  Strictly  speaking  we  cannot
be  said  to  hnow  anything  unless  it  is  the  case.  Thus,  in  order  that
a proposition  should  be  ^own  it  is  necessary  both  that  the  proposi-
tion should  that  it^shouM^^^^  Although  to

believe  a proposition  and  to  believe  it  to  %e  ir^^e*^e’'^ra^hd  the  same
thing,  yet  we  beheve  many  "propositions  which  are  in  fact  false.
Sometimes  we  discover  their  falsity  by  reasoning  from  the  proposi-
tions we  believe  to  conclusions  which  we  recognize  to  be  false,  l^en
we  reason  we  desire  to  ascertain  what  is  true,  or  what  must  be  true
if  something  else  is  true.  We  can  hnow  our  conclusions  to  be  true
only  when  we  know  both  that  the  premisses  are  true  and  that  these
premisses  imply  the  cont!htsidiir“''"S’6^^^  can  recognize  that

we  b^^^^^fh)^osiiion,aTld.  therefore,  believe  it  to  be  true,  although
we  fecognize  that  we  do  not  yet  fenmjj^to  be  true.  Often,  however,
we  fail  to  distinguish  between  our  beliefs  and  our  hnowledg,e.  When
"our  belief  is  challenged  then  we  may  come  to  recognize  that,  after
all,  we  did  not  hnow  but  only  believed  that  so-and-so  was  the  case.
Doubting  is  a mental  state  clearly  distinguishable  from  belief.  We
doubt  a proposition  when  with  regard  to  it  we  know  that  we  do
not  hnow  whether  it  is  true  or  whether  it  is  false.  The  state  of
doubting  is  usually  unpleasant ; hence,  we  desire  to  resolve  a doubt.
Keasoning  from  true  premisses,  or  from  premisses  believed  to  be
true,  is  a method  of  resolving  doubt.  But  we  may  be  persuaded
to  believe  by  other  methods  than  reasoning.  Also  many  of  our
beliefs  are  due  neither  to  persuasion  nor  to  reasoning.  Were  this
not  the  case  we  could  have  but  few  beliefs,  since  neither  our
mental  power  nor  our  length  of  days  permit  us  to  inquire  into  the
30  465


466


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


foundation  of  all  that  we  believe.  Thus  many  of  our  beliefs  are
not  well-founded  beliefs  even  though  what  we  believe  may  happen  to
be  true.

There  are  at  least  five  difierent  ways  in  which  belief  may  be
attained.  Eirst,  we  may  believe  a proposition  because  we  always
have  believed  it.  How  we  first  came  to  believe  it  we  need  not
here  inquire.  We  are  concerned  only  to  notice  that  we  believe
some  propositions  only  because  we  have  never  seen  fit  to  doubt
with  regard  to  them.  Such  beliefs  are  usually  pleasant,  that  is  to
say,  the  truth  of  the  propositions  thus  believed  seems  to  us  to  be
conducive  to  our  interests ; were  this  not  the  case  we  should  be
tempted  to  doubt,  since  unpleasantness  is  a stimulus  to  activity.
The  fact  that  some  people,  of  a melancholy  cast  of  mind,  may  believe
a proposition  that  something  unpleasant  is  the  case,  for  no  other
reason  than  its  unpleasantness,  does  not  contradict  this  contention.
For  it  is  just  this  unpleasantness  that  satisfies  their  melancholy,
hence,  their  belief  that  something  unpleasant  is  the  case  is  not  itself
unpleasant.  This  way  of  attaining  belief  may  be  called,  by  a perhaps
permissible  metaphor,  the  way  of  the  limpet  The  thinker  sticks  to
his  belief  as  the  limpet  to  its  rock,  without  taking  note  of  its  con-
nexion with  anything  else  in  the  neighbourhood.  Thus,  for  instance,
the  ardent  hunter  may  believe  that  foxes  enjoy  being  hunted ; the
wealthy  old  lady,  tender-hearted  but  unimaginative  and  conservative,
may  believe  that  the  unemployed  are  ‘‘the  woht-works The
chief  advantage  of  this  way  of  belief  is  its  comfortableness.  Its
disadvantage  is  due  to  the  fact  that  beliefs  thus  attained  may  be
upset  by  the  pressure  of  facts,  and  that  this  upset  may  have  disastrous
consequences.

The  second  way  of  attaining  belief  may  be  described  as  the  way
of  authority.  Two  different  types  of  authority  may  be  distinguished.
To  accept  a proposition  on  authority  is  to  accept  it  on  the  ground
that  some  one  whose  opinion  we  respect  has  asserted  it  to  be  true.
Our  respect  may  be  due  to  the  office  occupied  by  this  person  or  to
our  recognition  that  he  is  an  expert  with  regard  to  the  subject-
matter  of  our  belief.  The  first  case  is  exemplified  in  the  acceptance
of  the  authority  of  a church,  or  of  a parent,  or  of  a teacher  whom
we  have  not  learnt  to  doubt.  ^ The  disadvantage  of  acquiring  beliefs

^ There  is  a difficiilty  in  giving  examples  of  this  way  of  belief,  since  the  writer
is  bound  to  give  examples  which  appear  to  her  to  be  baseless  beliefs,  whereas,  with
regard  to  any  example  chosen,  the  reader  may  have  sources  of  knowledge,
unknown  to  the  writer,  which  would  justify  these  beliefs.  In  that  case,  the
reader  will  have  no  difficulty  in  finding  examples,  supplied  by  other  peoples’
beliefs,  which  seem  to  him  baseless.  To  recognize  that  a belief  is  after  all  only  a
^ prejudice  is  to  recognize  that  it  was  attained  by  the  way  of  the  limpet.  O

* It  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  a teacher  (in  the  educational  sense)
whose  pronouncements  are  never  doubted  is  a bad  teacher.


THE  CHAEACTEEISTICS  OF  LOGICAL  THINKING  467


ia  ttis  way  is  that  the  acceptance  of  authority  stifles  inquiry.  More-
over, authorities  may  be  naistaken.  The  advantages  resemble  the
advantages  of  the  way  of  the  limpet.  The  second  case  is  exem-
plified in  the  acceptance  of  expert  testimony.  When  a man  has  made
a careful  study  of  a subject,  and  has  come  to  conclusions  for  which
he  is  prepared  to  offer  evidence  that  seems  to  him  conclusive,  then
it  is  not  unreasonable  to  believe  that  his  opinion  has  more  weight
than  that  of  one  who  has  made  no  such  study.  When  there  is  a
consensus  of  expert  opinion  with  regard  to  a given  proposition  it
is  reasonable  to  accept  the  opinion  of  these  experts  if  we  have  not
ourselves  examined  the  evidence  upon  which  the  proposition  is
asserted  to  be  based.  Thus  it  is  reasonable  for  the  layman  to  accept
the  authority  of  the  expert.  With  regard  to  the  greater  part  of  our
beliefs  we  are  all  in  the  position  of  laymen.  It  follows  that  to  believe
a proposition  on  authority  is  often  the  wisest  course  to  pursue.  The
danger  of  this  way  of  belief  is  that  we  are  liable  to  confuse  one
kind  of  authority  with  another  and  to  be  confident  that  experts
cannot  err.  But  even  a consensus  of  experts  is  not  infallible.

Thirdly,  we  may  attain  belief  by  the  way  of  self-evidence.  We
cannot  disbelieve  what  is  self-evident,  for  to  say  that  a proposition
is  self-evident  is  to  say  that  its  truth  is  obvious.  But  what  is  obvious
may  nevertheless  not  be  the  case.  If  there  are  propositions  which
no  one  can  doubt,  then  they  are  in  fact  indubitable.  But  proposi-
tions that  have  been  accepted  by  many  careful  thinkers  as  self-
evident  have  finally  been  found  not  to  be  indubitable.  Thus  we
must  distinguish  between  the  assertion  that  a given  proposition  is
psychologically  self-evident,  in  the  sense  that  no  one  doubts  it,  and
the  assertion  that  it  is  self-evident  in  some  other  sense,  strictly
relevant  to  logic.  Whether  there  are  any  propositions  self-evident
in  the  latter  sense  is  a matter  for  investigation.^  To  recognize  that
self-evident  propositions  naay  require  investigation  is  already  to
have  abandoned  the  way  of  self-evidence.  The  danger  of  this  way
of  belief  is  that  it  checks  inquiry  and  may  encourage  erroneous
beliefs.  To  avoid  this  danger  it  is  well  to  form  the  habit  of  suspending
judgement,  and  hence  of  being  prepared  to  doubt  whatever  can  be
doubted.

The  fourth  and  fifth  ways  of  attaining  belief  are  to  be  distin-
guished from  the  first  three  in  that  they  involve  a process  of  inquiry
the  purpose  of  which  is  to  resolve  a state  of  doubt.  This  process
may  be  terminated  either  by  persuasion  or  by  conviction.  Here
“ persuasion  is  used  in  opposition  to  conviction  although  no
doubt  they  are  sometimes  used  as  synonyms.  The  way  of
persuasion  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  way  of  conviction  by  the
nature  of  the  process  whereby  doubt  is  resolved.  Even  if  ration-
1 See  Chap.  X,  pp.  176-7.


468


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


ality  is  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  human  nature,  it  must
be  admitted  that  few  of  our  beliefs  are  based  upon  rational  grounds.
Moreover,  not  only  do  we  tend  to  believe  what  we  wish  to  believe
but,  further,  this  wish  to  believe  often  operates  in  making  us  suppose
that  what  we  believe  is  a logical  consequence  of  something  else  that
may  be  taken  for  granted.  Ehetoric  is  a means  of  persuasion.
The  aim  of  the  orator  is  to  induce  belief,  not  to  demonstrate  a con-
clusion ; his  art  consists  in  persuading  others  to  accept  a conclusion
for  which  there  is  no  adequate  evidence.  Since  our  beliefs  are  deter-
mined to  such  a small  extent  by  logical  considerations  the  orator
employs  various  devices  to  persuade  us.  If  his  hearers  were  clear
thinkers,  free  from  the  bias  of  special  interest,  and  if  his  conclusions
were  susceptible  of  demonstration,  then  he  would  need  no  other
method  of  producing  belief  than  the  method  of  logical  argument.
Seldom,  however,  is  either  of  these  conditions  satisfied.  Conse-
quently, the  orator  substitutes  persuasion  for  conviction,  appealing
to  emotion  rather  than  to  reason.  The  speech  of  a great  orator  is
a work  of  art ; as  such,  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  logic,  and,  as  such
it  can  be  admired  by  those  whom  it  does  not  persuade.  But  the
way  of  persuasion  is  not  confined  to  great  orators  ; it  is  employed
with  considerable  success  by  advertising  experts,  whose  insight  into
practical  psychology  makes  them  adepts  in  persuading  those  who
do  not  think  to  buy  goods  which  are  either  useless  or  harmful.  Pos-
sibly in  this  case  there  is  action  without  belief  so  that  this  topic
lies  outside  the  scope  of  our  discussion.

The  way  of  conviction  is  by  reasoning.  This  is  the  method  of
science  and  the  proper  business  of  the  logician.  It  might  be  sup-
posed that  as  logicians  we  have  no  concern  with  any  other  way  of
attaining  belief.  In  a sense  this  is  so,  but  it  is  often  diSicult  to
determine  how  a belief  has  been  attained  although  the  ways  of  attain-
ment are  distinct.  Not  aU  thinking  is  logical  thinking,  nor  all
reasoning  good.  We  may  more  easily  apprehend  the  characteristics
of  good  reasoning  when  we  have  recognized  the  various  ways  in
which  we  attain  our  behefs.  A well-constructed  argument  the  pur-
pose of  which  is  to  produce  conviction  exhibits  the  characteristics
of  clearness,  connectedness  or  relevance,  freedom  from  contradiction
or  consistency,  demonstrativeness  or  cogency.  Throughout  our
discussion  of  logical  method  we  have  laid  stress  upon  relevance  as
an  essential  characteristic  of  logical  thinking.  To  know  what  is
relevant  to  a situation  is  to  apprehend  connexions.  The  discovery
of  relevance  requires  judgement,  for  not  all  relevance  is  logical.  But
in  connected  thinking  certain  logical  principles  are  implicit,  upon
which  the  cogency  of  the  argument  depends.  These  principles  will
be  considered  in  the  next  section.


THE  CHAEACTEEISTICS  OF  LOGICAL  THINKING  469


§ 2.  LOGICAL  PEIISrCIPLES  AND  THE  TEADITIONAL
‘'LAWS  OF  THOUGHT’^

All  logical  tkiiikmg  exemplifies  certain  abstract  principles  in
accordance  with  wbicb  such  thinking  takes  place.  It  is  extremely
difficult  to  determine  what  these  principles  are,  and  which,  if  any,
are  independent  of  the  rest.  Three  of  these  principles  have  been
singled  out  by  the  traditional  Logicians  and  described  as  “ Laws
of  Thought  This  description  is  nnfortunate.  since  it  suggests  a
reference-tjQ..iinifQrmities  of  thinking,  i.e.  to  psychological  laws,“wMch
was  probably  not  intended.^  But  the  chief  objection  to  t^e  tradi-
tional treatment  lies  not  in  the^scripHonnSutlKtEe  c
oTwEat~iF  TOsthi(F~TO  For  “ the  laws  ’’  must

mean  a^TtEel^  suppose  that  there  are  onlyi

three.  There  has  been  considerable  difference  of  opinion  as  to  howi
these  “ laws  ” should  be  stated.  The  starting-point  of  the  tradi-
tional theory  of  logic  is  to  be  found  in  the  Aristotelian  category ^f
substance-attribute.  Assertions  with  regard  to  the  attributes  of
a substance  can  be  most  naturally  ^pressed  in  singular  propositions
of  the  subject-predicate  form,  viz.  This  S is  P.  Accordingly  the
“ laws  ’’  have  often  been  expressed  in  a manner  appropriate  only
to  propositions  of  this  form.  An  affirmation  with  regard  to  This  S
was  held  both  by  Plato  and  Aristotle  to  be  an  affirmation  with  regard
to  a definite  thing,  or  individual,  having  a determinate  nature.  From
this  point  of  view  the  Laws  may  be  stated  as  follows :

(1)  The  Law  of  Identity,  Everything  is  what  it  is  ; or,  A is  A.

(2)  The  Law  of  Contradiction.  A thing  cannot  both  be  and  not
be  so  and  so ; or,  A is  not  both  B and  not  B.

(•3)  The  Law  of  Excluded  Middle,  A thing  either  is  or  is  not  so
and  so ; or,  A either  is  or  is  not  B.

The  formulation  of  (1)  as  “ A is  A ” may  be  regarded  as  express-
ing an  important  principle  of  sjrmbolism,  but  it  is  not  usually  so
regarded.  From  the  point  of  view  of  a principle  concerned  with
the  use  of  symbols,  the  principle  of  identity  can  be  formulated  as
follows  : Sameness  of  symbol  indicates  sameness  of  referend.  Clearly
symbols  which  refer  to  different  referends  are  different  symbols.
Hence,  it  must  always  be  non-significant  to  write  ‘ A = A ’.  It
is  true  that  it  is  convenient  in  practice  to  say  that  a name  is  identical
with  a given  description  (e.g.  ‘ Scott  is  identical  with  the  author
of  Waverley  ’),  or  that  two  descriptions  are  identical  (e.g.  ‘ The  author
of  Waverley  is  identical  with  the  author  of  Marmion  ’).  But  in  these
cases  analysis  reveals  that  what  is  meant  by  “ is  identical  with  ’’
involves  the  notion  of  applying  to.  But  neither  the  traditional  Law
of  Identity  nor  any  principle  of  identity  concerning  the  use  of

^See  Sir  WilliarD  Hamilton,  Lectures  on  Logic  (Sect.  V).


470


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


S3anbols  lias  ever  been  interpreted  in  terms  of  applying  to.  Conse-
quently, these  expressions  cannot  be  regarded  as  exemplifications
of  the  law  of  identity.  The  traditional  interpretation  of  this  law  is
metaphysicaL  If  ‘‘A’’  be  regarded  as  symbolizing  a subject  of
attributes,  then  the  formula  may  be  interpreted  as  expressing  the
permanence  of  substance,  or  as  the  persisting  of  something  through-
change.  Such  an  interpretation  is  clearly  metaphysical;  it  ex-
presses a theory  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  persistent  individuality.
This  could  not  properly  be  regarded  as  a fundamental  principle  of
logical  thinking,  so  that  this  interpretation  need  not  be  discussed
here.  Aristotle  did  not  himself  formulate  any  law  of  identity  ”,
but  such  a law  might  be  extracted  from  his  assertion,  ^ Everything
that  is  true  must  in  every  respect  agree  with  itself.’  ^

It  is  worth  while  to  consider  briefly  how  Aristotle  was  led  to
formulate  the  law  of  contradiction.  He  was  in  search  of  an  in-
^demonstrable  principle  which  could  be  regarded  as  the  basis  of  all
demonstration.  For,  as  he  points  out,  ' it  islmposSbleTihat  there
should  be  demonstration  of  absolutely  everything ; for  there  would
be  an  infinite  regress,  so  that  there  would  still  be  no  demonstration  ^
Now,  he  argues,  ' the  most  certain  principle  of  all  is  that  regarding
which  it  is  impossible  to  be  mistaken  Such  a principle  is  ^ that
the  same  attribute  cannot  at  the  same  time  belong,  and  not  belong
to  the  same  subject  in  the  same  respect.  . . . This,  then,  is  the  most,
certain  of  all  principles,  since  it  answers  to  the  definition  given
above.  For  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  believe  the  same  thing
to  be  and  not"to"BeUas  some^thiA  Heraclitus  says  This  state-
ment suggests  the  formulations  given  of  (2)  above.  But  Aristotle^
was  aware  that  contradiction  is  a relation  that  holds  between  two
propositions  which  are  such  that  one  must  be  true  one  false.  In
discussing  the  relations  between  propositions  he  formulated  both
the  laws  of  contradiction  and  excluded  middle  as  follows :

‘ If  it  is  true  to  say  that  a thing  is  white,  it  must  necessarily
be  white ; if  the  reverse  proposition  is  true,  it  will  of  necessity  not
be  white.  Again,  if  it  is  white,  the  proposition  stating  that  it  was
white  was  true ; if  it  is  not  white,  the  proposition  to  the  opposite
effect  was  true.  And  if  it  is  not  white,  the  man  who  states  that
it  is  \ making  a false  statement ; and  if  the  man  who  states  that
it  is  white  is  making  a false  statement,  it  follows  that  it  is  not  white.
It  may  therefore  be  argued  that  it  is  necessary  that  aflSxmations
or  denials  must  be  either  true  or  false

^ Anal.  Priora.9  4na,  9.  See  Sigwart,  Logic,  I,  pp.  83-9,  for  a discussion  of  the
principle  of  identity.

^ Metaphyaica,  1006ct,  7.

® iUd.,  10056, 17.  Ctf.  Socrates’  attempt  to  express  this  principle  in  EepuUic.

InUrpretatione,  186,  1-^,


THE  CHAEACTEEISTICS  OE  LOGHCAL  THINKING  471


It  is  not  difficult  to  extract  from  tMs  passage  tiie  formulations :
(i)  This  S is  p and  This  S is  not  p cannot  both  be  true  ; (ii)  Either
This  S is  p is  true  or  This  S is  not  p is  true.  These  are  respectively
the  laws  (2)  and  (3).  This  passage  also  brings  out  clearly  that  both
these  laws,  or  principles,  are  required  in  order  to  define  the  relation  of
contradiction  between  propositions,  since  contradictory  propositmns
cannot  both  be  true  and  one  must  be  true.

With  regard  to  these  three  Laws  there  has  been  considerable
discussion  as  to  whether  they  are  laws  of  They

are  clearly  not  laws  of  thought  in  the  sense  that  they  express  ways
in  which  wc  always  do  think,  since  we  sometimes  fall  into  contradic-
tion. If  it  be  maintained  that  on  such  occasions  we  are  not  thinhing^
then  thinking  ” must  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  logical  thinking
In  that  case  these  “ laws  ’’  cannot  be  regarded  as  uniformities,  or
generalizations  derived  from  experience.^  Probably  few,  if  any,
logicians  to-day  would  take  this  view.  Mr.  J oseph  says  : ‘ Now
though  these  are  called  laws  of  thought,  and  in  fact  we  cannot
think  except  in  accordance  with  them,  yet  they  are  reaUy  statements
j[hich  we  cannot  but  hold  true  about  things.  We  amnot  think
pontradictory  propositions,  because  we  see  that  a thing  ccmnot  have
^ once  and  not  have  the  same  character  ; and  the  so-called  necessity
of  thought  is  really  the  apprehension  of  a necessity  in  the  being
of  things  ’.2  This  passage  suggests  that  Mr.  Joseph  holds  BbtETthat
these  laws  are  laws  of  thought  and  that  they  are  laws  of  things  There
seems  nothing  to  be  said  in  favour  of  this  view.  We  have  already
seen  reason  to  reject  the  view  that  these  laws  ” are  laws  of  thought
It  is  also  misleading  to  describe  them  as  laws  of  things  since  such
an  expression  suggests  that  they  in  some  way  determine  what  is
actual,  or  given.  They  are,  however,  purely  formal  principles  which
are  independent  of  what  is  given : they  are  negative  determinations
of  what  is  possible.  Only  in  the  sense  that  what  is  actuarmasE
also  be  possible  could  these  principles  be  regarded  as  determining
what  is  actual ; they  do  not  determine  what  is  actual  in  so  far  as
it  is  actual ; they  in  no  sense  limit  the  actual  to  be  so-and-so.

Dr.  J.  N.  Keynes  says : ‘ The  so-called  fundamental  laws  of  thought
...  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  foundation  of  aU  reasoning  in  the
sense  that  consecutive  thought  and  coherent  argument  are  im-
possible unless  they  are  taken  for  granted  It  is  certainly  true
that  ‘ consecutive  thought  and  coherent  argument  ’ must  exemplify
these  principles,  but  it  would  be  incorrect  to  suppose  that  they  are


^ The  view  that  these  laws  are  generalizations  from  experience  was  held  by
Mill.


2 Introd,,  p.  13.  It  is  clear  that  li^JosepJ^  supposes  that  all  tUnking  is

foyiica?  tHnMng.  *"

p.  450.  Appendix  B to  the  Formal  Logic  contains  a long  discussion
of  the  traditional  laws.


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


efficient  to  constitute  ‘the  foundation  of  all  reasoning’.  We
eannot  here  attempt  to  state  all  the  principles  that  would  together
be  sufficient ; we  shall  select  those  which  are  most  obviously  exem-
plified in  ordinary  reasoning.^  We  may  first  restate  the  ‘three
laws  ’ in  the  form  of  principles  exemplified  in  the  relations  between
propositions.  We  shall,  as  usual,  employ  'p,  q,  to  stand  for  any
propositions.

(1)  Principle  of  Identity,  If  then  p.

(2)  Princtple  of  Contradiction,  p cannot  be  both  true  and  false.

(3)  Principle  of  Excluded  Middle,  Either  p is  true  or  p is  false.

This  formulation  brings  out  the  essential  relation  of  the  three

principles.  They  cannot,  however,  beTeduced  to  a single  principle,
since  the  deduction  of,  for  instance,  (3)  Either  p is  true  or  p is  false
from  (1)  If  p,  then  p,  or  from  (2)  Not  both  p true  and  p false,  requires
the  independent  notion  of  falsity,  or  of  negation,  which  cannot  be
defined  without  using  the  principles  themselves.  ^

We  require  principles  of  implication  and  of  deduction.  These
may  be  stated  as  follows :

(4)  Principle  of  Syllogism,  If  p implies  q,  and  q implies  r,  then
p implies  r.

(5)  Principle  of  Deduction,  If  p implies  q,  and  p is  true,  then
q is  true.

This  principle  is  required  in  order  that  conclusions  should  be
drawn : the  principle  permits  the  omission  of  an  implicans  provided
that  the  implicans  is  true.

There  is  further  required  a principle  permitting  the  substitution
of  any  given  member  of  a class  in  an  assertion  about  every  member
of  the  class.  This  might  be  expressed  as  follows  :

(6)  Whatever  can  be  asserted  about  any  instance  however  chosen,
can  be  asserted  about  any  given  instance.

This  principle  may  be  described  as  the  “ principle  of  substitu-
tion ” since  it  is  in  virtue  of  this  principle  that  we  can  substitute
constant  values  for  the  variables  in  a functional  expression.  Mr.
J ohnson  calls  this  the  ‘ Applicative  Principle  ’ and  says  that  it  ‘ may
be  said  to  formulate  what  is  involved  in  the  intelligent  use  of
“ every  * This  principle  together  with  the  principle  of  deduction
is  exemplified  in  all  chains  of  reasoning.

There  are  three  principles  relating  to  the  conjunctive  use  of  and
which  are  important.^  These  are  :

* (7)  Principle  of  Tautology,  p and  p is  equivalent  to  p.  This
principle  asserts  that  the  reiteration  of  a proposition  adds  nothing
to  the  original  assertion.

(8)  Principle  of  Commutation,  p and  q is  equivalent  to  q and  p,

^ See  Chap.  X,  § 5,  for  a fuller  statement  of  these  principles.

»See  p.  191  above.  " W.  E.  J.,  II,  p.  9.  *W.  E.  J.,  I,  pp.  29-30,


THE  CHAKACTERISTICS  OF  LOGICAL  THINKING  473


This  principle  asserts  that  the  order  in  which  propositions  are  asserted
is  indifierent.  This  principle  follows  from  the  fact  that  and  is  a
symmetrical  relation.

(9)  Principle  of  Association,  f and  q and  also  r is  equivalent  to
p and  also  q and  r.  This  principle  asserts  that  the  order  in  which
propositions  are  grouped  is  indifferent.  These  principles  also  relate
to  the  alternative  or.  They  can  be  restated  by  substituting  or  for
and  in  each  case.

(10)  There  is  a Principle  of  Distribution  relating  to  the  combina-
tion of  propositions  connected  by  and  and  by  or.  This  may  be
stated  in  the  form : p or  q,  and  also  r is  equivalent  to  p and  r,  or
q and  r.

It  is  not  likely  to  be  denied  that  these  principles  are  all  psycho-
logically seh-evident.  Within  a given  deductive  system  these  prin-
fciples  may  be  deduced  froni  logically  more  primitive  principles.

I But  these  primitive  principles  will  not  be  self-evident  in  any  sense
in  which  the  derived  principles  are  not  also  self-evident ; they  will
be  primitive,  or  underived:,  only  because  they  are  taken  for  granted,
and  thuslbrm  tiie  basis  of  the  given  system/Fundaniental  logical
principles  cannot  be  proved  in  any  absolute  s^e,  for  all  proof  must
presuppose  them^  To  think  logically  some  principles  must  be
assumed,  since  logical  thipking  is  thinking  in^accprdance  with  logical
p™ci;pks.  The  hotioh  of  proof  is  relative  to  something  uhproveH^;
/^nat  is  taken  as  unproved  determines  what  can  be  proved.  The
principles  can  be  used  so  that  they  can  be  proved  by  themselves.
Such  proof  is  circular.  This  circularity  is  a test  of  self-consistencv.
Those  principles  which  appear  in  every  deductive  development  from
given  principles,  either  as  unproved  principles  or  as  deductions  from
these  principles,  may  be  regarded  as  fundamental  logical  principles.
The  three  principles  selected  by  the  traditional  Logicians  have  this
characteristic  only  in  a more  obvious  manner  than  the  other  principles
we  have  stated.

§3.  THE  NORMATIVE  ASPECT  OF  LOGIC

Logicians  have  been  wont  to  raise  the  question  whether  logic
is  a science  or  an  art.  Presumably,  a science  is  a systematic  study,
whilst  an  art  is  a set  of  rules  the  learning  of  which  may  fit  some
one  to  do  something.  If  this  be  so,  there  seems  little  doubt  that
logic  is  not  an  art,  but  a science.  There  may  be  an  art  of  thinking.
Not  a few  public  men  have  recently  written  books  professing  to
deal  with  such  an  art.  But  the  art  of  thinking  must  not  be  confused
with  logic.  No  doubt  the  man  who  sets  out  to  instruct  us  how  to
think  must  be  conversant  with  the  logical  principles  of  reasoning
as  well  as  with  the  ordinary  workings  of  the  human  mind.  The
logician  also  may  have  to  take  note  of  psychological  processes,  but


474


A MODEEN  INTEODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


Ms  interest  in  these  processes  is  analytical  and  critical.  We  shall
see  in  the  next  chapter  that  the  study  of  logic  originated  in  an
attempt  to  determine  the  nature  and  conditions  of  valid  thinking
hy  criticizing  types  of  argumentative  discussion.  This  criticism
resulted  in  the  discovery  that  the_yalidity  of  reasoning  depends
only  upon  its  form.  Once  this  is  realized  it  becomes  clear  that  logic
is  a pure  science.

» The  position  of  logic  amongst  the  sciences  has  certain  peculiarities.
The  natural,  or  empirical,  sciences  are  concerned  with  given  regions
of  fact.  Their  field  of  investigation  is  the  actual  world.  Logic,!
on  the  contrary,  is  concerned  not  with  what  is  actual  but  withj
what  is  possible.  Yet  the  relation  between  logic  and  the  other
sciences  is  very  close.  Were  this  not  the  case  our  discussion  of
scientific  method  would  have  been  a sheer  irrelevance.  The  scientist
aims  at  discovering  true  propositions  with  regard  to  the  field  of  his
inquiry.  Consequently,  he  infers,  and  he  desires  that  his  inferences
should  be  valid.  In  so  far  as  scientific  thinking  is  methodical,  or
orderly,  it  will  exhibit  logical  form.  Accordingly,  the  logician  is
interested  in  the  analysis  and  criticism  of  the  methods  employed
by  those  who  are  attempting  to  introduce  order  into  a set  of  facts.
It  is  sometimes  said -that  logic  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the
other  sciences  in  virtue  of  the  fact  that  it  is  normative.  A normative
science,  as  the  name  suggests,  is  concerned  with  norms,  or  standards.
In  so  far  as  logic  is  concerned  with  the  criticism  of  modes  of  thinking
it  has  3 normative  aspect.  Erom  tMs  point  of  view  logic  may  be
regarded  as  a regulative  science.  But  this  normative  aspect  is,  as
it  were,  a by-product.  Wa  do  not  study  logic  m ofderTo^stablish
norms  by  reference  to  whicfi. 'the  validity  of  reasoning  may  be  tested.
The  discovery  of  norms  of  thinking — when,  indeed,  they  are  dis-
covered;:;;::results  from  the  fact  that  valid  tMnking  is  formal  and
that  fogic  is  the  science  of  possible  forms.  It  is  a mistake  to  regard
the"  normative  -aspect  of  logic  as  constituting  its  distinguishing
characteristic.  Nevertheless,  this  is  the  aspect  that  is  important
from  the  point  of  view  of  reflective  thinking,  and  which  makes  the
study  of  logic  useful  even  for  journahsts  and  politicians.  The
utility  of  logic  has  often  been  based  upon  the  claim  that  in  studying
the  principles  of  reasoning  we  learn  to  be  good  reasoners.  Certainly
we  are  less  likely  to  be  misled  by  erroneous  reasoning  i£  we  have
clear  ideas  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  proof  and  the  forms  of  our
arguments.  Mill,  whose  interests  were  mainly  practical,  stressed
this  aspect  of  logic  and  hoped  to  promote  clear  thinkmg  by  making
evident  the  nature  of  logical  method.  ‘ Logic  he  says,  ‘ is  the
common  judge  and  arbiter  of  all  particular  investigations.  It  does
not  undertake  to  find  evidence,  but  to  determine  whether  it  has
be^TToundtr  Logic  neither  observes,  nor  invents,  nor  discovers ;


THE  OHAKACTEEISTICS  OE  LOGICAL  THINKING  475

but  judges/  ^ Sucb  a conception  of  logic  suggests  that,  though  it
be  a science,  yet  it  is  primarily  to  be  studied  as  an  art.  To  take
this  view  is  to  misconceive  the  nature  of  logic.  Rather  is  it  the
case  that  the  attempt  to  study  the  art  of  reasoning  may  lead  to
the  apprehension  of  logical  form.  Knowledge  of  logical  form,  on  the
other  hand,  no  more  sufiS.ces  to  make  men  good  reasoners  than  know-
ledge of  prosodical  form  suffices  to  make  them  good  poets.  No  one
reaUy  understands  the  form  of  his  reasoning,  or  is  able  to  estimate  its
validity,  unless  he  can  recognize  this  form  when  it  is  exhibited  in
different  subject-matters.  As  Locke  has  rightly  insisted : Nobody
is  made  any  thing  by  hearing  of  rules,  or  laying  them  up  in  his
memory ; practice  must  settle  the  habit  of  doing,  without  reflecting
on  the  rule : and  you  may  as  well  hope  to  make  a good  painter
or  musician,  extempore,  by  a lecture  and  instruction  in  the  arts  of
music  and  painting,  as  a coherent  thinker,  or  strict  reasoner,  by  a
a set  of  rules,  showing  him  wherein  right  reasoning  consists  But
this  ^ reflecting  on  the  rule  ’ — to  use  Locke’s  expression — ^is  just
precisely  the  concern  of  the  logician.  The  study  of  examples,  the
criticism  of  thought  in  the  light  of  normative  principles,  these  are
but  means  to  enable  him  to  abstract.  The  analysis  of  particular
examples  is  an  aid  to  the  beginner ; it  puts  him  in  a favourable
position  for  the  apprehension  of  form.  In  a similar  way  the  beginner
in  Latin  learns  to  apprehend  the  structure  of  a latin  sentence,
i.e.  its  syntactical  form,  only  by  studying  particular  examples  of
latin  sentences.  So  it  is  also  with  geometry.  Just  because  form  is
abstract  it  is  not  easily  apprehended.  Small  wonder,  then,  that
logic  was  first  conceived  as  limited  to  the  study  of  modes  of  reasoning
as  they  are  exemplified  in  the  special  sciences  or  in  argumentative
discussion.  To  this  limitation  is  due  the  emphasis  upon  the  norm-
ative aspect  of  logic.  When  the  norms  of  thinking  are  seen  to  be
norms  only  because  they  are  pure /oma,  the  exemplification  of  these
forms  can  be  recognized  to  be  irrelevant  to  the  science  of  logic.

Logic i Introd.,  §5.  ^The  Conduct  of  The  Understanding ^ §4.


CHAPTER  XXV


A SKETCH  OF  THE  HISTORICAL  DEVELOPMENT
OF  LOGIC

‘ Everything  of  importance  lias  been  said  before  by  somebody  who  did  not
discover  it.’ — A,  N,  Whitehead,

§ 1.  ORIGIN  OF  LOGIC  IN  THE  ANALYSIS  OF
REFLECTIVE  THINKING

At  the  present  day  there  is  considerable  diversity  of  opinion
with  regard  to  the  proper  definition  and  scope  of  logic.
Traditionally  logic  has  been  regarded  as  essentially  con-
cerned with  thinking  regarded  from  the  regulative,  or  normative,
point  of  view.  Yet,  as  we  have  seen,  the  generalization  of  logic
has  resulted  in  a science  of  pure  form  not  to  be  distinguished  from
mathematics.  One  of  the  ablest  modern  writers  on  mathematical
logic  declares,  ‘ It  really  should  be  clear  that  those  who  say  mathe-
Imatics  is  logic  are  not  meaning  by  '‘logic  ’’  at  all  the  same  thing
as  those  who  define  logic  as  the  analysis  and  criticism  of  thought."  ^
This  is  true.  Logic  as  the  science  of  order,  capable  of  expression
in  a symbolic  system,  is  certainly  quite  dSerent  from  logic  as  the
analysis  an Jcriticism  of  thought.  iSo,  too,  are practicSIamsurvey-
ing  and  geometiy‘ij;uitenif^^  But  just  as  geometry  originated
in  practical  land  surveying  and  only  by  a long  process  of  develop-
ment became  a purely  formal  science,  so  logic  originated  in  the
analysis  and  criticism  of  thought,  and  only  by  a long  process  2
development"  became  the "purely^ormal  science  of  order.  The
developmenF~or¥  s is  an  historical  process  dependent  upon
the  ways  in  which  men  think.  The  development  of  geometry  from
reflection  upon  the  operations  involved  in  practical  land  surveying,
and  the  development  of  generalized  logic  from  reflection  upon  the
operations  involved  in  reflective  thinking,  has  in  each  case  been  one
of  continuous  generalization  and  consequent  abstraction,  with  the
resulFthat  the  two  lines  of  development  have"meFiogether  in  the
science  of  pure  form,  whiclL,is  the  general  sciencKoT order.

The  collection  of  doctrines  that  have  been  gathered  together  at
various  times  under  the  one  name  " logic  ” is  not,  then,  a mere

1 See  E.  P.  Kamsey,  Froc,  London  Mathematical  Aesociation,  Series  2,  Vol.  25»
Pt.  6,  p.  353a.


476


HISTORICAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF  LOGIC


477


haphazard  collection,  although  no  doubt  the  selection  of  certain  of
these  doctrines  within  the  covers  of  a single  book  claiming  the  com-
prehensive title  of ''  logic  ’’  has  often  been  haphazard.  These  various
doctrines  may  be  grouped  as  follows : (1)  psychological  discussion
of  the  nature  of  the  thinking  process  ; (2)  linguistic  discussion  with
regard  to  the  use  of  words,  sometimes  including  historical  informa-
tion with  regard  to  their  etymological  derivation  ; (B)  epistemological
considerations  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  knowledge ; (D  meta-
physical discussions  with  regard  to  problems  such  as  the  nature  of
universals,  and  the  relation  of  thought  to  sense ; (5)  discussion  of
formal  validity  and  the  principles  of  reasoning ; (6)  discussion  of
the  " metibiods"  emplovednSy  scientist  ~(7y'‘^discuss30^
arguments  with  an  examination  of  certain  ancient  fallacies.  It  must
be  granted  that  (^and  (4)  form  no  part  of  logic ; that  (7)  is  in
the  nature  of  an  appendix ; that  (1)  and  (2)  are  in  the  nature  of
prolegomena.  But  (5)  and  (6)  both  properly  belong  to  logic.  Their
precise  relation  is  seldom  stated  with  any  approach  to  clearness,
but,  since  scientific  method  is  essentially  logical,  and  since  thd'
validity  of  reasoning  depends  upon  its  form,  it  follows  that  theSe
topics  are  closely  r.on-np.p.tfid.

In  this  chapter  we  shall  attempt  to  indicate  the  way  in  which
logic  has  developed  from  the  science  of  reflective  thinking,  or  reason-
ing, to  the  science  of  form.

^ For  our  purpose  it  is  not  necessary  to  seek  the  origins  of  the
science  of  logic  farther  back  than  the  age  of  the  sophists  in  Greece.
The  contribution  of  the  sophists  lies  in  their  development  of  the  art
of  argumentative  discussion.  No  doubt  they  sought  rather  to/
instruct  than  to  demonstrate,  so  that  they  were  content  with  per-
suasion  instead  of  rational  conviction.  Their  starting-point  was^
provided  by  customary  opinions  accepted  without  criticism  and
held  without  clearness.  To  reasoning  ‘ &om  opinions  that  are  gener-j
ally  accepted’  Aristotle  gave  the  name  ' dialectic  Thus  under-|
stood,  dialectic  is  an  art,  not  a science  concerned  with  principles.
In  this  art  Socrates,  as  we  pointed  out  in  Chapter  XXII,  was  pro-(
ficient.  But  he  was  not  content  to  accept  customary  opinion ; he
sought  to  be  clear  as  to  the  grounds  on  which  a given  conclusion
was  to  be  accepted.  Thus  he  sought  to  know  what  it  is  concerning
which  conclusions  are  drawn.  In  this  way,  as  we  saw,  Socrates
was  led  to  seeXlEr  "definitions  regarded  as  expressing  the  essence
olthat  which  was  defined.  ' It  was  natural  says  Aristotle,  ‘ that
Socrates  should  seek  the  essence.  For  he  was  seeking  to  syllogize
and  the  essence  is  the  starting-point  of  syllogisms.  . . . For  two
things  may  be  fairly  ascribed  to  Socrates — ^inductive  arguments  and
universal  definition,  both  of  which  are  concerned  with  the  starting-
^ Toxica,  Bk.  I,  100a,  30.


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


478

point  of  science.’  ^ In  ascribing  inductive  arjsrument  to  Socrates
Aristotle  is  thinking  of  Socrates’  method  of  selecting  instances  of
some  universal  such  as  justice^  in  order  to  (HscovSFwEat*  exactly
must  be  present  in  every  instance  that  can  be  rightly  said  to  fall
pider  that  universal.  We  saw  that  the  result  of  this  inquiry  can
me  formulated  in  a definition,  and  can  be  applied  syllogistically.^
Thus  definition  is  conceived  as  depending  upon  a collection  of  in-
stances of  that  which  is  to  be  defined.  But  Socrates  points  out
that  a mere  set  of  instances  is  not  equivalent  to  a definition.  It
does  not  answer  the  question  what  the  nature  of  the  thing  is.^  Once
the  definition  has  been  formulated  it  can  be  tested  by  application
to  new  instances,  especially  by  application  to  instances  which  would
appear  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  definition.  Beflection  upon  such
inconsistencies  may  lead  to  the  discovery  that  one  set  of  instances
must  be  distinguished  from  another  set  although  both  may  be
regarded  as  instances  of  some  more  comprehensive  universal.  In
this  way  Plato  was  led  to  develop  the  processes  of  classification
'and  division.  His  investigation  culminated  in  the  conception  of  an
ordered  ^tem  of  universals,  or  ^ Ideas  the"""reIaHbnr’T^
which  in  no  sense  depend  upon  their  apprehension  by  the  thinker.
It  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  inquire  into  the  metaphysical  con-
struction that  Plato  based  upon  this  conception,  nor  into  the  problem
of  the  relation  of  the  " Idea  ’ to  the  instances  that  exemplify  it.
For  our  purpose  it  is  enough  to  notice  Plato’s  insistence  upon  the
notion  of  system.  Order  and  system  are  the  same  whether  exem-
plified in  a metaphysical  system  or  in  a physical  system.  Plato’s
metaphysic  provided  an  example  of  reflective  thinking  susceptible
of  logical  analysis.  He  did  not  himself  reflect  upon  the  logical
i structure  of  his  thought.

§2.  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  LOOIC  AS  THE  SCIENCE

OF  FORM

It  is  usual  to  regard  Aristotle  as  the  founder  of  Logic.  In  so
far  as  he  was  the  first  to  conceive  of  reflective  thinking  as  itself

^ Metafhysicaf  1078&,  23-30.  ® See  p.  428  above.

® Cf.  the  following  characteristic  passage :

‘ Soc,  How  fortunate  I am,  Meno  I When'  I ask  you  for  one  virtue,  you
present  me  with  a swarm  of  them,  which  are  in  your  keeping.  Suppose  that
I carry  on  the  figure  of  the  swarm,  and  ask  of  you,  what  is  the  nature  of  the
bee  ? and  you  answer  that  there  are  many  kinds  of  bees,  and  I reply : But  do
bees  differ  as  bees,  because  there  are  many  and  difierent  kinds  of  them  ; or  are
they  not  rather  to  be  distinguished  by  some  other  quality,  as  for  example,
beauty,  size,  or  shape  ? How  would  you  answer  me  ?

Men,  I should  answer  that  bees  do  not  difier  from  one  another,  as  bees.

Soc,  And  suppose  that  I went  on  to  say,  that  is  what  I want  to  know,
Meno  ; tell  me  what  is  that  quality  in  which  they  do  not  difier,  but  are  all  alike ;
you  would  be  able  to  answer  ?

Men,  I should.’  (Jfewo,  726,  Jowett’s  translation,)


HISTORICAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF  LOGIC


479


the  subject-matter  of  a special  science  he  may  be  admitted  to  have
founded  that  science.  Neither  Socrates  nor  Plato  reflected  upon!
the  form  of  their  reasoning.  Aristotle,  on  the  contrary,  as  we  saw  *
in  Chapter  X,  was  aware  that  propositions  have  form,  and  that  ^
it  is  their  form  that  is  important  in  reasoning.  Accordingly  he  was
led  to  reflect  upon  given  propositions  in  order  to  determine  their
form.  Unfortunately,  however,  Aristotle,  as  we  saw  in  Chapter
XXII,  took  as  his  model  the  argumentative  discussions  of  Socrates
with  regard  to  correct  definitions.  He  was  thus  led  to  conceive  of  ^
the  syllogism  as  the  sole  form  of  reasoning.  It  is  true  that  lateri
he  inve^gated  fEA structure'^ mathematical  reasoning ; this  in-
vestigation, however,  was  not  undertaken  until  he  had  so  fully
accepted  his  own  theory  of  the  syllogism  that  he  forced  mathematical
reasoning  into  the  form  which  he  recognized  to  be  proper  to  Socrates^
subsumption  of  the  particular  under  the  universal.  It  is  natural
that  Aristotle  sEould  have  been  unduly  influenced  by  linguistic
considerations,  and  that  he  should  have  failed  clearly  to  distinguish
between  grammatical  and  logical  analysis.  This  defect  should  be
noticed  but  it  need  not  be  stressed  here.  We  are  concerned  only  to
ascertain  how  Aristotle  was  led  to  the  discovery  of  syllogistic  form.
For  this  purpose  we  must  first  follow  Aristotle’s  own  formulation
of  the  syllogism,  and  must  then  inquire  how  he  was  led  to  select
just  that  form.

Aristotle’s  definition  of  syllogism  is  much  more  general  than  his*^
treatment  of  syllogistic  reasoning.  In  the  Toxica  he  says : ‘ Nqw


Tnis^nnifion  repeats  in  effect  the  definition  given  in  the  AnalyUca
Priora,  ^ As  thus  defined  syllogistic  reasoning  is  taken  to  be  equiva-
lent to  demonstration,  so  that  syllogism  becomes  siniply  the  form
ofimplicatim.  Aristotle,  however,  proceeds  to  Kmit  quite  arBitrarily
theAm^^oF  premisses  suitable  for  use  in  a demonstrative  argument.
Thus  he  says  : ‘ It  is  necessary  that  every  demonstration  and  every
syllogism  should  prove  either  that  something  belongs  or  that  it
does  not,  and  this  either  universally  or  in  part,  and  further  either
ostensively  or  hypothetically.’  ^ This  is  equivalent  to  the  assertion
that  every  syllogism  must  be  of  the  subject-predicate  form^  We
have  ahea^  seen  how  Aristotle  interpreted  this  assertion.^  Accord-
ingly, it  is  not  surprising  that  Aristotle’s  formulation  of  the  funda-
mental principle  of  syllogism  should  have  been  what  is  now  known
as  the  dictmnJk  omni  et  nullo.  He  says  : ^ Whenever  three  terms
are  so  related  to  one  another  that  the  last  is  contained  in  the  middle
as  in  a whole,  and  the  middle  is  either  contained  in,  or  excluded


1 100a,  25.

* AnaL  Prior  a,  40&,  23.


®See  above,  p.  81.
*See  p.  82.


480


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


from,  tlie  first  as  in  or  from  a whole,  the  extremes  must  be  related
by  a perfect  syllogism.  I call  that  term  middle  which  is  itself  con-
tained in  another  and  contaius  another  in  itself : m position  also
this  comes  in  the  middle.  By  extremes  I mean  both  that  term
which  is  itself  contaiued  in  another  and  that  in  which  another  is
contained.  If  A is  predicated  of  all  B,  and  B of  all  C,  A must  be
predicated  of  all  C.  . . , Similarly  also,  if  A is  predicated  of  no  B,
and  B of  all  C,  it  is  necessary  that  no  C will  be  A.’  ^ From  this  point
of  view  Aristotle  was  led  to  limit  the  premisses  and  conclusion  of
a syllogism  to  one  or  more  of  the  four  A E I 0 forms.  ^

We  have  now  to  inquire  why  ArlSbtle  should  ha^  been  led  to
restrict  the  syllogism  to  this  form.  The  answer  has  to  be  found
in  the  mode  of  reasoning  which  Aristotle  selected  for  analysis.  We
saw  that  the  answer  to  the  question  what  makes  an  act  to  be  just,
or  courageous,  or  holy,  takes  the  form  that  it  is  an  act  of  such  and
such  a sort.  This  is  an  assertion  that  such  and  such  characteristics
belong  to  all  of  a certaiu  set  of  acts.  The  given  act  is  judged  to
belong  to  this  set  because  it  has  those  characteristics.  We  see,
therefore,  how  Aristotle  was  led  to  analyse  the  syllogi^  int£  three
and  only  three  terns  cbn^ciedbylEer^^  sj^e  of  las

reEance^upon  linguistic  forms  he  saw  that  tEeloumber  of  words  has
no  relevance  to  the  number  of  terms.  For  example,  in  All  who  are
fit  to  govern  are  reluctant  to  govern ; this  man  is  fit  to  govern ;
therefore,  this  man  is  reluctant  to  govern  t^^jOudlhsipsiL!^?^
strated  of  the  minor  through  the  middle.  In  attempting  to  exhibit
tEelwISK^^orsu^^  was  led  to  recognize  that  the

set  of  words  preceding  the  verb  must  be  ta>hen  as  a whole,  and  like-
wise the  set  of  words  following  the  verb.  TEtsli^ndt  because  the
same  set  of  words  occurs  twice  (either  in  both  premisses,  or  in  one
premiss  and  the  conclusion),  but  because  the  connexion  asserted  in
the  conclusion  is  estabhshed  only^becausrthe  twg"s^^^  of  JwdrJs^
Gave  each  been  related  as  a whole  sejj  qf_  words jbha^  occu^

iSrbacTpremi^  It  follows  that  each  set  of  words  must  be  "sym-
btJHzedn^^"^  symbol,  since  what  is  symbolized  is  taken  as
a unit.  Thus  the  argument  is  symbohzed  by : All  B is  C,  This
A is  B ; therefore,  This  A is  C.  Thus  A,  B,  and  0 are  taken  each
as  a single  term  about  the  whole  or  part  of  which  a predication  is
made.®  The  result  of  this  analysis  yields  the  four  forms  of  the
traditional  schedule.

“^Anal,  Priora,  25&,  32-26a,  1,  It  will  be  noticed  that  Aristotle’s  first
example  is  a syllogism  in  Barbara,  the  second  of  one  in  Celarent

® Thus  the  major.  A,  is  predicated  of  all,  or  of  no,  or  of  some,  or  of  not  all,
the  minor,  B.  It  should  be  noticed  that  Aristotle  writes  the  major  term  first,
since  he  expresses  the  proposition  in  the  form  “A  is  predicated  of  all  B ’.

®It  should  be  observed  that  Aristotle  reached  this  s5nmbolism  from  an
analysis  of  the  whole  argument.  If  he  had  attempted  to  analyse  a sentence


HISTOEICAL  DEVELOPMENT  Of  LOGIC


481


The  discovery  of  the  syllogism  asa/omof  reasoning  necessitated!
the  use  of  symbols  to  express  the  form.  This  point  should  requirej
no  further  discussion  A Whatever  may  be  the  defects  of  Aristotle’s
logic  it  cannot  be  denied  that  his  treatment  of  the  syllogism  was
formal.  His  main  error  lay  not  in  any  failure  to  realize^Hie  import-!
ancebi  form  but  in  his  failure  to  carry  the  analysis  far  enough.  Thusj
he  did  not  attempt  to  symbolize  the  relation  connecting  the  terms
of  a proposition ; consequently  he  did  not  realize  that  the  sub-
sumptive  syllogism  is  only  one  form  of  demonstrative  reasoning,  and
that  its  validity  depends  upon  the  formal  properties  of  the  relations
that  enter  into  the  reasoning.  Had  he  done  so  he  could  hardly  have!
failed  to  recognize  that  the  propositional  form  All  S is  P is  difierentf
from  the  propositional  form  This  S is  P.  To  recognize  this  distinc-
tion is  to  admit  that  All  S is  P is  not  a simple  proposition.  It  is-
to  be  regretted  that  Aristotle  did  not  attempt  to  analyse  the  method
of  mathematics  before  he  had  developed  his  theory  of  the  syllogism,  j
Had  he  done  so  he  might  have  been  led  to  the  discovery  of  the
logical  variable.  His  great  merit  is  to  have  generalized  a common
form  of  reasoning  by  exhibiting  it  in  symbolic  form.  There  is
some  foundation  for  Leibniz’s  view  that  the  syllogism  ^^is  like  a,
universal  mathematics  But  it  was  not  given  to  Aristotle  to
apprehend  it  from  this  point  of  view.^

Before  considering  Leibniz’s  attempt  to  develop  a universal
mathematics  we  must  refer  briefly  to  Aristotle’s  conception  of  mathe-
matical reasoning.  In  the  Analytics  Posi^iora  fm  YAAc^  EeTiiim
tMTsuBJectThe  says  : ' All  instruction  given  or  received  by  way  of
argument  proceeds  from  pre-existent  knowledge.  This  becomes  evi-
dent upon  a survey  of  all  the  species  of  such  instruction.  The  mathe-
matical sciences  and  all  other  speculative  disciplines  are  acquired
in  this  wa37-,  and  so  are  the  two  forms  of  dialectical  reasoning,  syllo-
5?  gistic  and  inductive  ; for  each  of  these  latter  make  use  of  old  know-
ledge to  impart  new,  the  syllogism  assuming  an  audience  that  accepts

expressing  a definition  it  is  extremely  imlikely  that  he  would  have  analysed  it
into  two  terms  connected  by  the  verb  to  he.  Such  a sentence  as  “ Every  just
act  has  such  and  such  characteristics”  would  be  naturally  symbolized  by
“ AX  is  BCD  It  is  in  the  use  of  “ AX  is  BCD  ” as  a premiss  in  a syllogism
that'  ‘ AX  ’ and  ‘ BCD  ’ must  be  taken  as  single  wholes.

^ See  above.  Chap.  VI,  § 6 ; Chap.  X,  § 1.

" ^ New  Essays  on  the  Human  Understanding ^ Bk.  IV,  Chap.  XVII,  § 9.

® Aristotle’s  logical  works  have  been  grouped  together  by  his  successors
under  the  title  Organon  (“the  Instrument”).  They  consist  of:  (1)  The
Categories,  dealing  with  names  for  the  fundamental  ideas  involved  in  all  thinking ;
(2)  De  Interpretatione,  dealing  mainly  with  the  structure  of  thought  as  revealed
in  language;  (3)  Prior  Analytics  ; (4)  Posterior  Analytics.  The  last  two  discuss
the  nature  of  demonstration,  and  of  induction,  regarded  as  a means  of  deriving
general  principles.  (5)  The  Sophistici  Elenchi,  dealing  with  the  refutation  of
sophistical  fallacies ; (6)  The  Topica,  dealing  with  dialectical  argument.

31


482


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


its  premisses,  mduction  exhibiting  the  uij^iversal  as  implicit  in  the
clearly  known  particular/  ^ TMs  passage

puee  MsipM“By^^  to  indemonstrable  premisses  from  wkicli
all  demonstration  starts.  He  constantly  asserts  that  the  preaid^es
must  be  ^■betten  known  ^ than  the  ^cpnclusion,  and  ^ prior  ’ to  it.
iJthey  were  not  better  known  the  conclusion  would  not  be  demon-
strated; if  they  were  not  prior  the  reasoning  would  be  circular.
These  prior  premisses  may  be  given  (1)  by  definitions  setting  forth
the  meaning  of  words,  or  expressing  the  essence  of  that  which  the
words  denote ; (2)  by  assumptions  with  regard  to  the  existence  of
genera  and  species ; (3)  by  propositions  which  are  immediately
evident  and  which  must  be  Imown  in  order  that  anything  else  should
be  known.  The  latter  are  called  axioms  {a^L6fxaxa)^  Aristotle’s
views  with  regard  to  the  function  of  definition  in  mathematics  are
not  perfectly  clear.  On  the  one  hand  he  maintains  that  ‘ definition
is  of  the  essential  nature  or  being  of  something,  and  all  demonstra-
tions evidently  posit  and  assume  the  essential  nature — mathematical
demonstrations,  for  example,  the  nature  of  unity  and  the  odd,  and
all  the  other  sciences  likewise  ’ ; ^ on  the  other  hand,  he  maintains
that  definitions  do  not  state  whether  the  things  defined  exist  or
not.^  It  is,  however,  clear  that  Aristotle  recognized  the  close  relation
\between  the  definitions  and  the  axioms  of  a mathematical  system
land  he  saw  that  both  were  required  for  demonstration.  His  analysis
of  mathematical  reasoning  was  based  upon  the  assumption,  which
he  shared  with  Plato,  that  there  are  intelligible  objects  (or  Ideas)
which  words  represent,  and  which  are  the  objects  of  definition.  This
theory  is  known  as  logical  realism.  Aristotle  accordingly  held  that
it  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  dej^itions  are  merely  statements  of  the
meaning  of  names.®  Such  a definition  would  be  what  is  now  called
jnominal  dejimition,  whereas  Aristotle’s  view  is  that  all  definitions
l^i^rear.

The  development  of  the  generalization  of  logic  is  closely  connected
with  the  distinction  between  real  and  nominal  definition.  If  all
definitions  are  real,  then  the  objects  to  which  the  definitions  refer
must  be  given  by  intuition  in  the  case  of  those  definitions  that  form
the  basis  of  a deductive  system.  This  undoubtedly  was  Euclid’s
view ; it  accounts  for  the  belief  that  the  axioma  are  necessarih  true
since  they  axe  held  to  relate  to  objects  that  are  given.®  This  view
was  criticized  by  Leibniz,  who  recognized  that  definitions  are  similar

^Aml  Post,  71a,  1-7.

Hhid.,  Bk.  I,  Chap.  II.  Cf.  Bk.  I,  Chap.  XXXII.

HUd.,  m,  30.  ^ibid.,  72a,  23.  Hbid„  92b,  25-35.

® The  distinction  between  real  and  nominal  definition  was  recognized  by
William  of  Occam  {Summa  Totius  Logicae  (Oxford  1675),  Bk.  I,  § 26),  and  by
Pascal (Pen^ees),  and  by  the  authors  of  the  Port  Royal  Logic  (Bk.  I,  Chap.  XIL
Bk.  IV,  Chap.  Y).


HISTOEICAL  DEVELOPMENT  OE  LOOIO


483


lojhe  expression  of  a qnantity_by  means  of  an  aIg:eT)raic  formula,  ^

of  the  Aristotelian  conception  of
definition  as  indicating  an  object  given  to  us,  and  to  the  recognition
of  the  part  played  by  definition  in  deductive  systems.  Thus  he  says,

‘ Propositions  in  every  science  are  either  principles  or  conclusions.
Principles  are  either  definitions,  or  axioms,  or  hypotheses  Axioms
are  said  to  be  ‘ propositions  which  are  regarded  by  every  one  as
evident  and  which  prove,  when  more  carefully  examined,  to  follow^
from  the  definitions He  insisted  that  axioms  must  be  demon-j
strated,  for  he  says,  ‘ I am  convinced  that  Tor  the  perfS^tion  of  the
sciences  certain  propositions  which  are  called  axioms  should  be
demonstrated,  as  indeed  Apollonius  has  taken  the  trouble  to  demon-
strate some  of  those  which  Euclid  took  for  granted  without  demon-
stration’.^ Leibniz  considered  that  only  those  propositions  which
were  identical  propositions  were  indemonstrable,  such  as  ^ A is  A
The  reduction  ot  axioms  to  propositions  that  were  identical  oT~were
immediate  consequences  of  definitions  was  connected  with  Leibniz’s
conception  of  a Chomc^s^ca  XJni^rmlis,  He  pointed  out  that
whereas  ordinary  language  imitates  on  paper  words  representing
objects,  Chinese  ideograms  and  Egyptian  hieroglyphs  directly  re-
present the  objects  themselves.  The  ClmracteristicaJJr^^  is
an  ideographic  language  every  character  of  which  stands  directly
fpraTsimple  concept!  Such  a character  is  called  by  Leibniz  a ^ real
characteristic  ’ ; which  would  be  understood  by  people  using  difierent
languages.  Leibniz  saw  that  such  a universal  characteristic  would
^ a symbolic  language  having  the  property  of  being  treated  as  a
“cal^lus  of  reasoning^,  like  an  algebra.  He  considered  that  the
characters  would ^chnsti^^  ‘Alphabet  of  human  thought’

corresponding  to  all  possible  simple  ideas  ; these  simple  ideas  would
be  primitive  concepts  out  of  which  complex  concepts  could  be  con-
structed by  means  of  rules  of  combination.  This  process  of  con-
structing complex  concepts  Leibniz  called  " the  art  of  combination
which  is  a calculus  of  reasoning.  Thus  Leibniz  conceived  both
the  possibility  of  a calculus  of  reasoning  and  the  possibility  of  a|
universal  mathematics,  which  has  given  rise  to  mathematical  logic.
He  saw  clearly  that  a universal  mathematics  must  be  founded
upon  a few  primitive  concepts  arbitrarily  symbolized ; that  new
concepts  must  be  introduced  by  the  substitution  of  a single  symbol
for  the  complex  of  defining  symbols ; finally,  that  these  symbols

^ Leibniz  (1646-1716)  regarded  a real  definition  as  an  analysis  of  a complex
concept  which,  is  possible,  whereas  a nominal  definition  is  one  which  states  the
characteristics  of  something  without  showing  that  what  is  defined  is  possible.

® Opuscules  et  Fragments  Inedits  de  'Leibniz  (ed.  Couturat),  p.  32.

^ibid.,  pp.  181-2.

* See  New  Essays  on  Human  Understanding,  Bk.  I,  Chap.  II,  § 22.


484


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

must  be  precise,  exact,  and  universal.  (^His  project  differed  in  two
important  respects  from  present  conceptions  of  matbematical  logic.
^ 'Firstly,  he  failed  to  realize  that  tbe  relations  involved  must  be
I,  .analysed.  Secondly,  he  supposed  that  the  primitive  concepts  would
Inecessmly  result  from  a correct  analysis  since  they  were  to  be
f given  by  means  of  the  alphabet  of  human  thought.  This  is  a
mistake.  The  primitive  concepts  of  a deductive  system  ar§.  as  we
have  seen,  not  ^iven  ; they  are,  to  some  extent  at  least,  arbitrarily
^selected ; consequently,  many  different  deductive  systems  are
'possible.

Leibniz  did  not  publish  his  researches  on  these  topics,  so  that
his  work  has  not  affected  the  subsequent  development  of  mathe-
matical logic.  This  development  followed  two  main  lines,  the  one
being  in  accordance  with  Leibniz’s  project  of  a calculus  of  reasoning,
the  other  in  accordance  with  his  conception  of  a universal  mathe-
niatics.  Each  of  these  developments  must  be  very  briefly  considered.

The  development  of  a calculus  of  reasoning  leads  directly  to  the
conception  of  a symbolic  system  whose  significance  is  determined
by  rules  of  combination  andisIbEus  independent  of  any  interpretation
of  the  system.  From  this  point  of  view  symbolic  logic  becomes  the
stndyijQLsfiecial^^  of  deductive  systems  ; it  involves  the  invSti-
gation  of  various  algebras  of  logicnEe  foundations  of  symbolic
logic  were  laid  down  by  George  Boole.  ^ In  an  important  passage
he  says  : ‘ Those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  present  state  of  the
theory  of  symbolic  algebra  are  aware  that  the  validity  of  the  processes
of  analysis  does  notJLepend  upon  the  interpretation  of  the  symbols
which  are  employed  but  solely  upon^TEolaws^oTth^  combination.

Every  system  of  interpretation  which  does  not aSect  the  truth  of

the  relations  supposed  is  equally  admissible,  and  it  is  thus  that  the
same  process  may  under  one  scheme  of  interpretation  represent  the
solution  of  a question  on  the  properties  of  number,  under  another
that  of  a geometrical  problem,  and  under  a third  that  of  optics.^
Recognizing  that  ordinary  language  is  not  a perfect  medium  for  the
expression  of  thought,  Boole  attempted  to  devise  a symbolic  language
fitted  to  express  exactly  what  he  called  'the  laws  of  thought’.
He  was,  however,  mistaken  in  supposing  that  he  was  concerned
with  thinking]  what  he  was  seeking  to  express  were  pure  logical
princwles.  He  thus  constructed  a symbolic  logic ; he"T[id  not
proviae  an  analysis  of  thought.  He  laid  stress  u^n
t^jI^entToIIIiS^ige^^  Now,  signs  are  arbitrary  marks

to  which  are  assigned  fixed  interpretations ; signs  are  susceptible

^ Boole  (1815-64),  His  chief  works  ar©  The  Mathematical  Analysis  of
Logic  and  The  Laws  of  Thought.  See  also  ‘ The  Calculus  of  Logic  ’ in  the
Cambridge  Mathematical  Journal,  1848.

* The  Malhemalical  Analysis  of  Logic  (1847),  p.  3.


HISTORICAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF  LOGIC


485


of  combination  in  accordance  witb  fixed  rules  wliicli  suffice  to
determine  tbe  significance  of  the  combination.  These  signs  Boole
‘"'"took  to  be  of  three  kinds,  viz. : (l)Jiteral^ymbols,  x^y,  • . • which
represent  the  objects  of  our  conceptions ; (2)  signs_jof„  operation
such  as  X,  by  means  of  which  literal  signs  are  combined

into  significant  statements ; (3)  the  simn-jofi-idontity,  = , which
Boole  regarded  as  the  fund^ental_relation.

Boole’s  contemporary,  Augustus  de  Morgan/  began  a thorough
analysis  of  relations  and  operations.  This  work  was  of  great  impor-
tance. He  used  a symbolism  much  less  adapted  to  the  needs  of  a
calculus  than  was  the  algebraical  s5nnbolism  of  Boole,  so  that  he
remains  somewhat  outside  the  main  line  of  development.  A con-
siderable advance  was  effected  by  the  work  of  the  American
philosopher,  C.  S.  Peicce.^  Professor  C.  I.  Lewis  says  of  Peirce
that  his  contributions  to  symbolic  logic  ‘ are  more  numerous  and
varied  than  those  of  any  other  writer — at  least  in  the  nineteenth
century.  He  understood  how  to  profit  by  the  work  of  his  pre-
decessors, Boole  and  de  Morgan,  and  built  upon  their  foundations,
and  he  anticipated  the  most  important  procedures  of  his  successors
even  when  he  did  not  work  them  out  himself.  Again  and  again,
one  finds  the  clue  to  the  most  recent  developments  in  the  writings
of  Peirce.’  ® Professor  Lewis  pomts  out  that  these  contributions
fall  under  three  heads.  (D  Peirce  distinguished  the  relations  (such
as  multiplication  in  Boole’s  algebra)  which  are  characteristic  of
logical  classes  from  the  relations  (such  as  subtraction  and  division)
which  are  more  closely  related  to  arithmetical  operations.  He
thus  effected  a considerable  improvement  in  the  Boolean  algebra.
(2)  He  made  use  of  the  work  of  de  Morgan  to  make  more  precise
and  more  properly  mathematical  the  treatment  of  relations  and
relative  terms.  He  fimt^lntfoduceHTEeTaethoT'of^^
traditionaTparticular  propositions  as  sums^  and  the  universal  proposi-
tions as  products^  of  propositions  containing  variables.  He  thus/
laid  the  foundation  for  Russell’s  conception  of  formal  implication}
(1)  Finally,  ' he  conceived  symbolic  logic  to  be  the  science  of  mathe-
matical form  in  general  In  this  respect  he  waiToIlo^v^^

^ de  Morgan  {1806-78)  wrote  a great  many  papers  on  mathematical  logic
(see  Bibliography).  He  also  made  important  contributions  to  the  subject  in
his  Formal  Logic  (1847),  and  in  Syllabus  of  a Proposed  System  of  Logic  (1860).

^ Charles  Sanders  Peirce  (1839-1914).  Peirce’s  papers  were  published  in
various  journals  not  easily  accessible  to  EngHsh  students,  so  that  for  some
time  Ms  work  was  little  known  in  this  country.  Many  of  his  papers  were  not
published  dxaxing  his  lifetime ; he  left  enormous  masses  of  fragments  wMch
are  now  being  published  by  Harvard  University  (see  BibMo^aphy).

* A Survey  of  Symbolic  Logic,  p.  79.  The  student  who  is  interested  in  the
Mstorical  development  of  SymboHc  Logic  cannot  do  better  than  consult  Pro-
fessor Lewis’s  book.


486  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTIOE*  TO  LOGIC

Boole,  de  Morgan,  and  C.  S.  Peirce,  may  be  said  to  have  laid
down  the  lines  of  subsequent  research  in  symbolic  logic.  Their
work  was  contiaued  by  Ernst  SchroederA  Dr.  Christuie  Ladd-
Pranklin,  and  Hugh  MacColl.^  The  most  elaborate  development  of
Boole’s  system  was  due  to  Schroeder,  whose  work  was  a continuation
of  Leibniz’s  conception  of  a calculus  of  reasoning  in  the  form  of  an
algebra  of  logic.  A summary  exposition  of  such  a calculus  is  value-
less ; the  interested  student  must  consult  Schroeder’s  own  work.

The  second  line  of  development  was  concerned  with  the  con-
""struction  of  a deductive  system  which  should  be  a ' universarmathe-
matics  such  as  Leibniz  dreamed  of  but  didmoFwoSE^out^

BuFm  such  a construction  the  detailed,  step-by-step,  working  out
is  all-important.  This  task  has  occupied  the  attention  of  logicians
for  not  more  than  the  last  fifty  years.  The  discovery  of  non-
Euclidean  systems  of  geometry  had  made  clear  that  the  axioms  of  a
geometrical  system  are  independent  of  spatial  intuitions.  This  is  a
discovery  of  the  greatest  importance.  We  saw  in  Chapter  X that
.the  recognition  of  the  nature  of  axioms  led  to  a more  rigorous  analysis
of  the  fundamental  concepts ; this  analysis  results  in  making  explicit
all  the  assumptions  involved  in  the  construction  of  a given  deductive
system.  The  foundations  of  this  method  of  analysis  were  laid  down
by  Frege.®  Since  it  was  not  Frege’s  purpose  to  develop  a calculus  by
means  of  which  logical  problems  could  be  accurately  and  rapidly
solved  in  a quasi-mechanical  manner,  but  to  analyse  the  logical
relations  involved  in  arithmetic,  he  found  it  necessary  to  invent
non-algebraical  svnihnls.  For  his  purposes  it  was  necessary  to
stress  the  differences  rather  than  the  analogies  between  logical
relations  and  the  operations  of  ordinary  mathematics.  He  showed
how  arithmetic  might  be  developed  from  purely  logical  premisses.
His  method  was  to  show  that  the  fundamental  conceptions  of
niathematics  are  capable  of  being  defined  in  terms  of  relations  that
enter  into  any  complicated  process  of  reasoning.  In  this  way
Frege  sought  to  achieve  the  complete  independence  of  deductive
systems  of  counting  or  of  intuitions  of  spatial  relations.  Frege’s
symbolism,  however,  was  so  cumbersome  and  difficult  that  his
work  was  left  unnoticed,  so  that  much  of  it  had  to  be  done  over
again.  The  attempt  to  complete  Frege’s  analysis  has  been  made
by  Peano  and  by  Bertrand  Eussell  and  A.  N.  Whitehead.  Peano  ^

^ See  VorlesuTigen  uher  die  Algebra  der  Logih  (3  vols.,  published  1890-95) ;
Der  Operationskreis  des  Logikkalhds  (1877);  Ahriss  der  Algebra  der  Logik,
Ersg,  V.  E.  Muller.

^ For  a note  on  the  publications  of  these  two  logicians,  see  Bibliography.

® Frege  (1848-1925).  Die  Grundlagen  der  Arithmetik,  eine  logisch-rmthe-'
matische  Untersuchung  iiber  den  Begriff  der  ZaU  (1884) ; Grundgesetze  der  Arith*
melik  (2  vols.,  1893-1903).

♦ Peano  published  Formudaire  de  Mathirmtiqm  at  intervals  from  1895  to  190  8.


HISTOEICAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF  LOGIC


487


effected  a useful  advance  by  inventing  symbols  for  logical  relations
wbicb  were  of  a different  shape  from  the  ordinary  algebraic  symbols
for  operations,  but  which,  unlike  Frege’s,  were  easily  apprehended.
It  may  seem  strange  that  the  invention  of  a shajpe  should  have
important  consequences  for  analysis,  but  we  have  already  noticed
that  a good  notation  is  an  aid  to  clear  thinking.  If  we  use  the
same  symbols  to  signify  different  relations  we  are  likely  to  become
confused  and  to  fail  to  notice  important  differences.  It  is  not  the
least  of  Peano’s  many  services  to  mathematical  logic  that  he  pro-
vided a symbolism  well  suited  to  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  to
be  used.  The  work  of  Frege  and  Peano  has  been  carried  on  byl
Whitehead  and  Eussell  in  their  great  work,  Principia  Mathematica,
This  survey  of  the  development  of  the  science  of  logic  may  fittingly
conclude  with  a brief  consideration  of  the  aims  and  achievements
of  this  work.

The  main  problem  of  is  to  wove  that

pure  mathematics  is  nothing^  other  than  an  extension  of  formal
lofflc.  We  have  already  seen  i that  Peano  ^as  able l:^show^^^^^t^
arithmetic  can  be  reduced  to  the  arithmetic  of  the  natural  numbers,
i.e.  the  positive  integers,  and  that  the  whole  of  arithmetic  can  be
deduced  from  the  three  primitive  concepts,  zero,  number,  successor
of.  The  question  then  arises  as  to  what  a positive  integer  is.  The
problem  is  whether  the  positive  integers  can  be  analysed  in  purely
logical  terms  or  whether  they  involve  a reference  to  something  not
reducible  to  logic.^  Eussell  showed  that  such  an  analysis  was
possible.  In  the  Introduction  to  Principia  Mathematica  the  authors
state  that  they  were  guided  by  three  different  purposes.  These
were  to  effect  the  greatest  possible  analysis  of  the  concepts  of
mathematics  and  of  the  processes  of  mathematical  demonstration  ® "

to  express  mathematical  propositions  in  the  most  convenient
notation  in  order  to  secure  the  most  precise  expression ; fS)  to
develop  a system  ^ specially  framed  to  solve  the  paradoxes  which,
in  recent  years,  have  troubled  students  of  symbolic  logic  and  the
theory  of  aggregates  It  may  be  said  at  once  that  this  third  aim
is  but  very  imperfectly  realized.  These  three  aims  are  regarded  by
the  authors  as  subsidiary  to  their  main  purpose  of  proving  that
pure  mathematics  is  derivable  from  pure  logic.  It  must  be  noted  '
exactly  what  it  is  they  seek  to  prove.  They  do  not  seek  to  prove
any  given  mathematical  theorem ; they  attempt  to  prove  that  any
such  theorem  follows  from  purely  logical  principles  and  that  this
proof  requires  nothing  hut  purely  logical  principles.  To  prove  thiS|

^ See  Chap.  X,  § 5.  ^

2 Of.  Kroneker’s  famous  remark : ‘ Die  ganzen  Zahlen  hat  Gott  gemacht ;
alles  anderes  ist  Menchenwerk.’

®See  p.  177  above.


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


488

they  found  it  necessary  jirst  to  analyse  the  concepts  used,  secondly
to  make  explicit  the  axioms"  correlation

iof  these  concepts.  They  found  it  necessary  to  formulate  expIicTtly
thTTogicar^^  involved,  and  in  so  doing  they  had  to  use
logical  principles.  This  procedure  appears  to  be  circular ; in  one
sense  it  is  circular,  but  the  circularity  is  not  necessarily  vicious.
There  is,  however,  reason  to  suppose  that  Whitehead  and  Russell
aimed  at  efiecting  an  analysis  that  did  not  involve  any  kind  of
circularity.  This  would  mean  that  the  primitive  propositions  of
the  system  exhibited  in  Principia  Maihematica  are  to  be  regarded
as  properly  primitive,  rather  than  as  undemonstrated  propositions.^
If  we  grant  that  this  procedure  is  correct,  then  we  may  regard
Whitehead  and  EusseU  as  having  achieved,  apart  from  certain
blemishes,  their  mam  purpose,  namely  to  establish  the  derivation
of  pure  mathematics  by  a step-by-step  procedure  from  the  principles
of  pure  logic.

Pep, -no  had  already  seen  clearly  that  what  is  fundamental  in
mathematics  is  deduction  from  propositional  functions,  i.e.  from
expr^sions  involvm^variablesl!  The  generalizatiorr  of  the  concept
of  the  variable  and  of  implication  between  propositional  functions
leads  to  the  generalization  of  logic  the  purpose  of  which  is  to  achieve
the  ideal  of  pure  form.  The  nearest  approach  to  this  ideal  is  con-
tained in  the  system  of  Principia  Mathematica,  but  it  is  not  com-
pletely realized.2  The  work  of  Mr.  Ludwig  Wittgenstein  and  E.  P,
Ramsey  led  to  certain  radical  changes  in  Russell’s  views,  which  are
expressed  in  the  Introduction  and  Appendices  to  the  second  edition
of  the  first  volume  of  Principia  Mathematical

It  is  important  to  observe  that  the  development  of  logic  as  the
science  of  pure  form  has  proceeded  from  an  analysis  of  the  logical
aspect  of  reflective  thmking.  It  originated,  as  we  saw,  in  Aristotle’s
attempt  to  exhibit  the  form  of  demonstration.  His  analysis  was
most  unfortunately  restricted  to  a single  form,  not  susceptible  of
development  into  a system.  Recent  developments  in  this  subject
have  been  achieved  by  analysing  mathematical  reasoning.  This
analysis  shows  that  when  all  the  assumptions  are  made  explicit,
demonstration  is  independent  of  any  subject-matter  derived  from
experience.  It  follows  that  no  propositions  concerning  matters  of
fact  (i.e.  propositions  relating  to  experience)  could  be  demoniEated.

of

reasonmg"wiSregS^  is  wholly  dependent

upon  the  formal  properties  of  the  objects  that  enter  into  the  reason-

^ See  Appendix  C.

2 See  above,  pp.  460-3.

® For  a discussion  of  these  views  see  E.  P.  Ramsey : The  Foundations  of
Mathematics^  •


HISTOEICAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF  LOGIC


489


ing.  There  is  a fundamental  difference  between  inference  by  logical
principles  from  asserted  matters  of  fact,  and  inference  by  logical
principles  from  purely  logical  propositions.  The  latter  cannot  be
asserted  in  the  same  sense  as  a proposition  concerning  a matter  of
fact  can  be  asserted.  Thus  we  may  say  that  we  do  n^  assert  the
truth  of  mathematics  ; we  assert  the  validity  of  “tESToglcalSju^ure^
exhibited  bv  the  system  of  mathematical  propositions.^  Generalized
logic  is,  in  other  words,  purely  formaL

§3.  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  CONCEPTION  OF
SCIENTIFIC  METHOD

The  development  of  the  science  of  logic,  sketched  in  the  preceding
section,  ends  in  the  conception  of  abstract  deductive  systems —
formal  structures — which  must  be  interpreted  if  tEey^feToTBFlised
foF1ffie""puri^so  of  obtaining  knowledge  about  the  world.  The
sciences  other  than  pure  mathematics  are  concerned  with  the  dis-
covery of  generalizations  with  regard  to  what  happens  and  with
the  establishment  of  comprehensive  theories  capable  of  being  tested
by  appeal  to  experimental  observation.  The  logical  analysis  of  the
method  whereby  such  generalizations  and  theories  are  obtained]
constitutes  the  theory  of  scientific  method.  From  the  logical  point!
of  view  the  discussion  of  scientific  method  is  concerned  with  two
quite  different  problems : (1)  the  analysis  of  scientific  method ;
(2)  the  logical  justification  of  its  claims  to  establish  true  statements.
These  two  problems  have  been  discussed  respectively  in  Chapters
XIII-XIX  and  in  Chapter  XXL  Here  it  is  possible  only  to  indicate
very  briefly  the  way  in  which  the  conception  of  the  form  of  scientific
method  has  developed  from  the  time  of  Bacon  ^ and  Galileo  until
the  present  day,  and  to  point  out  how  this  development  has  affected
the  statement  of  the  second  problem.

iThe  theory  of  scientific,  method  is  sometimes  described  as  ^ induc-
tive logic  This  description  is,  however,  a mis-nomer.  Both
inductive  and  deductive  reasoning  are  involved  in  scientific  method.
The  common  opposition  between  induction  and  deduction  is  unclear."^
I Min  defined  ^ induction  ’ as  the  ‘ operation  of  discovering  and  proving
1 general  propositions  ^ This^  is  an  unfortunate  use  of  the  word

ing,  and  general  propositions  may  be  discovered  by  deductive

^ See  p.  176,  above.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  mathematics  cannot  be
regarded  as  a system  of  true  propositions ; it  is  a structure.

® Bacon  lived  from  1560-1626.

® Logic,  Bk.  Ill,  Chap.  I,  § 1.  Mill  also  defines  Induction  as  ‘ that  opera-
tion of  the  mind  by  which  we  infer  that  what  we  know  to  be  true  in  a 'par-
ticular case  or  cases,  will  be  true  in  all  cases  which  resemble  the  former  in
certain  assignable  respects  ’ (Chap.  II,  § 1).


490


A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


inference.  Nor  is  it  correct  to  regard  induction  as  the  method  of
\^discovefing  general  propositions,  and  deduction  as  the  method  of
\ exhibiting  this  discovery.  The  traditional  view  that  deduction  is
.inference  from  universal  to  particular  propositions  is  equally  mistaken.
No  inference  to  a particular  proposition  is  valid  unless  there  be  a
particular  proposition  among  the  premisses-  Inductive  inference  is
essentially  generalization  from  particular  instances  ; hence,  inductive
inference  belongs  to  the  earlier  stages  of  a scientific  inquiry.  Mill’s
I confused  conception  of  the  nature  of  induction  was  due  toUEs
\jSn3amimtE"^^  Me  "BMie^d  that  not  only  the  axioms

dl  geometry  but  a]^  ^ axiom  ’ could  be  validly  established  as

indubitable  upon  the  basis  of  particular  observations.  Hence,  on
his  view,  even  syllogistic  reasoning  is  ^ form  of  juduction.^

We  shoinr"nb'f“oOTbse  induction  ”to  deduction*;  the  proper
opposition  is  betweefli  demonstrative  inference  an(J%)roblemafe
inference.  This  distinctioiTEas"  been  made  by  W.  E.  Johnson,  who
-I  contends  that  there  is  a form  of  demonstrative  induction,  and  that
Mill’s  methods,  when  properly  interpreted  and  restated,  are  of  this
'type.  2 Dr.  Broad  has  worked  out  the  forms  which  demonstrative
induction  may  assume,  and  has  shown  clearly  the  assumptions  upon
which  it  is  based,  ^ It  is  clear  that  demonstrative  induction  is  not
capable  of  yielding  conclusions  that  are^  ceffam.  As*  Dr'  Broad"
says,  ‘ In  all  cases  we“"“are  likely  to  have  ""to  consider,  the  major
premiss  of  a demonstrative  induction  rests  ultimately  on  a problematic
induction.  In  all  such  cases  it  will  only  have  a certain  degree  of
probability.  Consequently,  although  the  conclusions  of  demon-
strative induction  do  follow  of  necessity  from  their  premisses,  they
are  only  probable  because  one,  at  least  of_fche  premisses  is  ^y
probable.’  This  Mill  would  certainly  have  refused  to  admit,  since,
ih*“Hs‘'™w,  these  major  premisses  would  be  provided  by  causal
laws  which  he  regarded  as  capable  of  being  established  with  certainty.
He  was  not  within  measurable  distance  of  understanding  the  nature
of  Johnson’s  opposition  between  demonstrative  and  problematic
inference.

The  opposition  of  induction  to  deduction  as  antithetical  modes  of
establishing  general  propositions  was  insisted  upon  by  Bacon,  who
has  often  been  regarded  as  ‘ the  Father  of  Modern  Logic  Bacon’s
[conception  of  scientific  method  is,  however,  singularly  defective.
His  view  is  clearly  indicated  in  four  Ajghorisms  in  Book  I of  the
Novum  Organon :

^ See  Chap.  XIV,  § 3 above.

2 W,  B,  J,,  Pt.  II,  Chaps.  X and  XI.

3 Mind,  X.S.,  155,  156.  In  these  two  articles  Dr.  Broad  gives  a full  and
very  clear  account  of  the  principles  of  demonstrative  induction,  to  which  the
student  should  refer  for  a further  discussion*


HISTOEICAL  DEVELOPMENT  OE  LOGIC


491


ApJi.  I.  ‘ Man,  being  the  servant  and  interpreter  of  Nature,  can  do  and
understand  so  much  and  so  muoli  only  as  he  has  observed  in  fact  or  in  thought
of  the  course  of  nature : beyond  this  he  neither  knows  anything  nor  can  do
anything.’

Aph.  XIX.  ‘ There  are  and  can  be  only  two  ways  of  searching  into  and
discovering  truth.  The  one  flies  from  the  senses  and  particulars  to  the  most
general  axioms,  and  from  these  principles,  the  truth  of  which  it  takes  for  settled
and  immoveable,  proceeds  to  judgement  and  to  the  discovery  of  middle  axioms.
And  this  way  is  now  in  fashion.  The  other  derives  axioms  from  the  senses
and  particulars,  rising  by  a gradual  and  unbroken  ascent,  so  that  it  arrives
at  the  most  general  axioms  last  of  all.  This  is  the  true  way,  but  as  yet  untried.’

ApJi.  XXII.  ‘ Both  ways  set  out  from  the  senses  and  particulars,  and  rest
in  the  highest  generalities ; but  the  difference  between  them  is  infinite.  For
the  one  just  glances  at  experiment  and  particulars  in  passing,  the  other  dwells
duly  and  orderly  among  them.  The  one,  again,  begins  at  once  by  establishing
certain  abstract  and  useless  generalities,  the  other  rises  by  gradual  steps  to
that  which  is  prior  and  better  known  in  the  order  of  nature.’

Aph.  XXVI.  ‘ The  conclusions  of  human  reason  as  ordinarily  applied  in
matter  of  nature,  I call  for  the  sake  of  distinction  Anticipations  of  Nature  (as  a
thing  rash  and  premature).  That  reason  which  is  elicited  from  facts  by  a just
and  methodical  process,  I call  Interpretation  of  Nature.'^  ^

These  passages  express  Bacon’s  distrust  of  hypotliesis  as  anticipa-^
tions  of  nature.  He  completely  failed  to  see  that  experimental  i
observation  must  be  guided  and  controlled  by  hypothesis.^  His
failure  to  grasp  the  importance  of  hypothesis  is  partly  due  to  his
reaction  against  excessive  reliance  upon  syllogistic  reasoning  based
upon  premisses  too  rashly  assumed  to  be  'truths  that  cannot  be
shaken  and  partly  to  the  fact  that  he  immensely  underestimate
the  complexity  of  nature.  There  is  no  doubt  that  he  was  right  in
insisting  upon  the  importance  of  experiment,  for,  as  we  have  seen,
scientific  theories  are  based  upon  observable  facts  and  return  to
them.  He  was  also  right  in  insisting  that  theories  must  be  tested  “
by  ' descending  ’ again  to  the  particulars.  But  it  was  an  error  to  ^
suppose  that  theories  can  be  ' read  off  ’ from  a collection  of  facts.
This,  however,  is  exactly  what  Bacon  did  suppose.  He  believed
the  work  of  science  was  to  discover  wha^he  _caUedJ  Bornas
In  Bk.  II,  Aph.

‘ For  tbe  Form  of  a nature  is  such,  that  given  the  form  the  nature  infallibly
follows.  Therefore  it  is  always  present  when  the  nature  is  present,  and  uni-
vSsally  implies  it,  and  is  constantly  inherent  in  it.  Again,  the  Form  is  such,
that  if  it  be  taken  away,  the  nature  infallibly  vanishes.  Therefore  it  is  always
absent,  when  the  nature  is  absent,  and  implies  its  absence,  and  inheres  in
nothing  else.  Lastly,  the  true  Form  is  such  that  it  deduces  the  given  nature
from  some  source  of  being  which  is  inherent  in  more  natures,  and  which  is
better  known  in  the  natural  order  of  things  than  in  the  Form  itself.  For  a
true  and  perfect  axiom  of  knowledge  then  the  direction  and  the  precept  will


^ Translation  by  Ellis  and  Spedding.
2 Cf.  Bk.  I,  ApL  CIV.


492  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

be,  that  another  nature  be  discovered  which  is  convertible  with  the  given
nature,  and  yet  is  a limitation  of  a more  general  nature,  as  a true  and  real
genus.’  ^

By  a form  Bacon  seems  to  mean  wliat  a given  thing  really  is,
/nnd  lie  conceived  that  this  would  always  be  ‘ a limitation  of  a more
general  nature  i.e.  a species  of  a more  generic  nature.  For  example,
heat  is  one  species  of  motion,  colour  another  species ; hence,  the
form  of  heat  and  the  form  of  colour  would  be  limitations  of  the  same
more  general  nature.  For  the  discovery  of  these  Forms  induction
by  simple  enumeration  is  useless.  It  is  necessary  to  draw  up  three
^ Tables  of  Investigation  ’ as  follows : (1)  Table  of  Essence  and
Presence  containing  all  known  instances  in  whicFISesimplelaature
is  present ; (2)  Table  of  Absence  containing  instances  corresponding
to  those  in  the  firsF![BBle™except  that  the  simple  nature  is  absent ;
(3)  Table  of  Degrees  containing  instances  in  which  the  simple  nature
is  presSFm“^^rying  degrees.  By  comparison  of  these  Tables  what
is  not  the  Form  can  be  excluded.  What  remains  is  the  Form.
Bacon  was  fully  aware  of  the  difficulty  of  this  method  of  exclusion.
Thus  he  says  : ' In  the  process  of  exclusion  are  laid  the  foundations
of  true  Induction,  which  however  is  not  completed  till  it  arrives  at
an  affirmative.  Nor  is  the  exclusive  part  itself  at  all  complete,
nor  indeed  can  it  possibly  be  so  at  first.  For  exclusion  is  evidently
the  rejection  of  simple  natures  ; as  if  we  do  not  yet  possess  sound
and  true  notions  of  simple  natures,  how  can  the  process  of  exclusion
be  made  accurate  ? ’ ^ He  suggested  various  devices  for  strengthening
the  method  of  exclusion  by  the  use  of  what  he  calls  Prerogative
Instances  which  cannot,  however,  be  discussed  here.  Although
Bacon  recognized  the  difficulty  of  carrying  out  satisfactorily  an
investigation  in  accordance  with  the  three  Tables  owing  to  our  in-
adequate knowledge  of  simple  natures,  it  never  occurred  to  him  to
suppose  that  the  method  itself  is  inadequate.  Its  inadequacy  is
due  to  the  fact  that  he  failed  to  grasp  the  importance  of  hypothesis
and  of  mathematical  deduction  in  scientific  investigation.  As  Mr.
J.  M.  Keynes  points  out,  ‘ Bacon’s  great  achievement,  in  the  history
of  logical  theory,  lay  in  his  being  the  first  logician  to  recognize  the
importance  of  methodical  analogy  to  scientific  argument  and  the
dependence  upon  it  of  most  well-established  conclusions.  The
Novum  Organum  is  mainly  concerned  with  explaining  methodical
ways  of  increasing  what  I have  termed  the  Positive  and  Negative
Analogies,  and  of  avoiding  false  analogies.’  ® We  have  seen  the
importance  of  analogy  for  inductive  investigation,  and  the  necessity
of  dispensing  as  far  as  possible  with  pure  induction.  We  have  also

^ Of.  0.  D.  Broad,  The  Philosophy  of  Francis  Bacon,  p.  33.

2 Nov.  Org.,  Bk.  II,  Aph.  XIX.

® A Treatise  on  Probability,  p.  268.


HISTOEIOAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF  LOGIC  493

seen  tliat  tMs  process  is  tlie  beginning  but  not,  as  Bacon  supposed,
also  the  end  of  scientific  inquiry.

In  many  respeijtsJMill  may  be  r^garfedjLsJ^ving^rri^p^^
work  oFBacOn.  TheTesemBlance” oflBacon’s  three  Tables  to  Mills
JmnFTSetEod  of  Agreement  and  Difierence  and  the  Method  of  Con-
comitant Variations  is  obvious.  Bacon’s  statement  of  these  methods
is  certainly  free  from  some  of  the  defects  which  mar  Mill’s  formu-
lation of  his  Canons.  They  agreed  in  placing  little  reliance  upon
simple  enumeration,  and  in  insisting  upon  the  importance  of  elimi-
nating what  is  not  the  Form,  or  not  the  cause.  There  is  no  doubt
that  an  important  step  in  scientific  inquiry  consists  in  the  delimitation
of  the  range  of  possible  causes.  If  we  do  not  know  what  hind  of
cause  could  be  effective  in  a given  situation  we  cannot  formulate
the  right  questions.  A given  experimental  investigation  may  have
no  other  aim  in  view  than  to  determine  whether  a possible  cause
is  in  this  case  an  actual  one.  Mill,  however,  paid  far  too  much
attention  to  this  stage  of  the  investigation.  Both  he  and  Bacon
faiTed^to  realize  the  iTrrpQ.rta.nce  of  hypothesis,  although  Mill  criticized .
Bacon  for  ‘ leaving  no  room  for  the  discovery  of  new  principles  by  1
way  of  deduction  at  all  ’.^  The  main  criticism  of  both  is  that  theyli
mistook  one  stage  of  scientific  method  for  the  whole.  Their  attentionll
•was  concentrated  upon  the  earlier  stages  of  science,  in  which  the
inductive  methods  play  an  important  part.  There  was  less  excuse
for  Mill,  who  not  only  lived  after  the  time  of  Newton  but  who  also
constantly  refers  to  ^ the  highest  generalizations  ’ of  mechanical
science  without  recognizing  in  the  least  the  importance  of  the  deduc-
tive development  of  hypothesis.  He  did  not  in  the  least  understand
the  nature  of  a constructive  description.

Bacon’s  great  contemporaries,  Kepler  and  Galileo,  entertained
a very  different  conception  of  scientific  method ; they  contributed
to  the  advance  of  science  by  using  the  ' hypothetical  method  ’ which
Mill  depreciated  and  Bacon  ignored.  This  method  has  been  the
basis  of  our  discussion  in  Part  II,  so  that  it  need  not  be  discussed
here.  Although  Galileo  did  not  professedly  write  on  the  theory  of
scientific  method,  he  made  many  incidental  contributions' to  it  in
the  course  of  his  controversies  with  the  Aristotelian  philosophers.
Kepler  certainly  " anticipated  Nature  ’ since  his  investigations  were
controlled  by  the  belief  that  Nature  is  fundamentally  mathematical!
and  that  certain  knowledge  is  always  of  quantitative  characteristics|3
We  have  already  seen  that  Galileo^s  methbcTreited  upon  the  assump-
tion  that  mathematics  alone  is  capable  of  providing  the  order  which^
will  render  natural  occurrences  intelligible.  Accordingly  his  pro-
cedure was  first  to  formulate  an  hypothesis  conceived  in  mathematical
form ; then  to  deduce  the  consequences  of  this  h37pothesis  ; finally,

1 Logic,  Bk.  Ill,  Chap.  XI,  § 7.


494


A MODERN  mTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


to  test  the  hypothesis  experimentally.  Thus  for  Galileo  the  function
of  experimental  observation  was  to  show  that  natural  occurrences
cannot  fail  to  be  ordered  in  accordance  with  the  expectations  of
reason.  The  purpose  of  such  an  experimental  test  is  negative  rather
than  positive,  namely,  to  show  conclusively  that  a given  theory  is
false.  The  contrast  of  this  conception  with  that  of  Bacon  is  obvious.
It  is  not  necessary  here  to  pursue  further  the  method  of  Galileo  since
it  has  been  illustrated  and  discussed  in  Chapters  XVI  and  XVIII.
Nor  need  anji^hing  more  be  added  to  our  previous  discussion  of
Newton’s  conception  of  scientific  method.^

The  importance  of  hypothesis  in  scientific  method  was  fully
realized  byM5rs“'"con±^pofar^^  HeHmsisted  that  the

'"bpj^sition  of  induction  to  deductioiTrcsted  upon  a misconception
of  the  nature  of  scientific  investigation.  He  saw  that  collections
of  instances,  such  as  Bacon  contemplated,  would  not  sufiice  to  ;^eld
scientific  theories  apart  from  what  he  called  ‘ the  colligation  of  facts
by  means  of  a true  and  appropriate  conceptionT'”^ucErim‘^“^
priate  conception’  is  anOxypotK^^.  for  the  forming  of  which  no
rules  can  be  laid  down.  Thus  Whewell  saysT'^'TffiF”^^

' bjTwEcO’act^  together,  are  suggested  by  the  sagacity  of

discoverers.  This  sagacity  cannot  be  taught.  It  commonly  succeeds
by  guessing ; and  this  success  seems  to  consist  in  framing  several
tentative  hypotheses  and  selecting  the  right  one.’^  It  is  true  that
Whewell  developed  his  theory  of  induction  upon  the  basis  of  the
Kantian  philosophy,  which,  though  popular  with  scientists,  is  irrele-
vant to  the  conception  of  scientific  method.  For  this,  and  other
reasons,  Whewell’s  writings  are  out  of  date,  and  cannot  be  read
with  very  great  profit  to-day.  Nevertheless,  he  made  an  important
contribution  to  the  theory  of  induction  in  showing  clearly,  and  with
a wealth  of  historical  examples,  that  the^rogress  of  science^dependg
upon  the  f ormulatiQii_cJ^.mj^^  w^^  'though  in-

volving much  that  is  superfluous,  and  even  erroneous  ’ lead  to  further
deductions  and  further  hypotheses  in  which  ' the  superfluity  and
error  may  afterwards  be  pared  away  Thus  Whewell  realized
more  clearly  than  either  Bacon  or  Mill  that  scientific  progress  pro-
ceeds piecemeal,  and  that  the  element  of  truth  in  an  hypothesis
renders  it  useful  as  a guide  to  further  research.

Thus  we  are  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  proper  method  of
scientific  investigation  is  hypothetical  and  djeductive.  The  develop-

^ See  Chap.  XVI,  § 6.

^ See  Novum  Organon  Benovatum,  and  The  Philosophy  of  Discovery,  The
title  of  the  latter  hook  suggests  WhewelFs  approach  to  the  study  of  scientific
method.  He  regarded  it  as  essentially  ^ method  of  discovery,  not  of  proof,

® Novum  Organon  Benovatum,  Aph,  PTHT

* Ibid.,,  Aph.  XL


HISTORICAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF  LOGIC  495

ment  of  a constructive  theory  into  a more  and  more  comprehensive
theory  is  made  possible  only  by  the  union  of  exact  mathematical
deduction  and  accurate  observation.  It  is  now  generally  admitted
that  only  h3rpotheses  which  are  stated  in  precise  quantitative  terms
can  yield  satisfactory  theories  with  regard  to  the  order  of  nature.
The  physical  sciences  at  all  events  have  reached  a stage  of  develop-
ment in  which  the  inductive  methods  of  Bacon  and  Mill  have  ceased
to  be  useful.  The  marvellously  exact  experiments  of  modern  science
are  suggested  by  mathematical  deductions  and  are  at  every  stage
controlled  by  theoretical  considerations.  We  saw  in  Chapter  XX
that  such  a procedure  results  in  theories  which  are  fragile  because
they  are  exceedingly  comprehensive.  The  development  of  physical
science  from  Galileo  to  Einstein  justifies  this  conception  of  scientific
method.

(2)  The  problem  of  the  logical  justification  of  induction  is  not
one  that  need  concern  the  scientist.  He  may  be  content  to  proceed
step  by  step  satisfied  if  his  theories  be  verified,  knowing  that  at  best
they  are  but  approximations.  The  logician,  however,  must  ask
what  are  the  grounds  upon  which  these  theories  are  to  be  accepted.
Little  remaius  to  be  added  to  the  discussion  of  this  problem  in
Chapter  XXL  We  saw  that  Hume  raised  the  question  of  the  validity
of  induction,  and  that  his  critics  have  failed  to  answer  him.  As
Mr.  Keynes  says  : ‘ Hume’s  statement  of  the  case  against  induction
has  never  been  improved  upon ; and  the  successive  attempts  of
philosophers,  led  by  Kant,  to  discover  a transcendental  solution
have  prevented  them  from  meeting  the  hostile  arguments  on  their
own  ground  and  from  finding  a solution  along  lines  which  might,
conceivably,  have  satisfied  Hume  himself.’  ^ Nevertheless,  noil
Bacon  only  but  also  Mill  believed  that  inductive  conclusions
capable  of  yielding  certainty.  Their  belief  was  n6~  "doubt  based  upon
the  urlrecogmxedirssu  of  the  principle  of  limited  independent

variety.  Dr.  Broad  has  pointed  out  that  Bacon  ' asserts  at  least
two  different  forms  of  this  principle.  In  the  first  place,  he  definitely
asserts  that  the  same  simple  nature,  e.g.  heat,  caimot  be  reduced
in  some  cases  (e.g.  in  fires)  to  one  form,  and  in  other  cases  (e.g.  in
the  heavenly  bodies  or  in  dunghills)  to  another  form.  He  thus
definitely  denies  that  there  can  be  a plurality  of  forms  for  a given
simple  nature.  Secondly,  Bacon  says  that  the  forms  of  simpler
natures,  though  few  in  number,  yet  in  their  communications  and
co-ordinations  make  all  this  variety  2 jjr.  Keynes  points  out
that  Mill  assumes  " that  every  event  can  be  analysed  into  a limited
number  of  ultimate  elements  although  he  does  not  make  this
assumption  explicit.  Certainly  without  such  an  assumption  Mill’s

^ A Treatise  on  Probability ^ p.  272.  ® op.  oit.,  pp.  35-6.

^ A Treatise  on  Probability , p.  272.


496  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

metliods  are  Tinworkable ; with  it  they  have  some  approach  to
cogency.  Both  Bacon  and  Mill  assumed  what  might  be  called  an
alphabetic  view  of  the  universe,  although  neither  of  them  realized
that  this  was  an  assumption  which  stands  in  need  of  justification,
or  at  least  of  explicit  statement.  Mr.  Keynes  and  Dr.  Broad  have
stated  very  clearly  what  exactly  must  be  assumed  with  regard  to
the  constitution  of  the  existent  world  if  inductive  conclusions  are
to  be  regarded  as  more  likely  to  be  true  than  to  be  false,.  Every
modem  logician  recognizes  that  the  foimdation  of  the  theory  of
induction  is  to  be  found  in  the  theory  of  probability.

The  development  of  the  conception  of  scientific  method  is  of
interest  to  the  logician  since  the  scientist  is  concerned  with  the
discovery  of  t3?p)es  of  order  by  means  of  which  conclusions  can  be
drawn.  It  has  been  the  purpose  of  this  chapter  to  show  that  the
traditional  Aristotelian  logic  and  the  recent  development  of  the
science  of  pure  form  have  had  a common  origin  in  reflection  upon  the
nature  and  conditions  of  valid  reasoning.  Reflection  upon  scientific
method  has  also  aided  the  development  of  logic.  We  saw  that
the  generalization  of  logic  as  the  science  of  pure  form  resulted
from  the  attempt  to  make  explicit  all  the  premisses  which  enter
into  the  construction  of  a system  of  geometry.  In  making  a similar
attempt  with  regard  to  the  analysis  of  scientific  method  the  logician
has  been  led  to  emphasize  the  distinction  between  pure  and
empirical  science.  In  the  former,  demonstration  is  possible ; m
the  latter,  it  is  not.  The  impossibility  in  the  latter  case  is  due  to
the  dependence  of  empirical  science  upon  sensible  facts.  Yet  even
an  empirical  science  as  it  becomes  highly  developed  tends  to  become
deductive  in  form,  notwithstanding  the  demand  that  it  must  fit
the  facts.  It  fits  the  facts  in  so  far  as  it  exhibits  a type  of  order
appropriate  to  the  facts.  But  though  it  fits  the  facts  it  is  not
adequate  to  the  facts  as  sensible  facts ; what  is  sensible  is  thereby
not  formal.  The  more  deductive  the  form  of  a scientific  theory
is  the  more  abstract  is  the  science  within  which  it  falls.  To  fit,  i.e.
to  be  appropriate  to,  the  facts  is  not  to  be  adequate.  There  is
always  much  from  which  a scientific  theory  must  abstract.  Never-
theless, an  empirical  science  remains  attached  to  sense-observation
in  that  it  must  not  only  start  from  but  also  return  to  sensible  facts
for  its  verification.  An  hypothesis  which  could  not  conceivably  be
verified  by  reference  to  sense-observation  would  not  be  a scientific
hypothesis.  In  its  final  stage  scientific  method  takes  the  form  of
constructive  description.  In  this  stage  mathematical  development
plays  an  immensely  important  part,  but  this  part  is  not  the  whole.

In  the  actual  procedure  of  the  scientist  much  is  involved  that  is
extra-logical.  The  discovering  of  an  hypothesis  capable  of  rendering


HISTOEICAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF  LOGIC  497


intelligible  tlie  connexion  between  sensible  facts  does  not  consist
in  the  following  a rule.  Nor,  too,  is  the  flash  of  insight  by  means
of  which  the  pure  mathematician  is  led  to  see  how  his  problem  can
be  solved.  But  the  statement  of  the  h37pothesis  as  a construction
capable  of  ordering  the  facts  exhibits  form  no  less  than  the  state-
ment of  a mathematical  theorem.  Only  when  the  form  of  the
reasoning  is  thus  exhibited  can  the  validity  of  the  reasoning  in  either
case  be  tested.  In  so  far  as  scientific  method  exhibits  form  it  is
the  proper  concern^“”ffielogr(3ah~  - -


APPENDIX  A

MEANING,  EEFEEENCE,  AND  DESCEIPTION

The  words  “ meaning  ” and  means  ’’  Lave  botL  barmful
ambiguity  and  systematic  ambiguity.  We  can  avoid  tbe
former  if  we  are  careful  to  remember  that  only  words  or  symbols
Lave  meaning.  A word  is  a conventional  sign,  a sound  or  a coloured
sLape,  i.e.  a mark,  used  by  someone  to  refer  to  sometLing.  Means,  or
symbolizes,  is  a triadic  relation ; its  tLree  terms  are  : (i)  tLe  sound  or
mark,  (ii)  tLe  person  using  tLe  sound  or  mark,  (iii)  tLat  wLicL  is  referred
to.  Since  tLe  people  wLo  speak  a given  language  (e.g.  EnglisL)  fre-
quently use  a certain  specific  sound  (e.g.  table)  with  tLe  same  reference,
we  come  to  tLmk  of  tLe  sound  as  tLe  word.  In  tLe  same  way  tLe  written
mark,  wLicL  can  appear  on  tLe  pages  of  a dictionary,  comes  to  be  taken
for  the  word,  and  tLus  we  say  we  can  ' look  up  the  meaning  of  the  word
in  tLe  dictionary’.  TLe  comparative  fixity  of  tLe  reference  intended
by  tLose  wLo  commonly  use  tLe  sound  or  mark  makes  it  natural  and
intelligible  for  us  to  speak  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  and,  at  tLe  same
time,  to  think  of  the  word  as  the  mark,  or  its  equivalent,  the  sound.
This  natural  expression  must  not,  however,  mislead  us  into  supposing
that  meaning  attaches  to  any  one  of  the  three  terms  in  the  triadic
relation  means ; meaning  attaches  to  the  sound  (or  mark)  as  used  by
someone  to  refer  to  sometLing.  Just  as  we  can  say  ' this  pen  is  a gift
so  we  can  think  of  an  element  in  the  triadic  relation  means  as  though
it  Lad  meaning.  But  we  da  reahze  that  this  fen  is  not  a gift  unless  it
be  given  by  a donor  to  a recipient ; in  the  same  way  we  ought  to  realize
that  a sound  (or  mark)  Las  no  meaning  unless  it  be  used  by  someone  to
refer  to  something.  * There  is  not  one  element  in  the  triadic  relation
means  which  has  meaning.  When,  therefore,  we  say  that  the  word  Las
meaning,  then  the  word  must  not  be  identified  with  the  sound  (or  mark) ;
it  will  be  the  sound  (or  mark)  as  used  to  refer  to  sometLing.  TLat
which  the  word  refers  to  is  the  referend.  TLe  referend  of  a demonstra-
tive symbol  (i.e.  a word  used  demonstratively)  is  the  object  directly
fresented  to  the  speaker.  TLe  referend  of  a descriptive  phrase  is  a
proferty,  or  set  of  properties.  When  these  properties  belong  to  an  object,
then  the  descriptive  phrase  may  be  said  to  have  application,  i.e.  it  applies
to  the  object  possessing  those  properties.  When  a descriptive  phrase
is  an  element  in  a definite  or  indefinite  description,  then  the  descriptive
phrase  is  used  as  a denoting  phrase.  A descriptive  phrase  always
describes,  (hence,  the  expression  “ descriptive  phrase  ”),  but  when  the

499


500  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

descriptive  phrase  las  no  denotation  then  it  describes  nothing.^  If,
however,  there  are  objects  having  the  properties  ascribed  by  the
descriptive  phrase,  then  these  objects  are  denoted  by  it.  In  the  case
of  a demonstrative  symbol  the  referend  is  the  denotation ; but  in  the
case  of  a descriptive  phrase  the  denotation  (if  any)  is  the  object,  or  set
of  objects,  having  the  properties,  whereas  the  referend  is  the  projperties.
Accordingly,  when  we  speak  of  ‘ the  meaning  of  a demonstrative  symbol  ’
and  ' the  meaning  of  a descriptive  phrase  we  are  using  meaning  in
two  different  senses.  The  demonstrative  symbol  means  its  denotation,
i.e.  it  stands  for  the  object  denoted ; whereas  the  descriptive  phrase
means  the  properties  and  not  the  objects  (if  any)  denoted.  Accortogly,
as  Mr.  Eussell  has  pointed  out,  ‘ there  is  not  one  relation  of  meaning
between  words  and  what  they  stand  for,  but  as  many  relations  of
meaning,  each  of  a different  logical  type,  as  there  are  logical  types  among
the  objects  for  which  there  are  words.^  Hence,  both  means  ’’  and

stands  for”  have  systematic  ambiguity.

It  should  also  be  observed  that  a symbol  and  what  it  stands  for  are
always  of  different  logical  types.  The  word  “word”  does  not  mean
the  mark  or  sound ; it  means,  or  stands  for,  the  frojperties  which  anything
that  is  a word  has.

The  way  in  which  a word  means  is  different  from  the  way  in  which  a
sentence  means.  A sentence  is  composed  of  words,  but  the  syntactical
form  of  the  sentence  is  not  another  word,  and,  in  order  to  understand
the  sentence,  this  form  as  well  as  the  separate  words  must  be  under-
stood. Our  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  forms  of  a familiar  language
may  enable  us  to  get  the  drift  of  a sentence  even  if  we  do  not  under-
stand all  the  separate  words ; but  we  might  know  all  the  words  and  yet
not  understand  the  sentence.  To  quote  Mr.  Russell  again  : ' We  might
understand  all  the  separate  words  of  a sentence  without  understanding
the  sentence:  if  a sentence  is  long  and  complicated,  this  is  apt  to
happen.  In  such  a case  we  have  knowledge  of  the  constituents,  but
not  of  the  form.  We  may  also  have  knowledge  of  the  form  without
having  knowledge  of  the  constituents.  ...  In  order  to  understand  a
sentence  it  is  necessary  to  have  knowledge  both  of  the  constituents
and  of  the  particular  instance  of  the  form.  It  is  in  this  way  that  a
sentence  conveys  information,  since  it  tells  us  that  certain  known  objects
are  related  according  to  a certain  known  form.’  ^

Sentences  may  be  said  to  express  propositions.  It  is  sometimes  said
that  the  proposition  expressed  is  what  the  sentence  means.  Here
“ means  ” is  again  used  differently,  for  the  relation  of  a sentence  to
what  it  expresses  is  t;^ically  different  from  the  relation  of  a word  to
its  referend.  An  English  and  a French  sentence  (if  the  one  is  a trans-
literal equivalent  of  the  other)  may  be  said  to  .express  the  same  proposi-
tion, or  have  the  same  meaning.  In  ordinary  discourse  sentences  are
so  used  as  to  have  a reference  to  facts.  If  the  sentence  is  used  to  say

We  must  be  careful  not  to  say  that  the  properties  apply  i properties
bdong ; it  is  descriptive  phrases  that  apply.

^ Contemporary  British  Philosophy,  Series  I,  p.  370.

* Our  Knowledge  of  the  External  Wcrrld,  pp.  43-4.


APPENDIX  A


601


what  is  true,  then  there  is  a fact,  or  a set  of  facts,  to  which  the  sentence
refers,  and  which  make  what  is  said  t7'ue.  The  reference  of  all  the
sentences  we  use  is  indirect ; only  a pictorial  sentence  could  express
the  fact  which  makes  the  sentence  capable  of  being  so  used  as  to  say
what  is  true.  The  reference  of  sentences  is’  indirect  just  as  the  use  of
symbols  is  descriptive  rather  than  demonstrative.  A descriptive  symbol
necessarily  involves  some  degree  of  generality  and  abstractness.  Accord-
ingly the  notion  of  a pictorial  sentence  is  an  ideal  approximation  to  a
limit.  It  is  no  accident  that  we  cannot  use  sentences  pictorially.  All
that  is  possible  is  to  decrease  the  departure  from  pictorialness.

As  we  have  seen,  ordinary  expressions  are  logically  inappropriate.
When  we  translate  a sentence  into  a logically  less  inappropriate  expres-
sion we  may  be  said  to  decrease  the  departure  from  pictorialness.  This
advance  in  clarity  may  be  otherwise  expressed  by  saying  that  we  sub-
stitute a sentence  approximating  more  closely  to  the  right  multipKcity.
A sentence  expressing  a fact  has  the  same  multiplicity  as  the  fact  it
expresses  when  the  elements  of  the  sentence  can  be  put  into  one-one
correspondence  with  the  elements  of  the  fact.  Such  a sentence  would
reveal  the  form  of  the  fact  expressed.


APPENDIX  B

LOGICAL  CONSTRUCTIONS


The  importance  of  Russell’s  tlieory  of  incomplete  symbols  is
tbat  it  makes  us  see  bow  indirect  is  tbe  reference  of  tbe  sentences
we  use  to  tbe  facts  we  seek  to  refer  to  in  using  them.  It  is
natural  to  suppose  that  there  is  a one-to-one  correspondence  between
tbe  elements  of  a sentence  and  tbe  constituents  of  some  fact.  Attention
to  sucb  words  as  “ tbe  ”,  any  ”,  “ a ”,  dispels  this  illusion,  but
tbe  belief  that  this  table  ”,  as  used  in  ''  This  table  is  brown  ”,
refers  Erectly  to  a constituent  of  a fact  persists.  It  was  shown  in  Chap-
ter IX  that  this  bebef  is  false ; its  persStence  is  due  to  tbe  failure
to  reabze  bow  logically  inappropriate  are  our  ordinary  bnguistic  expres-
sions.

“*It  is  difficult  to  give  clear  examples  of  logical  constructions,  for  tbe
assertion  that,  for  example,  this  table  is  a logical  construction  is  ^ meta-
physical statement.  To  accept  the  st^t^inent  is  to  accept  a certain
metajpbysical  analysis.  It  should,  however,  be  possible  to  say  what
is  meant  by  tbe  assertion  that  something  is  a logical  construction  even
if  we  then  go  on  to  deny  that  sucb  a statement  is  ever  true.  I have
tried  to  do  this  in  Chapter  IX.  Here  I am  concerned  to  point  out  that
there  are  good  reasons  for  supposing  that  tbe  famibar  objects  of  daily
life,  incluffing  persons,  are  logical  constructioMr*”  Uiie  of  the  difficulties
m the  wajT'ln  acceptm^  this  view  seems  to  me  to  be  due  to  a misunder-
standing of  tbe  expression  logical  construction  There  is  no  doubt
that  it  is  an  unfortunate  expression,  for  it  certainly  suggests  that  some-
thing is  constructed,  which  is  not  tbe  case,  and  that  logic  is  adequate  to
tbe  construction,  which  is  also  false.  Russell’s  habit  of  using  “ logical
fictions  ” as  a sjmonym  for  logical  constructions  ” makes  matters
worse.  The  expression  logical  fictions  ” suggests  something  fictitious.^
But  to  say  that  the  table  is  a logical  fiction  (or  construction)  is  not  to
say  that  the  table  is  a fictitious,  or  an  imaginary,  object ; it  is  rather
to  deny  that,  in  any  ordmary  sense,  it  is  an  object  at  all.

1 think  a clearer  apprehension  of  what  is  meant  by  this  table  is  a
logical  construction  ” may  be  gained  if  we  consider  how  Russell  seems
to  have  been  led  to  this  view.  It  seems  to  me  that  two  different  lines

^ This  has  been  a common  mistake  of  Russeh’s  critics,  and  it  is  a mistake
to  which  much  that  Russell  says  lends  itself.  See  A.  0.  Lovejoy,  The  BevoU
against  Dualism,  p.  199.  Cf.  my  article  on  ‘ Subjla^pgi?,  §,nd  Eacts

Jmrr^oi  Philosophy.  June  9,  1932.

502


APPENDIX  B


505


of  reflexion  converged  to  tMs  conclusion.  On  tlie  one  liand,  Russell
was  concerned  to  analyse  general  propositions ; on  the  other,  he  sought
to  discover  a simple  fact,  which  he  could  regard  as  an  indubitable  datum.
At  first  sight,  the  connexion  between  these  two  problems  seems  absurdly
remote,  but  when  it  is  remembered  that  Russell  came  to  hold  that  a
table  is  a class  of  appearances,  the  connexion  seems  more  obvious.  There
is  not  space  here  to  deal  fully  with  these  considerations  but  a few  of
the  more  important  points  may  be  noted.

The  analysis  of  general  propositions  such  as  Men  are  mortal  has  been
given  in  Chapter  IX.  Here  it  is  sufficient  to  recall  that  men  ” as
used  in  ‘‘  men  are  mortal  refers  to  each  individual  man  indirectly
through  the  property  of  being  human ; hence,  its  significance  does  not
depend  upon  acquaintance  with  each  individual  man.  If  the  table  is  a
class  of  appearances,  then,  in  saying  “ This  table  is  brown  ’’  there  is
reference  to  each  member  of  the  class  although  the  speaker  is  acquainted
only  with  one  member,  namely,  the  appearance  which  is  sensibly  present
to  him,  which  Russell  calls  a sense-datum  This  line  of  reflexion
leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  table  is  not  the  sort  of  object  which  could
be  directly  presented,  so  that  the  table  could  not  be  referred  to  demon-
stratively, Russell,  as  was  pointed  out  in  Chapter  IX,  seems  to  assume
that  to  say  that  a symbol  is  incomplete  is  to  say  that  it  does  not  name
a constituent  of  the  proposition  in  whose  verbal  expression  it  occurs,
so  that,  from  the  fact  that  the  table  could  not  be  named,  he  would  derive
the  conclusion  that  the  table  is  a logical  construction.

The  second  hue  of  reflexion  arises  in  the  search  for  an  indubitable
datum.  We  may,  in  any  given  case,  be  mistaken  in  believing  that  we
are  seeing  a table,  for  we  may  be  victims  of  illusions  or  hallucinations.
But  even  in  such  cases  the  percipient  is  aware  of  a sensible  element,
and  Russell  maintains  that  with  regard  to  the  sensible  element — or,
as  he  would  say,  the  sense-datum — doubt  is  impossible.^  Sense-data
are  to  be  regarded  as  elements  in  simple  facts,  which  Bussell  calls  ‘ facts
of  sense  ’.  These  constitute  ^ hard  data  i.e.  data  ‘ which  resist  the
solvent  influence  of  critical  reflexion  ^ Tables,  persons,  and  the  ordinary
famihar  things,  do  not  resist  this  solvent  influence.  Accordingly,  Russell
sought  a method  of  dispensing  with  the  assumption  that  there  are
tables,  whilst  still  permitting  us  to  speak  about  tables.  In  short,  Russell
regards  the  problem  of  the  nature  of  the  external  object,  e.g,  the  table,
as  primarily  a problem  of  justifying  an  inference.  The  table,  he  seems
to  suppose,  is  reached  by  an  inference ; but  all  inferences  concerning
that  which  is  not  purely  formal,  are  liable  to  doubt ; hence,  he  seeks
to  justify  the  inference.  At  one  time  (viz.  in  1912  Russell  held  that
the  table  was  known  by  description  as  The  thing  having  R to  this  sense-
datum  ’’  (where  ^ R ’ stands  for  the  converse  of  the  relation  being  an
appearance  of.)  But  a description  may  describe  nothing,  and  yet  be
significant.  His  next  step  was  to  apply  Occam’s  Razor  to  cut  out  the
tMe.‘  His  formulation  of  the  Razor — ‘ Wherever  possible  logical  con-

^ See  Our  Knowledge  of  the  External  World,  p.  70 ; Outline  of  Philosophy,
pp.  4-5.

2 See  Problems  of  Philosophy^


504  A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

structions  are  to  be  substituted  for  inferred  entities  ’ ^ is^  significant  in
revealing  Ms  attitude.  The  opposition  of  logical  constructions  to  inferred
entities  shows  that  he  regarded  the  problem  as  essentially  one  of  justify-
ing a risky  inference.  To  this  is  no  doubt  due  the  misleading  expression
logical  constructions

A tMrd  consideration  may  have  led  Eussell  to  some  of  his  mislead-
ing statements  about  logical  constructions.  He  accepted  Whitehead’s
method  of  extensive  abstraction  as  a satisfactory  method  of  constructing
'points.  He  then  assumed  that  the  same  method  could  be  used  in  the
same  way  to  construct  tables.  But  in  favour  of  the^  view  that  points
are  constructions  reasons  may  be  urged  that  are  lacking  in  the  case  of
tables.  These  reasons  are  the  same  as  those  wMch  can  be  urged  in
favour  of  the  view  that  “ matter  ” is  a ' convenient  expression  which
can  be  regarded  as  defined  for  the  purposes  of  physical  inquiry.  The
same  does  not  hold  with  regard  to  tables.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that
there  are  tables ; the  doubt  arises  with  regard  to  the  difficulty  of  deter-
mining what  is  the  correct  analysis  of  propositions  in  whose  verbal
expression  ‘table’  occurs.  By  failing  to  make  these  considerations
clear,  Eussell  has  obscured  the  analysis  of  The  table  is  a logical
construction.

The  point  to  be  emphasized  is  that  every  statement  wMch  would
commonly  be  said  to  be  a statement  about  the  table  can  be  transformed
into  a set  of  statements  wMch  can  be  jointly  substituted  for  the  original
statement,  but  no  grammatical  element  in  the  substituted  set  will  be
used  with  the  same  meaning  as  any  grammatical  element  in  the  verbal
expression  of  the  original  statement.^  An  illustration  may  suffice  to
show  this.  We  may  say  that  a College,  or  the  Council  of  a College,  or
a Committee,  or  a Nation,  have  acted  in  a certain  way.  Thus,  for
example,  we  may  say,  ‘ The  Council  have  elected  A as  chairman  TMs
statement  says  something  about  each  member  of  the  Council,  but  it
does  not  say  of  each  member  that  he  elected  A.  But  a set  of  statements
could  be  found,  jointly  equivalent  to  the  original  statement,  which
would  be  each  a statement  about  one  individual  member.  The  action
of  the  Council  is  a logical  construction  out  of  a set  of  facts  each  of  which
is  a fact  about  one  individual  member ; but  the  action  of  the  Council
is  not  the  sum  of  the  actions  of  the  members.  Mr.  Wisdom  has  pointed
out  that  similar  considerations  hold  with  regard  to  the  analysis  of  such
statements  as  ‘ France  fears  Germany  Such  words  as  “ fears  ”,
“ acts  ”,  “ are  ” have  systematic  ambiguity.  Hence  we  must  be  careful
not  to  suppose  that  we  are  saying  precisely  the  same  tHng  when  we
say  that  a Committee  acts  as  we  are  saying  when  we  say  that  a person
acts.

There  are,  further,  different  t'ypes  of  logical  constructions.  There
are  logical  constructions  out  of  facts  about  simple  constituents ; con-

1 Mysticism  and  Logic,  p.  165.  This  essay  was  published  first  in  January,

1914.  ' —

2 See  J.  Wisdom,  ‘Logical  Oonat^rnGtions % NB.y  p.  15&  Mr.  Wis-

dom’s articles  on  this  subject,  which  have  not  yet  been  completed,  will  be
found  of  the  utmost  use  to  advanced  students.


APPENDIX  B


605


structions  out  of  facts  concerning  tliese  facts,  and  so  on.  This  problem,
of  types  of  logical  constructions  is  intimately  connected  with  the
problem  of  the  nature  and  kinds  of  abstraction.  Much  work  requires
to  be  done  on  this  problem,  but  it  cannot  be  discussed  here.

It  remains  to  remove  a common  misunderstanding.  It  has  been
erroneously  supposed  that  from  the  two  statements  I am  sitting  on  this
chair  and  This  chair  is  a logical  construction,  it  follows  that  I am  sitting
on  a logical  construction.  This  supposition  involves  a serious  confusion
due  to  a complete  failure  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  saying  that
This  chair  is  a logical  construction.  The  two  statements  are  funda-
mentally difierent  in  logical  form.  The  confusion  is  as  gross  as  the
confusion  in  supposing  that  if  men  are  numerous  and  Socrates  is  a man,
it  would  follow  that  Socrates  is  numerous.  It  cannot  be  necessary  to
argue  that  this  conclusion  does  not  follow.  But  sometimes,  owing  to
our  failure  to  recognize  that  a word  is  systematically  ambiguous,  we
make  mistakes  which  are  quite  as  absurd  but  not  so  obvious.

It  must  be  remembered  that  logical  constructions  are  not  incom-
plete symbols.  Nothing  that  can  significantly  be  said  about  a logical
construction  can  be  significantly  said  about  an  incomplete  symbol.
The  first  duty,  and  the  greatest  dif&culty,  of  the  philosopher  is  to
distinguish  statements  that  are  significant  from  those  that  are  meaning-
less, or  non-significant.  We  saw  in  Chapter  XXIII  that  ‘ A class  is
not  a member  of  itself  ’ is  meaningless.  But  that  it  is  meaningless  is
by  no  means  obvious.  Our  difiiculty  is  to  hww  when  we  are  talking
nonsense.  The  recognition  of  systematic  ambiguity  sometimes  enables
us  to  make  this  discovery.


APPENDIX  0


POSTUIATIONAL  SYSTEMS  AND
PRINCIPIA  MATHEMATICA

The  construction  of  a deductive  system  may  be  approacbed  from
two  fundamentally  different  points  of  view.  On  tbe  one  band
the  construction  may  be  undertaken  in  order  to  see  wbat
theorems  can  be  derived  from  a set  of  primitive  propositions  regarded
as  mutually  consistent  and  severally  independent.  Such  a set  of  primi-
tive propositions  may  be  called  " a set  of  postulates  and  tbe  system
thus  constructed  may  be  called  ‘ a postulational  system  It  is  cbarac-
teristio  of  postulational  systems  that  tbe  analysis  involved  may  be
circular.^  This  circularity  is  due  to  tbe  fact  that  tbe  theorems  and
tbe  postulates  are  at  the  same  level.  This  means  that,  once  tbe  postulates
have  been  selected,  then  simplicity  is  to  be  understood  with  reference
only  to  tbe  steps  involved  in  passing  from  tbe  postulates  to  tbe  theorems.
One  theorem  is  simpler  than  another  if  the  former  is  derived  from  tbe
postulates  in  a fewer  number  of  steps  than  tbe  latter.  Tbe  postulates
are  simple  only  in  tbe  sense  that  no  steps  are  required  to  reach  tbe
postulates ; on  tbe  contrary,  all  steps  set  out  from  them.  Thus  tbe
postulates  are  not  simpler  than  anything.  Tbe  selection  of  any  given
postulate-set  may  be  due  to  a variety  of  reasons,  but  these  reasons  have
nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  system  when  constructed.  Hilbert,
Veblen,  and  E.  Y.  Huntington  have  constructed  many  different  postu-
lational systems,  relating  to  various  branches  of  mathematics.  The
reference  to  mathematics,  however,  comes  in  only  when  tbe  postulational
system  is  interpreted.  Demonstration  occurs  in  the  system,  but  the
demonstration  is  relative  to  tbe  initial  postulates.

The  construction  of  a postulational  system  may,  on  tbe  other  band,
be  undertaken  in  order  to  analyse  the  entities  constituting  tbe  undefined
concepts  and  to  exhibit  their  interrelations  in  an  orderly  manner.  In
such  a system  circularity  would  be  a defect,  since  its  distinguishing
characteristic  is  that  it  has  a direction.  I propose  to  call  a system  thus
constructed  a ^ directional  system  ’,  in  order  to  mark  its  difference  from
an  ordinary  postulational  system.  In  a directional  system  tbe  postulates
will  be  properly  primitive ; that  is  to  say,  tbe  distinction  between  the
theorem  and  the  postulates  of  tbe  system  will  not  relate  merely  to  tbe
fact  that  tbe  latter  are  undemonstrated.  It  seems  to  me  that  White-
bead  and  Eussell  in  constructing  the  system  developed  in  Prindpm
^ See  C.  I.  Lewis,  MM  and  the  World-Order^  p.  210.

506


APPENDIX  C


507


Mathematica  were  not  constructing  a postulational  system,  but  a direc-
tional system.^  They  clearly  state  tbiat  their  work  ^ aims  at  effecting
the  greatest  possible  analysis  of  the  ideas  with  which  it  deals  These
* ideas  ’ are  the  fundamental  concepts  of  mathematics,  which  they
sought  to  reduce  to  their  simplest  elements,  and  thus  to„  show  that
mathematical  concepts  are  wholly  reducible  to  the  concepts  of  pure
logic.  They  were  not  content  to  construct  one  out  of  a possible  variety
of  postulational  systems,  any  one  of  which  would  yield  theorems  capable
of  mathematical  interpretation.  They  sought  a single  system  such  that
its  primitive  concepts  and  its  primitive  propositions  should  be  adequate
to  the  construction  of  the  whole  of  mathematics.  This  system  must  be
uniquely  based  upon  a single  set  of  fundamental  concepts  and  postulates,
and  to  admit  only  of  a unique  interpretation.  To  achieve  tMs  aim  the
primitive  concepts  cannot  be  taken  merely  as  undefined,  nor  the  primitive
propositions  merely  as  postulated  ; they  must  be  fundamental  in  a sense
which  excludes  arbitrary  selection,  and  thus  be  simple  in  some  non-
relative  sense.

If  this  view  of  Principia  Mathematica  be  correct,  then  it  is  open  to
a criticism  which  is  difficult  to  refute,  and  which  is  independent  of  any
such  defects  as  the  assumption  of  the  so-called  Axiom  of  Eeducibility.
This  criticism  may  be  raised  by  considering  Eussell^s  treatment  of
symbolism  and  of  the  part  played  by  definition  in  the  system  of  Principia
Mathematica,  It  was  pointed  out  in  Chapter  XXII  that  EusselTs
account  of  definition  is  inconsistent  and  untenable. ^ He  wants  both  to
regard  definitions  as  merely  ^ typographical  conveniences  ’ and  also  to
hold  that  definitions  may  ^ express  a notable  advance  ’ by  containing
an  analysis  of  a concept.  His  confusion  on  this  point  is  no  doubt
responsible  for  his  failure  to  see  that  in  defining  p'D  hj  p \
he  is,  according  to  his  own  statement,  merely  giving  a ‘ convenient
abbreviation’,  whereas  he  treats  the  definition  as  though  it  afforded
an  analysis  of  implication.  In  the  same  way  he  regards  the  notion  of  a
propositional  function,  and  therefore,  of  a class,  as  fundamental,  yet
at  the  same  time  he  declares  that  classes  are  ‘ mere  symbolic  con-
veniences Both  these  views  cannot  be  correct.  The  latter  is  the
view  which  Eussell  evidently  wishes  to  maintain,  but  he  does  not  seem
able  to  dispense  with  the  former.  His  whole  treatment  of  the  notion
of  a class  is  obscured  by  the  confusion,  to  which  Eussell  is  singularly
prone,  of  the  symbol  with  the  symbolized.

This  point  raises  the  question  of  Eussell’s  treatment  of  symbolism.
Nowhere  in  Principia  Mathematica  is  there  any  discussion  of  the  nature
and  conditions  of  symboHsm  and  its  relation  to  mathematics.  In  the
Introduction  to  the  first  edition  we  find  the  following  statement : ‘ The
use  of  a symbolism,  other  than  that  of  words,  in  all  parts  of  the  book

^ Bor  a discussion  of  directional  analysis  see  my  paper  on  ‘ The  Method  of
Analysis  in  Metaphysics’,  Proc,  Arist,  Boc,,  N.S.,  XXIII.

® See  p.  440,  above.  In  the  rest  of  this  discussion  I shall  speak  of  ‘ Bussell
instead  of  ‘ Whitehead  and  Busseii-%  since  YoL  I is  recognized  to  be  due  almost
entirely  to  Bussell,  and  to  him  the  whole  of  the  second  edition  of  Principia
Mathematica  is  due.


508


A MODEEN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


wHcli  aim  at  embodying  strictly  accurate  demonstrative  reasoning,
lias  been  forced  on  us  by  tbe  consistent  pursuit  of  the  above  three
purposes  ^ But  the  account  which  follows  does  not  explain  whether
symbols  are  essential  or  whether  they  are  employed  merely  because
human  intellect,  being  finite,  is  limited  in  apprehension.  The  latter
alternative  is  suggested,  but  the  former  seems  to  be  the  one  required.
If,  however,  symbols  are  essential,  then  in  what  sense  have  these  symbols
significance  ? A non-significant  symbol  is  a contradiction  in  terms.
Yet,  if  they  have  significance,  whence  is  their  significance  derived  ?
Do  we  not  in  any  case  require  non-symholic  rules  relating  to  the  significance
of  the  symbolic  expressions  ? No  such  rules  are  given  within  the  system
of  Principia  Mathematica  itseK.  In  the  Preface  it  is  stated : ' Our
logical  system  is  wholly  contained  in  the  numbered  propositions,  which
are  independent  of  the  Introduction  and  the  Summaries  ^ But  we
look  in  vain  among  the  numbered  propositions  for  any  principles  deter-
mining what  combination  of  symbols  are  significant.

These  difficulties,  and  others  which  cannot  be  discussed  here,  suggest
that  certain  pre-mathematical  notions  are  indispensable  to  the  con-
struction of  a mathematical  system,  and  that  non-symbolic  rules  of
significance  are  required,  and  must  be  included  in  the  system,  if  the  system
is  to  be  a directional  system  capable  of  yielding  an  analysis  of  the
fundamental  ideas  of  mathematics.  As  W.  E.  Johnson  has  pointed
out:  ^Even  a perfectly  constructed  symbolic  system  would  need  to
introduce  some  axioms,  as  also  some  propositions  derived  from  axioms,
that  can  only  be  expressed  in  non-symbohc  terms.  This  necessary
recourse  to  ordinary  language  in  developing  a deductive  system  shows
that  direct  attention  to  meanings,  presented  linguistically,  is  entailed
in  the  intelhgent  following  of  even  a professedly  symbohc  exposition
This  is  undoubtedly  true  of  a directional  system  such  as  that  presented
in  Prindpia  Mathematica,

The  importance  of  rules  of  significance,  or,  to  use  Johnson’s  expres-
sion, ' attention  to  meanings  ’ is  recognized  by  Halbert  and  his  school,
who  are  usually  called  ^ Formalists  I have  space  here  only  to  consider
very  briefly  the  contrast  of  the  FormaHst  conception  of  mathematics
with  that  contained  in  Prindpia  Mathematica,  Hilbert  distinguishes
between  mathematics  and  metamathematics.  This  distinction  may
be  regarded  as  a distinction  between  the  construction  of  a symbohc
system  involving  arbitrarily  selected  rules,  or  postulates,  and  the  state-
ment of  rules  of  significance.  According  to  Hilbert  the  mathematician
operates  with  marks,  or  numerals,  i.e.  physical  signs  on  paper.  These
marks  are  as  counters  in  a game,  or  as  chessmen  in  a game  of  chess.

^ For  the  statement  of  these  three  purposes,  see  p.  487  above.

^ This  statement  is  not  accurate,  for  it  is  not  possible  to  understand  the
numbered  propositions  without  reference  to  the  summaries.  For  example,  in
*•'21,  it  is  assumed  that  ^{x,  y)  shall  be  different  from  ^{y,  x),  and  mention  is
made  of  alphabetical  order  and  of  typographical  order.  But  this  explanation
is  contained  in  the  Summary  only,  yet  the  sense  of  the  relation  y)  is  essential

to  the  understanding  of  the  theorems.

® W,  E.  J„  Pt.  II,  p.  U.


APPENDIX  C


509


Tlie  rules  in  accordance  with  wMch  certain  combinations  of  the  marks
are  allowed  constitutes  metamatbematics.  They  cannot  be  brought
within  the  system,  but  the  system  could  not  be  developed  without  them.
The  theorems  of  metamathematics  stand  to  the  theorems  of  mathe-
matics as  the  rules  of  chess  stand  to  the  actual  positions  of  the  chessmen
in  possible  games  of  chess.  As  Prof.  G.  H.  Hardy  has  pointed  out,^
this  distinction  involves  a sharp  distinction  between  two  forms  of  ^roof.
There  is  first  'pure  demonstration y which  is  proof  inside  the  system.
This  corresponds  to  games  of  chess.  There  is  secondly  the  proof  that
certain  combinations  of  symbols  cannot  occur.  These  are  the  theorems
of  metamathematics.  In  the  construction  of  these  proofs  there  must
be  attention  to  meanings.  This  separation  of  metamathematics  from
mathematics  seems  to  have  for  its  purpose  the  separation  of  the  form
of  the  system  from  what  would  commonly  be  regarded  as  its  significance.
To  ask  whether  any  theorem  in  the  purely  formal  system  is  true  would
be  to  ask  a nonsensical  question.  We  can  only  ask  whether  the  rules
have  been  followed.  If  they  have,  then  the  system  is  consistent.

There  is  much  to  be  said  in  favour  of  this  Formalist  conception  of
mathematics.  But  it  still  leaves  a considerable  problem,  which  cannot
be  regarded  as  settled.  This  is  the  problem  of  the  exact  nature  of  the
metamathematical  statements,  and  thus  of  the  part  played  by  intuition
in  the  foundation  of  mathematics.  A word  may  finally  be  added  on
this  important  topic.

Modern  logicians  are  agreed  that  spatial  intuition  does  not  enter
in  mathematics.  Bussell  and  Whitehead  seem  to  recognize  that
intuition  of  the  fundamental  logical  concepts  is  required.  Hilbert,
whilst  denying  that  mathematical  notions  can  be  derived  from  purely
logical  notions,  insists  that  intuition  plays  an  important  part,  and  that
what  is  intuited  is  the  actual  marks,  or  numerals,  the  physical  signs  on
paper  with  which  the  mathematician  operates.  A third  school,  of  whom
Brouwer  and  Weyl  are  the  most  important  representatives,  hold  that
mathematics  is  based  upon  a pure  intuition  of  the  integral  numbers,
which  are  involved  in  the  intuition  of  time.  None  of  the  three  views
can  be  regarded  as  having  been  satisfactorily  established.  All  that  can
be  said  here  is  that  no  view  is  Hkely  to  be  satisfactory  unless  due  notice
is  taken  of  the  important  problem  of  significance.  Mathematics  is
something  more  than  a symbohc  structure;  it  is  a structure  having
significance.  Symbolism  is,  indeed,  essential  to  mathematics,  and  not
adopted  merely  for  convenience.  The  symbolism  must,  however,  be
adequate  to  that  which  is  symbolized.

^ ‘Mathematical  Proof’,  Mind,  N.S.,  149.  The  student  who  is  interested
in  the  theory  of  the  foimdations  of  mathematics  should  consult  this  article.
I should  have  made  use  of  it  in  the  first  Edition  of  this  book,  had  it  been  pub-
lished before  I wrote  it.  I am  much  indebted  to  it  now.


APPENDIX  D
THING  AND  CAUSE


IN  my  discussion  of  causality  I tave  laid  stress  upon  tLe  intimate
connexion  between  thing  and  cause.  I entirely  agree  with
W.  E.  Johnson  who  says  : No  adequate  account  of  causahty  can
be  given  without  reference  to  the  conception  of  substance,  i.e.  of  an
existing  continuant,  physical  or  psychical ; and  on  the  other  hand,  we
can  only  assign  properties  to  the  substance  or  continuant  by  defining
the  modes  according  to  which  it  is  existentially  manifested  as  a causal
agent  or  re-agent.  Thus  what  is  called  a property  of  a continuant  is
not  an  actually  manifested  character,  but  it  defines  what  characters
would  be  phenomenally  manifested  when  certain  assignable  conditions
occur By  a 'continuant’  Mr.  Johnson  means  what  in  ordinary
language  are  called  ' things  Scientists  frequently  speak  of  ' the  prop-
erties ’ of  things,  e.g.  ' the  properties  of  matter  ' the  properties  of
chemical  substances  This  mode  of  speaking  tends  to  suggest  that  the
chemical  substances,  e.g.  water^  iron,  carbon,  are  self-contained  entities
each  having  a distinctive  essence,  for  ' property  ’ is  a word  derived  from
Aristotle’s  doctrine  of  the  predicables.  But,  as  Locke  clearly  saw,
things  are  not  self-contained  entities,  for  ' things  however  absolute  and
entire  they  seem  in  themselves  are  but  retainers  to  other  parts  of  nature
for  that  which  they  are  most  taken  notice  of  by  us.’  ^ To  say  ' this
thing  has  the  property  such  and  such  ’ is  merely  a way  of  saying  ' this
thing,  under  certain  conditions,  behaves  in  such  and  such  a way  Thus
Sugar  has  the  property  of  solubility  means  Sugar  dissolves  in  fluids ; Iron
has  the  property  of  expanding  when  heated  means  Iron  expands  when  heated.
Emphasis  upon  the  properties  of  a substance  may  mislead  us  into  thinking
of  the  substance  apart  from  the  situation  in  which  it  is,  that  is  apart
from  other  substances,  or  things,  in  its  neighbourhood.  There  is  no
doubt  that  it  is  often  useful  to  regard  the  thing  as  isolated  from  its
neighbouxhood  in  order  to  investigate  its  various  modes  of  behaviour
and  to  determine  those  which  are  invariable.  Such  invariable  modes  of
behaviour  constitute  the  invariant  properties  of  the  substance.  These
can  be  detected  only  by  placing  the  thing  in  difierent  conditions  in  order
to  observe  how  it  behaves  in  varying  circumstances.  Por  example,  mass
wffl  be  regarded  as  an  invariant  property  of  a piece  of  metal  if  through
all  its  physical  and  chemical  changes  it  remains  true  to  say  ' This  state
of  the  piece  of  metal  has  the  mass  m An  invariant  property  is  thus

^ Pt.  Ill,  p.  86.  2 S00  270,  above.

• Cf.  C.  D.  Broad,  Mind,  N.S.,  113,  p.  21.

510


APPENDIX  D


511


a ctaiacteiistic  and  peculiar  mode  of  behaviour.  In  the  same  way  a
permanent  characteristic  is  a peculiar  mode  of  behaviour,  namely,
persistence  in  a given  state  notwithstanding  changes  which  are  occurring
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  thing.

There  is,  then,  a close  relation  between  a thing  and  a relatively
isolated  system.  Just  as  we  can  regard  a given  system  in  isolation  from
other  systems,  so  we  can  regard  a thing  in  isolation  from  its  situation.
Just  as  for  certain  purposes  we  need  to  regard  this  relatively  isolated
system  as  itself  a sub-system  in  a larger  system,  so  we  may  need  to
regard  this  thing  as  part  of  a larger  thing,  or  as  an  element  in  a complicated
situation.  These  considerations  show  how  it  is  that  the  common-sense
conception  of  what  constitutes  one  thing  is  necessarily  indeterminate,  for
whether  X is  one  thing,  or  not,  depends  upon  the  attitude  from  which
it  is  regarded.  The  most  persistent  and  permanent  of  things  are  con-
stantly undergoing  changes,  i.e.  are  exhibiting  characteristic  modes  of
behaviour  in  a given  situation.  When  these  changes  are  so  slow  or  so
small  as  to  be  imperceptible  we  are  apt  to  think  that  no  change  has
been  occurring.  T^en  these  changes  are  very  rapid  or  involve  consider-
able qualitative  variation  we  say  that  the  thing  has  disappeared.  Each
time  the  blade  of  a knife  is  used  to  sharpen  a pencil  a change  occurs  in
the  blade  ; gradually  it  wears  away.  From  the  point  of  view  of  practical
use  the  blade  will  be  discarded  whilst  it  is  still  recognizable  as  a blade.
When  a glass  vase  is  smashed  to  fragments,  or  a gold  sovereign  is  melted,
or  a ship  is  blown  up,  we  say  that  the  vase,  the  sovereign,  the  ship,
has  disappeared.  Complete  disappearance  is  incompatible  with  scientific
investigation,  just  as  creation  ex  nihilo  would  be.  The  scientist  seeks
to  regard  the  changes  which  things  undergo,  i.e.  their  modes  of  behaviour
in  varying  circumstances,  as  recurrent  modes  of  changes.  That  is  to
say,  the  scientist  seeks  to  formulate  causal  laws  which  will  enable  him
both  to  predict  and  to  control  the  behaviour  of  things.  Hence  arises
the  scientific  concept  of  the  properties  of  things.

Advance  in  the  physical  sciences  appears  to  consist  in  the  gradual
reduction  of  the  number  of  properties  that  need  be  mentioned.  A pea
dropped  to  the  ground  falls  in  a characteristic  manner ; a ball  thrown
from  the  hand  behaves  in  a characteristic  manner ; the  Moon  moves,
relatively  to  the  Earth,  in  a characteristic  manner  ; likewise  the  planets
relatively  to  the  Sun.  Hence  there  arises  the  problem  whether  the  modes
of  behaviour  thus  exhibited  by  these  things  can  all  be  regarded  as
reducible  to  invariant  properties  of  a minute  material  particle.  At  this
stage  the  material  particle  is  itself  regarded  as  a thing,  i.e.  as  an  isolable
entity.  In  this  way  science  seeks  to  discover  permanence  in  the  form
of  regular,  and  thus  predictable  and  controllable,  modes  of  change.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


This  bxbliograpliy  is  not  intended  to  be  exhaustive.  Its  purpose  is  to
suggest  further  reading  along  various  lines  of  approach  to  the  sub-
ject. Books  of  an  advanced  nature  are  marked  by  an  asterisk.

I.  INTRODUCTORY  BOOKS

Carveth  Read.  Logic,  Deductive  and  Inductive.  (Simpkin  Marshall.)

R.  Latta  and  A.  Maobeath.  The  Elements  of  Logic.  (Macmillan.)

Either  of  these  books  would  provide  the  student  with  an  elementary
treatment  of  logic  along  traditional  lines.

H.  W.  B.  Joseph.  An  Introduction  to  Logic.  (Oxford  University  Press.)

This  is  by  far  the  best  systematic  exposition  of  the  traditional  Logic,
but  it  is  closer  to  Aristotle  than  to  the  tradition  of  the  Logicians.  It
affords  an  excellent  introduction  to  philosophical  logic.

R.  M.  Eaton.  General  Logic.  (Charles  Scribner’s,  Sons,  1931.)

This  book  deals  with  the  topics  of  formal  logic  and  scientific  method.
The  treatment  of  the  latter  is  not  very  satisfactory.  Part  III  contains
an  excellent  introduction  to  Principia  Mathematica.

E.  M.  Chapman  and  P.  Henle.  (Charles  Scribner’s,  Sons,  1933.)

A very  simple  treatment  of  logic  from  the  modern  point  of  view,
based  upon  Eaton’s  General  Logic.  It  provides  an  excellent  first  book
in  Logic.

II.  PURE  LOGIC

A.  GENERAL  EXPOSITIONS

J.  N.  Keynes.  Formal  Logic.  (Macmillan.)

This  is  an  exhaustive  study  of  Aristotelian  Logic  in  its  purely  formal
aspect,  and  is  the  best,  as  well  as  the  most  comprehensive,  book  written
from  this  point  of  view.  It  contains  a valuable  Ap'pendix  deafing  with
a generalization  of  logical  processes,  in  their  application  to  complex
inferences,  without  the  aid  of  symbols  of  operation.  (1st  Ed.,  1884 ;
4th  Ed.,  1906.)

J.  Eoyce.  ‘ The  Principles  of  Logic  ’ in  Encyclopaedia  of  the  Philosophical
Sciences,  Vol.  I,  Logic.  (Macmillan,  1913.)

This  is  a masterly  introduction  to  the  general  principles  of  logic,
written  from  the  modem  point  of  view.  The  student  who  is  interested
in  the  generahzation  of  logic  would  be  well  advised  to  read  this  essay.
L.  CouTURAT.  ‘ The  Principles  of  Logic  ’ {in  the  same  volume  as  the  preceding).
This  is  a brief  introductory  exposition  of  the  nature  of  symbolic  logic.
Algehra  of  Logic  (Paris,  1905 ; Eng.  Trans,  by  Pohinson,  1913.  Open
Court  Publishing  Company).

*C.  I.  Lewis.  A Survey  of  Symbolic  Logic.  (University  of  California  Press,
Berkeley,  U.S.A.,  1918.)

This  is  the  most  comprehensive  exposition  of  the  various  systems  of
symbolic  logic.  Chapter  I contains  an  excellent  historical  survey,  and
there  is  a very  full  bibliography.

*C.  I.  Lewis  and  C.  H.  Langeord.  Symbolic  Logic.  (The  Century  Company,
New  York  and  London,  1932.)

An  important  contribution  to  the  subject.

♦B.  A.  W.  Russell.  Introduction  to  Mathematical  Philosophy.  (Allen  &
Unwin,  1919.)

This  is  the  standard  work  on  the  subject.

512


BIBLIOGRAPHY


513


B.  M.  Baton.  Symbolism  and  Truth.  An  Introduction  to  the  Theory  of  Know-
ledge. (Harvard  University  Press,  1925.)

This  is  a discussion  of  the  role  of  symbols  in  knowledge.  It  contains
a nsefnl  chapter  on  ‘ Formal  Deduction

L.  Roxjgieb.  La  Structure  des  Theories  Deductives  (Paris.  Alcan,  1921.)

A useful  elementary  treatment.

B.  Caenap.  Abriss  der  Logistih.  (Vienna,  Julius-Springer,  1929.)

A useful  treatment  of  postulational  systems.

B.  CLASSICAL  WOBKS  IN  CHBONOLOGICAL  OBDEB

G.  Boole.  1847.  The  Mathematical  Analysis  of  Logic.  (Macmillan.)

1848.  ‘ The  Calculus  of  Logic  ’,  Cambridge  Mathematical  Journal.

1854.  An  Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought.  (Beprinted  in  1916  as
Vol.  2 of  Boole's  Collected  Logical  Works,  Ed.  Jourdain.  Open  Court
Publishing  Company.)

A.  beMoegan.  1847.  Formal  Logic:  ot  The  Calculus  of  Inference,  Necessary
and  Probable.  (Ed.  by  A.  E.  Taylor  in  1926.  Open  Court  Publishing
Company.)

1846-1863.  *Five  Papers,  ‘ On  the  Syllogism,  etc  (Transactions  of  the
Cambridge  Philosophical  Society.)

1860.  Syllabus  of  a Proposed  System  of  Logic.  (Walton.)

*B.  Peiece.  1870.  Linnear  Associative  Algebra.  (BepubHshed,  with  notes,
by  C,  S.  Peirce,  in  American  Journal  of  Mathematics,  1881.)

*C.  S.  Peirce.  Publications  between  1867  and  1927.  Collected  Papers.
Vols.  II-IV.  (Ed.  by  C.  Hartshorne  and  P.  Weiss.  Harvard  University
Press.)

*E.  ScHEOEBEE.  1877.  Der  Operationshreis  des  Logihhalkuls.  (Leipzig,
Teubner.)

1890-1895.  Vorlesungen  uber  die  Algebra  der  Logilc.  (Leipzig,  Teubner.)

*G.  Feege.  1884.  Die  Grundlagen  der  Arithmetik,  eine  logischmathematische
Untersuchung  iiber  den  Begriff  der  Zahl.  (Breslau,  Koebner.)

1893-1903.  Grundgesetze  der  Arithmetik.  (Jena.  Pohle.)

*G.  Peano.  1895-1908.  Formulaire  de  Mathematiques.  (Turin,  Bocca.)

These  five  volumes  contain  writings  by  a set  of  Italian  logicians.  The
successive  volumes  are  revised,  enlarged  editions  of  the  preceding.

♦A.  B.  Kempe.  1886.  ‘Memoir  on  the  Theory  of  Mathematical  Form.’
{Phil.  Trans.  Boyal  Society,  Vol.  177.)

1890.  ‘ On  the  relation  between  the  logical  theory  of  classes  and  the
geometrical  theory  of  points.’  {Proc.  London  Math.  Soc.,  Vol.  21.)

1890.  ‘The  Subject-matter  of  exact  thought.’  {Nature.  Vol.  43.)

*B.  a.  W.  Bxjssell.  1903.  Principles  of  Mathematics.  (Cambridge  Univer-
sity Press ; only  Vol.  I published.)

1905.  ‘ On  Denoting.’  {Mind,  N.S.,  14.)

1906.  ‘The  Theory  of  Implication.’

1908.  ‘Mathematical  Logic  as  based  on  the  Theory  of  Types.’  (Both
in  American  Journal  of  Mathematics.)

1913.  ‘ The  Philosophical  Importance  of  Mathematical  Logic.’  {Monist,
VoL  23.)

*A.  N.  Wbiteheab  and  B.  A.  W.  Bussell.  1910-1926.  Principia  Mathe-
matica.  (Vol.  1, 1st  Ed.,  1910 ; 2nd  Ed.,  1925 ; Vol.  II,  1912,  Vol.  Ill,

/ 1912.)

"^L.  Wittgenstein.  Tractatus  Logico-Philosophicus.  (Began  Paul,  1922.)

*F.  P.  Bamsey.  The  Foundations  of  Mathematics.  (Ed.  by  B.  B.  Braithwaite.
Kegan  Paul.)

33


514  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

III.  SCIENTIFIC  METHOD

A.  D.  Ritchie.  Scientific  Method.  (Kegan  Paul,  1923.)

An  elementary  treatment  of  some  topics  in  scientific  metliod.

P.  Westaway.  Scientific  Method.  (Blackie.)

Books  III  and  IV  contain  some  useful  illustrations  of  scientific  metliod.
W.  P.  and  E.  M.  Eldeetoh.  Primer  of  Statistics.  (A.  & C.  Black.)

A.  L.  Bowley.  An  Elementary  Manual  of  Statistics.  (P.  S.  King  & Son.)
W.  S.  Jevons.  The  Princwles  of  Science.  (Macmillan,  1905.)

*L.  T.  Hobhoxjse.  Theory  of  Knowledge.  (Methuen.)

*J.  M.  Keyites.  a Treatise  on  Prohahihty.  (Macmillan.)

*J.  Nicod.  Foundations  of  Geometry  and  Induction.  (Kegan  Paul,  1930.)
*A.  Lalahde.  Les  Theories  de  ITnduction  et  de  V Experimentation.  (Paris,
Bovin  et  Cie,  1929.)

IV.  PHILOSOPHICAL  LOGIC

*P.  H.  Beadley.  Logic.  Two  Vols.  (Oxford  University  Press.)

This  is  the  standard  work  in  Idealist  Logic.

*B.  Bosanqtjet.  Logic.  Two  Vols.  (Macmillan.)

In  the  main  this  work  follows  Bradley.

*J.  Cook  Wilsoh.  Statement  and  Inference,  Two  vols.  (Oxford  University
Press.)

These  lectures  (posthumously  published)  contain  a useful  discussion
of  Aristotelian  doctrines,  and  of  various  traditional  developments,
treated  mainly  with  relation  to  the  theory  of  knowledge.

♦R.  Robinson.  The  Province  of  Logic.  (George  Routledge  & Sons,  1931.)

An  acute  exposition  and  discussion  of  Cook  Wilson’s  views.

*H.  Lotze.  Logic.  (Eng.  Trans,  by  Bosanquet.  Oxford  University  Press.)
*W.  E,  Johnson.  Logic.  Three  Parts.  (Cambridge  University  Press.)

This  work  contains  a detailed  development  of  formal  logic,  from  an
Aristotelian  point  of  view,  as  well  as  a discussion  of  certain  of  the  views
of  Bertrand  Russell ; it  deals  systematically  with  Mill’s  Methods,  and
contains  a prolonged  discussion  of  causation.

V.  BOOKS  DEALING’ WITH  SPECIAL  TOPICS

A.  N.  Whitehead.  Introduction  to  Mathematics.  (Home  University  Library.)
The  Aims  of  Education.  (Williams  & Norgate.)

This  is  a republication,  with  additions,  of  the  essays  originally  ;biib-
lished  under  the  title  ‘ The  Organization  of  Thought
The  Function  of  Reason.  (Princeton  University  Press.  London,  Humphrey
Milford.  1929.)

K.  Peaeson.  The  Grammar  of  Science.  (3rd  Ed.,  1911.  A.  & C.  Black.)
*E.  Mach.  The  Science  of  Mechanics.  (Eng.  Trans.,  Open  Court  Publishing
Company.)

M.  Planck.  A Survey  of  Physics.  (Methuen.)

H.  Poincae:^.  Science  and  Method.  (Eng.  Trans.,  Nelson.)

Science  and  Hypothesis.  (Eng.  Trans.,  Walter  Scott  Publishing  Company.)

N.  R.  Campbell.  What  is  Science  ? (Methuen.)

^E.  Meybrson.  Identity  and  Reality.  (Eng.  Trans.,  Allen  & Unwin.)

De  V Explication  dans  les  Sciences.  (Paris,  Payot  et  Cie.)

H.  Dingle,  Science  and  Human  Experience.  (Williams  & Norgate,  1931.)

J *J.  H.  WooDGEE,  fijalogical  Principles.  (Kegan  Paul.)

W.  C.  D.  Whetham:.  A History  of  S^mce.  (Cambridge  University  Press.)
Cambridge  Readings  in  the  lAterature  of  Science.  (Arranged  by  W.  0*  D*
and  M.  D.  Whetham.)  (Cambridge  University  Press.)


INDEX


About,  two  senses  of,  34,  153
Absorption,  Principles  o/,  189
Abstraction,  and  classification,  445 ;
degrees  of,  242  ; and  determin-
ateness, 445  ; and  generality,
446 ; and  language,  12,  117 ;
and  mathematics,  446 ; and
Occam’s  Hazor,  XXIII,  § 3 ;
and  principle  of  convergence  to
simplicity,  446  ; and  recognition
of  similarity,  7 ; and  thought,
443

Accident,  Aristotle’s  definition  of,
430

Acquaintance,  explained,  23  ; and
description,  23-24,  150  fi. ; and
demonstrative  symbol,  25  ;

and  knowledge  by  description,
24  n.

A fortiori  argument,  114, 174
Agreement,  Principle  of,  329  ;

MiU’s  Method  of,  333,  337
Alexander,  S,,  viii
Aliorelative  relation,  169
Alternative  proposition,  70
Ambiguity,  19  ff. ; of  terms  of
syllogism,  98  ff. ; traditional
treatment  of,  21 ; see  also
Systematic  ambiguity
Analogical  Hypothesis,  307,  309
Analogy,  Chap.  XIV,  § 3 ; argument
from  analogy,  251 ; and  enu-
meration, 250  ff. ; explanation
by,  389 ; metaphor  expanded
into,  18  ; positive  and  negative,
250, 492  ; strength  of,  253
Analysis,  directional,  507 ; func-
tional, Chap.  XVIII,  § 2;
method  of,  contrasted  with
proof,  177  ff. ; Newton  on,  313  ;
in  postulational  systems,  App.
C ; quantitative,  and  measure-
ment, 374

Andrade,  E.  N,  da  C,,  quoted,  389


Antilogism,  defined,  95 ; and  re-
duction, Chap.  VI,  § 4
Apparent  Variable,  136
Application,  (including  applying
to,)  25,  and  describing,  31,  499 ;
having,  499 ; see  Belonging  to
Applicative  principle,  173
Argument,  see  Syllogism
Argument  of  function,  128
Aristotle,  and  argumentative  dis-
cussion, 429  ; interest  in  form,
164  ff . ; on  indirect  moods,
94  n, ; on  induction,  243  ; on
propositions,  33  n.  \ on  the
predicables,  428,  432  ff. ; on
‘ the  scientific  figure  ’,  97  ; on
Socrates,  477 ; and  symbolic
treatment  of  syllogism,  101-2 ;
and  traditional  schedule,  44 ;
quoted,  243 ; referred  to,  488
Assertion,  and  belief,  213;  and
inference,  215

Assertion,  Principle  of,  192  ; not
capable  of  symbolic  expression,
193

Association,  Principle  of,  188,
473

Atomic  Uniformity,  Principle  of,
413

Average,  forms  of,  359  ff.

Axiom,  175,  and  intuition,  178, 457 ;
Leibniz  on,  483 ; and  logical
necessity,  175 ; and  logical
priority,  178 ; MiU’s  views  on,
490 ; use  of,  by  Euohd,  177  ff.

Bacon,  Francis,  on  Aristotle,  487 ;
Broad  on,  490  ff. ; his  concep-
tion of  scientific  method,  490  ff . ;
on  crucial  experiment,  307 ;
J.  M.  Keynes  on,  492 ; and  Mill,
493 ; on  simple  enumeration,
247 ; referred  to,  332 ; quoted#
227,317;  465


515


616


A MODEEN  lOTRODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


Bacon,  Roger,  on  * experimental
science  302
Bain,  A.,  x;  6

Begging  the  Question,  Fallacy  of,
99,  216

Being,  different  modes  of,  159;
Moore  on,  159  ff.

Belief,  and  assertion,  213 ; five
ways  of  attaining,  466  ff . ;
W.  E.*  Johnson  on,  213  n.
Belonging  to,  144 ; 160  ff.

Boole,  0.,  on  form  of  syllogism,  101 ;
on  laws  of  thought,  484 ; and
symboHo  logic,  484  ff. ; on
universe  of  discourse,  55  ; see
also  173  n»

Bosanquet,  B.,  on  proper  names,  30  ;
quoted,  251  n, ; referred  to,
38  n.,  43  70  n,,  218

Bragg,  Sir  William,  quoted,  239,  305
Brahe,  Tycho,  395
Brentano,  F.,  referred  to,  38  w.

Broad,  G.  D.,  on  Bacon,  490  ff. ; on
causation,  284 ; on  induction
and  deduction  in  science,  408 ;
on  induction  and  probability,
409  ff.,  493  ; on  intelligibility
of  nature,  401 ; on  significance
of  class-names,  248 ; quoted,
400

Brouwer,  509

Calculus  of  reasoning,  180
Campbell,  N,  R.,  368  n.

Carroll,  Lewis,  viii,  139
Causal  characteristic,  266  ff. ;
defined, 267

Causal  determination,  special  prin-
ciples of,  Chap.  XVII,  § 3 passim;
two  fundamental  principles  of,
319

Causal  law,  defined,  274 ; is  ab-
stract, 275 ; and  fimctional
dependence,  380  ff. ; necessity
of  observation  for  discovery  of,
275 ; and  particular  causal
proposition,  275 ; and  recurrent
modes  of  change,  274 ; and
things,  273  ff.,  and  App.  D ;
and  unconditionality,  280  ff.
Causal  relation,  and  implication,
286;  necessity  of.  Chap.  XV,
§ 6 passim

Causal  system,  268 ; isolated  C.S.,
272


Causal  uniformity,  and  abstraction,
264,  269  ; and  formal  implica-
tions, 269

Causation,  activity  view  of,  261 ;
anthropomorphic  element  in  con-
cept of,  261 ; immanent,  272  ;
Joseph  on,  285  ff. ; Mill’s  theory
of.  Chap.  XV,  § 5 ; and  necessity,
288  ff. ; and  regular  sequence,
Chap.  XV,  § 6,  280  ; transeunt,
272

Cause,  and  change,  262  ff. ; com-
mon-sense notion  of,  260  ff. ;
and  condition,  261 ; counter-
acting 0,  279,  349 ; Galileo’s
definition  of,  331 ; Locke’s  defi-
nition of,  260  ; and  thing,  App.
D ; origin  of  notion  of,  262.
Chadwick,  J.  A.,  referred  to,  52  n,,
53  n.

Ghampollion,  referred  to,  385  n.
Circularity,  of  postulational  sys-
tems, 506  ff.,  and  directional
analysis,  507

Class,  and  acquaintance,  141 ;
analysis  of,  140  ff. ; and  enu-
meration, 140 ; and  extension,
141 ; and  fictions,  455 ; infinite
c,  140  ,*  and  intension,  141 ; and
logical  constructions,  158 ; and
Occam’s  Razor,  455  ; ‘ ordinary
class  ’ defined,  460  ; RusseU  on,
158,  455  ; and  symbols,  141  ff.  ;
system  of  classes,  182
Classes,  formal  equivalence  of,  142
Classification,  Chap.  JSXII,  § 3
passim  ; and  abstraction,  445  ff.;
and  biological  sciences,  436  ; and
classing,  433 ; and  definition,
437 ; and  division,  435 ; and
traditional  doctrine  of  extension,
29-30

Class-interval,  359
Class -membership  proposition^
29,40

Clifford,  W.  K.,2Q%n.

Climate  of  opinion,  291
Coefficient  of  correlation,  362
Coherence,  198  ff.

Coleridge,  8.  T.,  21
Collective  names,  54
Combining,  function  of,  in  proposi-
tions, 53 ; modes  of,  classes,  183,
propositions,  185

Communication,  and  language,  16


INDEX


517


Commutation,  Principle  of,  188,
472

Commutative  Law,  69  117

Complex  effects,  analysis  of,  Chap.
XVIII,  § 1 ; heterogeneous  and
homogeneous,  344
Component,  of  proposition,  53
Composition,  Principle  of,  190
Compound  propositions,  40  ff. ;
45 ; relations  between.  Chap.  V,
§3

Concomitant  Variation,  Mill’s
Method  of,  335  ; and  quantita-
tive analysis.  Chap.  XVIII,  § 2
Condition,  and  cause,  271 ; counter-
acting, 263 ; defined,  271  ; nega-
tive, 279 ; sufficient  and  neces-
sary, 271,  275
Conjunction,  41, 186  ff.

Connexity,  169

Connotation,  and  intension,  27  ff. ;
Mill  on,  27  ; and  proper  names,
32

Constituent,  and  descriptions.  Chap.
IX,  § 2 ; kinds  of,  52  ff. ; of
propositions,  34 ; 147;  Russell’s
use  of,  154

Constructions  ve/rsua  inferences,
principle  of,  455 ; sec  Logical
constructions

Constructive  description,  392,
Chap.  XX,  § 3 ; and  abstraction,
453 ; and  ai  hoc  hypotheses,
397  ff. ; and  explanation,  397
Continuant,  510

Contradiction,  Law  of,  469  ; and
negation,  191 ; Priucipleof,  191,
472

Contraposition,  65,  66
Convergence  to  Simplicity,  Prin-
ciple of,  stated,  350  ; and  ab-
straction, 446
Convergent  sets,  449  if.

Converse  domain,  168
Conversion,  of  proposition,  63,  64
Conviction,  not  proof,  465  ff.
Copernicus f 298  ff.,  395  ff.

Gornford,  F,  M.j  12, 16  w-,

Cmturat,  L,,  on  verb  ^to  &e’,  102;
see  also  129  n.,  188  n.,  192  w.

de  Ooulanges,  quoted,  388
Pedekind’s  Theorem,  462  n.
Deduction,  and  induction,  489, 490 ;
Principle  of,  192, 472


Deductive  reasoning,  489 ; see  also
Inference

Deductive  system,  Chap.  X,  § 4 ;
abstract  d.s.,  489  ; and  genera-
ting relation,  196  ; and  inter-
pretation, 207  ff. ; and  postulates,
506  ff. ; and  symbolism,  507  ff.
Definition,  and  analysis,  Chap.
XXII,  § 4 passim ; analytic,  of
a symbol,  424,  441  ff. ; and
deductive  system,  180  ; exten-
sive, 422 ; nature  of.  Chap.
XXII,  § 1 ; nominal,  180,  482,
not  arbitrary,  427 ; ostensive,
423  ; Rules  of,  424  ff. ; Russell’s
views  on,  440,  507 ; and  the
Predioables,  Chap.  XXII,  § 2 ;
and  Socrates,  429  ff. ; and  sub-
stitution, 423

Demonstration,  and  analysis,  178  ;
formal,  488 ; in  postulational
systems,  506  ff.,  509
Demonstrative  phrase,  and  des-
criptive phrase,  15 ; and  pre-
cision of  reference,  19 ; ^ee  also
App.  A

de  Morgan^  A.,  on  universe  of  dis-
course, 55 ; view  of  mathe-
matics, 457  ; work  in  symbolic
logic,  485  ff.;  quoted,  12,  163,
210,  304

de  Morgan’s  Formulae,  366
Denotation,  and  demonstrative  sym-
bol, 500  ; and  extension,  30
Denoting  phrase,  499
Descriptions,  analysis  of.  Chap.  IX,

§ 2 ; definite,  149 ; and  des-
criptive phrases,  149 ; indefinite,
149 ; and  one-many  relations,
170  ff.

Descriptive  hypothesis,  307-309
Descriptive  phrase.  Chap.  Ill,  § 2;
and  denotation,  500  ; and  des-
criptions, 149
Determinable,  445
Determinate,  445
Deviation,  mean,  360 ; standard,
361

Dialectic,  Aristotle’s  definition  of,
477

Dicta,  for  Figures  II  and  III,  96;
for  Figure  IV,  97

Dictum  de  omni,  Aristotle’s  formu-
lation, 86, 479 ; and  Figure  I,
93


518  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Difference,  Mill’s  Method  of,  333;

Principle  of,  330
Differentia,  430
Dilemma,  107-108
Directional  analysis,  507
Disjunction,  186  ff.

Disjunctive  proposition,  70
Distribution,  of  terms,  48 ; Prin-
ciple of,  189,  473 ; traditional
doctrine  of.  Chap.  IV,  § 4
Division,  and  classification,  435 ;
rules  of,  435

Division  by  dichotomy,  435  fi.
Domain,  168

Double  Negation,  Principle  of,
191

jDreyer,  J»  L,  E.,  295

Eddington^  A>  S.,  209,  306  n.,  372,
406

Einstein,  A.,  on  scientific  theories,
398  ; quoted,  311 ; see  also  407,
495

Elimination,  of  possible  causes,  343 ;

of  terms,  173, 202
Empirical  generalization,  242
Empirical  sciences,  232
Enclosure,  449  ff.

Entails,  225  ff.,  286
Enthymene,  83
Epicheirema,  110
Equality,  defined,  188  ; and  equiva-
lence, 182

Equivalence,  136,  of  classes,  142 ;

and  equality,  182
Euclid,  174  ff.,  178, 183, 449, 457
Euler,  72

Excluded  Middle,  Daw  of,  469;

Principle  of,  190, 472
Existence,  Chap.  IX,  § 4;  and
descriptive  phrases,  25  ff. ; and
universe  of  discourse,  55  ; Mill
on  ‘ real  existence  ’,  168  ; of
points,  453  ff.

Existence  Theorem,  179  w.
“Exists”,  Ambiguity  of.  Chap.

IX,  § 4;  and  “real”,  162
E!  and  a,  137;  143  ff.

Existential  Proposition,  55  ff.,  80 ;
144

Experiment,  crucial,  307 ; defined,
302 ; and  hypothesis.  Chap.
XVI,  § 3 ; and  observation,  237,
302

Experimental  investigation, 325 ff .


Experimental  sciences,  319  ; con^
trasted  with  historical  sciences,
Chap.  XIX,  §§  1,  2 ; advance
in,  382

Explanation,  causal,  392  ; common-
sense  form.  Chap.  XX,  § 1 ; and
constructive  description,  397 ;
and  intelligibility,  389 ; and
purpose,  395  ,*  scientific,  392  ff.
Explanatory  hypothesis,  307
Expohible  sentence,  79
Extension;  and  denotation,  27,
29  ff. ; traditional  conception
of,  27  ; two  different  senses  of,
29  ; and  intension,  28  ff.
Extensive  abstraction.  Method  of.
Chap.  XXII,  § 2 ; 504

Fact,  36,  196  ff. ; and  datum,  240  ;

mutual  compatibility  of,  197
Fallacy,  of  affirming  the  consequent,
105 ; of  begging  the  question,
99,  216  ; of  illicit  major,  88  ; of
illicit  minor,  88 ; of  undistri-
buted middle,  88
Field  of  Relation,  168  -
Figure  of  Syllogism,  85  ; special
rules  of  Figures,  90-91
Form,  apprehension  of,  165;  of
implication,  83  ; of  proposition,
51-53,  127  ff. ; symbols  and  1,
Chap.  VIII,  § 3.  See  Logical
Form  ; see  also,  500
Formal  Implication,  143  n,,  223,
288;  485

Formalists,  508,  see  also  458  n.
Forms,  Bacon’s  Theory  of,  491  ff.
Forster,  E.  M.,1
Foucault’s  Experiment,  307
Frege,  G,,  and  mathematics,  486  ff. ;
on  the  variable,  136  ; see  also  40,
129  ^.,181, 213  459

Frequency  Distribution,  359
Freud,  4
Fronde,  387

Function,  and  form,  Chap.  VIII,
§ 3 ; notion  of  a,  352  ; one-
valued and  many- valued,  129  ;
pronositional,  129 ; of  proposi-
tion, 186 ; and  significance,
143

Functional  correlation,  352, 355  ff.
Functional  dependence,  272 ; and
causal  law,  380

Fundamentum  Divisionis,  435


INDEX


519


Galen,  85

Galileo,  conception  of  scientific
method,  300,  493  fi. ; on
Copernican  system,  299 ; and
law  of  freely  falling  bodies,  353  ;
quoted,  236,  331,  353
Gauss,  459  n.

General  name,  54
Generality,  and  pure  form,  179  fi. ;
463

General  proposition,  43-44 ; 139-
144;  503
Genus,  430
Goclenius,  109  n.

Goodrich,  I,,  quoted,  439
Grammatical  Form,  and  linguistic
expression,  79,  139  ff.
Grammatical  subject,  153 ; dis-
appearance of,  154  fi.

Hardy,  G,  H.,  509

Herschel,  Sir  J.,  on  experimenting,
303  ; on  residual  factors,  346  ff.,
see  also  332

Hilbert,  506,  508,  509,  see  also
458  n, .

History,  data  of,  384 ; method  in,
Chap.  XIX,  § 3

Historical  sciences,  aim  of,  382  ff. ;
contrasted  with  experimental
sciences,  Chap.  XIX,  § 2
Hudson,  W,  H.,  292
Hume,  and  induction,  414  fi. ; see
also  307  n.,  332
Huntington,  E,  7.,  180  w.,  506
Huyghens,  G.,  305

Hypothesis,  Chap.  XVI  passim ; ad
hoc,  397  fi. ; alternation  of
observation  and,  237  ; defined,
235 ; and  experiment.  Chap.
XVI,  § 3 ; function  of  in  science,
488f!. ; Jevons  on,  304  ff. ; kinds
of,  307 ; logical  form  of,  305 ;
Mill’s  view  of,  342  ; verification
of,  306

Hypothetical  Method,  Mill’s  view
of,  342  ; in  science,  493
Hypothetical  proposition,  and  im-
plication, 107

Identity,  Law  of,  469  ; Law  of,  and
causation,  286 ; Principle  of>
188, 472

Immediate  Inferences,  of  proposi^
tions>  62  ff. ; summary  of^  68


Implication,  and  deduction,  Chap.
XII,  § 4 ; and  entails,  222  ff. ;
formal,  143  n, ; 223,  288,  485 ;
material,  223  ff.,  285  ff. ; para-
doxes of,  194

Implicative  proposition,  70, 107
Inappropriate  expressions,  see

Logically  inappropriate  express
sions

Incomplete  symbol,  defined,  155 ;
and  classes,  158 ; and  logical
constructions,  157  ff.,  502  ff. ;
Moore  on,  155  ff.  ; Russell’s
theory  of.  Chap.  IX,  § 3,  and
App.  B

Induction,  ambiguity  of,  243  ; and
deduction,  489  ff. ; Hume  on,
495 ; intuitive,  244,  97  n. ;
‘ perfect  ’,  244  ; problem  of.
Chap.  XXI;  summary,  244;
validity  of,  414  ff.,  495
Inductive  Hypothesis,  The,  413
Inductive  method,  235
Inference,  and  assertion,  215 ; con-
stitutive and  epistemio  condi-
tions of,  215  ; defined,  211 ; and
implication.  Chap.  XII  passim
Intelligibility  of  Nature,  401  ff.,
407

Intension,  and  connotation,  27 ; and
extension,  28  ff.,  141  ff. ; tra-
ditional use  of,  27 ; supposed
inverse  variation  of  extension
and  intension,  29

Interpretation,  Method  of.  Chap.

XI,  § 4 passim

Intuition,  in  mathematics,  178  ff. ;

and  number,  456,  509
Intuitionists,  509
Invariant  properties , of  substances,
510

Inversion,  65-67

Isolated  system,  and  immanent
causation,  272  ; and  thing,  511

James,  W.,  20, 173
Jeans,  Sir  J.,  quoted,  256,  375
Jevons,  W.  S.,  on  hypothesis,  304  ff. ;
and  Mill’s  methods,  337  n.;
quoted,  328

Johnson,  Samuel,  6, 103
Johnson,  W,  E,,  on  analogy,  249  ; on
continuant,  510  ; on  definition,
423 ; on  demonstrative  induc-
tion, 490  ; on  determinable^  445 ;


520  A MODEEN  INTEODUOTION  TO  LOGIC


on  diagrammatic  representation,
78  ; on  Mill,  220  ; on  relations,
166  ; on  syllogism,  102;  on

symboHo  systems,  508 ; on
validity  of  inference,  213  ;

quoted,  41 ; 189  243  ; see

also  37  40  w.,  53. n,,  68  n.,

69  n.,  70  n.,  72  n.,  74  n,,  97, 119,
173,  383  n.

Joint  Method,  334,  337

Jones,  E.  E,  G.,  referred  to,  41  n,

Joseph,  E.  W.  B.,  on  categorical
propositions,  42  ; on  causation,
285  fi.,  416  fi. ; on  distribution,
49 ; on  Laws  of  Thought,  471 ;
on  singular  propositions,  50
51  n, ; see  also  28  n.,  34  82  n,,

108  n.,  243  n.,  249

Kant,  416

Keith,  Sir  Arthur,  quoted,  254

Kepler,  and  Galileo,  300,  493 ; and
Laws  of  Planetary  Motion,  396  ;
and  Orbit  of  Mars,  395  ff.  ;
scientific  method,  conception  of,
493

Keynes,  J.  Maynard,  on  analogy,
Chap.  XIV,  § 3 passim;  on
Hume,  495  ; on  induction,  412
fE.,  492 ; on  Mill,  496 ; and
uniformity  of  Nature,  418 ;
quoted,  257

Keynes,  J.  N,,  on  extensive  defini-
tion, 422  ; see  also  28,  37  n,,
41  n,,  51  n.,  60,  63,  70  n.,  74,
80  n.,  87  n.,  97  n.,  98  n,,  106  n,,
107  7^.,109?^.,  151  n.

Kirchhoff,  393

Knowing , two  kinds  of,  22-24, 150  ff .

Knowledge  by  description,  defined,
151

Kroneher,  487  n.

Ladd-FranhUn,  G.,  and  Antilogism,
94-95  ; and  schedule  of  proposi-
tions, 77 ; and  symbolic  logic,
486

Lamb,  E.,  quoted,  406

Langhis,  G.,  on  data  of  history,  384 ;
on  method  in  history,  385,  386,
388

Language,  Chap.  II  passim ; and
abstraction,  117  ; emotive  and
scientific  use  of,  17 ; Moore  on
misleadingness  of  language,  1 60».


Laplace,  and  Rule  of  Succession,  368 ;
quoted,  255

Law  of  Universal  Causation,  and
Hume’s  problem,  417  ; and  in-
duction, 416  fi. ; Joseph’s  view
of,  416 ; and  Law  of  Identity,
416 ; Mil’s  account  of,  279  fi. ;
statement  of,  416

Leibniz,  G.,  on  Gharacteristica  Uni-
versalis, 483 ; and  calculus  of
reasoning,  484 ; and  definition,
483  ; and  mathematics,  456  ;
and  notation  for  infinitesimal
calculus,  125  ; on  syllogism,  481 ;
quoted,  81

Le  Verrier,  J,,  and  discovery  of
Neptune,  346  fi. ; and  orbit  of
Mercury,  398

Lewis,  G,  L,  on  Peirce,  485 ; see  also
222  n.,  506  n.

Limited  Independent  Variety,
Principle  of,  412

Loche,  J.,  and  cause,  260,  265  ; and
thing,  260, 510  ; quoted,  11, 276,
475

Lodge,  Sir  0.,  295  n,,  300  n.

Logic,  and  the  art  of  disputation,
163 ; generalization  of,  Chap.
X passim,  Chap.  XXIII,  § 4,
Chap.  XXIV,  § 2,  496;  and
mathematics.  Chap.  XXIII,  § 4
passim ; normative  aspect  of,
Chap.  XXIV,  § 3 ; origin  of
science  of,  477  ff. ; and  reflective
thinking,  1 ; and  rhetoric,  468  ;
as  science  of  pure  form,  488 ;
scope  of,  477

Logical  calculus,  180  fi. ; and  de-
ductive system,  182 ; Leibniz
and,  483

Logical  constant,  120,  165

Logical  construction,  defined,  157 ;
and  incomplete  symbol,  158 ;
kinds  of,  158  ; Russell  on,  157  ;
see  also  App.  B ; referred  to,
23  n.

Logical  Fiction,  158,  502

Logical  Form,  35 ; and  function,
126-133 ; and  linguistic  expres-
sion, 79,  139  ff.

Logical  impossibility,  225

Logically  inappropriate  expres-
sions, defined,  79 ; need  to
determine  significance  of*  139  fi.  j
144, 151 fi*


INDEX


521


Logical  necessity,  relative  nature
of,  175;  and  simplicity,  175;
199 ; and  entails,  225
Logical  priority,  relative  nature  of,
175;  and  self-evidence,  175;
and  logical  necessity,  225
Logical  product,  of  classes,  185 ;

of  propositions,  187
Logical  subject,  and  grammatical
subject,  153  ; see  also  154  n.
Logical  sum,  of  classes,  185 ; of
propositions,  187

Logical  symbolism,  function  of,
121

Logical  Types,  Theory  of,  461

Lohatschewshy,  208

MacGoll,  if.,  486
MacSy  C,  A,,  3Sl  n,

Mach,  E.,  on  descriptive  theory
of  science,  393  fi. ; see  also
236  n.

Madvig’s  emendation,  386
Major  premiss,  defined,  82
Major  term,  defined,  82
MalinowsTci,  JB,,  quoted,  259
Material  Implication,  see  Implica-
tion '

Mathematics,  de  Morgan’s  view  of,
457  n. ; Leibniz’s  view  of,  456  ;
and  logic,  Chap.  XXIII,  § 4 ; and
metamathematics,  508  ff. ; and
natural  sciences,  231  fi.,  301,
375 ; B.  Peirce’s  definition  of,
458 ; and  physics,  176 ; Rus-
sell’s definition  of,  459 ; see
also  App.  C

Maxwell,  J,  Clarice,  and  analogical
h3rpotheses,  309  ; on  Faraday’s
‘ lines  of  force  ’,  308  fi. ; see  also
208

Mean,  358,  361
Mean  deviation,  360
Meaning,  and  reference,  App.  A;
and  understanding,  14.  See  also
Means

Means,  ambiguity  of,  14  n.,  152,
500 ; and  word,  14,  500 ; see
also  Symbolizes

Measurable  properties,  defined,
372

Measurement,  Chap.  XVIII,  § 5 ;
fundamental  rules  for,  373  ; and
matching,  369
Median,  358,  361


Metamathematics,  509
Merz,  T,,  231  n,

Michelson  - Morley  experiment,
398

Middle  term,  82.

Miles,  Susan,  IZn,

Mill,  J.  S,,  on  analogy,  254;  and
causation.  Chap.  XV,  § 5 ; on
connotation,  27,  SO  ; and
induction,  245  n.,  417  fi.,  489,
490 ; and  intermixture  of  effects,
345 ; on  Logic,  474 ; on  methods
of  experimental  inquiry.  Chap,
XVII,  § 4;  on  Method  of
Residues,  348 ; on  real  exist-
ence, 158 ; on  significant  propo-
sitions, 158 ; on  simple  enumera-
tion, 247  ff . ; and  scientific
method.  Chap.  XVII,  § 5 ; on
vahdity  of  syllogism,  219  ff.
Minor  premiss,  defined,  82
Minor  term,  defined,  82
Mode,  360,  361
Modus  ponendo  ponens,  104
Modus  ponendo  tollens,  105
Modus  tollendo  ponens,  105
Modus  tollendo  tollens,  105
Moment,  definition  of,  by  extensive
abstraction,  452
Monadic  relation,  53
Monism,  197  n.

Mood  of  Syllogism,  defined,  85;
indirect  moods,  92 ; valid  moods
of  Figures  I,  II,  and  III,  91
Moore,  G,  JS'.,vii  ff. ; on  ‘being’,  159
ff. ; on  entailing,  222  ff. ; and
incomplete  symbols,  155  ff. ;
quoted,  196,  160,  211  n,;  see
also  36  n,,  145  n.,  151  n,,  154  n,,
155  w.,  156  71.;  286.
Multiformities,  defined,  260
Multiplicity,  and  one-one  corre-
spondence, 501

Name,  Logicians  use  of,  53  n» ; and
things,  12

Names,  collective  and  distributive
use  of,  54;  and  demonstrative
symbol,  25  ; general,  53 ; logic-
ally proper,  146  n, ; singular,
54

Natural  kinds,  249 ; and  induction,
411 ; Mill  on,  278
Necessary  condition,  defined,  271
Negation,  186, 191.  *


522  A MODERN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC

Newton,  Si/  J., ' and  constructive  Plato,  on  division,  437  ; method  of.


description,  395  ff. ; on  hypo-
thesis, 311  ; and  notation  for

infinitesimal  calculus,  125 ; and
Eules  for  Reasoning,  312  ff. ;
and  scientific  method,  Chap.
XVI,  §5;  see  also  Z28,m
Nonsense,  505

Notation,  Arabic,  122  ; importance
of  a good,  125
Null-class,  148,  184
Number,  definition  of  442 ; dis-
tinguished from  numeral,  123
Nunn,  T.  P.,  quoted,  241, 261

Obversion,  65

Occam’s  Razor,  454 ; and  abstrac-
tion, Chap.  XXIII,  § 3 ; and
fictions,  454  ; Russell  on,  453  ff.,
503  fi.

Occurrence,  defined,  262
One-one  Correspondence,  123 ;
and  counting,  123,  456 ; and
multiplicity  of  sentences,  501
Ohm’s  Law,  377  fi.

Operation,  Logical,  182
Opposition,  Figure  of,  59
‘ Or  Interpretation  of,  70, 184  n.
Order,  Chap.  XI,  § 2 ; importance
of,  227  fi. ; scientific  and  teleo-
logical, 291  fi. ; types  of  in
science,  496 ; 228  fi.

Ostwald,  W.,  and  descriptive  theory  of
science,  393  ; on  hypothesis,  310

Particular,  proposition,  46 ; con-
stituent, 53, 147

Particularity,  and  datable  events,
383

Pasteur,  L,,  and  theory  of  spon-
taneous generation,  319  ff.  .
Peano,  G.,  and  the  foundations  of
mathematics,  459,  486  £P. ; see
also  40, 175  n,

Pearson,  K,,  on  scientific  theory,
393  ff.

Peirce,  B,,  458
Peirce,  G,  S.,  485
Perrp,  J.,  385

Petitio  Principii,  Fallacy  of,  216 ;

and  syllogism,  219  ff.

Physics,  and  mathematics,  176
Pictorial  Sentence,  see  Sentence
Plmclc,  M.,  and  anthropomorphism
of  science,  405  ff.


478  ; and  system,  478  ; quoted,
22,  421

Plurality  of  Causes,  involves  many-
one  relations,  264 ; distinguished
from  combination  of  causes,
344 ; and  Mill’s  methods,  343
ff. ; and  prospective  attitude,
263

Poincare,  H.,  quoted,  179  ?^.,  402  n.
Point,  definition  of,  by  extensive
abstraction,  450
Port  Royal  Logicians,  80, 163
Post  hoc  ergo  propter  hoc,  329
Postulate,  and  self -evidence,  178 ;
and  primitive  proposition,  178,

507  ; and  simplicity,  178,  507
Postulational  system,  see  App.  C
Poynting,  J.  H.,  on  explanation,  390 ;

quoted,  389

Precision,  16  ; of  reference,  19
Predicables , 428 ; Aristotle’s  theory
of,  428  fi.,  432  ; and  defimtion,
432  ; Porphyry’s  theory  of,  432
Premiss,  9 ; major,  82  ; minor,  82  ;

strengthened,  92  n.

Primary  characteristics,  266
Primary  occurrence,  150-151
Primitive  concept,  175,  506
Primitive  proposition,  175 ; and
directional  system,  506
Principia  Mathematica,  aims  of,  487,

508  ; method  of,  177  fi. ; and
Postulational  systems,  App.  C ;
and  symbolism,  507 ; referred
to,  488

Probability,  Chap.  XVIII,  § 4 ; and
induction,  409  £f.

Proof,  logical,  463 ; two  forms  of
proof,  509 ; and  method  of
analysis,  463

Proper  Names,  and  connotation,
55  ; and  demonstrative  symbols,
25  ; and  descriptive  phrases,  26 ;
ordinary  P.N.,  26,  30  ff. ;
uniquely  descriptive  names,  54 ;
Russell’s  use  of  ‘ P.N.  in  general-
ized sense  152  ; see  also  146  n.
Proposition,  atomic,  37  w. ; class-
membership,  39  ; composite,  41 ;
compound,  40  ; defined,  33  ;
diagrammatic  representation  of,
72;  elementary  and  non-ele-
mentary,  44,  Chap.  IX,  §§  1,  2
passim;  form  of,  51,  126


INDEX


523


164  ff. ; general,  43  ; Chap.  IX,

§ 1,  503  ; implicative,  70  ; kinds
of,  Chap.  IV,  § 2 ; relational,
38 ; relations  between.  Chap.  V,
§ 1 ; and  sentence,  33  ; subject-
predicate  form,  38 ; see  also
Sentence

Propositional  Function,  defined,
131  ; and  descriptive  function,
131  ; and  mathematical  func-
tion, 131  fi. ; as  symbolic  device,
142  n.  ; Russell's  use  in  analysis
of  general  propositions,  130,
143-144,  in  singular,  non-ele-
mentary  propositions,  144-150
Proprium,  430

Psychology,  whether  a science,  231  ;

quantitative  units  in,  362
Ptolemaic  hypothesis,  293, 296  ff.
Ptolemy,  296  ff.,  395  ff.

Qualitative  and  quantitative  uni-
formities, 353
Quality,  of  propositions,  46
Quantitative  analysis,  350  fi.,
356

Quantity  of  propositions,  46

Ramsey , F.  P.,  and  axiom  of  reduci-
bility,  463,  488  ; and  logic,  476 ;
and  theory  of  types,  462  n, ; see
also  37  52  w.

Reducibility,  Axiom  of,  462  ff.,
507

Reference,  indirect  r.  of  sentences,
501 ; and  meaning,  App.  A
Referend,  defined,  13 ; of  demon-
strative symbol,  499
Referent,  defined,  111,  167
Reflective  thinking,  contrasted
with  unr effective,  2,  5 ; defined,
4 ; and  logic,  1 ; and  relevance,
8

Regulative  principles,  403
Reidf  T.,  quoted,  252
Relation,  explained.  111,  166  ; clas-
sification of  kinds  of,  112-113  ;
field  of,  168  ; formal  properties
of,  167  ff. ; many-many,  170  ;
many-one,  170  ; one-one,  170  ;
and  qualities,  166;  square  of,
171 ; and  transitive  adjective,
166%

Relation-likeness,  205
Relative  product,  171


Relatum,  defined,'  111,  167
Relevance,  and  abstraction.  Chap.

XXIII,  § 1 passim
Relevant  connexions,  in  reflective
thinking.  Chap.  I passim
Relevant  knowledge,  importance  in
scientific  inquiry,  Chap-  XIII,
§4

Residual  factor,  345
Residues,  method  of,  347 ; and
Mill’s  deductive  method,  348
Rhetoric,  and  logic,  468
Richards,  /.  A,,  13  17

Riemann,  208

Russell,  B,  A.  IV.,  on  assertion,  213  ;
on  cause,  260,  272  %.,  289  ; on
causation,  282  ff. ; on  class,
158,  455,  461  ; on  definition,
440  ff.,  507 ; on  descriptions,
Chap.  IX,  § 2 passim ; on  dia-
grammatic representation,  78 ;
on  form,  52  ; on  ‘ implies  ’,221
ff. ; on  incomplete  symbols,
Chap.  IX,  § 3 ; on  inference,
212  ff. ; on  interpretation,  209 ;
on  knowledge  by  description,
151  ; on  logic  and  mathematics,
459,  App.  C passim ; on  logical
constructions,  App.  B passim;
on  monadic  relation,  53 ; on
natural  laws,  416  ; on  Occam’s
Razor,  453  ff.,  503  ff.  ; on
propositional  functions,  129  ff. ;
on  self-evidence,  177 ; on  sen-
tence, 500  ; on  scientific  theory,
238  ; on  using  and  talking  about
symbols,  156 ; see  also  24  %.,
37  %.,  51  %.,  53  %.,  Ill  %.,  112,
132  %.,  159  %.,  169,  192,  201  %.,
351  %.,  485,  486,  502,  506-508
Russell,  L,  J.,  on  ‘ demands  403

Schroeder,  E,,  486

Science,  how  used,  231  ; pure  and
applied,  ^232 ; pure  and  em-
pirical, 232

Sciences,  experimental,  375  ff. ; his-
torical, 383 ; quantitative  in-
vestigation in,  381 ; relatively
advanced  and  less  advanced,
375  ff„  382  ff.

Scientific  Thinking,  230  ff. ; and
value,  292

Secondary  occurrence,  150-151
Seignohos,  see  Langlois


624


A MODEEN  INTEODUCTION  TO  LOGIC


Sentence,  indirect  reference  of,  to
proposition,  501 ; meaning  of,
500  ; and  proposition,  33  &, ;
pictorial  sentence,  *"157,  501  ;
transformation  of,  80 ; Russell
on,  500 ; see  also  Logically
inappropriate  expressions
Significance,  rules  of  needed  in
mathematics,  508 ; and  struc-
ture, 509

Signifying,  11 ; and  reasoning,  9;
relation  of,  10,  13

Signs,  Boole  on,  484 ; expressive,
etc.,  115 ; and  language,  Chap.
II,  § 1 ; and  signifying,  4 ; and
symbol,  11

Sigwartf  referred  to,  38  n.,  96
Similarity,  of  classes,  205,  442  ; of
relations,  205 ; and  structure.
Chap.  XI,  § 3 passim
Simplicity,  in  postulational  systems,
App.  C ; two  kinds  of,  293 ;
Principle  of,  293,  405
Simplification,  Principle  of,  189
Singular  name,  54
8izz%,  F.,  quoted,  251,  300
Skipped  Intermediaries,  Axiom
of,  173

Smart,  W,  M.,  295  n.

Smith,  C,,  3G8  n,

Socrates,  and  argumentative  discus-
sion, 432  ; and  Aristotle,  477 ;
and  definition,  432 ; and  method,
478

‘ Some  \ Interpretation  of,  71,
143

Sorites,  109

Statistical  investigation,  and  com-
plexity, 375

Statistical  methods,  357  fi.

Stewart,  D.,  218
Stout,  a F„  115
Structural  hypothesis,  307
Structure,  of  deductive  systems,
App.  C ; of  relations,  205  ;

and  similarity,  203  ff  •

Subject,  34 ; grammatical,  distin-
guished from  logical,  153-154;
traditional  conception  of,  34  .
Subjectless  proposition,  37
Substances,  and  things,  Locke’s
conception  of,  270;  invariant
properties  of,  510

Substantive,  Elimination  of,  Chap.

XIV,  § 1


Sufficient  condition,  defined,  271
Syllogism,  as  argument,  83 ; de-
fined, 81 ; Figure  of,  85 ; as
form  of  implication,  83  ; Prin-
ciple of,  190,  472  ; rules  of.
Chap.  VI,  § 3 ; symbolic  treat-
ment of,  by  traditional  Logicians,
Chap.  VI,  § 6 ; validity  of,
216  ff..  Chap.  XII,  § 3
Symbol,  defined,  11 ; demonstrative
and  descriptive,  25,  499-500 ;
and  form,  Chap.  VIII  passim ;
illustrative,  119  ; and  meaning,
14  n.,  16,  App.  A ; non-verbal,
33  ; short-hand,  119  ; and  sign,
11,  13 ; and  words,  13 ; used
and  talked  about,  156
Symbolism,  and  abstraction,  127
ff.,  Chap.  X,  § 1 ; conditions  of
satisfactory,  118  fi.,  121 ; im-
portance of,  126  ; and  language,
13 ; and  mathematics,  Chap.
VIII,  § 2,  509  ; and  Traditional
Syllogism,  100-102 ; use  of  in
Prinoipia  Mathemalica,  507  ff.
Symbolizing,  triadic  relation  of,  14,
499

Symmetry,  113, 168
System,  causal,  268;  of  classes,
183  ff. ; coherent,  198  ; con-
ditions of,  197  ; deductive.  Chap.
X,  § 4 ; determinism  and  system,
198 ; isolated  system,  272,  511  ;
ordered  system,  201 ; postula-
tional system,  App.  C ; of  propo-
sitions, 186  ff.

Systematic  ambiguity,  defined,
161 ; of  “ exists  ”,  Chap.  IX,

§ 4 ; and  generality,  161  ff.

Tautology,  Principle  of,  189,  472
Term,  ambiguity  of,  54
Terms,  kinds  of,  Chap.  IV,  § 5.
Things,  and  cause,  266  ff.,  App.  I)  ;
state  of  a thing,  266,  269 ; as
logical  constructions,  502  ff.
Thomson,  J.  J,,  quoted,  309  n.
Thought,  Laws  of,  Chap,  XXIV,

§ 2 passim ; Boole  on,  484 ;
Traditional  Logicians  on,  469  ff.
Torricelli,  236  n.,  303
Traditional  Logic,  name  explained,
ix

Traditional  Logicians,  name  ex-
plained, ix ; on  analysis  of


INDEX


625


propositions,  34 ; on  composite  Vailati,  203

propositions,  42  ; on  compound  Variable,  defined*  128,  352  ; appar-
propositions,  42  ; on  distri-  ent,  136 ; and  generalimtion,


bution,  49  ; on  equivocal

words,  21 ; on  kinds  of  terms,
50  ; on  Laws  of  Thought,

469  ; on  logical  form,  49  ; on

relational  arguments,  114 ; on
Syllogism,  Chap.  VI  passim ;
see  also  41  n.

Traditional  Schedule,  47, 143  if.

Transformation  of  sentences,
utility  of,  80

Transitiveness,  113, 168

Transposition,  Principle  of,  190

Types,  theory  of,  461  fi.

Understanding,  and  language,  10 ;
14

Uniformities,  defined,  260  ,*  quali-
tative and  quantitative,  350  fi.,
375  ff.

Uniformity  of  Nature,  416  ff.

Uniquely  descriptive  name,  54

Unity,  Principle  of.  See  Principle
of  Simplicity

Universal,  proposition,  46 ; con-
stituent, 53, 147

Universe  of  Discourse,  Chap.  IV,

§ 6 ; and  existence,  74 ; see
also  159


488

Vehlen,  506

Venn,J.,  75-76,  36Bn.

Verification,  of  hypothesis,  306  fi.

Vicious -Circle  principle,  461

Welton,  J.,  100

Weylf  509

WJietham,  C.  D.,  236  n.

Whewell,  W.,  on  hypothesis,  494  fi. ;
on  Newton,  311 ; on  scientific
method,  494

Whitehead,  N,,  on  abstraction,
443  fi. ; on  ‘ climate  of  opinion
291 ; on  definition,  180 ; on
extensive  abstraction.  Chap.
XXIII,  § 2,  488 ; on  measure-
ment, 368 ; on  the  order  of
Nature,  400;  quoted,  115,  122,
124,  126,  164,  179  n„  235,  238,
291,  344,  406  n,,  443,  476 ; 5ee
also  506

Whole-to-part  relation,  448

Wilson,  J,  Cook,  154  n.

Wisdom,  /.,  155  n.,  156  n.,  157  n,,
504  n,

W%ttgenstein,  L.,  33,  157  n,,  463,
488
