The Way of Initiation (Rudolf Steiner, 1909)
==========================================================
Steiner's Way of Initiation (1909 edition) — how to attain knowledge of the higher worlds; the practical manual of Anthroposophy. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

<y ; <> 

j (Order  of  tOe  Star  in  t()e  tost  j 

lilbrarK 

1 SC”  . 

\ .it >4  t^toottt  fltreeti  London,  tD.l.  = 

I 

m ^ m 

j TERMS.  i 

: 10/6  per  year,  3/6  per  quarter,  \ 

I OR  z 

: 2/6  per  year  booking  fee  and  ’ : 

E 2d.  per  volume  for  fourteen  days.  = 

^ 


22502832753 


Q j 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Wellcome  Library 


https  ://arch  i ve  .org/detai  Is/b2901 2454 


r 


THE  WAY  OF  INITIATION 


E-‘  ' 

- 


f- 


: .&■ 


E 


X' 


'■  ^.  -|  .j|  • . * - • 


\- 


V 

X- 


»*• 


X 


V 


\ 


> V»  y\  CTi 


THE 

WAY  OF  INITIATION 

OR 

HOW  TO  ATTAIN  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE 
HIGHER  WORLDS 


BY 

RUDOLF  STEINER,  Ph.D. 


WITH  A FOREWORD  BY 

ANNIE  BES  ANT 

AND  SOME  BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES  OF  THE  AUTHOR  BY 

EDOUARD  SCHUR^: 


Second  Impression 


LONDON 

THEOSOPHICAL  PUBLISHING  SOCIETY 


1909 


1500  printed  December  1908 
1500  printed  May  19*^9 


\VI:LLCe\\lh 

LH3RARY 

C'lcneral  I A^llocrk^ns 

M 


TRANSLATOR’S  NOTE 


Being  deeply  interested  in  Dr.  Steiner’s  work 
and  teachings,  and  desirous  of  sharing  with  my 
English-speaking  friends  the  many  invaluable 
glimpses  of  Truth  which  are  to  be  found  therein, 
I decided  upoi^the  translation  of  the  present 
volume.  It  is  due  to  the  kind  co-operation  of 
several  friends  who  prefer  to  be  anonymous  that 
this  task  has  been  accomplished,  and  I wish  to 
express  my  hearty  thanks  for  the  literary  assist- 
ance rendered  by  them — also  to  thank  Dr.  Peipers 
of  Munich  for  permission  to  reproduce  his  excellent 
photograph  of  the  author. 

The  special  value  of  this  volume  consists,  I 
think,  in  the  fact  that  no  advice  is  given  and  no 
statement  made  which  is  not  based  on  the 
personal  experience  of  the  author,  who  is,  in  the 
truest  sense,  both  a mystic  and  an  occultist. 

If  the  present  volume  should  meet  with  a 
reception  justifying  a further  venture,  we  propose 
translating  and  issuing  during  the  coming  year  a 
further  series  of  articles  by  Dr.  Steiner  in  con- 
tinuation of  the  same  subject,  and  a third  volume 
will  consist  of  the  articles  now  appearing  in  the 
pages  of  The  Theosophist,  entitled  “ The  Education 
of  Children.” 


Belsize  Lodge,  Belsize  Lane, 
London,  N.W., 

Zrd  November  1908. 


MAX  GYSI. 


FOREWORD 

I AM  very  happy  to  recommend  this 
valuable  little  work  to  English  readers, 
having  already  circulated  the  articles 
comprised  in  it  in  the  pages  of  The 
Theosophist.  Dr.  Steiners  views,  re- 
presenting a deeply  mystical  Christian 
Theosophy,  are  of  very  great  utility, 
supplying  a side  of  Theosophical  thought 
which  might  otherwise  miss  fitting  recogni- 
tion. He  is  the  natural  heir  of  the  great 
German  mystics,  and  adds  to  their  pro- 
found spirituality  the  fine  lucidity  of  a 
philosophic  mind.  Under  his  guidance, 
German  Theosophy  is  taking  its  right 
place  in  European  thought,  and  is  be- 
coming a real  force.  If  English  readers 
find  herein  presentments  of  great  truths 


Ill 


that  seem  somewhat  unfamiliar,  let  them 
remember  that  in  this  difference  lies  their 
specific  value,  and  let  them  seek  to  gain 
new  views  of  truth  by  studying  it  from 
another  standpoint.  If  they  read  sympa- 
thetically, seeking  to  understand,  rather 
than  in  the  spirit  of  antagonism,  seeking 
to  criticise,  they  will  find  many  a gem  of 
value,  many  a pearl  of  price,  among  the 
thoughts  herein  presented,  and  Theo- 
sophy’s jewelled  diadem  will  be  the  richer 
for  tlieir  insetting. 


ANNIE  BESANT, 

Presid'uU  of  the  Tloeosophical  Society. 


Adyar, 

nth  September  lilUS. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

THE  PERSONALITY  OP  RUDOLF  STEINER  AND 

HIS  DEVELOPMENT  .....  1 

1.  THE  SUPERPHYSICAL  WORLD  AND  ITS  GNOSIS  41 

2.  HOW  TO  ATTAIN  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  HIGHER 

WORLDS  ......  66 

3.  THE  PATH  OF  DISCIPLESHIP  ...  88 

4.  PROBATION  . . . . . .112 

5.  ENLIGHTENMENT  . . . . . .130 

6.  INITIATION  . . . . .167 

7.  THE  HIGHER  EDUCATION  OF  THE  SOUL  . 194 

8.  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  DISCIPLESHIP  . . 216 


THE  PERSONALITY  OF 
RUDOLF  STEINER  AND 
HIS  DEVELOPMENT 

By  EDOUARD  SCHURE  * 

Many  of  even  the  most  cultivated  men 
of  our  time  have  a very  mistaken  idea  of 
what  is  a true  mystic  and  a true  occultist. 
They  know  these  two  forms  of  human 
mentality  only  by  their  imperfect  or 
degenerate  types,  of  which  recent  times 
have  afforded  but  too  many  examples. 
To  the  intellectual  man  of  the  dav,  the 
mystic  is  a kind  of  fool  and  visionary  who 
takes  his  fancies  for  facts ; the  occultist 
is  a dreamer  or  a charlatan  who  abuses 
public  credulity  in  order  to  boast  of  an 
imaginary  science  and  of  pretended  powers. 
Be  it  remarked,  to  begin  with,  that  this 

* Translated  by  kind  permission  of  the  author  from 
the  introduction  to  Le  Mystere  Chretien  et  les  Mysteres 
Antiques.  Traduit  de  I’allemand  par  Edouard  Schur4, 
Librairie  acad4mique,  Perrin  & Co.,  1908,  Paris. 

1 


definition  of  mysticism,  though  deserved 
by  some,  would  be  as  unjust  as  erroneous 
if  one  sought  to  apply  it  to  such  person- 
alities as  Joachim  del  Fiore  of  the 
thirteenth  century,  Jacob  Boehme  of  the 
sixteenth,  or  St.  Martin,  who  is  called 
“the  unknown  philosopher,”  of  the 
eighteenth  century.  No  less  unjust  and 
false  would  be  the  current  definition 
of  the  occultist  if  one  saw  in  it  the 
slightest  connection  with  such  earnest 
seekers  as  Paracelsus,  Mesmer,  or  Fabre 
d’Olivet  in  the  past,  as  William  Crookes, 
de  Rochat,  or  Camille  Flammarion  in  the 
present.  Think  what  we  may  of  these 
bold  investigators,  it  is  undeniable  that 
they  have  opened  out  regions  unknown  to 
science,  and  furnished  the  mind  with  new 
ideas. 

No,  these  fanciful  definitions  can  at 
most  satisfy  that  scientific  dilettantism 
which  hides  its  feebleness  under  a super- 
cilious mask  to  screen  its  indolence,  or  the 


worldly  scepticism  which  ridicules  all  that 
threatens  to  upset  its  indifference.  But 
enough  of  these  superficial  opinions.  Let 
us  study  history,  the  sacred  and  profane 
books  of  all  nations,  and  the  last  results 
of  experimental  science ; let  us  subject 
all  these  facts  to  impartial  criticism, 
inferring  similar  effects  from  identical 
causes,  and  we  shall  be  forced  to  give 
quite  another  definition  of  the  mystic  and 
the  occultist. 

The  true  mystic  is  a man  who  enters 
into  full  possession  of  his  inner  life,  and 
who,  having  become  cognisant  of  his  sub- 
consciousness,  finds  in  it,  through  con- 
centrated meditation  and  steady  discipline, 
new  faculties  and  enlightenment.  These 
new  faculties  and  this  enlightenment 
instruct  him  as  to  the  innermost  nature  of 
his  soul  and  his  relations  with  that  im- 
palpable element  which  underlies  all,  with 
that  eternal  and  supreme  reality  which 
religion  calls  God,  and  poetry  the  Divine. 


The  occultist,  akin  to  the  mystic,  but 
differing  from  him  as  a younger  from  an 
elder  brother,  is  a man  endowed  with 
intuition  and  with  synthesis,  who  seeks 
to  penetrate  the  hidden  depths  and 
foundations  of  Nature  by  the  methods 
of  science  and  philosophy : that  is  to  say, 
by  observation  and  reason,  methods  in- 
variable in  principle,  but  modified  in 
application  by  being  adapted  to  the 
descending  kingdoms  of  Spirit  or  the 
ascending  kingdoms  of  Nature,  according 
to  the  vast  hierarchy  of  beings  and  the 
alchemy  of  the  creative  Word. 

The  mystic,  then,  is  one  who  seeks  for 
truth  and  the  divine  directly  within  him- 
self, by  a gradual  detachment  and  a 
veritable  birth  of  his  higher  soul.  If  he 
attains  it  after  prolonged  effort,  he  plunges 
into  his  own  glowing  centre.  Then  he 
immerses  himself,  and  identifies  himself 
with  that  ocean  of  life  which  is  the  prim- 
ordial Force. 


The  occultist,  on  the  other  hand,  dis- 
covers, studies,  and  contemplates  this 
same  Divine  outpouring,  given  forth  in 
diverse  portions,  endowed  with  force,  and 
multiplied  to  infinity  in  Nature  and  in 
Humanity.  According  to  the  profound 
saying  of  Paracelsus  : he  sees  in  all  beings 
the  letters  of  an  alphabet,  which,  united  in 
man,  form  the  complete  and  conscious  Word 
of  life.  The  detailed  analyses  that  he 
makes  of  them,  the  syntheses  that  he 
constructs  with  them,  are  to  him  as  so 
many  images  and  forecastings  of  this 
central  Divine,  of  this  Sun  of  Beauty,  of 
Truth  and  of  Life,  which  he  sees  not,  but 
which  is  reflected  and  bursts  upon  his 
vision  in  countless  mirrors. 

The  weapons  of  the  mystic  are  concen- 
tration and  inner  vision ; the  weapons  of 
the  occultist  are  intuition  and  synthesis. 
Each  corresponds  to  the  other ; they 
complete  and  presuppose  each  other. 

These  two  human  types  are  blended  in 


the  Adept,  in  the  higher  Initiate.  No 
doubt  one  or  the  other,  and  often  both, 
are  met  with  in  the  founders  of  great 
religions  and  the  loftiest  philosophies. 
No  doubt  also  they  are  to  be  found  again, 
in  a less,  but  still  very  remarkable  degree, 
among  a certain  number  of  personages 
who  have  played  a great  part  in  history  as 
reformers,  thinkers,  poets,  artists,  states- 
men. 

Why,  then,  should  these  two  types  of 
mind,  which  represent  the  highest  human 
faculties,  and  were  formerly  the  object  of 
universal  veneration,  usually  appear  to  us 
now  as  merely  deformed  and  travestied  ? 
Why  have  they  become  obliterated? 
Why  should  they  have  fallen  into  such 
discredit  ? 

That  is  the  result  of  a profound  cause 
existing  in  an  inevitable  necessity  of 
human  evolution. 

During  the  last  two  thousand  years,  but 
especially  since  the  sixteenth  century. 


humanity  has  achieved  a tremendous 
work,  namely,  the  conquest  of  the  globe 
and  the  constitution  of  experimental 
science,  in  what  concerns  the  material 
and  visible  world. 

That  this  gigantic  and  herculean  task 
should  be  successfully  accomplished,  it 
was  necessary  that  there  should  be  a 
temporary  eclipse  of  man’s  transcen- 
dental faculties,  so  that  his  whole  power 
of  observation  might  be  concentrated  on 
the  outer  world.  These  faculties,  how- 
ever, have  never  been  extinct  or  even 
inactive.  They  lay  dormant  in  the  mass 
of  men  ; they  remained  active  in  the  elect, 
far  from  the  gaze  of  the  vulgar. 

Now,  they  are  showing  themselves 
openly  under  new  forms.  Before  long 
they  will  assume  a leading  and  directing 
importance  in  human  destinies.  I would 
add  that  at  no  period  of  history,  whether 
among  the  nations  of  the  ancient  Aryan 
cycle,  or  in  the  Semitic  civilisations  of 


Asia  and  Africa — whether  in  the  Graeco- 
Latin  world,  or  in  the  middle  ages  and  in 
modern  times,  have  these  royal  faculties, 
for  which  positivism  would  substitute  its 
dreary  nomenclature,  ever  ceased  to 
operate  at  the  beginning  and  in  the  back- 
ground of  all  great  human  creations  and 
of  all  fruitful  work.  For  how  can  we 
imagine  a thinker,  a poet,  an  inventor, 
a hero,  a master  of  science  or  of  art,  a 
genius  of  any  kind,  without  a mighty  ray 
of  those  two  master-faculties  which  make 
the  mystic  and  the  occultist — the  inner 
vision  and  the  sovereign  intuition  ? 

# * # 

Rudolf  Steiner  is  both  a mystic  and 
an  occultist.  These  two  natures  appear 
in  him  in  perfect  harmony.  One  could 
not  say  which  of  the  two  predominates 
over  the  other.  In  intermingling  and 
blending,  they  have  become  one  homo- 
geneous force.  Hence  a special  develop- 


ment  in  which  outward  events  play  but  a 
secondary  part. 

Dr.  Steiner  was  born  in  Upper  Austria 
in  1861.  His  earliest  years  were  passed 
in  ^ little  town  situated  on  the  Leytha, 
on  the  borders  of  Styria,  the  Carpathians, 
and  Hungary.  From  childhood  his 
character  was  serious  and  concentrated. 
This  was  followed  by  a youth  inwardly 
illuminated  by  the  most  marvellous  in- 
tuitions, a young  manhood  encountering 
terrible  trials,  and  a ripe  age  crowned 
by  a mission  which  he  had  dimly  fore- 
seen from  his  earliest  years,  but  which 
was  only  gradually  formulated  in  the 
struggle  for  truth  and  life.  This  youth, 
passed  in  a mountainous  and  secluded 
region,  was  happy  in  its  way,  thanks  to 
the  exceptional  faculties  that  he  dis- 
covered in  himself.  He  was  employed  in 
a Catholic  church  as  a choir  boy.  The 
poetry  of  the  worship,  the  profundity  of 
.the  symbolism,  had  a mysterious  attrac- 


( 10  ) 

tion  for  him ; but,  as  he  possessed  the 
innate  gift  of  seeing  souls,  one  thing  terri- 
fied him.  Tliis  was  the  secret  unbelief  of 
the  priests,  entirely  engrossed  in  the  ritual 
and  the  material  part  of  the  service. 
There  was  another  peculiarity  : no  one, 
either  then  or  later,  allowed  himself  to 
talk  of  any  gross  superstition  in  his  pres- 
ence, or  to  utter  any  blasphemy,  as  if  those 
calm  and  penetrating  eyes  compelled  the 
speaker  to  serious  thought.  In  this  child, 
almost  always  silent,  there  grew  up  a 
quiet  and  inflexible  will,  to  master  things 
through  understanding.  That  was  easier 
for  him  than  for  others,  for  he  possessed 
from  the  first  that  self-mastery,  so  rare 
even  in  the  adult,  which  gives  the  mastery 
over  others.  To  this  firm  will  was 
added  a warm,  deep,  and  almost  painful 
sympathy ; a kind  of  pitiful  tenderness 
to  all  beings  and  even  to  inanimate 
nature.  It  seemed  to  him  that  all  souls 
had  in  them  something  divine.  But  in 


( 11 ) 

what  a stony  crust  is  hidden  the  shining 
gold ! In  what  hard  rock,  in  what  dark 
gloom  lay  dormant  the  precious  essence ! 
Vaguely  as  yet  did  this  idea  stir  within 
him  — he  was  to  develop  it  later  — that 
the  divine  soul  is  present  in  all  men, 
but  in  a latent  state.  It  is  a sleeping 
captive  that  has  to  be  awakened  from 
enchantment. 

To  the  sight  of  this  young  thinker, 
human  souls  became  transparent,  with  their 
troubles,  their  desires,  their  paroxysms  of 
hatred  or  of  love.  And  it  was  probably 
owing  to  the  terrible  things  he  saw,  that 
he  spoke  so  little.  And  yet,  what  delights, 
unknown  to  the  world,  sprang  from  this 
involuntary  clairvoyance  ! Among  the  re- 
markable inner  revelations  of  this  youth, 
I will  instance  only  one  which  was  ex- 
tremely characteristic. 

The  vast  plains  of  Hungary,  the  wild 
Carpathian  forests,  the  old  churches  of 
those  mountains  in  wliich  the  monstrance 


( 12  ) 

glows  brightly  as  a sun  in  the  darkness  of  - 
the  sanctuary,  were  not  there  for  nothing, 
but  they  were  helpful  to  meditation  and 
contemplation. 

At  fifteen  years  of  age,  Steiner  became 
acquainted  with  a herbalist  at  that  time 
staying  in  his  country.  The  remarkable 
thing  about  this  man  was  that  he  knew 
not  only  the  species,  families,  and  life  of 
plants  in  their  minutest  details,  but  also 
their  secret  virtues.  One  would  have 
said  that  he  had  spent  his  life  in  convers- 
ing with  the  unconscious  and  fluid  soul  of 
herbs  and  flowers.  He  had  the  gift  of 
seeing  the  vital  principle  of  plants,  their 
etheric  body,  and  what  occultism  calls  the 
elementals  of  the  vegetable  world.  He 
talked  of  it  as  of  a quite  ordinary  and 
natural  thing.  The  calm  and  coolly  scien- 
tific tone  of  his  conversation  did  but  still 
further  excite  the  curiosity  and  admiration 
of  the  youth.  Later  on,  Steiner  knew  that 
this  strange  man  was  a messenger  from 


{ 13  ) 

the  Master,  whom  as  yet  he  knew  not,  but 
who  was  to  be  his  real  initiator,  and  who 
was  already  watching  over  him  from  afar. 

What  the  curious,  double-sighted  herbal- 
ist told  him,  young  Steiner  found  to  be  in 
accordance  with  the  logic  of  things.  That 
did  but  confirm  an  inner  feeling  of  long 
standing,  and  which  more  and  more  forced 
itself  on  his  mind  as  the  fundamental 
Law,  and  as  the  basis  of  the  Great  All. 
That  is  to  say  : the  two-fold  eurrent  which 
constitutes  the  very  movement  of  the  world, 
and  which  might  be  called  the  flux  and 
reflux  of  the  universal  life. 

We  are  all  witnesses  and  are  conscious 
of  the  outward  current  of  evolution,  which 
urges  onward  all  beings  of  heaven  and  of 
earth — stars,  plants,  animals,  and  human- 
ity— and  causes  them  to  move  forward  to- 
wards an  infinite  future,  without  our  per- 
ceiving the  initial  force  which  impels  them 
and  makes  them  go  on  without  pause  or 
rest.  But  there  is  in  the  universe  an  in- 


( 14  ) 


verse  current,  which  interposes  itself  and 
perpetually  breaks  in  on  the  other.  It  is 
that  of  involution,  by  which  the  principles, 
forces,  entities,  and  souls  which  come  from 
the  invisible  world  and  the  kingdom  of 
the  Eternal  infiltrate  and  ceaselessly  inter- 
mingle with  the  visible  reality.  No  evolu- 
tion of  matter  would  be  comprehensible 
without  this  occult  and  astral  current, 
which  is  the  great  propeller  of  life,  with  its 
hierarchy  of  powers.  Thus  the  Spirit, 
which  contains  the  future  in  germ,  involves 
itself  in  matter ; thus  matter,  which  re- 
ceives the  Spirit,  evolves  towards  the  future. 
While,  then,  we  are  moving  on  blindly 
towards  the  unknown  future,  this  future 
is  approaching  us  consciously,  infusing 
itself  in  the  current  of  the  world  and  man 
who  elaborate  it.  Such  is  the  tivo-fold 
movement  of  time,  the  out-hreathing  and 
the  in-hreathing  of  the  soul  of  the  world, 
which  comes  from  the  Eternal  and  returns 
thither. 


( 1-^ ) 

From  the  age  of  eighteen,  young  Steiner 
possessed  the  spontaneous  consciousness 
of  this  two-fold  current — a consciousness 
which  is  the  condition  of  all  spiritual 
vision.  This  vital  axiom  was  forced  upon 
him  by  a direct  and  involuntary  seeing  of 
things.  Thenceforth  he  had  the  unmis- 
takable sensation  of  occult  powers  which 
were  working  behind  and  through  him 
for  his  guidance.  He  gave  heed  to  this 
force  and  obeyed  its  admonitions,  for  he 
felt  in  profound  accordance  with  it. 

This  kind  of  perception,  however, 
formed  a separate  category  in  his  in- 
tellectual life.  This  class  of  truths  seemed 
to  him  something  so  profound,  so  mys- 
terious, and  so  sacred,  that  he  never 
imagined  it  possible  to  express  it  in  words. 
He  fed  his  soul  thereon,  as  from  a divine 
fountain,  but  to  have  scattered  a drop  of 
it  beyond  would  have  seemed  to  him  a 
profanation. 

Beside  this  inner  and  contemplative 


( 16  ) 

life,  his  rational  and  philosophic  mind  was 
powerfully  developing.  From  sixteen  to 
seventeen  years  of  age,  Kudolf  Steiner 
plunged  deeply  into  the  study  of  Kant, 
Fichte,  and  Schelling.  When  he  came 
to  Vienna  some  vears  after,  he  became 
an  ardent  admirer  of  Hegel,  whose  trans- 
cendental idealism  borders  on  occultism ; 
but  speculative  philosophy  did  not  satisfy 
him.  His  positive  mind  demanded  the 
solid  basis  of  the  sciences  of  observa- 
tion. So  he  deeply  studied  mathematics, 
chemistry,  mineralogy,  botany,  and  zoology. 
“ These  studies,”  he  said,  “ afford  a surer 
basis  for  the  construction  of  a spiritual 
system  of  the  universe  than  history  and 
literature.  The  latter,  wanting  in  exact 
methods,  could  thus  throw  no  side-lights 
on  the  vast  domain  of  German  science.” 
Inquiring  into  everything,  enamoured  of 
high  art,  and  an  enthusiast  for  poetry, 
Steiner  nevertheless  did  not  neglect 
literary  studies.  As  a guide  therein  he 


( 17  ) 

found  an  excellent  professor  in  the  person 
of  Julius  Schroer,  a distinguished  scholar 
of  the  school  of  the  brothers  Grimm,  who 
strove  to  develop  in  his  pupils  the  art  of 
oratory  and  of  composition.  To  this  dis- 
tinguished man  the  young  student  owed 
his  great  and  refined  literary  culture. 
“ In  the  desert  of  prevailing  materialism,” 
says  Steiner,  ‘‘his  house  was  to  me  an 
oasis  of  idealism.” 

But  this  was  not  yet  the  Master  whom 
he  sought.  Amidst  these  varied  studies 
and  deep  meditations,  he  could  as  yet 
discern  the  building  of  the  universe  but 
in  a fragmentary  way ; his  inborn  intui- 
tion prevented  any  doubt  of  the  divine 
origin  of  things  and  of  a spiritual  Beyond. 
A distinctive  mark  of  this  extraordinary 
man  was  that  he  never  knew  any  of  those 
crises  of  doubt  and  despair  which  usually 
accompany  the  transition  to  a definite  con- 
viction in  the  life  of  mystics  and  of  thinkers. 

Nevertheless,  he  felt  that  the  central  light 

2 


( 18  ) 

which  illumines  and  penetrates  the  whole 
was  still  lacking  in  him.  He  had  reached 
young  manhood,  with  its  terrible  problems. 
What  was  he  going  to  do  with  his  life? 
The  sphinx  of  destiny  was  facing  him. 
How  should  he  solve  its  problem  ? 

It  was  at  the  age  of  nineteen  that  the 
aspirant  to  the  mysteries  met  with  his 
guide — the  Master — so  long  anticipated. 

It  is  an  undoubted  fact,  admitted  by 
occult  tradition  and  confirmed  by  ex- 
perience, that  those  who  seek  the  higher 
truth  from  an  impersonal  motive  find  a 
master  to  initiate  them  at  the  right 
moment : that  is  to  say,  when  they  are 
ripe  for  its  reception.  “Knock,  and  it 
shall  be  opened  to  you,  ” said  Jesus.  That 
is  true  with  regard  to  everything,  but 
above  all  with  regard  to  truth.  Only, 
the  desire  must  be  ardent  as  a flame,  in  a 
soul  pure  as  crystal. 

The  Master  of  Rudolf  Steiner  was  one 
of  those  men  of  power  who  live,  unknown 


( 19  ) 

to  the  world,  under  cover  of  some  civil 
state,  to  carry  out  a mission  unsuspected 
by  any  but  their  fellows  in  the  Brother- 
hood of  self-sacrificing  Masters.  They 
take  no  ostensible  part  in  human  events. 
To  remain  unknown  is  the  condition  of 
their  power,  but  their  action  is  only  the 
more  efficacious.  For  they  inspire,  pre- 
pare, and  direct  those  who  will  act  in  the 
sight  of  all.  In  the  present  instance  the 
Master  had  no  difficulty  in  completing  the 
first  and  spontaneous  initiation  of  his 
disciple.  He  had  only,  so  to  speak,  to 
point  out  to  him  his  own  nature,  to  arm 
him  with  his  needful  weapons.  Clearly  did 
he  show  him  the  connection  between  the 
ordinary  and  the  secret  sciences  ; between 
the  religious  and  the  spiritual  forces  which 
are  now  contending  for  the  guidance  of 
humanity  ; the  antiquity  of  the  occult  tra- 
dition which  holds  the  hidden  threads  of 
history,  which  mingles  them,  separates,  and 
re-unites  them  in  the  course  of  ages. 


( ^0  ) 

Swiftly  he  made  him  clear  the  successive 
stages  of  inner  discipline,  in  order  to 
attain  conscious  and  intelligent  clair- 
voyance. In  a few  months  the  disciple 
learned  from  oral  teaching  the  depth  and 
incomparable  splendour  of  the  esoteric 
synthesis.  Rudolf  Steiner  had  already 
sketched  for  himself  his  intellectual 
mission : “ To  re-unite  Science  and 

Religion.  To  bring  back  God  into 
Science,  and  Nature  into  Religion.  Thus 
to  re-fertilise  both  Art  and  Life.”  But 
how  to  set  about  this  vast  and  daring 
undertaking?  How  conquer,  or  rather, 
how  tame  and  transform  the  great  enemy, 
the  materialistic  science  of  the  day,  which 
is  like  a terrible  dragon  covered  with 
its  carapace  and  couched  on  its  huge 
treasure  ? How  master  this  dragon  of 
modern  science  and  yoke  it  to  the  car  of 
spiritual  truth  ? And,  above  all,  how 
conquer  the  bull  of  public  opinion  ? 

Rudolf  Steiner’s  Master  was  not  in 


( 21  ) 

the  least  like  himself.  He  had  not  that 
extreme  and  feminine  sensibility  which, 
though  not  excluding  energy,  makes 
every  contact  an  emotion  and  instantly 
turns  the  suffering  of  others  into  a per- 
sonal pain.  He  was  masculine  in  spirit, 
a born  ruler  of  men,  looking  only  at  the 
species,  and  for  whom  individuals  hardly 
existed.  He  spared  not  himself,  and  he 
did  not  spare  others.  His  will  was  like 
a ball  which,  once  shot  from  the  cannon’s 
mouth,  goes  straight  to  its  mark,  sweeping 
off  everything  in  its  way.  To  the  anxious 
questioning  of  his  disciple  he  replied  in 
substance  : 

“If  thou  wouldst fight  the  enemy,  begin 
by  understanding  him.  Thou  wilt  con- 
quer the  dragon  only  by  penetrating  his 
skin.  As  to  the  bull,  thou  must  seize  him 
by  the  horns.  It  is  in  the  extremity  of 
distress  that  thou  wilt  find  thy  weapons 
and  thy  brothers  in  the  fight.  I have  shown 
thee  who  thou  art,  now  go — and  he  thyself ! ” 


( 22  ) 

Rudolf  Steiner  knew  the  language  of 
the  Masters  well  enough  to  understand 
the  rough  path  that  he  was  thus  com- 
manded to  tread  ; but  he  also  understood 
that  this  was  the  only  way  to  attain  the 
end.  He  obeyed,  and  set  forth. 

^ ^ ^ 

•W*  *7?* 

From  1880  the  life  of  Rudolf  Steiner 
becomes  divided  into  three  quite  distinct 
periods  : from  twenty  to  thirty  years  of 
age  (1881-1891),  the  Viennese  period,  a 
time  of  study  and  of  preparation  ; from 
thirty  to  forty  (1891-1901),  the  Weimar 
period,  a time  of  struggle  and  combat ; 
from  forty  to  forty-six  (1901-1907),  the 
Berlin  period,  a time  of  action  and  of 
organisation,  in  which  his  thought  crystal- 
lised into  a living  work. 

I pass  rapidly  over  the  Vienna  period, 
in  which  Steiner  took  the  degree  of 
Doctor  of  Philosophy.  He  afterwards 
wrote  a series  of  scientific  articles  on 


( 23  ) 

zoology,  geology,  and  the  theory  of  colours, 
in  which  theosophical  ideas  appear  in  an 
idealist  clothing.  While  acting  as  tutor 
in  several  families,  with  the  same  con- 
scientious devotion  that  he  gave  to  every- 
thing, he  conducted  as  chief  editor  a 
weekly  Viennese  paper,  the  Deutsche 
W ochenschrift.  His  friendship  with  the 
Austrian  poetess,  Marie  Eugenie  delle 
Grazie,  cast,  as  it  were,  into  this  period  of 
heavy  work  a warm  ray  of  sunshine,  with 
a smile  of  grace  and  poetry. 

In  1890  Steiner  was  summoned  to 
collaborate  in  the  archives  of  Goethe  and 
Schiller  at  Weimar,  to  superintend  the 
re-editing  of  Goethe’s  scientific  works. 
Shortly  after,  he  published  two  important 
works,  Truth  and  Science  and  The  Philo- 
so'phy  of  Liberty.  “ The  occult  powers  that 
guided  me,”  he  says,  “forced  me  to  in- 
troduce spiritualistic  ideas  imperceptibly 
into  the  current  literature  of  the  time.’» 
But  in  these  various  tasks  he  was  but 


( 24  ) 

studying  his  ground  while  trying  his 
strength.  So  distant  was  the  goal  that 
he  did  not  dream  of  being  able  to  reach  it 
as  yet.  To  travel  round  the  world  in  a 
sailing  vessel,  to  cross  the  Atlantic,  the 
Pacific  and  the  Indian  Ocean,  in  order  to 
return  to  a European  port,  would  have 
seemed  easier  to  him.  While  awaiting 
the  events  that  would  allow  him  to  equip 
his  ship  and  to  launch  it  on  the  open  sea, 
he  came  into  touch  with  two  illustrious 
personalities  who  helped  to  determine  his 
intellectual  position  in  the  contemporary 
world. 

These  two  persons  were  the  celebrated 
philosopher,  Friedrich  Nietzsche,  and  the 
no  less  famous  naturalist,  Ernst  Haeckel. 

Pudolf  Steiner  had  just  written  an 
impartial  treatise  on  the  author  of 
Zcirathustra.  In  consequence  of  this, 
Nietzsche’s  sister  begged  the  sympathetic 
critic  to  come  and  see  her  at  Naumburg, 
where  her  unhappy  brother  was  slowly 


( 25  ) 

dying.  Madame  Foerster  took  the  visitor 
to  the  door  of  the  apartment  where 
Nietzsche  was  lying  on  a couch  in  a 
comatose  condition,  inert,  stupefied.  To 
Steiner  there  was  something  very  signifi- 
cant in  this  melancholy  sight.  In  it  he 
saw  the  final  act  in  the  tragedy  of  the 
would-be  superman.” 

The  author  of  Beyond  Grood  and  Evil 
had  not,  like  the  realists  of  Bismarck- 
ian  imperialism,  renounced  idealism,  for 
he  was  naturally  intuitive ; but  in  his 
individualistic  pride  he  sought  to  cut  oft* 
the  spiritual  world  from  the  universe,  and 
the  divine  from  human  consciousness. 
Instead  of  placing  the  “ superman,”  of 
whom  he  had  a poetic  vision,  in  the 
spiritual  kingdom,  which  is  his  true  sphere, 
he  strove  to  force  him  into  the  material 
world,  which  alone  was  real  in  his  eyes. 
Hence,  in  that  splendid  intellect  arose  a 
chaos  of  ideas  and  a wild  struggle  which 
finally  brought  on  softening  of  the  brain. 


( 26  ) 

To  explain  this  particular  case,  it  is  need- 
less to  bring  in  atavism  or  the  theory  of 
degeneracy.  The  frenzied  combat  of  ideas 
and  of  contradictory  sentiments,  of  which 
this  brain  was  tlie  battlefield,  was  enough. 
Steiner  had  done  justice  to  all  the  genius 
that  marked  the  innovating  ideas  of 
Nietzsche,  but  this  victim  of  pride,  self- 
destroyed  by  negation,  was  to  him  none  the 
less  a tragic  instance  of  the  ruin  of  a mighty 
intellect  which  madly  destroys  itself  in 
breaking  away  from  spiritual  intelligence. 

Madame  Foerster  did  her  utmost  to 
enrol  Dr.  Steiner  under  her  brother’s  flag. 
For  this  she  used  all  her  skill,  making 
repeated  offers  to  the  young  publicist  to 
become  editor  and  commentator  of  Niet- 
zsche’s works.  Steiner  withstood  her  in- 
sistence as  best  he  could,  and  ended  by 
taking  himself  off  altogether,  for  which 
Madame  Foerster  never  forgave-  him. 
She  did  not  know  that  Rudolf  Steiner 
bore  within  him  the  consciousness  of  a 


( 27  ) 

work  no  less  great  and  more  valuable 
than  that  of  her  brother. 

Nietzsche  had  been  merely  an  interest- 
ing episode  in  the  life  of  the  esoteric 
thinker  on  the  threshold  of  his  battle- 
field. His  meeting  with  the  celebrated 
naturalist,  Ernst  Haeckel,  on  the  contrary, 
marks  a most  important  phase  in  the 
development  of  his  thought.  Was  not 
the  successor  of  Darwin  apparently  the 
most  formidable  adversary  of  the  spiritual- 
ism of  this  young  initiate,  of  that  philo- 
sophy which  to  him  was  the  very  essence 
of  his  being  and  the  breath  of  his  thought  ? 
Indeed,  since  the  broken  link  between 
man  and  animal  has  been  re-joined,  since 
man  can  no  longer  believe  in  a special 
and  supernatural  origin,  he  has  begun 
altogether  to  doubt  his  divine  origin  and 
destiny.  He  no  longer  sees  himself  as 
anything  but  one  phenomenon  among  so 
many  phenomena,  a passing  form  amidst 
so  many  forms,  a frail  and  chance  link  in 


( 28  ) 

a blind  evolution.  Steiner,  then,  is  right 
in  saying : “ The  mentality  deduced  from 
natural  sciences  is  the  greatest  power  of 
modern  times.”  On  the  other  hand,  he 
knew  that  this  system  merely  reproduces 
a succession  of  external  forms  among  living 
beings,  and  not  the  inner  and  acting  forces 
of  life.  He  knew  it  from  personal  initia- 
tion, and  a deeper  and  vaster  view  of  the 
universe.  So  also  he  could  exclaim  with 
more  assurance  than  most  of  our  timid 
spiritualists  and  startled  theologians  : “ Is 
the  human  soul  then  to  rise  on  the  wings 
of  enthusiasm  to  the  summits  of  the  True, 
the  Beautiful,  and  the  Good,  only  to  be 
swept  away  into  nothingness,  like  a bubble 
of  the  brain  ? ” Yes,  Haeckel  was  the 
Adversary.  It  was  materialism  in  arms, 
the  dragon  with  all  his  scales,  his  claws, 
and  his  teeth. 

Steiner’s  desire  to  understand  this  man, 
and  to  do  him  justice  as  to  all  that  was 
great  in  him,  to  fathom  his  theory  so  far 


( 29  ) 

as  it  was  logical  and  plausible,  was  only 
the  more  intense.  In  this  fact  one  sees 
all  the  loyalty  and  all  the  greatness  of  his 
comprehensive  mind. 

The  materialistic  conclusions  of  Haeckel 
could  have  no  influence  on  his  own  ideas, 
which  came  to  him  from  a difterent 
science ; but  he  had  a presentiment  that 
in  the  indisputable  discoveries  of  the 
naturalist  he  should  find  the  surest  basis 
of  an  evolutionary  spiritualism  and  a 
rational  theosophy. 

He  began,  then,  to  study  eagerly  the 
History  of  Natural  Creation.  In  it  Haeckel 
gives  a fascinating  picture  of  the  evolution 
of  species,  from  the  amoeba  to  man.  In 
it  he  shows  the  successive  growth  of 
organs,  and  the  physiological  process  by 
which  living  beings  have  raised  themselves 
to  organisms  more  and  more  complex  and 
more  and  more  perfect.  But  in  this 
stupendous  transformation,  which  implies 
millions  and  millions  of  years,  he  never 


( 30  ) 

explains  the  initial  force  of  this  universal 
ascent,  nor  the  series  of  special  impulses 
which  cause  beings  to  rise  step  by  step. 
To  these  primordial  questions,  Haeckel 
has  never  been  able  to  reply  except  by 
admitting  spontaneous  generation,^  which 
is  tantamount  to  a miracle  as  great  as  the 
creation  of  man  by  God  from  a clod  of 
earth.  To  a theosophist  like  Steiner,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  cosmic  force  which 
elaborates  the  world  comprises  in  its 
spheres,  fitted  one  into  another,  the 
myriads  of  souls  which  crystallise  and 
incarnate  ceaselessly  in  all  beings.  He, 
who  saw  the  underside  of  creation,  could 
but  recognise  and  admire  the  extent  of 
the  all-round  gaze  with  which  Haeckel 
surveyed  his  above.  It  was  in  vain  that 
the  naturalist  would  deny  the  divine 
Author  of  the  universal  scheme : he  proved 

^ A speech  delivered  in  Paris,  28th  August  1878. 
See  also  Haeckel’s  Histonj  of  Natural  Creation^  13th 
lecture. 


( 31  ) 

it  in  spite  of  himself,  in  so  well  describ- 
ing His  work.  As  to  the  theosophist,  he 
greeted,  in  the  surging  of  species  and  in 
the  breath  which  urges  them  onward — 
Man  in  the  making,  the  very  thought  of 
God,  the  visible  expression  of  the  planet- 
ary Word.^ 

While  thus  pursuing  his  studies,  Rudolf 
Steiner  recalled  the  saying  of  his  Master ; 

1 This  is  how  Dr.  Steiner  himself  describes  the 
famous  German  naturalist : “ Haeckel’s  personality  is 
captivating.  It  is  the  most  complete  contrast  to  the 
tone  of  his  writings.  If  Haeckel  had  but  made  a slight 
study  of  the  philosophy  of  which  he  speaks,  not  even 
as  a dilettante,  but  like  a child,  he  would  have  drawn 
the  most  lofty  siiiritual  conclusions  from  his  phylo- 
genetic studie.s.  Haeckel’s  doctrine  is  grand,  but 
Haeckel  himself  is  the  worst  of  commentators  on  his 
doctrine.  It  is  not  by  showing  our  contemporaries 
the  weak  points  in  Haeckel’s  doctrine  that  we  can 
promote  intellectual  progress,  but  by  pointing  out  to 
them  the  grandeur  of  his  phylogenetic  thought.” 
Steiner  has  developed  these  ideas  in  two  works : 
Welt  und  Lehensanscliauungen  im  \^ten  Jahrliundert 
(Theories  of  the  Universe  and  of  Life  in  the  Nineteenth 
Century),  and  Haeckel  und  seine  Oegner  (Haeckel  and 
his  Opponents). 


( 32  ) 

“To  conquer  the  dragon,  his  skin  must 
be  penetrated.”  While  stealing  within 
the  carapace  of  present-day  materialism, 
he  had  seized  his  weapons.  Henceforth 
he  was  ready  for  the  combat.  He  needed 
but  a field  of  action  to  give  battle,  and 
a powerful  aid  to  uphold  him  therein. 
He  was  to  find  his  field  in  the  Theoso- 
phical  Society,  and  his  aid  in  a remarkable 
woman. 

In  1897  Rudolf  Steiner  went  to  Berlin 
to  conduct  a literary  magazine  and  to  give 
lectures  there. 

On  his  arrival,  he  found  there  a branch 
of  the  Theosophical  Society.  The 
German  branch  of  this  Society  was 
always  noted  for  its  great  independence, 
which  is  natural  in  a country  of  trans- 
cendental philosophy  and  of  fastidious 
criticism.  It  had  already  made  a con- 
siderable contribution  to  occult  literature 
through  the  interesting  periodical.  The 
Sphinx,  conducted  by  Dr.  Hubbe-Schleiden, 


( 33  ) 

and  Dr.  Carl  du  Prel’s  book — Philosophie 
der  Mystik.  But,  the  leaders  having  re- 
tired, it  was  almost  over  with  the  group. 
Great  discussions  and  petty  wrangiings 
divided  the  theosophists  beyond  the 
Rhine.  Should  Rudolf  Steiner  enter  the 
Theosophical  Society  ? This  question 
forced  itself  urgently  upon  him,  and  it 
was  of  the  utmost  gravity,  both  for  him- 
self and  for  his  cause. 

Through  his  first  Master,  through  the 
brotherhood  with  which  he  was  associated, 
and  by  his  own  innermost  nature,  Steiner 
belongs  to  another  school  of  occultism, 
I mean  to  the  esoteric  Christianity  of  the 
West,  and  most  especially  to  the  Rosi- 
crucian  initiation. 

After  mature  consideration  he  resolved 

to  join  the  Theosophical  Society  of  which 

he  became  a member  in  1902.  He  did 

not,  however,  enter  it  as  a pupil  of  the 

Eastern  tradition,  but  as  an  initiate 

of  Rosicrucian  esotericism  who  gladly 

3 


( 34  ) 

recognised  the  profound  depth  of  the 
Hindu  Wisdom  and  offered  it  a brotherly 
hand  to  make  a magnetic  link  between 
the  two.  He  understood  that  the  two 
traditions  were  not  meant  to  contend  with 
each  other,  but  to  act  in  concert,  with 
complete  independence,  and  thus  to  work 
for  the  common  good  of  civilisation.  The 
Hindu  tradition,  in  fact,  contains  the 
greatest  treasure  of  occult  science  as 
regards  cosmogony  and  the  prehistoric 
periods  of  humanity,  while  the  tradition 
of  Christian  and  Western  esotericism 
looks  from  its  immeasurable  height  upon 
the  far-off  future  and  the  final  destinies 
of  our  race.  For  the  past  contains  and 
prepares  the  future,  as  the  future  issues 
from  the  past  and  completes  it. 

Rudolf  Steiner  was  assisted  in  his  work 
by  a powerful  recruit  and  one  of  inesti- 
mable value  in  the  pi  opagandist  work  that 
he  was  about  to  undertake. 

Mile.  Marie  von  Sivers,  a Russian  by 


( 35  ) 

birth,  and  of  an  unusually  varied  cosmo- 
politan education  (she  writes  and  speaks 
Russian,  French,  German,  and  English 
equally  well),  had  herself  also  reached 
Theosophy  by  other  roads,  after  long 
seeking  for  the  truth  which  illumines  all 
because  it  illumines  the  very  depths  of 
our  own  being.  The  extreme  refinement 
of  her  aristocratic  nature,  at  once  modest 
and  proud,  her  great  and  delicate  sensi- 
tiveness, the  extent  and  balance  of  her 
intelligence,  her  artistic  and  mental 
endowments,  all  made  her  wonderfully 
fitted  for  the  part  of  an  agent  and  an 

apostle.  The  Oriental  theosophy  had 

* 

attracted  and  delighted  her  without 
altogether  convincing  her.  The  lectures 
of  Dr.  Steiner  gave  her  the  light  which 
convinces  by  casting  its  beams  on  all 
sides,  as  from  a transplendent  centre. 
Independent  and  free,  she,  like  many 
Russians  in  good  society,  sought  for  some 
ideal  work  to  which  she  could  devote 


( 36  ) 

all  her  energies.  She  had  found  it.  Dr. 
Steiner  having  been  appointed  General 
Secretary  of  the  German  Section  of  the 
Theosophical  Society,  Mile.  Marie  von 
Sivers  became  his  assistant.  From  that 
time,  in  spreading  the  work  throughout 
Germany  and  the  adjacent  countries,  she 
displayed  a real  genius  for  organisation, 
maintained  with  unwearied  activity. 

As  for  Kudolf  Steiner,  he  had  already 
given  ample  proof  of  his  profound  thought 
and  his  eloquence.  He  knew  himself, 
and  he  was  master  of  himself.  But  such 
faith,  such  devotion  must  have  increased 
his  energy  a hundredfold,  and  given 
wings  to  his  words.  His  writings  on 
esoteric  questions  followed  one  another  in 
rapid  succession.^ 

1 Die  Mystik,  im  Auf gauge  des  neuzeitUcheu  Geistes- 
lebens  (1901)  ; Das  Christentum  als  mystische  Tat- 
sache  (1902) ; Tlieosophie  (1904).  He  is  now  pre- 
paring an  important  book,  which  will  no  doubt  be  his 
chief  work,  and  which  is  to  be  called  Geheimioissenschaft 
(Occult  Science). 


( 37  ) 

He  delivered  lectures  in  Berlin,  Leipzig, 
Cassel,  Munich,  Stuttgart,  Vienna,  Buda- 
pest, etc.  All  his  books  are  of  a high 
standard.  He  is  equally  skilled  in  the 
deduction  of  ideas  in  philosophical  order, 
and  in  rigorous  analysis  of  scientific  facts. 
And  when  he  so  chooses,  he  can  give  a 
poetical  form  to  his  thought,  in  original 
and  striking  imagery.  But  his  whole  self 
is  shown  only  by  his  presence  and  his 

t 

speech,  private  or  public.  The  character- 
istic of  his  eloquence  is  a singular  force, 
always  gentle  in  expression,  resulting 
undoubtedly  from  perfect  serenity  of  soul 
combined  with  wonderful  clearness  of 
mind.  Added  to  this  at  times  is  an  inner 
and  mysterious  vibration  which  makes 
itself  felt  by  the  listener  from  the  very 
first  words.  Never  a word  that  could 
shock  or  jar.  From  argument  to  argu- 
ment, from  analogy  to  analogy,  he  leads 
you  on  from  the  known  to  the  unknown. 
Whether  following  up  the  comparative 


( 38  ) 

development  of  the  earth  and  of  man, 
according  to  occult  tradition,  through 
the  Lemurian,  Atlantean,  Asiatic,  and 
European  periods ; whether  explaining 
the  physiological  and  psychic  constitution 
of  man  as  he  now  is ; whether  enumerat- 
ing the  stages  of  Eosicrucian  initiation,  or 
commenting  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  John 
and  the  Apocalypse,  or  applying  his  root- 
ideas  to  mythology,  history,  and  literature, 
that  which  dominates  and  guides  his 
discourse  is  ever  this  power  of  synthesis, 
which  co-ordinates  facts  under  one  ruling 
idea  and  gathers  them  together  in  one 
harmonious  vision.  And  it  is  ever  this 
inward  and  contagious  fervour,  this  secret 
music  of  the  soul,  which  is,  as  it  were, 
a subtle  melody  in  liarmony  with  the 
Universal  Soul. 

Such,  at  least,  is  what  I felt  on  first 
meeting  him  and  listening  to  him  two 
years  ago.  I could  not  better  describe 
this  undefinable  feeling  than  by  recalling 


( 39  ) 

the  saying  of  a poet-friend  to  whom  I was 
showing  the  portrait  of  the  German 
theosophist.  Standing  before  those  deep 
and  clear-seeing  eyes,  before  that  counte- 
nance, hollowed  by  inward  struggles, 
moulded  by  a lofty  spirit  which  has 
proved  its  balance  on  the  heights  and  its 
calm  in  the  depths,  my  friend  exclaimed  : 
“ Behold  a master  of  himself  and  of  life ! 


>1 


'0 


6 - 1 •'  ^ ' ' ; . *i 


Uf  ■ 


1 


" '-^^i  ■-:  % -■  ' 7.  - V-, 

>J--  ‘A’-  ''';*'^*^v-f^  ■ ^ . .,1 

•u~^> 


I - 


#.  f ^ ■I^i'A*/’>-  aTf?r 


eu^' 


O r-  ^ *f. 


% ' ■ ■ t ' * **  f , ■*  4 ^ 'i 


-V-  ••'  ‘7..*: 


^ « 

.» 


^ 4,  - j 

3 \ - ':  C/:  • T--  v^ 


»--  V 


n- 


.1 


'>,«.• 

* -I  . 


’s:1 


•><  %,  *’•  -- 


• N 

-■it' 


s: 

— ■ 1/1 


^‘:’4-';  ;:i^r  ^ 

feA.i  .^\  ^£7^^'-^' , , , ' -^_  ‘‘•f'lj^-  :. 

■'^"-  'v"  '‘~  , . 1 ' ’ _'*.  -?  ' -»/.j.r 

• 


' ^ M ■■■■  's.'i-^;' 

“ f • *,  »i4t. 


-1 


t'L'5 


■7\<sM7 


'5^. 


.•j^ 


’f' ' • ‘i 

' ‘ 'r4  7^7'  * , 4 


w.’ 


i;]!Cf^-;«/^?%s 

'1^  - ' 


2b  \«  ► kt'..^ 


L':,^4 


.r  . -.  i^^- 


THE  WAY  OF  INITIATION 


I 

THE  SUPERPHYSICAL  WORLD 
AND  ITS  GNOSIS' 

It  is  natural  that  most  people,  who  hear 
of  transcendental  truths  in  our  time, 
should  at  once  put  the  question  : “ How 
may  we  attain  to  such  knowledge  for  our- 
selves?” Indeed,  it  is  often  remarked  as 
a characteristic  of  people  to-day,  that  they 

^ Translated  from  Lucifer-Gnosis  (May  to  Dec.  1904), 
a theosophical  magazine,  published  by  M.  Altmann, 
Leipzig,  and  edited  by  Dr.  Rudolf  Steiner  (17  Motz- 
strasse,  Berlin,  W.).  This  translation  appeared  first 
in  the  Theosophist  (October  1907  -June  1908),  a 
magazine  of  Brotherhood,  of  Comparative  Religion, 
Philosophy  and  Science,  and  of  Occultism.  Edited  by 
Annie  Besant,  President  of  the  Theosophical  Society, 
Adyar,  Madras. 


41 


( 42  ) 

will  accept  nothing  on  faith,  on  mere 

authority,”  but  wish  rather  to  rely  en- 
tirely upon  their  own  judgment.  And 
therefore  it  is  that  when  mystics  and 
theosophists  profess  to  know  something 
of  the  superphysical  nature  of  man,  and 
of  the  destiny  of  the  human  soul  and 
spirit  before  birth  and  after  death,  they 
are  at  once  confronted  with  this  funda- 
mental demand  of  our  day.  Such  dogmas, 
they  seem  to  say,  have  only  an  importance 
for  anyone  when  you  have  shown  him  the 
way  by  which  he  may  convince  himself  of 
their  truth. 

This  demand  is  quite  justified ; and 
never  could  any  true  mystic  or  theosophist 
fail  to  recognise  it.  But  it  is  equally  cer- 
tain that  with  many  who  make  it,  there 
exists  a feeling  of  scepticism  or  antagonism 
toward  the  assertions  of  the  mystic.  This 
feeling  becomes  especially  marked  when 
the  mystic  sets  out  by  intimating  how  the 
truths  which  he  has  described  may  be 


( 43  ) 

attained.  For  then  people  often  say  to 
him  : What  is  true  may  be  demonstrated  ; 
therefore,  prove  to  us  what  you  assert.” 
Furthermore,  they  imply  that  the  truth 
must  be  something  clear  and  simple, 
something  which  a ‘^modest”  intellect 
may  comprehend ; surely,  they  seem  to 
say,  it  cannot  be  the  possession  of  a 
chosen  few,  to  whom  it  is  given  by  a 
“ special  revelation  ” ! And  in  this  way 
the  messenger  of  transcendental  truths  is 
frequently  confronted  with  people  who 
reject  him,  because — unlike  the  scientist, 
for  example — he  can  produce  no  proofs 
for  his  assertions,  of  such  a nature  as  they 
can  themselves  understand.  Again,  there 
are  some  who  more  cautiously  reject  these 
matters,  but  who,  nevertheless,  refuse 
any  close  connection  with  them  because, 
they  think,  they  do  not  seem  reasonable. 
Thereupon  they  soothe  themselves^  though 
not  entirely,  by  saying  that  we  cannot 
know  anything  of  what  lies  beyond  birth 


( 44  ) 

or  death,  of  what  we  cannot  perceive  with 
our  senses. 

These  are  but  a few  of  the  conceptions 
and  criticisms  with  which  to-day  the 
messenger  of  a spiritual  philosophy  has  to 
deal.  But  they  are  similar  to  all  those 
that  compose  the  key-note  of  our  time. 
And  he  who  puts  himself  at  the  service 
of  a spiritual  movement  must,  recognise 
this  key-note  quite  clearly. 

For  his  own  part,  the  mystic  is  aware 
that  his  knowledge  rests  upon  superphysi- 
cal facts  ; just  as  facts,  for  example,  form 
the  foundation  of  the  experiences  and 
observations  described  by  a traveller  in 
Africa.  To  the  mystic  applies  what  Annie 
Besant  has  said  in  her  manual,  “ Death 
— and  After?'' 

“ A seasoned  African  explorer  would  care  but 
little  for  the  criticisms  passed  on  his  report  by 
persons  who  had  never  been  thither ; he  might 
tell  what  he  saw,  describe  the  animals  whose 
habits  he  had  studied,  sketch  the  country  he 


( 45  ) 

had  traversed,  sum  up  its  products  and  its 
characteristics.  If  he  was  contradicted,  laughed 
at,  set  right,  by  untravelled  critics,  he  would 
be  neither  ruffled  nor  distressed,  but  would 
merely  leave  them  alone.  Ignorance  cannot 
convince  knowledge  by  repeated  asseveration  of 
its  nescience.  The  opinion  of  a hundred  persons 
on  a subject  of  which  they  are  wholly  ignorant 
is  of  no  more  weight  than  the  opinion  of  one 
such  person.  Evidence  is  strengthened  by  many 
consenting  witnesses,  testifying  each  to  his 
knowledge  of  a fact,  but  nothing  multiplied  a 
thousand  times  remains  nothing.” 

Here  is  expressed  the  mystic’s  view  of 
himself.  He  hears  the  objections  which 
are  raised  on  every  side,  yet  he  knows 
that  he  has  no  need  to  dispute  them.  He 
realises  that  his  certain  knowledge  is 
being  criticised  by  those  who  have  not 
experienced  or  felt  as  he  himself  has  done. 
He  is  in  the  position  of  a mathematician 
who  has  discovered  a truth  which  loses 
no  value  though  a thousand  voices  are 
raised  in  opposition. 

Here  at  once  will  arise  the  objection  of 


{ 46  ) 

the  sceptic  : “ Mathematical  truths  may 
be  proved  to  anyone,”  he  will  say,  “ and 
though  perhaps  you  have  really  found 
something,  I shall  only  accept  it  when 
I have  learnt  of  its  truth  by  my  own 
observation.”  Then  he  considers  him- 
self to  be  in  the  right,  because,  as  he 
thinks,  it  is  clear  that  anyone  who  acquires 
the  necessary  knowledge  can  prove  a 
mathematical  truth,  while  the  experiences 
professed  by  the  mystic  depend  upon  the 
special  faculties  of  a few  elect  people, 
whom  he  is  expected  to  believe  blindly. 

But  for  him  who  rightly  considers  this 
objection,  any  justification  for  the  doubt 
immediately  vanishes.  For  every  true 
mystic  will  here  speak  just  like  the  very 
sceptics  themselves.  He  will  always 
emphasise  the  truth  that  the  way  to  the 
Higher  Knowledge  is  open  for  anyone 
who  has  acquired  for  himself  the  faculties 
by  which  he  may  win  entrance.  The 
mystic  asserts  nothing  which  his  oppo- 


( 47  ) 

nents  would  not  also  be  compelled  to  assert, 
if  they  did  but  fully  understand  what  they 
are  saying.  They,  however,  in  making  an 
assertion,  at  once  formulate  a claim  which 
constitutes  a direct  contradiction  of  their 
own  assertion. 

Sceptics  are  not  content  to  test  the 
assertions  of  the  mystic  only  when  they 
have  acquired  the  necessary  faculties,  but 
rather  judge  him  according  to  their  present 
faculties,  and  not  with  those  which  he  is 
bound  to  demand.  He  says' to  them  : “I 
do  not  claim  to  be  ‘chosen’  in  the  sense 
that  you  mean.  I have  merely  worked 
witliin  myself,  in  order  to  acquire  these 
powers  through  which  it  is  possible  to 
speak  of  glimpses  into  superphysical 
regions.  But  these  faculties  are  dormant 
within  everyone,  only  they  must  be  de- 
veloped.” But  his  opponents  then  answer : 
“You  must  prove  your  truths  to  us  as  we 
are  now.”  They  will  not  meet  his  demand 
that  they  should  develop,  first,  the  dor- 


( 48  ) 

mant  powers  within  them,  but  rather, 
without  being  willing  to  do  so,  insist  that 
he  shall  give  them  proofs.  Nor  do  they 
see  that  this  is  exactly  as  if  a peasant  at 
his  plough  should  demand  of  the  mathe- 
matician the  proof  of  a complicated 
problem  without  first  undergoing  the 
trouble  of  learning  mathematics. 

All  this  appears  to  be  so  simple  that 
one  almost  hesitates  to  speak  of  it.  And 
yet  it  indicates  a delusion  under  which 
millions  of  people  at  the  present  time  are 
living.  If  one  explains  it  to  them  they 
always  agree  with  it  in  theory,  since  it  is 
quite  as  obvious  as  that  two  and  two 
make  four.  Yet  in  practice  they  continu- 
ally contradict  it.  One  can  very  soon 
convince  oneself  of  that.  The  mistake  has 
become  second  nature  with  many ; they 
practise  it  without  any  longer  realising 
that  they  do  so,  without  desiring  to  be 
convinced  of  it,  just  as  they  offend  against 
everything  which  they  would  at  all  times 


( 49  ) 

allow  to  pass  for  a principle  of  the  simplest 
nature,  could  they  only  consider  it  quietly. 
It  matters  not  whether  the  mystic  of  to- 
day moves  in  a circle  of  thinking  artisans, 
or  in  a more  educated  circle,  for  wherever 
he  goes  he  meets  with  the  same  prejudice, 
the  same  self-contradiction.  One  finds  it 
in  popular  lectures,  in  all  the  newspapers 
and  magazines,  and  even  in  more  learned 
works  or  treatises. 

And  here  we  must  recognise  quite 
clearly  that  we  are  dealing  tvith  a sign  of 
the  time  which  we  cannot  simply  consider 
as  mere  incompetency,  nor  expose  as  criti- 
cism, correct  perhaps,  but  nevertheless 
not  just.  We  must  understand  that  this 
symptom,  this  prejudice  against  the  higher 
truths,  lies  deep  in  the  very  being  of  our 
age.  We  must  understand  clearly  that 
the  great  successes,  the  immense  advance, 
which  distinguish  it,  necessarily  tend  to- 
ward this  mistake.  The  nineteenth  century 

especially  had  in  this  respect  a dark  side 

4 


( 50  ) 

to  its  wonderful  excellences.  Its  greatness 
rests  upon  its  discoveries  in  the  external 
world,  and  its  conquest  of  natural  forces 
for  technical  and  industrial  purposes. 
These  successes  could  only  have  been 
attained  by  the  observation  of  the  senses, 
and  afterwards  by  the  employment  of  the 
mind  upon  what  the  senses  had  thus  per- 
ceived. The  civilisation  of  the  present 
day  is  the  result  of  the  training  of  our 
senses,  and  of  that  part  of  our  mind  which 
is  occupied  with  the  world  of  sense. 
Almost  every  step  we  take  in  the  street 
to-day,  shows  us  how  much  we  owe  to 
this  kind  of  training.  And  it  is  under  the 
influence  of  these  blessings  of  civilisation 
that  the  habits  of  thought  prevalent  among 
our  fellow-men  of  to-day  have  been  de- 
veloped. They  continue  to  abide  by  the 
senses  and  the  mind,  because  it  is  by 
means  of  these  that  they  have  grown 
great.  People  were  taught  to  train  them- 
selves to  admit  nothing  as  true  except 


( 51  ) 

those  things  that  were  presented  to  them 
by  the  senses  or  the  mind.  And  nothing  is 
more  apt  to  claim  for  itself  the  only  valid 
testimony,  the  only  absolute  authority, 
than  the  mind  or  the  senses.  If  a man 
has  acquired  by  means  of  them  a certain 
degree  of  culture,  he  thenceforth  accustoms 
himself  to  submit  everything  to  their  con- 
sideration, everything  to  their  criticism. 
And  again  in  another  sphere,  in  the 
domain  of  Social  Life,  we  find  a similar 
trait.  The  man  of  the  nineteenth  century 
insisted,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word, 
upon  the  absolute  freedom  of  personality, 
and  repudiated  any  authority  in  the  Social 
Commonwealth.  He  endeavoured  to  con- 
struct the  community  in  such  a way  that 
the  full  independence,  the  self-chosen 
vocation  of  each  individual,  should,  with- 
out interference,  be  assured.  In  this  way 
it  became  habitual  for  him  to  consider 
everything  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
average  individual.  The  higher  powers 


( ) 

which  lie  dormant  in  the  soul  may  be 
developed'  by  one  person  in  this  direction, 
by  another  in  that.  One  will  make  more 
progress,  another  less.  When  they  develop 
such  powers,  or  when  they  attach  any 
value  to  them,  men  begin  to  differentiate 
themselves.  One  must  also,  if  one  admits 
their  existence,  allow  to  the  man  who  has 
progressed  further,  more  right  to  speak 
on  a subject,  or  to  act  in  a certain  way, 
than  to  another  who  is  less  advanced. 
But  with  regard  to  the  senses  and  the 
mind,  one  may  employ  an  average  stand- 
ard. All  have  there  the  same  rights, 
the  same  liberty. 

It  is  also  noticeable  that  the  present 
formation  of  the  Social  Commonwealth 
has  helped  to  bring  about  a revolt  against 
the  higher  powers  of  man.  According  to 
the  mystic,  civilisation  during  the  nine- 
teenth century  has  altogether  moved  along 
physical  lines ; and  people  have  accus- 
tomed themselves  to  move  on  the  physical 


( 53  ) 

plane  alone,  and  to  feel  at  home  there. 
The  higher  powers  are  only  developed  on 
planes  other  than  the  physical,  and  the 
knowledge  which  these  faculties  bring  has, 
therefore,  become  alien  to  man.  It  is  only 
necessary  to  attend  mass-meetings,  if  one 
wishes  to  be  convinced  of  the  fact  that  the 
speakers  there  are  totally  unable  to  think 
any  thoughts  but  those  which  refer  to  the 
physical  plane,  the  world  of  sense.  This 
can  also  be  seen  among  the  leading 
journalists  of  our  papers  and  magazines  ; 
and,  indeed,  on  all  sides  one  can  observe 
the  haughtiest  and  most  complete  denial 
of  everything  that  cannot  be  seen  with  the 
eyes,  or  felt  with  the  hands,  or  compre- 
hended by  the  average  mind.  Once  more 
let  it  be  said  that  we  do  not  condemn  this 
attitude.  It  denotes  a necessary  stage  in 
the  development  of  humanity.  Without 
the  pride  and  prejudices  of  mind  and 
sense,  we  should  never  have  achieved  our 
great  conquests  over  material  life,  nor 


( 54  ) 

have  been  able  to  impart  to  the  person- 
ality a certain  measure  of  elasticity : 
neither  could  we  hope  that  many  ideals, 
which  must  be  founded  on  man’s  desire 
for  freedom  and  the  assertion  of  person- 
ality, might  yet  be  realised. 

But  this  dark  side  of  a purely  material- 
istic civilisation  has  deeply  affected  the 
whole  being  of  the  modern  man.  For 
proof  it  is  not  necessary  to  refer  to  the 
obvious  facts  already  named  ; it  would  be 
easy  to  demonstrate  by  certain  examples 
which  are  lightly  underrated,  especially 
tO'day,  how  deeply  rooted  in  the  mind  of 
the  modern  man  is  this  adhesion  to  the 
testimony  of  the  senses,  or  the  average 
intelligence.  And  it  is  just  these  things 
that  indicate  the  need  for  the  renewal  of 
spiritual  life. 

The  strong  response  evoked  by  Pro- 
fessor Friedrich  Delitzsch’s  Babel  and  Bible 
Theory  fully  justifies  a reference  to  its 
author’s  method  of  thinking,  as  a sign  of 


( 55  ) 

the  time.  Professor  Delitzsch  has  demon- 
strated the  relationship  of  certain  tradi- 
tions in  the  Old  Testament  to  the  Baby- 
lonian accounts  of  the  Creation,  and  this 
fact,  coming  from  such  a source  and  in 
such  a form,  has  been  realised  by  many 
who  would  otherwise  have  ignored  such 
questions.  It  has  led  many  to  reconsider 
the  so-called  idea  of  Kevelation.  They 
ask  themselves : How  is  it  possible  to 
accept  the  idea  that  the  contents  of  the 
Old  Testament  were  revealed  by  God, 
when  we  find  very  similar  conceptions 
among  decidedly  heathen  nations  ? This 
problem  cannot  here  be  further  discussed. 
Delitzsch  found  many  opponents  who 
feared  lest,  through  his  exposition,  the 
very  foundations  of  Religion  had  been 
shaken.  He  has  defended  himself  in  a 
pamphlet,  Babel  and  Bible,  a Retrospect 
and  a Forecast.  Here  we  shall  only  refer 
to  a single  sentence  in  the  pamphlet.  It 
is  an  important  sentence,  because  it 


( 66  ) 

reveals  the  view  of  an  eminent  man  of 
science  regarding  the  position  of  man  with 
respect  to  transcendental  truths.  And 
to-day  innumerable  other  people  think 
and  feel  just  like  Delitzsch.  The  sentence 
affords  an  excellent  opportunity  for  us 
to  find  out  what  is  the  innermost  convic- 
tion of  our  contemporaries,  expressed  here 
quite  freely  and  therefore  in  its  truest 
form. 

Delitzsch  turns  to  those  who  reproach 
him  with  a somewhat  liberal  use  of  the 
term  “ Revelation,”  who  would  fain 
regard  it  as  “a  kind  of  old  priestly 
wisdom  ” which  “ has  nothing  at  all  to  do 
with  the  layman.”  In  opposition  to  this 
he  says  : 

“ For  my  part,  I am  of  opinion  that  while  our 
children  or  ourselves  are  instructed  in  school  or 
at  church  as  regards  Revelation,  not  only  are 
we  within  our  right,  but  it  is  our  duty,  to  think 
independently  concerning  these  deep  questions, 
possessing  also,  as  they  do,  an  eminently  prac- 
tical side,  were  it  only  that  we  might  avoid 


( 57  ) 

giving  our  children  ‘evasive’  answers.  For 
this  very  reason  it  will  be  gratifying  to  many 
searchers  after  Truth  when  the  dogma  of  a 
special  ‘ choosing  ’ of  Israel  shall  have  been 
brought  forward  into  the  light  of  a wider  his- 
torical outlook,  through  the  union  of  Babylonian, 
Assyrian,  and  Old  Testament  research.  ...  [A 
few  pages  earlier  we  are  shown  the  direction  of 
such  thoughts.]  For  the  rest,  it  would  seem  to 
me  that  the  only  logical  thing  is  for  Church 
and  School  to  be  satisfied  as  regards  the  whole 
past  history  of  the  world  and  of  humanity, 
with  the  belief  in  One  Almighty  Creator  of 
Heaven  and  Earth,  and  that  these  tales  of 
the  Old  Testament  should  be  classified  by  them- 
selves under  some  such  title  as  ‘ Old  Hebraic 
Myths.’  ” 

(It  may  be  taken  as  a matter  of  course, 
we  suppose,  that  no  one  will  see  in 
the  following  remarks  an  attack  on  the 
investigator  Delitzsch.)  What,  then,  is 
here  said  in  naive  simplicity  ? Nothing 
less  than  that  the  mind  which  is  engaged 
upon  physical  investigation  may  assert  the 
right  of  judging  experiences  of  super- 
physical nature.  There  is  no  thought 


( 58  ) 

that  this  mind,  without  further  prepar- 
ing itself,  may  perhaps  be  unfit  to  reflect 
upon  the  teachings  of  these  “ Eevelations.” 
When  one  wishes  to  understand  what 
appears  as  a “ Revelation,”  one  cannot  do 
so  unless  one  brings  to  bear  upon  it  those 
forces  out  of  which  the  ‘^Revelation” 
itself  has  come. 

He  who  develops  within  himself  the 
mystical  power  of  perception  soon  observes 
that  in  certain  stories  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment which  were  called  by  Delitzsch  “ Old 
Hebraic  Myths,”  there  are  revealed  to  him 
truths  of  a higher  nature  than  those  which 
may  be  comprehended  by  the  intellect, 
which  is  only  concerned  with  the  things 
of  sense.  His  own  mystical  experiences 
will  lead  him  to  see  that  these  “ Myths  ” 
have  proceeded  out  of  a mystical  percep- 
tion of  transcendental  truths.  And  then, 
in  one  moment,  his  whole  point  of  view  is 
changed. 

As  little  as  one  can  demonstrate  the 


( 59  ) 

fallacy  of  a mathematical  problem  by 
discovering  who  solved  it  first,  or  even 
that  several  people  have  solved  it — which 
would  certainlv  be  a valuable  historical 
discovery — just  so  little  can  one  impugn 
the  truth  of  a biblical  narrative  by  the 
discovery  of  a similar  story  elsewhere. 
Instead  of  demanding  that  everyone 
should  insist  upon  his  right,  or  even  his 
duty,  to  think  independently  on  the  so- 
called  “ Revelations,”  we  ought  rather  to 
consider  that  only  he  has  a right  to  decide 
anything  about  the  matter  who  has 
developed  in  himself  those  latent  powers 
which  make  it  possible  for  him  to  re-live 
what  was  once  realised  by  those  very 
mystics  who  proclaimed  the  “ supersen- 
suous  revelations.” 

Here  we  have  an  excellent  example  of 
how  the  average  intellect,  qualified  for 
the  highest  triumphs  in  practical  sense- 
knowledge,  sets  itself  up,  in  naive  pride,  as 
a judge  in  domains,  the  existence  of  which 


( 60  ) 

it  does  not  even  care  to  learn.  For  purely 
historical  investigation  is  also  carried  on  by 
nothing  but  the  experience  of  the  senses. 

In  just  the  same  way  has  the  investi- 
gation of  the  New  Testament  led  us  into  a 
blind  alley.  At  all  costs  the  method  of  the 
“Newer  Historical  Investigation  ” had  to 
be  directed  upon  the  Gospels.  These  docu- 
ments have  been  compared  with  each  other, 
and  brought  into  relation  with  all  sorts  of 
things,  in  order  that  we  might  find  out  what 
really  happened  in  Palestine  from  the  year 
1 to  the  year  33  ; how  the  “ historical 
personality  ” of  whom  they  tell  really  lived, 
and  what  He  can  really  have  said. 

Now  a man  of  the  seventeenth  century, 
Angelus  Silesius,  has  already  expressed 
the  whole  of  the  critical  attitude  toAvard 
this  kind  of  investigation  : 

“ Though  Christ  were  yearly  born  in  Bethlehem, 
and  never 

Had  birth  in  you  yourself,  then  were  you  lost 
for  ever ; 


( 61  ) 

And  if  within  yourself  it  is  not  reared  again, 

The  Cross  at  Golgotha  can  save  you  not  from 
pain.  ” 

Nor  are  these  the  words  of  one  who 
doubted,  but  of  a Christian,  strong  in  his 
belief  And  his  equally  fervent  pre- 
decessor, Meister  Eckhart,  said  in  the 
thirteenth  century  : 

“ There  are  some  who  desire  to  see  God  with 
their  eyes,  as  they  look  at  a cow ; and  just  as 
they  love  a cow,  so  they  desire  to  love  God.  . . . 
Simple-minded  people  imagine  that  God  may  be 
seen  as  if  He  stood  there  and  they  stood  here. 
But  this  is  not  so : in  that  perception,  God  and 
I are  one.” 

These  words  must  emphatically  not 
be  directed  against  the  investigation  of 
“ historical  truth.”  Yet  no  one  can  rightly 
understand  the  historic  truth  of  such  docu- 
ments as  the  Gospels,  unless  he  has  first 
experienced  within  himself  the  mystical 
meaning  which  they  contain.  All  such 
comparisons  and  analyses  are  quite  worth- 
less, for  no  one  can  discover  who  was 


( 62  ) 

“ born  in  Bethlehem  ” but  he  who  has 
mystically  experienced  the  Christ  within 
himself ; neither  can  anyone  in  whom  it 
has  not  already  been  erected,  decide  how 
it  is  that  ‘‘the  Cross  at  Golgotha”  can 
deliver  us  from  pain.  Purely  historical 
investigation  “ can  discover  no  more 
concerning  the  mystic  reality  than  the 
dismembering  anatomist,  perhaps,  can 
discover  the  secret  of  a great  poetical 
genius.”  (See  my  book.  Das  Christentum 
als  mystische  Tatsache,  Berlin,  C.  A. 
Schwetschke  und  Sohn,  1902,  or  its 
French  translation,  mentioned  on  page  1.) 

He  who  can  see  clearly  in  these  matters 
is  aware  how  deeply  rooted,  at  the  present 
time,  is  the  “ pride  ” of  the  intellect, 
which  only  concerns  itself  with  the  facts 
of  sense.  It  says  : “I  do  not  wish  to 
develop  faculties  in  order  that  I may 
reach  the  higher  truths  ; I wish  to  form 
my  decisions  concerning  them  with  the 
powers  that  I now  possess.” 


( 63  ) 

In  a well-meant  pamphlet,  which  is 
written,  however,  entirely  in  that  spirit 
of  the  age  which  we  have  already  indi- 
cated {What  do  we  know  about  Jesus 
by  A.  Kalthoff,  Berlin,  1904),  we  read  as 
follows  : 

“ Christ,  who  symbolises  the  life  of  the  Com- 
munity, may  be  discerned  within  himself  by  the 
man  of  to-day : out  of  his  own  soul  the  man 
of  to-day  can  create  Christ  just  as  well  as  the 
author  of  a gospel  created  him ; as  a man  he 
may  put  himself  in  the  same  position  as  the 
gospel-writers,  because  he  can  reinstate  himself 
into  the  same  soul-processes,  can  himself  speak 
or  write  Gospel.” 

These  words  may  be  true,  but  they  may 
also  be  entirely  erroneous.  They  are  true 
when  understood  in  the  sense  of  Aimelus 

O 

Silesius,  or  of  Meister  Eckhart,  when  they 
are  referred  to  the  development  of  powers 
dormant  in  every  human  soul,  which,  from 
some  such  idea,  endeavours  to  experience 
within  itself  the  Christ  of  the  Gospels. 
They  are  altogether  wrong,  if  a more  or 


( 64  ) 

less  shallow  ideal  of  the  Christ  is  thus 
created  out  of  the  spirit  of  an  age  that 
acknowledges  the  truth  of  no  perceptions 
but  those  of  the  senses. 

The  life  of  the  Spirit  can  only  be  under- 
stood when  we  do  not  wish  to  criticise  it 
with  the  lower  mind,  but  rather  to  develop 
ourselves  for  it  internally.  No  one  can 
hope  to  learn  anything  of  the  highest 
truths  accessible  to  man,  if  he  demands 
that  they  shall  be  lowered  to  the  “average 
understanding.”  To  this  it  might  be  ob- 
jected : Why,  then,  do  you,  mystics  and 
theosophists,  proclaim  these  truths  to 
people  who,  as  you  declare,  cannot  as  yet 
understand. them ? Why  should  there  be 
a Theosophical  Movement  which  proclaims 
certain  teachings,  when  the  powers  which 
bring  men  to  the  preception  of  them 
ought  first  to  be  developed? 

It  is  the  task  of  this  book  to  solve  this 
apparent  contradiction.  It  will  show  that 
the  spiritual  currents  of  our  day  speak 


( 65  ) 

from  a different  basis,  in  a different 
manner,  from  the  science  which  relies 
entirely  on  the  lower  intellect.  Yet,  in 
spite  of  this,  the  spiritual  currents  are  not 
less  scientific  than  the  science  which  is 
based  upon  physical  facts  alone.  Kather 
do  they  extend  the  field  of  scientific  in- 
vestigation into  the  superphysical.  We 
must  close  this  chapter  with  one  more 
question,  which  will  perhaps  be  asked  : 
How  can  one  attain  to  superphysical 
truths,  and,  towards  this  attainment,  of 
what  help  are  spiritual  movements? 


5 


II 

HOW  TO  ATTAIN  KNOWLEDGE 
OF  THE  HIGHER  WORLDS 

In  every  man  there  are  latent  faculties 
by  means  of  which  he  can  acquire  for 
himself  knowledge  of  the  higher  worlds. 
The  mystic,  theosophist,  or  gnostic  speaks 
of  a soul-world  and  a spirit-world,  which 
are,  for  him,  just  as  real  as  the  world 
which  we  see  with  our  physical  eyes,  or 
touch  with  our  physical  hands.  At  every 
moment  his  listener  may  say  to  himself : 
What  he  speaks  about  I too  can  learn, 
when  I have  developed  within  myself 
certain  powers  which  to-day  lie  slumber- 
ing within  me.  There  remains  only  the 

question  as  to  how  one  has  to  commence 

66 


( 67  ) 

in  order  to  develop  within  oneself  such 
faculties.  For  this  only  those  can  give 
advice  who  have  already  developed  such 
powers  within  themselves.  As  long  as 
the  human  race  has  existed,  there  have 
always  been  schools  in  which  those  who 
possessed  these  higher  faculties  gave 
instruction  to  those  who  were  in  search 
of  them.  Such  are  called  the  occult 
schools,  and  the  instruction  which  is 
imparted  therein  is  called  esoteric  science, 
or  occult  teaching.  Such  a designation 
naturally  awakens  misunderstanding.  He 
who  hears  it  may  be  very  easily  misled 
into  the  belief  that  those  who  work  in 
these  schools  desire  to  represent  a special, 
privileged  class,  which  arbitrarily  with- 
holds its  knowledge  from  its  fellow- 
creatures.  Indeed,  he  may  even  think, 
that  perhaps  there  is  nothing  really  impor- 
tant behind  such  knowledge.  For  he  is 
tempted  to  think  that,  if  it  were  a true 
knowledge,  there  would  then  be  no  need 


( 68  ) 

to  make  a secret  about  it : one  might  then 
communicate  it  publicly  and  open  up  its 
advantages  to  all  men. 

Those  who  have  been  initiated  into  the 
nature  of  the  occult  knowledge  are  not  in 
the  least  surprised  that  the  uninitiated 
should  so  think.  Only  he  who  has  to  a 
certain  degree  experienced  this  initiation 
into  the  higher  secrets  of  being  can  under- 
stand the  secret  of  that  initiation.  But 
it  may  be  asked : How,  then,  shall  the 
uninitiated,  considering  the  circumstances, 
develop  any  interest  at  all  in  this  so-called 
occult  knowledge  ? How  and  why  ought 
they  to  search  for  something  of  whose 
nature  they  can  form  no  idea  ? But  such 
a question  is  based  upon  an  entirely 
erroneous  conception  of  the  real  nature  of 
occult  knowledge.  There  is,  in  truth, 
no  difference  between  occult  knowledge 
and  all  the  rest  of  man's  knowledge  and 
capacity.  This  occult  knowledge  is  no 
more  of  a secret  for  the  average  man  than 


( 69  ) 

writing  is  a secret  to  him  who  has  never 
learned  to  read.  And  just  as  everyone 
who  chooses  the  correct  method  may 
learn  to  write,  so  too  can  everyone  who 
searches  after  the  right  way  become  a 
disciple,  and  even  a teacher.  In  only  one 
respect  are  the  conditions  here  different 
from  those  that  apply  to  external  thought- 
activities.  The  possibility  of  acquiring 
the  art  of  writing  may  be  withheld  from 
someone  through  poverty,  or  through  the 
state  of  civilisation  into  which  he  has 
been  born  ; but  for  the  attainment  of 
knowledge  in  the  higher  worlds  there  is 
no  obstacle  for  him  who  sincerely  searches 
for  it. 

Many  believe  that  one  has  to  find,  here 
or  there,  the  Masters  of  the  higher  know- 
ledge, in  order  to  receive  enlightenment 
from  them.  In  the  first  place,  he  who 
strives  earnestlv  after  the  higher  know- 
ledge  need  not  be  afraid  of  any  difficulty 
or  obstacle  in  his  search  for  an  Initiate 


( 70  ) 

who  shall  be  able  to  lead  him  into  the 
profounder  secrets  of  the  world.  Every- 
one, on  the  contrary,  may  be  certain  that 
an  Initiate  will  find  him  out,  under  any 
circumstances,  if  there  is  in  him  an 
earnest  and  worthy  endeavour  to  attain 
this  knowledge.  For  it  is  a strict  law 
amongst  all  Initiates  to  withhold  from 
no  man  the  knowledge  that  is  due  to 
him.  But  there  is  an  equally  strict 
law  which  insists  that  no  one  shall  re- 
ceive any  occult  knowledge  until  he 
is  worthy.  And  the  more  strictly  he 
observes  these  two  laws,  the  more  per- 
fect is  an  Initiate.  The  order  which 
embraces  all  Initiates  is  surrounded,  as  it 
were,  by  a wall,  and  the  two  laws  here 
mentioned  form  two  strong  principles  by 
which  the  constituents  of  this  wall  are 
held  together.  You  may  live  in  close 
friendship  with  an  Initiate,  yet  this  wall 
will  separate  him  from  you  just  as  long  as 
you  have  not  become  an  Initiate  yourself. 


( 71  ) 

You  may  enjoy  in  the  fullest  sense  the 
heart,  the  love  of  an  Initiate,  yet  he  will 
only  impart  to  you  his  secret  when  you 
yourself  are  ready  for  it.  You  may  flatter 
him ; you  may  torture  him ; nothing  will 
induce  him  to  divulge  to  you  anything 
which  he  knows  ought  not  to  be  disclosed, 
inasmuch  as  you,  at  the  present  stage  of 
your  evolution,  do  not  understand  how 
rightly  to  receive  the  secret  into  your 
soul. 

The  ways  which  prepare  a man  for  the 
reception  of  a secret  are  clearly  prescribed. 
They  are  indicated  by  the  unfading,  ever- 
lasting letters  within  the  temples  where 
the  Initiates  guard  the  higher  secrets.  In 
ancient  times,  anterior  to  “ history,”  these 
temples  were  outwardly  visible ; to-day, 
because  our  lives  have  become  so  un- 
spiritual, they  are  mostly  quite  invisible 
to  external  sight.  Yet  they  are  present 
everywhere,  and  all  who  seek  may  find 
them. 


( 72  ) 

Only  within  his  soul  may  a man  dis- 
cover the  means  which  will  open  for  him 
the  lips  of  the  Initiate.  To  a certain  high 
degree  he  must  develop  within  himself 
special  faculties,  and  then  the  greatest 
treasures  of  the  Spirit  become  his  own. 

He  must  begin  with  a certain  funda- 
mental attitude  of  the  soul : the  student 
of  Occultism  calls  it  the  Path  of  Devotion, 
of  Veneration.  Only  he  who  maintains 
this  attitude  can,  in  Occultism,  become  a 
disciple.  And  he  who  has  experience  in 
these  things  is  able  to  perceive  even  in 
the  child  the  signs  of  approaching  disciple- 
ship.  There  are  children  who  look  up 
with  religious  awe  to  those  they  venerate. 
For  such  people  they  have  a respect  which 
forbids  them  to  admit  even  in  the  inner- 
most sanctuary  of  the  heart  any  thought 
of  criticism  or  opposition.  Such  children 
grow  up  into  young  men  and  maidens 
who  feel  happy  when  they  are  able  to 
look  up  to  anything  venerable.  From  the 


( 73  ) 

ranks  of  such  children  are  recruited  many 
disciples. 

Have  you  ever  paused  outside  the  door 
of  some  venerated  man,  and  have  you,  on 
this  your  first  visit,  felt  a religious  awe  as 
you  pressed  the  handle,  in  order  to  enter 
the  room  which  for  you  is  a holy  place  ? 
Then  there  has  been  manifested  in  you  an 
emotion  which  may  be  the  germ  of  your 
' future  discipleship.  It  is  a blessing  for 
every  developing  person  to  have  such 
emotions  upon  which  to  build.  Only  it 
must  not  be  thought  that  such  qualities 
are  the  germ  of  submissiveness  and 
slavery.  Experience  teaches  us  that 
those  can  best  hold  their  heads  erect  who 
hitve  learnt  to  venerate  where  veneration 
is  due.  And  veneration  is  always  in  its 
place  when  it  rises  from  the  depths  of  the 
heart. 

If  we  do  not  develop  within  ourselves 
this  deeply-rooted  feeling  that  there  is 
something  higher  than  ourselves,  we  shall 


( 74  ) 

never  find  enough  strength  to  evolve  to 
something  higher.  The  Initiate  has  only 
acquired  the  power  of  lifting  his  intellect 
to  the  heights  of  knowledge  by  guiding 
his  heart  into  the  depths  of  veneration  and 
devotion.  The  heights  of  the  Spirit  can 
only  be  reached  by  passing  through  the 
portals  of  humility.  You  can  only  acquire 
right  knowledge  when  you  have  learnt  to 
esteem  it.  Man  has  certainly  the  right  to 
gaze  upon  the  Keality,  but  he  must  first 
acquire  this  right.  There  are  laws  in  the 
spiritual  life,  as  in  the  physical  life.  Eub 
a glass  rod  with  an  appropriate  material 
and  it  will  become  electric,  that  is  to  say, 
it  will  receive  the  power  of  attracting 
small  bodies.  This  exemplifies  natural 
law.  And  if  one  has  learnt  even  a little 
of  physics,  one  knows  this.  Similarly,  if 
one  is  acquainted  with  the  first  principles 
of  Occultism,  one  knows  that  every  feel- 
ing of  true  devotion  which  opens  out  in 
the  soul,  develops  a power  which  may, 


( 75  ) 

sooner  or  later,  lead  to  the  Path  of  Know- 
ledge. 

He  who  possesses  within  himself  this 
feeling  of  devotion,  or  who  is  fortunate 
enough  to  receive  it  from  his  education, 
brings  a great  deal  along  with  him,  when, 
later  in  life,  he  seeks  an  entrance  to  the 
higher  knowledge.  But  he  who  brings  no 
such  preparation  will  find  himself  con- 
fronted with  difficulties  even  upon  the 
first  step  of  the  Path  of  Knowledge,  un- 
less he  undertakes,  by  rigorous  self-educa- 
tion, to  create  the  devotional  mood  within 
himself.  In  our  time  it  is  especially  im- 
portant that  full  attention  be  given  to  this 
point.  Our  civilisation  tends  much  more 
towards  criticism,  the  giving  of  judgments, 
and  so  forth,  than  toward  devotion,  and  a 
selfless  veneration.  Our  children  already 
criticise  far  more  than  they  worship.  But 
every  judgment,  every  carping  criticism, 
frustrates  the  powers  of  the  soul  for  the 
attainment  of  the  higher  knowledge,  in 


I 


( 76  ) 

the  same  measure  that  all  heartfelt  de- 
votion develops  them.  In  this  we  do  not 
wish  to  say  anything  against  our  civilisa- 
tion. It  is  in  no  way  a question  of  passing 
a criticism  upon  it.  It  is  just  to  this 
critical  faculty,  this  self-conscious  human 
judgment,  this  “prove  all  things  and  hold 
fast  the  good,”  that  we  owe  the  greatness 
of  our  civilisation.  We  could  never  have 
attained  to  the  science,  the  commerce,  the 
industry,  the  law  of  our  time,  had  we  not 
exercised  our  critical  faculty  everywhere, 
had  we  not  everywhere  applied  the  stand- 
ard of  our  judgment.  But  what  we  have 
thereby  gained  in  external  culture  we  have 
had  to  pay  for  with  a corresponding  loss 
of  the  higher  knowledge,  of  the  spiritual 
life. 

Now  the  one  thing  that  everyone  must 
clearly  understand  is  that  for  him  who 
is  right  in  the  centre  of  the  objective 
civilisation  of  our  time,  it  is  very  difficult 
to  advance  to  the  knowledge  of  the  higher 


( 77  ) 

worlds.  He  can  only  do  so  if  he  work 
energetically  within  himself.  At  a time 
when  the  conditions  of  outward  life  were 
simpler,  spiritual  exaltation  was  easier 
of  attainment.  That  which  ought  to  be 
venerated,  that  which  ought  to  be  kept 
holy,  stood  out  in  better  relief  from  the 
ordinary  things  of  the  world.  In  a period 
of  criticism  these  ideals  are  lowered  ; other 
emotions  take  the  place  of  veneration, 
respect,  prayer,  and  wonder.  Our  own 
age  continually  pushes  these  emotions 
further  and  further  back,  so  that  in  the 
daily  life  of  the  people  they  play  but  a 
very  small  part.  He  who  seeks  for  higher 
knowledge  must  create  it  within  himself ; 
he  must  himself  instil  it  into  his  soul.  It 
cannot  be  done  by  study  : it  can  only  be 
done  through  life.  He  who  wishes  to 
become  a disciple  must  therefore  as- 
siduously cultivate  the  devotional  mood. 
Everywhere  in  his  environment  he  must 
look  for  that  which  demands  of  him  ad- 


( 78  ) 

miration  and  homage.  Whenever  his 
duties  or  circumstances  permit,  he  should 
try  to  renounce  entirely  all  criticism  or 
judgment.  If  I meet  a man  and  blame 
him  for  his  weakness,  I rob  myself  of 
power  to  win  the  higher  knowledge ; but 
if  I try  to  enter  lovingly  into  his  merits, 
I then  gather  such  power.  The  disciple 
must  continually  try  to  follow  out  this 
advice.  Experienced  occultists  are  aware 
how  much  they  owe  to  the  continual 
searching  for  the  good  in  all  things,  and 
the  withholding  of  all  carping  criticism. 
This  must  not  remain  only  as  an  external 
rule  of  life  ; rather  must  it  take  possession 
of  the  innermost  part  of  our  souls.  We 
have  it  in  our  power  to  perfect  ourselves, 
and  by  and  by  to  transform  ourselves 
completely.  But  this  transformation  must 
take  place  in  the  innermost  self,  in  the 
mental  life.  It  is  not  enough  that  I show 
respect  only  in  my  outward  bearing  to- 
ward a person ; I must  have  this  respect 


( 79  ) 

in  my  thought.  The  disciple  must  begin 
by  drawing  this  devotion  into  his  thought- 
life.  He  must  altogether  banish  from  his 
consciousness  all  thoughts  of  disrespect, 
of  criticism,  and  he  must  endeavour 
straightway  to  cultivate  thoughts  of  de- 
votion. 

Every  moment  in  which  we  set  ourselves 
to  banish  from  our  consciousness  whatever 
remains  in  it  of  disparaging,  suspicious 
judgment  of  our  fellow-men,  every  such 
moment  brings  us  nearer  to  the  knowledge 
of  higher  things.  And  we  rise  rapidly 
when,  in  such  moments,  we  fill  our  con- 
sciousness only  with  thoughts  that  evoke 
in  us  admiration,  respect,  and  veneration 
for  men  and  things.  He  who  has  experi- 
ence in  these  matters  will  know  that  in 
every  such  moment  powers  are  awakened 
in  man  which  otherwise  remain  dormant. 
In  this  way  the  spiritual  eyes  of  a man 
are  opened.  He  begins  to  see  things 
around  him  which  hitherto  he  was  unable 


( 80  ) 

to  see.  He  begins  to  understand  that 
hitherto  he  had  only  seen  a part  of  the 
world  around  him.  The  man  with  whom 
he  comes  in  contact  now  shows  him  quite 
a different  aspect  from  what  he  showed 
before.  Of  course,  he  will  not  yet,  through 
this  rule  of  life  alone,  be  able  to  see  what 
has  elsewhere  been  described  as  the  human 
aura,  because,  for  that,  a still  higher  train- 
ing is  necessary.  But  he  can  rise  to 
this  higher  training  if  he  has  previously 
gone  through  a thorough  training  in 
devotion.* 

Noiseless  and  unnoticed  by  the  outer 
world  is  the  treading  of  the  “ Path  of 
Discipleship.’'  It  is  not  necessary  that 
anyone  should  notice  a change  in  the 
disciple.  He  does  his  duties  as  hitherto  ; 

* In  the  last  chapter  of  the  book  entitled  Theo- 
sophie  (Berlin,  C.  A.  Schwetschke  und  Sohn),  Dr. 
Rudolf  Steiner  fully  describes  this  “ Path  of  Know- 
ledge” ; here  it  is  only  intended  to  give  some  practical 
details. 


( 81  ) 

he  attends  to  his  business  as  before.  The 
transformation  goes  on  only  in  the  inner 
part  of  the  soul,  hidden  from  outward 
sight.  At  first  the  entire  soul-life  of  a 
man  is  flooded  by  this  fundamental  mood 
of  devotion  for  everything  which  is  truly 
venerable.  His  entire  soul-life  finds  in 
this  fundamental  mood  its  pivot.  Just  as 
the  sun,  through  its  rays,  will  vivify  every- 
thing living,  so  in  the  life  of  the  disciple 
this  reverence  vivifies  all  the  perceptions 
of  the  soul. 

At  first  it  is  not  easy  for  people  to 
believe  that  feelings  like  reverence,  respect, 
and  so  forth,  have  anything  to  do  with 
their  perceptions.  This  comes  from  the 
fact  that  one  is  inclined  to  think  of  per- 
ception as  a faculty  quite  by  itself,  one 
that  stands  in  no  relation  to  what  other- 
wise happens  in  the  soul.  In  so  thinking, 
we  do  not  remember  that  it  is  the  soul 
which  perceives.  And  feelings  are  for  the 

soul  what  food  is  for  the  body.  If  we 

6 


( 82  ) 

give  the  body  stones  in  place  of  bread  its 
\ activity  will  cease.  It  is  the  same  with 
the  soul.  Veneration,  homage,  devotion, 
are  as  nutriment  which  makes  it  healthy 
and  strong,  and  especially  strong  for  the 
activity  of  perception.  Disrespect,  anti- 
pathy, and  under-estimation,  bring  about 
the  starvation  and  withering  of  this 
activity.  For  the  occultist  this  fact  is 
visible  in  the  aura.  A soul  which 
harbours  the  feelings  of  devotion  and 
reverence,  brings  about  a change  in  its 
aura.  Certain  yellowish-red  or  brown-red 
tints  will  vanish,  and  tints  of  bluish-red 
will  replace  them.  And  then  the  organ 
of  perception  opens.  It  receives  infor- 
mation of  facts  in  its  neighbourhood  of 
which  hitherto  it  had  no  knowledge. 
Eeverence  awakens  a sympathetic  power 
in  the  soul,  and  through  this  we  attract 
similar  qualities  in  the  beings  which 
surround  us,  which  would  otherwise 
remain  hidden.  More  effective  still  is 


that  power  which  can  be  obtained  by 
devotion  when  another  feeling  is  added. 
One  learns  to  give  oneself  up  less  and 
less  to  the  impressions  of  the  outer 
world,  and  to  develop  in  its  place  a vivid 
inward  life.  He  who  darts  from  one 
impression  of  the  outer  world  to  another, 
who  constantly  seeks  dissipations,  cannot 
find  the  way  to  Occultism.  The  disciple 
must  not  blunt  himself  to  the  outer  world  ; 
but  his  rich  inner  life  will  point  out  the 
direction  in  which  he  ought  to  lend  him- 
self to  its  impressions.  When  passing 
through  a beautiful  mountain  district,  the 
man  with  depth  of  soul  and  richness  of 
emotion  has  different  experiences  from 
the  man  with  few  emotions.  Only  what 
we  experience  within  ourselves  opens  up 
the  beauties  of  the  outer  world.  One 
man  sails  across  the  ocean,  and  only  a 
few  inward  experiences  pass  through  his 
soul  : but  another  will  then  hear  the 
eternal  language  of  the  World-Spirit,  and 


( 84  ) 

for  him  are  unveiled  the  mysteries  of- 
creation. 

One  must  have  learnt  to  control  one’s 
own  feelings  and  ideas  if  one  wishes  to 
develop  any  intimate  relationship  with 
the  outer  world.  Every  phenomenon  in 
that  outer  world  is  full  of  divine  splendour, 
but  one  must  have  felt  the  Divine  within 
oneself  before  one  can  hope  to  discover  it 
without.  The  disciple  is  told  to  set  apart 
certain  moments  of  his  daily  life  during 
which  to  withdraw  into  himself,  quietly 
and  alone.  But  at  such  times  he  ought 
not  to  occupy  himself  with  his  own  per 
sonal  affairs,  for  this  would  bring  about 
the  contrary  of  that  which  he  is  aiming 
at.  During  these  moments  he  ought 
rather  to  listen  in  complete  silence  to  the 
echoes  of  what  he  has  experienced,  of 
what  the  outward  world  has  told  him. 
Then,  in  these  periods  of  quiet,  every 
flower,  every  animal,  every  action  will 
unveil  to  him  secrets  undreamed  of,  and 


( ) 

thus  will  be  prepare  himself  to  receive 
new  impressions  of  the  external  world,  as 
if  he  viewed  it  with  difterent  eyes.  For 
he  who  merely  desires  to  enjoy  impression 
after  impression,  only  stultifies  the  per- 
. ceptive  faculty,  while  he  who  lets  the 
enjoyment  afterwards  reveal  something  to 
him,  thus  enlarges  and  educates  it.  But 
he  must  be  careful  not  merely  to  let  the 
enjoyment  reverberate,  as  it  were  ; but, 
renouncing  any  further  enjoyment,  rather 
to  work  upon  his  pleasurable  experiences 
with  an  inward  activity.  The  danger  at 
this  point  is  very  great.  Instead  of  work- 
ing within  oneself,  it  is  easy  to  fall  into 
the  opposite  habit  of  afterwards  trying 
to  completely  exhaust  the  enjoyment.  Let 
us  not  undervalue  the  unforeseen  sources 
of  error  which  here  confront  the  disciple. 
He  must  of  necessity  pass  thioiigh  a host 
of  temptations,  each  of  which  tends  only 
to  harden  his  Ego  and  to  imprison  it 
within  itself.  He  ought  to  open  it  wide 


( 86  ) 

for  the  whole  world.  It  is  necessary  that 
he  should  seek  enjoyment,  for  in  this  way 
only  can  the  outward  world  get  at  him ; 
and  if  he  blunts  himself  to  enjoyment  he 
becomes  as  a plant  which  cannot  any 
longer  draw  nourishment  from  its  environ- 
ment. Yet,  if  he  stops  at  the  enjoyment, 
he  is  then  shut  up  within  himself,  and 
will  only  be  something  to  himself  and 
nothing  to  the  world.  However  much  he 
may  live  within  himself,  however  intensely 
he  may  cultivate  his  Ego,  the  world  will 
exclude  him.  He  is  dead  to  the  world. 
But  the  disciple  considers  enjoyment  only 
as  a means  of  ennobling  himself  for  the 
world.  Pleasure  is  to  him  as  a scout  who 
informs  him  concerning  the  world,  and 
after  having  been  taught  by  pleasure  he 
passes  on  to  work.  He  does  not  learn  in 
order  that  he  may  accumulate  learning 
as  his  own  treasure,  but  in  order  that  he 
may  put  his  learning  at  the  service  of  the 
world. 


( 87  ) 

In  all  forms  of  Occultism  there  is  a 
fundamental  principle  which  cannot  be 
transgressed,  if  any  goal  at  all  is  to  be 
reached.  Every  occult  teacher  must 
impress  it  upon  his  pupils,  and  it  runs 
as  follows : Every  branch  of  knowledge 
which  you  seek  only  to  enrich  your  own 
learning,  only  to  accumulate  treasure  for 
yourself  leads  you  away  from  the  Path : 
hut  all  knowledge  which  you  seek  for  work- 
ing in  the  service  of  humanity  and  for 
the  uplifting  of  the  world,  brings  you  a 
step  forward.  This  law  must  be  rigidly 
observed  ; nor  is  one  a genuine  disciple 
until  he  has  adopted  it  as  the  guide  for 
his  whole  life.  In  many  occult  schools 
this  truth  is  expressed  in  the  following 
short  sentence  : Every  idea  which  does  not 
become  an  ideal  for  you,  slays  a power  in 
your  soul : every  idea  which  becomes  an 
ideal  creates  within  you  living  powers. 


Ill 

THE  PATH  OF  DISCIPLESHIP 

At  the  very  beginning  of  his  course  the 
student  is  directed  to  the  Path  of  Rever- 
ence, and  the  development  of  the  inner 
life.  But  the  occult  teaching  also  gives 
practical  instructions  by  the  observance 
of  which  he  may  learn  to  tread  that  Path 
and  develop  that  inner  life.  These  prac- 
tical directions  have  no  arbitrary  basis. 
They  rest  on  ancient  experience  and 
ancient  wisdom,  and  wheresoever  the  ways 
to  higher  knowledge  are  marked  out,  they 
remain  of  the  same  nature.  All  genuine 
teachers  of  Occultism  are  in  agreement  as 
to  the  essential  character  of  these  rules, 

although  they  do  not  always  express 

88 


( 80  ) 

them  in  the  same  words.  This  difference, 
which  is  of  a minor  character  and  is 
more  apparent  than  real,  is  due  to  cir- 
cumstances which  need  not  be  touched 
on  here. 

No  teacher  wishes  by  means  of  such 
rules  to  establish  an  ascendency  over 
other  persons.  He  would  not  tamper 
with  individual  independence.  Indeed, 
no  one  respects  and  cherishes  human  indi- 
viduality more  than  the  teachers  of  Oc- 
cultism. It  was  said  (in  the  first  part  of 
this  book)  that  the  order  which  embraces 
all  Initiates  was  surrounded  by  a wall, 
and  that  two  laws  formed  the  principles 
by  which  it  was  upheld.  Whenever  the 
Initiate  leaves  this  enclosure  and  steps 
forth  into  the  world,  he  must  submit  to  a 
third  inviolable  law.  It  is  this : Keep 
watch  over  each  of  your  actions  and  each 
of  your  words,  in  order  that  you  may  not 
hinder  the  free-will  of  any  human  being. 
Those  who  recognise  that  genuine  occult 


( 90  ) 

teachers  are  thoroughly  permeated  with 
this  principle  will  understand  that  they 
need  sacrifice  none  of  their  independence 
by  the  practical  directions  which  they  are 
advised  to  follow. 

One  of  the  first  of  these  rules  may  be 
thus  expressed  in  our  language : “ Pro- 
vide for  yourself  moments  of  inward  calm, 
and  in  these  moments  learn  to  distinguish 
between  the  real  and  the  unreal!'  I say 
advisedly  “ expressed  in  our  language,” 
because  originally  all  rules  and  teach- 
ings of  occult  science  were  expressed  in 
a symbolical  sign-language.  Those  who 
desire  to  master  its  whole  scope  and 
meaning  must  first  obtain  permission  to 
learn  this  symbolical  language,  and  before 
this  permission  can  be  obtained,  it  is 
necessary  to  have  taken  the  first  steps  in 
occult  knowledge.  This  may  be  achieved 
by  the  careful  observance  of  such  rules  as 
are  here  given.  The  Path  stands  open  to 
all  who  earnestly  will  to  enter  it. 


( 91  ) 

Simple,  in  truth,  is  the  rule  concerning 
moments  of  inner  calm,  and  easy  it  is  to 
follow  ; but  it  only  leads  to  the  goal  when 
the  pursuit  is  as  earnest  and  strict  as 
the  way  is  simple.  I will,  therefore,  state 
without  further  preamble  the  method  in 
which  this  rule  should  be  observed. 

The  student  must  mark  off  a small  part 
of  his  daily  life  in  which  to  occupy  himself 
with  something  quite  different  from  the 
avocations  of  his  ordinary  life,  and  the 
way  in  which  he  occupies  himself  at  such 
a time  must  also  differ  from  the  way  in 
which  he  performs  the  rest  of  his  duties. 
But  this  does  not  mean  that  what  he  does 
in  the  time  thus  set  apart  has  no  connec- 
tion with  his  daily  work.  On  the  contrary, 
the  man  who  seeks  such  moments  in  the 
right  way  will  soon  find  that  it  is  just  this 
which  gives  him  the  full  power  to  do  his 
daily  task.  Nor  must  it  be  supposed  that 
the  observance  of  this  rule  really  deprives 
anyone  of  time  needed  for  the  perform- 


( 92  ) 

ance  of  his  duties.  If  any  person  really 
has  no  more  time  at  his  disposal^  jive 
minutes  a day  will  suffice.  The  real  point 
is  the  manner  in  which  these  five  minutes 
are  spent. 

At  these  periods  a man  should  raise 
himself  completely  above  his  work-a-day 
life.  His  thoughts  and  feelings  must  take 
on  a different  colouring.  His  joys  and 
sorrows,  his  cares,  experiences,  and  actions, 
must  pass  in  review  before  his  soul.  And 
he  must  cultivate  a frame  of  mind  which 
enables  him  to  regard  all  his  other  experi- 
ences from  a higher  point  of  view.  We 
need  only  bear  in  mind  how  different  is 
the  point  of  view  from  which  in  ordinary 
life  we  regard  the  experiences  and  actions 
of  another,  and  that  from  which  we  judge 
our  own.  This  is  inevitable,  for  we  are 
interwoven  with  our  own  actions  and 
experiences,  while  we  only  contemplate 
those  of  another.  Our  aim  in  these 
moments  of  retirement  must  be  to  con- 


( 93  ) 

template  and  judge  our  own  experiences 
and  actions  as  though  it  were  not  our- 
selves but  some  other  person  to  whom 
they  applied.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a • 
certain  misfortune  has  befallen  someone. 
What  a different  attitude  that  person 
takes  towards  it  as  compared  with  an 
identical  misfortune  that  has  befallen  his 
neighbour  ! No  one  can  blame  this  atti- 
tude as  unjustifiable ; it  is  a part  of 
human  nature.  And  just  as  it  is  in  ex- 
ceptional circumstances,  so  it  is  also  in 
the  daily  affairs  of  life.  The  student  must 
endeavour  to  attain  the  power  of  regarding 
himself  at  certain  times  as  he  would  regard 
a stranger.  He  must  contemplate  himself 
with  the  inward  calm  of  the  critic.  When 
this  is  attained,  our  own  experiences 
present  themselves  in  a new  light.  As 
long  as  we  are  interwoven  with  them  and 
are,  as  it  were,  inside  them,  we  are  as 
closely  connected  with  the  unreal  as  with 
the  real.  When  we  attain  to  a calm 


( ) 

survey,  the  real  is  separated  from  the 
unreal.  Sorrow  and  joy,  every  thought, 
every  resolve,  appear  changed  when  we 
contemplate  ourselves  in  this  way.  It  is 
as  though  we  had  spent  the  whole  day  in 
a place  where  we  saw  the  smallest  objects 
at  the  same  range  of  vision  as  the  largest 
ones,  and  in  the  evening  climbed  a neigh- 
bouring hill  and  surveyed  the  whole  scene 
at  once.  Then  the  parts  of  the  place  take 
on  proportions  different  from  those  they 
bore  when  seen  from  within.  The  value 
of  such  calm  inward  contemplation  de- 
pends less  on  the  actual  thing  we  contem- 
plate than  on  the  power  which  such 
inward  calm  develops  in  us. 

For  in  every  human  being  there  is, 
besides  what  we  call  the  work-a-day 
man,  a higher  being.  This  higher-  being 
remains  concealed  until  it  is  awakened. 
And  each  of  us  can  only  awaken  it  for 
himself.  But  as  long  as  this  higher  being 
is  not  awakened,  the  higher  faculties 


f 


( 95  ) 

which  lie  dormant  in  every  man  and  lead 
to  supersensual  knowledge,  must  remain 
hidden.  This  power  which  leads  to 
inward  calm  is  a magic  force  that  sets 
free  certain  higher  faculties.  Until  a seeker 
feels  this  magic  force  witlfln  him,  he  must 
continue  to  follow  strictly  and  earnestly 
the,  rule  here  given.  To  every  man  who 
thus  perseveres,  the  day  will  come  when 
a spiritual  light  is  revealed  to  him,  and 
a whole  new  world,  whose  existence  was 
hitherto  unsuspected,  is  discerned  by  an 
eye  within  him. 

There  is  no  need  for  any  outward  change 
in  the  life  of  the  student  because  he  be- 
gins to  follow  this  rule.  He  performs  his 
duties  as  before,  and  at  first  he  endures 
the  same  sorrows  and  experiences  the 
same  joys  as  of  old.  In  no  way  does  it 
estrange  him  from  life,  rather  is  he  en- 
abled to  devote  himself  to  it  the  more 
completely,  because  in  the  moments  set 
apart  he  has  a Higher  Life  of  his  own. 


( 96  ) 

Gradually  this  Higher  Life  will  make  its 
influence  felt  on  the  ordinary  life.  The 
calm  of  the  moments  set  apart  will 
influence  the  ordinary  existence  as  well. 
The  whole  man  will  grow  calmer,  will 
attain  serenity  in  all  his  actions,  and  will 
cease  to  be  perturbed  by  all  manner  of 
incidents.  Gradually  will  a student  who 
thus  advances  guide  himself  more  and 
more,  and  be  less  directed  by  circum- 
stances and  external  influences.  Such  a 
man  will  soon  discover  how  great  a 
source  of  strength  lies  for  him  in  these 
periods  of  contemplation.  He  will  cease 
to  be  worried  by  things  that  formerly 
worried  him  ; and  countless  matters  that 
used  to  inspire  him  with  fear  will  cease 
to  alarm  him.  He  acquires  a new  out- 
look on  life.  Formerly  he  may  have 
taken  up  this  or  that  task  with  a sense 
of  timidity.  He  would  say  : “I  lack  the 
power  to  do  this  as  well  as  I could  wish.” 
Now  he  no  longer  admits  such  a thought 


( 97  ) 

but,  instead  of  it,  one  quite  different.  He 
now  says  to  himself : “ I will  summon 
up  all  my  strength  so  as  to  do  my  work 
as  well  as  I possibly  can.”  And  he 
suppresses  the  thought  which  encourages 
timidity;  for  he  knows  that  this  very 
timidity  might  spoil  his  undertaking,  and 
that  at  any  rate  it  can  contribute  nothing 
to  the  improvement  of  his  labour.  And 
thus  one  thought  after  another,  each 
fraught  with  advantage  to  his  whole  life, 
begins  to  penetrate  the  student’s  outlook. 
They  take  the  place  of  those  that  had 
a hampering  and  weakening  effect.  He 
begins  to  steer  his  own  ship  with  a firm, 
secure  course  among  the  waves  of  life, 
which  formerly  tossed  it  helplessly  to  and 
fro. 

And  this  calm  and  serenity  react  on 

the  whole  being.  They  assist  the  growth 

of  the  inner  man,  and  of  those  inner 

faculties  which  lead  to  the  higher 

knowledge.  For  it  is  by  his  progress  in 

7 


( 98  ) 

this  direction  that  the  student  gradually 
attains  to  a state  in  which  he  himself 
determines  the  manner  in  which  the 
impressions  of  the  external  world  shall 
affect  him.  Thus,  he  may  hear  a word, 
spoken  with  the  object  of  wounding  or 
vexing  him.  Before  he  began  his  occult 
studies  it  would  indeed  have  wounded  or 
vexed  him.  But  now  that  he  treads  the 
Path  of  Discipleship,  he  is  able  to  take 
from  it  the  sting  which  gives  it  the  power 
to  hurt,  before  ever  it  enters  his  con- 
sciousness. Take  another  example : we 
naturally  grow  impatient  when  we  are 
kept  waiting,  but  the  student  is  so  per- 
meated in  his  moments  of  calm  with 
the  realisation  of  the  uselessness  of  im- 
patience, that  this  feeling  is  present  with 
him  on  every  such  occasion.  The  im- 
patience which  would  naturally  overcome 
him  vanishes,  and  an  interval  which  would 
otherwise  have  been  wasted  in  the  ex- 
pression of  impatience  may  be  utilised 


( 99  ) 

by  making  some  profitable  observation 
during  the  period  of  waiting. 

Now  we  must  realise  the  significance  of 
these  facts.  We  must  remember  that  the 
“ Higher  Being  ” in  a man  is  in  constant 
development,  and  only  the  state  of  calm 
and  serenity  here  described  renders  an 
orderly  development  possible.  The  waves 
of  outward  life  press  in  upon  the  inner  man 
from  all  sides,  if,  instead  of  controlling 
this  outward  life,  he  is  controlled  by  it. 
Such  a man  is  like  a plant  which  tries  to 
expand  in  a cleft  in  the  rock,  and  is  stunted 
in  its  growth  until  new  space  is  given  it. 
No  outward  forces  can  supply  space  for 
the  inner  man  ; it  can  only  be  supplied  by 
the  inner  calm  which  he  may  give  to  his 
soul.  Outward  circumstances  can  only 
alter  the  course  of  his  outward  life ; they 
can  never  awaken  the  spiritual  inner  man. 
The  student  must  himself  give  birth  to 
the  new  and  higher  man  within  him. 

The  higher  man  becomes  the  “inner 


( 100  ) 

Ruler,”  who  directs  the  circumstances  of 
the  outer  man  with  sure  guidance.  As 
long  as  the  latter  has  the  upper  hand, 
this  inner  man  is  enslaved,  and  therefore 
cannot  develop  his  powers.  If  another 
than  myself  has  the  power  to  make  me 
angry,  I am  not  master  of  myself,  or,  to 
put  it  better,  I have  not  yet  found  “ the 
Ruler  within  me.”  I must  develop  the 
power  within  of  letting  the  impressions  of 
the  outer  world  approach  me  only  in  the 
way  in  which  I myself  choose ; then  only 
do  I really  become  an  occult  student. 
And  only  by  earnestly  striving  after  this 
power  can  a student  reach  the  goal.  It 
is  not  of  so  much  importance  to  achieve  a 
great  deal  in  a given  time,  as  to  be  earnest 
in  the  search.  Many  have  striven  for  years 
without  noticing  any  marked  advance ; 
but  many  of  those  who  did  not  despair, 
and  struggled  on  undaunted,  have  some- 
times quite  suddenly  achieved  the  “ inner 
victory.” 


( 101  ) 

In  many  situations  it  requires  a good 
deal  of  effort  to  achieve  these  moments  of 
inward  calm.  But  the  greater  the  effort 
needed,  the  more  important  is  the  achieve- 
ment. In  esoteric  studies,  everything 
depends  on  the  energy,  inward  truth- 
fulness, and  uncompromising  sincerity 
with  which  we  contemplate  ourselves  and 
our  actions  from  the  standpoint  of  com- 
plete strangers. 

But  only  one  side  of  the  student’s  inner 
activity  is  characterised  by  this  birth  of 
his  own  higher  being.  Something  else 
is  needed  in  addition.  Even  if  a man 
regards  himself  as  a stranger,  it  is  only 
himself  that  he  contemplates ; he  looks 
at  those  experiences  and  actions  with 
which  he  is  connected  through  his  par- 
ticular mode  of  life,  and  it  is  necessary 
for  him  to  rise  above  this,  and  attain  to 
a purely  human  point  of  view,  no  longer 
connected  with  his  own  individual  circum- 
stances. He  must  pass  on  to  the  contem- 


( 102  ) 

plation  of  those  things  which  concern  him 
as  a human  being,  even  though  he  himself 
dwell  in  a different  condition  and  different 
circumstances.  In  this  way  something  is 
brought  to  birth  within  him  which  rises 
beyond  the  personal  point  of  view.  Thus 
his  gaze  is  directed  to  higher  worlds  than 
those  he  knows  in  every-day  life.  And 
then  he  begins  to  feel  and  realise  that 
he  belongs  to  these  higher  worlds  about 
which  his  senses  and  his  daily  occupations 
can  tell  him  nothing.  In  this  way  he 
shifts  the  central  point  of  his  being  to 
the  inner  part  of  his  nature.  He  listens 
to  the  voices  within  him  which  speak 
to  him  in  his  moments  of  calm ; and  in- 
wardly he  cultivates  an  intercourse  with 
the  spiritual  world.  He  is  removed 
from  the  every-day  world,  and  no  longer 
hears  its  voices.  All  around  him  there 
is  silence.  He  puts  away  from  him  all 
his  external  surroundings,  and  everything 
which  even  reminds  him  of  such  external 


( 103  ) 

impressions.  His  entire  soul  is  filled  with 
calm  inward  contemplation  and  converse 
with  the  purely  spiritual  world.  This 
calm  contemplation  must  become  a 
necessity  to  the  student.  He  is  plunged 
completely  in  a world  of  thoughts.  He 
must  develop  an  earnest  desire  for  such 
calm  thinking.  He  must  learn  to  love 
the  in-pouring  of  the  spirit.  He  will 
soon  cease  to  regard  this  thought-world 
as  more  unreal  than  the  everyday  things 
which  surround  him.  He  begins  to  deal 
with  his  thoughts  as  with  things  existing 
in  space.  And  then  the  moment  is  at 
hand  when  the  revelations  of  his  quiet 
thinking  begin  to  seem  much  higher  and 
more  real  than  the  things  existing  in 
space.  He  discovers  that  this  thought- 
world  is  an  expression  of  life.  He 
realises  that  thoughts  are  not  mere 
phantoms,  but  that  through  them  beings 
speak  to  him  who  were  hidden  before. 
He  begins  to  hear  voices  speak  to  him 


( 104  ) 

through  the  silence.  Formerly  his  ear 
was  the  only  organ  of  hearing ; now  he 
can  listen  with  his  soul.  An  inner 
language  and  an  inner  voice  are  revealed 
to  him.  It  is  a moment  of  the  supremest 
ecstasy  to  the  student  when  this  experi- 
ence first  comes  to  him.  An  inner  light 
floods  the  whole  external  world  for  him, 
and  he  is  “ born  anew.”  Through  his 
being  passes  a current  from  a divine 
world,  bringing  with  it  divine  bliss. 

This  thought-life  of  the  soul,  which  is 
gradually  widened  into  a life  of  spiritual 
being,  is  designated  by  the  Gnosis  and  by 
Theosophy  as  meditation  (contemplative 
thought).  This  meditation  is  the  means 
by  which  super-sensual  knowledge  is 
attained.  But  during  such  moments  the 
student  must  not  be  content  to  give  him- 
self up  to  the  luxury  of  sensation.  He 
must  not  permit  undefined  feelings  to  take 
possession  of  his  soul.  That  would  only 
hinder  him  from  attaining  true  spiritual 


( 105  ) 

knowledge.  His  thoughts  must  be  clearly 
and  sharply  defined,  and  he  will  be  helped 
in  this  by  not  allowing  himself  to  be 
carried  away  blindly  by  the  thoughts  that 
spring  up  within  him.  Kather  must  he 
permeate  his  mind  with  the  lofty  thoughts 
which  originated  with  advanced  students 
to  whom  inspiration  has  already  come. 
Let  him  first  of  all  study  those  writ- 
ings which  themselves  originated  in  such 
moments  of  meditation.  'Ilie  student  will 
find  such  in  the  mystical,  gnostic,  and 
theosophical  literature  of  our  time,  and 
will  there  gain  the  material  for  his  medi- 
tation. Wise  men  have  themselves  in- 
scribed in  these  books  the  thoughts  of 
divine  science,  or  have  proclaimed  them 
to  the  world  through  their  agents. 

Such  meditation  produces  a complete 
transformation  in  the  student.  He  begins 
to  form  entirely  new  conceptions  of 
Reality.  All  things  acquire  fresh  values 
in  his  eyes.  And  it  cannot  be  declared 


( 106  ) 

too  often  that  this  transformation  does 
not  estrange  him  from  actuality,  or  re- 
move him  from  his  daily  round  of  duties. 
For  he  comes  to  realise  that  his  most 
insignificant  actions  or  experiences  are  in 
close  connection  with  the  great  cosmic 
beings  and  events.  When  once  this  con- 
nection is  revealed  to  him  in  his  moments 
of  contemplation,  he  is  endowed  with 
fresher  and  fuller  power  for  his  daily 
duties.  For  then  he  knows  that  his 
labour  and  his  suffering  are  given  and 
endured  for  the  sake  of  a great  spiritual 
cosmic  whole.  Thus,  instead  of  weari- 
ness, his  meditation  gives  him  strength 
to  live. 

With  firm  step  the  student  passes 
through  life.  No  matter  what  it  may 
bring  him,  he  goes  forward  erect.  In  the 
past  he  knew  not  why  he  worked  and 
suffered,  but  now  he  knows.  It  is  obvious 
that  such  meditation  is  more  likely  to 
lead  to  the  goal,  if  conducted  under  the 


( 107  ) 

direction  of  experienced  persons,  who 
know  actually  bow  everything  may  best 
be  done.  We  should,  therefore,  seek 
the  advice  and  direction  of  such  experi- 
enced guides  (Gurus  they  are  called  in 
certain  schools  of  thought).  What  would 
else  be  mere  uncertain  groping  is  trans- 
formed by  such  direction  into  work  that 
is  sure  of  its  goal.  Those  who  apply  to 
the  teachers  possessed  of  such  knowledge 
and  experience  will  never  apply  in  vain. 
Only  they  must  be  quite  clear  that  it  is 
the  advice  of  a friend  they  desire,  not  the 
domination  of  a would-be  ruler.  Those 
who  really  know  are  always  the  most 
modest  of  men,  and  nothing  is  further 
from  their  nature  than  what  is  called  the 
passion  for  power. 

Those  who,  by  means  of  meditation, 
rise  to  that  which  unites  man  with 
spirit,  are  bringing  to  life  within  them 
the  eternal  element  which  is  limited  by 
neither  birth  nor  death.  Only  those  who 


( 108  ) 

have  had  no  experience  of  it  themselves 
can  doubt  the  existence  of  this  eternal 
element.  Thus  meditation  becomes  the 
way  by  which  man  also  attains  to  the 
recognition  and  contemplation  of  his 
eternal,  indestructible,  essential  being. 
xVnd  only  through  meditation  can  one 
attain  to  such  a view  of  life.  Gnosis  and 
Theosophy  tell  of  the  eternal  nature  of 
this  essential  being,  and  of  its  reincarna- 
tion. The  question  is  often  asked  : “ Why 
does  a man  know  nothing  of  those  experi- 
ences which  lie  beyond  the  borders  of 
birth  and  death?”  Not  thus  should  we 
ask,  but  rather : How  may  we  attain  to 
such  knowledge  ? ” The  entrance  to  the 
Path  is  opened  by  right  meditation.  This 
alone  can  revive  the  memory  of  events 
that  lie  beyond  the  borders  of  birth  and 
death.  Everyone  can  attain  to  this 
knowledge ; in  each  of  us  is  the  faculty 
of  recognising  and  contemplating  for  our- 
selves the  truths  of  Mysticism,  Theosophy, 


( 109  ) 

and  Gnosis ; but  the  right  means  must  be 
chosen.  Only  a being  with  ears  and  eyes 
can  perceive  tones  and  colours,  nor  can  the 
eye  perceive,  if  the  light  by  which  things 
are  visible  be  wanting.  Occult  science 
gives  the  means  of  developing  the  spiritual 
ears  and  eyes,  and  kindling  the  spiritual 
light.  There  are,  according  to  esoteric 
teachers,  three  steps  by  which  the  goal 
may  be  attained  : 1.  Probation.  This  de- 
velops the  spiritual  senses.  2.  Enlighten- 
ment.  This  kindles  the  spiritual  light. 
3.  Initiation.  This  establishes  intercourse 
with  the  higher  spiritual  beings. 

The  following  teachings  proceed  from  a 
secret  tradition,  but  precise  information 
concerning  its  nature  and  its  name  cannot 
be  given  at  present.  They  refer  to  the 
three  steps  which,  in  the  school  of  this 
tradition,  lead  to  a certain  degree  of  initia- 
tion. But  here  we  shall  find  only  so  much 
of  this  tradition  as  may  be  openly  declared. 
These  teachings  are  extracted  from  a much 


( no  ) 

deeper  and  more  secret  doctrine.  In  the 
occult  schools  themselves  a definite  course 
of  instruction  is  followed,  and  in  addition 
to  this  there  are  certain  practices  which 
enable  the  souls  of  men  to  attain  a con- 
scious intercourse  with  the  spiritual  world. 
These  practices  bear  about  the  same  rela- 
tion to  what  will  be  imparted  in  the 
following  pages,  as  the  teaching  which  is 
given  in  a well-disciplined  school  bears 
to  the  instruction  that  may  be  received 
occasionally  during  a walk.  And  yet  the 
ardent  and  persevering  pursuit  of  what  is 
here  hinted  at  will  lead  to  the  way  by 
which  one  obtains  access  to  a genuine 
occult  school.  But,  of  course,  an  im- 
patient perusal,  devoid  of  sincerity  and 
perseverance,  can  lead  to  nothing  at  all. 
He  who  believes  himself  to  be  ready  for 
more  must  apply  to  an  occult  teacher.  The 
study  of  these  things  can  only  be  success- 
ful if  the  student  will  observe  what  has 
already  been  written  in  previous  chapters. 


( 111 ) 

The  stages  which  the  above-mentioned 
tradition  specifies  are  the  following  three  ; 

I.  Probation, 

II.  Enlightenment, 

III.  Initiation. 

It  is  not  altogether  necessary  that 
these  three  stages  should  be  so  taken 
that  one  must  have  quite  completed  the 
first  before  beginning  the  second,  nor  this 
in  its  turn  before  beginning  the  third. 
With  respect  to  certain  things  one  can 
partake  of  Enlightenment,  and  even  of 
Initiation,  while  as  regards  others  one 
is  still  in  the  probationary  stage.  Yet  it 
will  be  necessary  to  spend  a certain  time 
in  this  stage  of  Probation  before  any 
Enlightenment  at  all  can  begin,  and  at 
least  in  some  respects  one  must  have  been 
enlightened  before  it  is  even  possible  to 
enter  upon  the  stage  of  Initiation.  But  in 
giving  an  account  of  them  it  is  necessary, 
for  the  sake  of  clearness,  that  the  three 
stages  follow  one  another. 


IV 

PROBATION 

Probation  consists  of  a strict  cultivation 
of  the  emotional  and  mental  life.  Through 
this  cultivation  the  ‘^spiritual  body”  be- 
comes equipped  with  new  instruments  of 
perception  and  new  organs  of  activity, 
just  as  out  of  indeterminate  living  matter 
the  natural  forces  have  fitted  the  physical 
body  with  organs. 

The  beginning  is  made  by  directing  the 

attention  of  the  soul  to  certain  events 

in  the  world  that  surrounds  us.  Such 

events  are  the  germinating,  expanding, 

and  flourishing  of  life  on  the  one  hand, 

and,  on  the  other  hand,  all  things  which 

are  connected  with  fading,  decaying,  and 

112 


(lying  out.  Wherever  we  turn  our  eyes 
we  can  observe  these  things  happening 
simultaneously,  and  everywhere  they  natu- 
rally evoke  in  men  feelings  and  thoughts. 
But  under  ordinary  circumstances  a man 
fails  to  attend  sufficiently  to  these  thoughts 
and  feelings.  He  hurries  on  too  quickly 
from  impression  to  impression.  What  is 
necessary,  therefore,  is  that  he  should  fix 
his  attention  intently  and  quite  consciously 
upon  these  phenomenaTr-  Wherever  he 
observes  expansion  and  flourishing  of  a 
certain  kind,  he  must  banish  everything 
else  from  his  soul,  and  entirely  surrender 

himself  for  a short  time  to  this  one  im- 

> 

pression.  He  will  soon  convince  himself 

that  a sensation  which  heretofore  in  a 

similar  case  would  have  merely  flitted 

through  his  soul,  is  now  so  magnified  that 

it  becomes  of  a powerful  and  enei'getic 

nature.  He  must  now  allow  this  thought- 

form  to  reverberate  quietly  within  himself, 

and  to  do  so  he  must  become  inwardly 

8 


( 114  ) 

quite  still.  He  should  draw  himself  away 
from  the  outward  world,  and  only  follow 
that  which  his  soul  tells  him  of  this  ex- 
pansion and  flourishing. 

Yet  it  must  not  be  thought  that  we  can 
make  much  progress  if  we  blunt  our  senses 
to  the  world.  First,  one  must  contemplate 
tliese  objects  as  keenly  and  precisely  as 
possible,  and  it  is  then  that  one  should 
give  oneself  up  to  the  sensations  that 
result,  and  the  thoughts  that  arise  within 
the  soul.  What  is  important  is  this  : that 
one  should  direct  the  attention,  with  per- 
fect inner  balance,  upon  both  of  these 
phenomena.  If  one  obtains  the  necessary 
quiet  and  surrenders  oneself  to  that  which 
arises  in  the  soul,  one  will  then,  in  due 
time,  obtain  the  following  experiences : 
One  will  notice  a new  kind  of  thoughts 
and  feelings,  unknown  before,  uprising- 
in  the  soul.  Indeed,  the  more  one  fixes 
the  attention  in  such  a way  alternately 
upon  something  growing,  expanding,  and 


( 115  ) 

flourishing,  and  upon  something  else  that 
is  fading  and  decaying,  the  more  vivid 
will  these  feelings  become.  And  just  as 
natural  forces  evolve  out  of  living  matter 
the  eyes  and  ears  of  the  physical  body, 
so  will  the  organs  of  clairvoyance  evolve 
themselves  from  the  feelings  which  are 
thus  evoked.  A definite  thought-form 
unites  itself  with  the  germinating  and 
expanding  object,  and  another,  equally 
definite,  with  that  which  is  fading  and 
decaying.  But  this  will  only  take  place 
if  the  cultivation  of  these  feelings  be 
striven  for  in  the  way  described. 

It  is  only  possible  to  describe  approxi- 
mately what  these  feelings  are  like. 
Indeed,  everyone  must  attain  his  own 
conception  of  them  as  he  passes  through 
these  inward  experiences.  He  who  has 
frequently  fixed  his  attention  on  the 
phenomena  of  germinating,  expanding,  and 
flourishing,  will  feel  something  remotely 
allied  to  the  sensation  of  a sunrise  ; and 


( 116  ) 

the  phenomena  of  fading  and  decaying 
will  produce  in  him  an  experience  com- 
parable, in  the  same  way,  to  the  gradual 
uprising  of  the  moon  on  the  horizon. 
Both  these  feelings  are  forces  which, 
when  carefully  cultivated,  with  a con- 
tinually increasing  improvement,  will  lead 
to  the  greatest  occult  results.  To  him 
who  again  and  again,  systematically  and 
with  design,  surrenders  himself  to  such 
feelings,  a new  world  is  opened.'  The 
“spiritual”  world,  the  so-called  “astral 
plane,”  begins  to  dawn  upon  him.  Bloom- 
ing and  fading  are  no  longer  facts  which 
make  indefinite  impressions  on  him,  as  of 
old,  but  they  rather  form  themselves  into 
spiritual  lines  and  figures  of  which  he 
had  previously  suspected  nothing.  And 
these  lines  and  figures  have  for  the 
different  phenomena  different  forms.  A 
blooming  flower,  an  animal  growing,  a 
decaying  tree,  evoke  in  his  soul  definite 
lines.  The  astral  plane  slowly  broadens 


( 117 ) 

out  before  him.  Nor  are  these  forms  in 
any  sense  arbitrary.  Two  students  who 
find  themselves  at  the  same  stage  of  de- 
velopment will  always  see  the  same  lines 
and  figures  under  the  same  conditions. 
Just  as  certainly  as  a round  table  will  be 
seen  as  round  by  two  normal  , persons, 
not  as  round  by  the  one  and  square  by 
the  other ; so,  too,  before  the  perception 
of  two  souls  a blooming  flower  will 
present  the  same  spiritual  form.  And 
just  as  the  shapes  of  animals  and  plants 
are  described  in  ordinary  natural  history, 
so,  too,  the  teacher  in  an  occult  school 
describes  and  delineates  the  spiritual 
forms  of  growing  and  decaying  processes 
after  their  nature  and  species. 

If  the  student  has  progressed  so  far 
that  he  can  see  such  aspects  of  phenomena 
which  are  also  physically  observable  with 
his  external  eyes,  he  will  not  then  be  far 
from  the  stage  when  he  shall  behold 
things  that  have  no  physical  existence. 


( 118  ) 

and  must  therefore  remain  entirely  hidden 
to  those  who  have  undergone  no  training 
in  the  occult  school. 

It  should  be  emphasised  that  the 
occult  explorer  ought  never  to  lose  him- 
self in  speculation  on  the  meaning  of  this 
or  that.  By  such  intellectualising  he 
only  brings  himself  away  from  the  right 
road.  He  ought  to  look  out  on  the  sense- 
world  freshly,  with  healthy  senses  and 
quickened  observation,  and  then  to  give 
himself  up  to  his  own  sensations.  He 
ought  not  to  wish,  in  a speculating 
manner,  to  make  out  what  this  or  that 
means,  but  rather  to  allow  the  things 
themselves  to  inform  him.* 

A further  point  of  importance  is  that 
which  is  called  in  occult  science  orienta- 
tion in  the  higher  worlds.”  This  point  is 

* It  should  be  remarked  that  the  artistic  perception, 
when  coupled  with  a quiet  introspective  nature,  forms 
the  best  foundation  for  the  development  of  occult 
faculties.  It  pierces  through  the  superficial  aspect  of 
things,  and  in  so  doing  touches  their  secrets. 


( 119  ) 

attained  when  one  realises  with  complete 
consciousness  that  feelings  and  thoughts 
are  veritable  realities,  just  as  much  as 
are  tables  and  chairs  in  the  world  of  the 
physical  senses.  Feelings  and  thoughts 
act  upon  each  other  in  the  astral-world 
and  in  the  thought  (or  mental)  world  just 
as  objects  of  sense  act  upon  each  other 
in  the  physical  world.  As  long  as  any- 
one is  not  truly  permeated  with  this 
realisation  he  will  not  believe  that  an 
evil  thought  projected  from  his  mind  may 
have  as  devastating  an  effect  upon  other 
thought  forms  as  that  wrought  upon 
physical  objects  by  a bullet  shot  at 
random.  Such  a one  will  perhaps  never 
allow  himself  to  perform  a physically 
visible  action  which  he  considers  to  be 
wrong,  yet  he  will  not  shrink  from  har- 
bouring evil  thoughts  or  feelings,  for  these 
do  not  appear  to  him  to  be  dangerous 
to  the  rest  of  the  world.  Nevertheless 
we  can  only  advance  in  occult  science  if 


( 120  ) 

we  guard  our  thoughts  and  feelings  in 
just  the  same  way  as  such  a man  would 
guard  the  steps  he  takes  in  the  physical 
world.  If  anyone  sees  a wall  before  him 
he  does  not  attempt  to  dash  right  through 
it,  but  directs  his  course  alongside.  In 
other  words,  he  guides  himself  by  the 
laws  of  the  physical  world. 

There  are  such  laws  also  in  the  world 
of  thought  and  feeling,  but  there  they 
cannot  impose  themselves  upon  us  from 
without.  They  must  flow  out  of  the  life 
of  the  soul  itself.  One  arrives  at  such 
a condition  when  one  forbids  oneself,  at 
all  times,  to  foster  wrong  thoughts  or 
feelings.  All  arbitrary  goings  to-and-fro, 
all  idle  fancies,  all  accidental  ups-and- 
downs  of  emotion  must  be  forbidden  in 
the  same  way.  But,  in  so  doing,  let  it 
not  be  thought  that  one  brings  about  a 
deficiency  of  emotion.  On  the  contrary,  if 
we  regulate  our  interior  life  in  this  manner, 
we  shall  speedily  find  ourselves  rich  in 


( 121  ) 

feelings  and  in  genuine  creative  imagina- 
tion. In  place  of  a mere  chaos  of 
petty  feelings  and  fantastic  trains  of 
thought,  there  appear  significant  emo- 
tions, and  thoughts  that  are  fruitful,  and 
it  is  emotions  and  thoughts  of  this  kind 
that  lead  a man  to  “ orientation  in  the 
higher  world.”  He  has  entered  into  the 
right  condition  for  the  things  of  that 
world,  and  they  entail  for  him  definite 
consequences.  Just  as  a physical  man 
finds  his  way  between  physical  things, 
so,  too,  his  path  now  leads  him  straight 
between  the  growing  and  the  fading 
which  he  has  already  come  to  know  in 
the  way  described  above.  For  he  follows 
all  processes  of  growing  and  flourishing, 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  of  withering  and 
decaying — it  is  necessary  for  his  own  and 
the  world’s  prosperity. 

The  occult  student  has  also  to  bestow  a 
further  care  on  the  world  of  sound.  He 
must  discriminate  between  the  tones 


( 122  ) 

which  are  produced  from  the  so-called 
inert  (lifeless)  bodies  (for  example,  a bell, 
a musical  instrument,  or  a falling  mass), 
and  those  which  proceed  from  a living 
creature  (an  animal  or  a person).  He  who 
hears  the  striking  of  a bell  will  receive  the 
sound  and  attach  to  it  a certain  sensation, 
but  he  who  hears  the  cry  of  an  animal 
will,  in  addition  to  this  sensation,  become 
aware  that  the  sound  reveals  also  an 
inward  experience  of  the  animal,  either  of 
pain  or  of  pleasure.  The  student  is  con- 
cerned with  the  latter  aspect  of  the  sound. 
He  must  concentrate  his  whole  attention 
upon  it,  so  that  the  sound  reveals  to  him 
something  that  lies  outside  of  his  own 
soul,  and,  more  than  this,  must  merge 
himself  in  this  exterior  thing.  He  must, 
closely  connect  his  own  emotion  with  the 
pleasure  or  pain  communicated  to  him 
by  means  of  the  sound.  He  must  care 
nothing  whether  for  him  the  sound  be 
pleasant  or  unpleasant,  welcome  or  not. 


( 1^3  ) 

and  his  soul  must  be  filled  only  with  that 
which  proceeds  from  the  creature  out 
of  whom  the  sound  has  come.  He  who 
systematically  and  deliberately  performs 
such  exercises  will  develop  within  himself 
the  faculty  of  intermingling,  as  it  were, 
with  the  creature  from  which  the  sound 
proceeded.  A person  sensitive  to  music 
will  find  it  easier  to  cultivate  his  spiritual 
life  in  this  respect  than  one  who  is  un- 
musical, but  no  one  should  think  that  a 
mere  sense  of  music  will  take  the  place  of 
this  culture. 

As  an  occult  student,  one  must  learn  to 
contemplate  the  whole  of  nature  in  this, 
way.  By  so  doing  a new  faculty  is  sown 
in  the  world  of  thought  and  feeling. 
Through  her  manifold  sounds  the  whole 
of  Nature  begins  to  whisper  secrets  to  the 
student.  What  was  hitherto  merely  in- 
comprehensible noise  to  his  soul  will 
become  by  this  means  a coherent  language 
of  Nature.  And  whereas,  hitherto,  he 


( 124  ) 

only  heard  sound  from  the  resonance  of 
^ so-called  inanimate  objects,  he  now  under- 
stands a new  speech  of  the  soul.  Should 
he  advance  in  this  culture  of  the  soul,  he 
will  soon  learn  that  he  can  hear  what 
hitherto  he  did  not  even  surmise.  He 
begins  to  hear  with  the  soul. 

One  thing  more  must  be  added  before 
we  can  reach  the  topmost  point  of  this 
region.  What  is  of  very  special  import- 
ance in  the  development  of  the  student 
is  the  way  in  which  he  hears  the  speech 
of  other  men.  He  must  accustom  himself 
to  do  this  in  such  a way  that  while  doing 
so  his  inner  self  is  absolutely  still.  If 
someone  expresses  an  opinion  and  another 
hears  it,  the  inner  self  of  the  latter^ will 
be  stirring  in  general  assent  or  contra- 
diction. Many  people  in  such  a case  feel 
themselves  urged  to  an  expression  of 
their  assent,  or,  more  especially,  of  their 
contradiction.  All  such  assent  or  contra- 
diction must,  in  the  occult  student,  be 


( 125  ) 

silenced.  It  is  not  imperative  that  he 
should  therefore  quite  suddenly  begin  to 
make  his  life  entirely  different,  in  order 
that  he  may  attain  to  this  inward  and 
fundamental  calm.  He  might,  therefore, 
begin  by  doing  so  in  special  cases,  de- 
liberately selected  by  himself.  Thus  quite 
slowly  and  by  degrees  will  this  new  way 
of  listening  creep  into  his  habits,  as  of 
itself  In  the  occult  schools  these  things 
are  systematically  practised.  For  the  sake 
of  practice  the  student  is  obliged  to  listen 
for  a certain  period  to  the  most  contra- 
dictory thoughts,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  suppress  all  assent,  and  more  especially  • 
all  adverse  criticism.  The  point  is  that  in 
such  a way  not  only  all  intellectual  judg- 
ment is  silenced,  but  also  all  sense  of 
displeasure,  denial,  or  even  acceptance. 
And  the  student  must  be  particularly 
watchful  that  such  feelings,  even  if  they 
are  not  upon  the  surface,  do  not  still 
remain  in  the  innermost  recesses  of  the 


( 126  ) 

sou].  He  must  listen,  for  example,  to  the 
statements  of  people  who  in  some  respects 
are  far  beneath  him,  and  yet,  while  so 
doing,  suppress  every  feeling  of  greater 
knowledge  or  of  superiority.  It  is  useful 
for  everyone  to  listen  in  this  way  to 
children,  for  even  the  wisest  may  learn 
very,  very  much  from  children.  So  does 
it  come  about  that  we  hear  the  words 
of  others  impersonally,  completely  divested 
of  our  own  personality  with  its  opinions 
and  feelings.  He  who  thus  makes  a 
practice  of  listening  uncritically,  even 
when  a completely  contradictory  opinion 
is  advanced,  learns  again  and  again  to 
blend  himself,  to  become  identified,  with 
the  being  of  another.  He  then  hears,  as 
it  were,  through  the  words  and  into  the 
souls  of  others.  Through  continual  exer- 
cise of  this  kind  only,  sound  becomes  the 
right  medium  for  the  revelation  of  the 
spirit  and  the  soul.  Of  course,  it  implies 
the  strictest  self-discipline,  but  it  leads 


( 127  ) 

to  a high  goal.  When  these  practices  are 
undertaken  in  connection  with  those  that 
deal  with  the  sounds  of  Nature,  the  soul 
develops  a new  sense  of  hearing.  It  is 
now  able  to  receive  demonstrations  from 
the  spiritual  world  which  do  not  find 
their  expression  in  outward  sounds  ap- 
prehensible by  the  physical  ear.  The 
perception  of  the  “inner  word”  awakens. 
Gradually  truths  from  the  spiritual  world 
reveal  themselves  to  the  student,  and  he 
hears  them  expressed  in  a spiritual  way.* 
All  high  truths  are  attained  through 
such  “ inner  encouragement,”  and  what 
we  may  hear  from  the  lips  of  a genuine 
occult  teacher  has  been  experienced  in 


* Only  to  him  who  by  listening  disinterestedly 
becomes  able  to  perceive  really  from  within,  silently, 
without  emotion  arising  from  personal  opinion  or 
personal  taste, — only  to  such  can  speak  the  Great  Souls 
who  are  known  in  Occultism  as  the  Masters.  As  long 
as  onr  opinions  and  feelings  are  in  a state  of  vehement 
opposition  to  the  communications  from  the  Masters, 
They  remain  silent. 


( 128  ) 

this  manner.  And  in  so  saying  it  must 
not  be  supposed  that  it  is  unimportant 
to  acquaint  oneself  with  the  writings  on 
occult  science,  before  one  can  actually 
gain  this  inner  encouragement.  On  the 
contrary,  the  reading  of  such  writings, 
and  the  listening  to  eminent  teachers  of 
occult  lore,  are  themselves  the  means  of 
attaining  a personal  knowledge.  Every 
sentence  of  the  esoteric  wisdom  which 
one  hears  is  adapted  to  direct  the  senses 
to  that  point  which  must  be  attained 
before  the  soul  can  experience  a real 
advance.  To  the  practice  of  all  which  has 
here  been  indicated,  must  be  added  an 
ardent  study  of  what  the  occult  teacher 
gives  out  to  all  the  world.  In  all  occult 
schools  such  a study  belongs  to  the  pro- 
bationary period,  and  he  who  would  employ 
all  other  methods  will  attain  no  goal  if  he 
omits  the  instructions  of  the  occult  teacher, 
for  inasmuch  as  these  instructions  proceed 
from  an  actual  “inner  word,”  an  actual 


( 129  ) 

‘‘  encouragement,”  they  possess  in  them- 
selves a spiritual  vitality.  They  are  not 
mere  words  : they  are  living  powers ; and 
while  you  follow  the  words  of  an  occultist, 
while  you  read  a book  which  comes  from 
a genuine  inner  experience,  powers  are 
at  work  in  your  soul  which  make  you 
clairvoyant,  just  as  natural  forces  have 
created  out  of  living  matter  your  eyes 
and  ears. 


9 


V 

ENLIGHTENMENT 

Enlightenment  is  the  result  of  very 
simple  processes.  Here,  too,  it  is  a matter 
of  developing  certain  feelings  and  thoughts 
which  are  dormant  within  all  men,  but 
must  be  awakened.  Only  he  who  carries 
out  these  simple  processes  with  complete 
patience,  continuously  and  strenuously,  can 
be  led  by  them  to  the  reception  of  inner 
illumination.  The  primary  step  is  taken 
by  observing  different  natural  objects 
in  a particular  way;  and  these  are  as 
follows  : a transparent  stone  of  beautiful 
form  (a  crystal),  a plant,  and  an  animal. 
One  should  endeavour  at  first  to  direct 
one’s  whole  attention  to  a comparison  of 

130 


( 131  ) 

the  stone  with  the  animal,  in  the  following 
way  : The  thoughts  which,  accompanied 
by  strong  emotions,  are  thus  induced, 
must  pass  through  the  soul,  and  no  other 
emotions  or  thoughts  must  be  mixed  with 
them,  or  disturb  the  intense  contempla- 
tion. One  then  says  to  oneself : “ The 
stone  has  a form  and  the  animal  has  also 
a form.  The  stone  remains  motionless 
in  its  place,  but  the  animal  changes  his. 
It  is  impulse  (desire)  which  causes  the 
animal  to  change  its  place,  and  it  is  these 
impulses  which  are  served  by  the  form  of 
the  animal.  Its  organs  and  instruments 
are  the  expression  of  these  impulses.  The 
form  of  the  stone,  on  the  contrary,  is 
fashioned,  not  in  accordance  with  im- 
pulses, but  in  accordance  with  an  im- 
pulseless force.”  ^ 

^ The  fact  here  mentioned,  in  its  bearing  on  the 
contemplation  of  crystals,  is  in  many  ways  distorted  by 
those  who  have  only  heard  of  it  in  an  outward  (exoteric) 
manner,  and  in  this  way  such  practices  as  crystal-gazing 
have  their  origin.  Misrepresentations  of  such  a kind 


( 132  ) 

If  one  sinks  deeply  into  sucli  thoughts, 
and  while  so  doing  observes  the  stone  and 
the  animal  with  fixed  attention,  then  there 
arise  in  the  soul  two  separate  kinds  of 
emotion.  From  the  stone  into  the  soul 
there  flows  one  kind  of  emotion,  and  from 
the  animal  another.  Probably  in  the  be- 
ginning the  experiment  will  not  succeed, 
but  little  by  little,  with  genuine  and 
patient  practice,  these  emotions  become 
manifest.  Again  and  again  one  should 
practise.  At  first  the  emotions  only  last 
as  long  as  the  contemplation.  Later  on, 
they  work  afterwards,  and  then  they 
grow  to  something  which  remains  alive 
in  the  soul.  One  then  needs  only  to 
reflect,  and  both  emotions  invariably 
arise,  apart  from  all  contemplation  of  an 
external  object. 

Out  of  these  emotions,  and  the  thoughts 

are  the  outcome  of  misunderstanding.  They  have  been 
described  in  many  books,  but  they  never  form  the 
subject  of  genuine  (esoteric)  teaching. 


( 133  ) 

which  are  bound  up  with  them,  clair- 
voyant organs  are  formed.  For  should 
the  plant  be  added  to  the  contemplation, 
one  will  notice  that  the  feeling  outflow- 
ing from  it,  both  in  its  quality  and  in  its 
degree,  lies  between  that  which  emanates 
from  the  stone  and  that  from  the  animal. 
The  organs  which  are  so  formed  are 
spiritual  eyes.  We  learn  by  degrees  and 
through  their  means  to  see  both  astral 
and  mental  colours.  As  long  as  one  has 
only  attained  the  condition  described  as 
Probation,  the  spiritual  world  with  its 
lines  and  figures  remains  dark,  but  through 
Enlightenment  it  will  become  clear.  It 
must  be  noted  here  that  the  words  “ dark  ” 
and  “light,”  as  well  as  the  other  common 
expressions,  do  but  approximately  describe 
what  is  really  meant.  But  if  ordinary 
language  is  not  used,  there  is  none 
possible,  and  yet  this  language  was  only 
constructed  to  suit  physical  conditions. 

Occult  science  describes  what  emanates 


( 134  ) 

from  the  stone  and  is  seen  by  clairvoyant 
eyes,  as  “ blue  " or  bluish-red  ” : that 
which  is  observed  as  coming  from  the 
animal  is  described  as  red  ” or  ‘‘  reddish- 
yellow.”  Ill  reality  they  are  colours  of 
a spiritual  kind  which  are  discerned. 
The  colour  proceeding  from  the  plant 
is  “green.”  Plants  are  just  those  natural 
l)lienoniena  whose  qualities  in  the  higher 
worlds  are  similar  to  their  qualities  in  the 
physical  world.  But  it  is  not  so  with 
stones  and  animals.  It  must  now  be 
clearly  understood  that  the  above-men- 
tioned colours  do  but  suggest  the  prevail- 
ing shades  of  the  stone,  the  plant,  or  the 
animal.  In  reality,  all  possible  overtones 
exist.  Every  animal,  every  stone,  every 
plant  has  its  own  peculiar  shade  of  colour. 
Ill  addition  to  these  there  are  also  the 
creatures  of  the  higher  worlds,  who  never 
incorporate  themselves  with  their  own 
colours,  often  marvellous,  often  horrible. 
Ill  fact,  the  variety  of  colours  in  these 


( 135  ) 

higher  worlds  is  immeasurably  greater 
than  in  the  physical  world. 

If  a man  has  once  acquired  the  faculty 
of  seeing  with  spiritual  eyes,  he  then, 
sooner  or  later,  meets  with  the  beings 
here  mentioned,  some  of  them  higher, 
some  lower  than  man  himself,  beings 
who  never  entered  into  physical  ex- 
istence. 

If  he  has  come  so  far,  the  way  to  a 
great  deal  lies  open  before  him  ; but  it  is 
inadvisable  to  proceed  any  further  with- 
out an  experienced  guide.  Indeed,  for 
all  that  has  been  here  described,  such 
experienced  guidance  is  desirable.  For 
the  rest,  if  anyone  has  the  power  and 
endurance  to  travel  so  far  that  he  fulfils 
the  elementary  conditions  of  enlighten- 
ment here  described,  he  will  assuredly 
seek  and  discover  his  guide. 

But  under  all  circumstances  it  is  im- 
portant to  give  one  warning,  and  he  who 
will  not  apply  it  had  better  leave  un- 


( 136  ) 

trodden  all  the  steps  of  occult  science. 
It  is  necessary  that  he  who  would  become 
an  occult  student  should  lose  none  of  his 
attributes  as  a good  and  noble  man, and  one 
susceptible  to  all  physical  truths.  Indeed, 
throughout  his  apprenticeship  he  must 
continually  increase  his  moral  strength, 
his  inner  purity,  and  his  powers  of 
observation.  Let  us  give  an  example  : 
During  the  preliminary  practices  of 
Enlightenment,  the  student  must  be  care- 
ful to  be  always  enlarging  his  sympathy 
with  the  animal  and  human  worlds,  and 
his  sense  of  Nature’s  beauty.  If  he  is  not 
careful  to  do  this,  he  persistently  blunts 
that  sense  and  that  feeling  by  the  use  of 
these  practices.  The  heart  would  grow 
cold  and  the  sense  become  blunted,  and 
that  could  only  lead  to  perilous  results. 

How  enlightenment  proceeds,  if  one 
rises,  in  the  sense  of  the  foregoing 
practices,  from  the  stone,  the  plant,  and 
the  animal,  up  to  man,  and  how,  after 


( 137  ) 

enlightenment,  under  all  circumstances, 
the  gentle  hand  of  the  Pilot  comes  on  a 
certain  day,  and  leads  to  Initiation — of 
these  things  the  next  chapter  will  deal  in 
so  far  as  it  can  and  may  do  so. 

In  our  time,  the  path  to  occult  science 
is  sought  after  by  many.  It  is  sought  in 
various  ways,  and  many  dangerous  and 
even  objectionable  practices  are  tried. 
Therefore  it  is  that  those  who  know  some- 
thing of  the  truth  concerning  these  things 
have  allowed  part  of  the  occult  training  to 
be  communicated.  Onlv  so  much  is  here 
imparted  as  this  permission  allows,  and  it 
is  necessary  that  something  of  the  truth 
should  be  known  in  order  that  it  may 
counteract  the  great  danger  of  these 
errors.  If  nothing  be  forced,  there  is  no 
danger  for  him  who  follows  the  way 
already  described  ; only  one  thing  should 
be  noted  : nobody  ought  to  spend  more 
time  or  power  upon  such  practices  than 
what  is  at  his  disposal  with  due  regard  to 


( 138  ) 

his  circumstances  and  his  duties.  No  one, 
for  the  sake  of  the  occult  path,  ought 
suddenly  to  change  anything  in  the 
external  conditions  of  his  life.  If  one 
desires  genuine  results,  one  must  have 
patience  ; one  should  be  able  to  cease  the 
practice  after  a few  minutes,  and  then 
peacefully  to  continue  one’s  daily  work, 
and  no  thought  of  these  practices  ought  to 
be  piingled  with  the  work  of  the  day.  He 
who  has  not  learned  to  wait,  in  the  best 
and  highest  sense  of  the  word,  is  of  no 
use  as  an  occult  student,  nor  will  he 
ever  attain  results  of  much  real  value.  ' 
He  who  is  in  search  of  the  paths  to 
occult  knowledge,  by  the  means  which  have 
been  indicated  in  the  foregoing  pages, 
must  fortify  himself  throughout  the  whole 
course  of  his  efforts  by  a certain  thought. 
He  must  ever  bear  in  mind  that  after 
persevering  for  some  time  he  may  have 
made  very  real  progress  without  becoming 
conscious  of  it  in  the  precise  way  which 


( 139  ) 

he  had  expected.  He  who  does  not  re- 
member this  is  likely  to  lose  heart,  and 
in  a little  while  to  abandon  his  efforts 
altogether.  The  mental  powers  and  facul- 
ties about  to  be  developed  are  at  first  of 
the  most  subtle  kind,  and  their  nature 
differs  entirely  from  the  conceptions  of 
them  which  are  formed  in  the  student’s 
mind.  He  was  accustomed  to  occupy 
himself  with  the  physical  world  alone. 
The  mental  and  astral  worlds  eluded  his 
gaze,  and  baffled  his  conceptions.  It  is, 
therefore,  not  remarkable  if,  at  first,  he 
fails  to  realise  the  new  forces,  mental  and 
astral,  which  are  developing  in  his  own 
-being.  This  is  why  it  is  dangerous  to 
enter  the  path  leading  to  occult  know- 
ledge without  experienced  guidance.  The 
teacher  sees  the  progress  made  by  the 
pupil,  long  before  the  latter  becomes  con- 
scious of  it  himself.  He  sees  the  delicate 
organs  of  spiritual  vision  beginning  to 
form  themselves,  before  the  pupil  is  aware 


( 140  ) 

of  their  existence,  and  a great  part  of  the 
duties  of  the  teacher  consists  in  perpetual 
watchfulness,  lest  the  disciple  lose  con- 
fidence, patience,  and  perseverance,  before 
he  becomes  conscious  of  his  own  progress. 
The  teacher,  as  we  know,  can  confer  upon 
the  student  no  powers  which  are  not 
already  latent  within  him,  and  his  sole 
function  is  to  assist  in  the  awakening  of 
slumbering  faculties.  But  he  may  be  a 
pillar  of  strength  to  him  who  strives  to 
penetrate  through  darkness  into  the  light. 

There  are  many  who  leave  the  occult 
path  soon  after  setting  foot  upon  it, 
because  they  are  not  immediately  conscious 
of  their  own  progress.  And  even  when 
higher  experiences  first  begin  to  dawn 
upon  the  seeker,  he  is  apt  to  regard  them 
as  illusions,  because  he  had  anticipated 
them  quite  differently.  He  loses  courage, 
either  because  he  regards  these  first 
experiences  as  of  no  value,  or  because 
they  appear  so  insignificant  that  he  has  no 


( 141  ) 


hope  of  their  leading  to  any  appreciable 
results  within  a measurable  time.  Cour- 
age and  self-confidence  are  the  two  lamps 
which  must  never  be  allowed  to  burn 
themselves  out  on  the  pathway  to  the 
occult.  He  who  cannot  patiently  repeat 
an  exercise  which  has  failed  for  an 
apparently  unlimited  number  of  times, 
will  never  travel  far. 

Long  before  any  distinct  perception  of 
progress,  comes  an  inarticulate  mental 
impression  that  the  right  road  has  been 
found.  This  is  a feeling  to  be  welcomed, 
and  to  be  encouraged,  since  it  may  develop 
into  a trustworthy  guide.  Above  all,  it  is 
imperative  to  extirpate  the  idea  that  any 
fantastic,  mysterious  practices  are  required 
for  the  attainment  of  higher  experiences. 
It  must  be  clearly  realised  that  ordinary 
every-day  human  feelings  and  thoughts 
must  form  the  basis  from  which  the  start 
is  to  be  made,  and  that  it  is  only  needful 
to  give  these  thoughts  and  feelings  a new 


( 142  ) 

direction.  Everyone  must  say  to  himself : 
“ In  my  own  sphere  of  thoughts  and  sen- 
sations lie  enfolded  the  deepest  mysteries, 
but  hitherto  I have  not  been  able  to  per- 
ceive them.”  In  the  end  it  all  resolves 
itself  into  the  fact  that  man,  ordinarily, 
carries  body,  soul,  and  spirit  about  with 
him,  yet  is  conscious  only  of  the  body,  not 
of  the  soul  and  spirit,  and  that  the  student 
attains  to  a siijfiilar  consciousness  of  soul 
and  spirit  also. 

Hence  it  is  highly  important  to  give  the 
proper  direction  to  thoughts  and  feelings, 
in  order  that  one  may  develop  the  percep- 
tion of  that  which  is  invisible  in  ordinary 
life.  One  of  the  ways  by  which  this 
development  may  be  carried  out  will  now 
be  indicated.  Again,  like  almost  every- 
thing else  we  have  explained  so  far,  it  is 
quite  a simple  matter.  Yet  the  results  are 
of  the  greatest  consequence,  if  the  experi- 
ment is  carried  out  with  perseverance,  and 
in  the  right  frame  of  mind. 


( 143  ) 

Place  before  you  the  small  seed  of  a 
plant.  It  is  then  necessary,  while  con- 
templating this  insignificant  object,  to 
create  with  intensity  the  right  kind  of 
thoughts,  and  through  these  thoughts  to 
develop  certain  feelings.  In  the  first 
place,  let  the  student  clearly  grasp  what 
is  really  presented  to  his  vision.  Let  him 
describe  to  himself  the  shape,  colour,  and 
all  other  qualities  of  the  grain  of  seed. 
Then  let  his  mind  dwell  upon  the  follow- 
ing train  of  thought ; “ This  grain  of  seed, 
if  planted  in  the  soil,  will  grow  into  a 
plant  of  complex  structure.”  Let  him 
clearly  picture  this  plant  to  himself.  Let 
him  build  it  up  in  his  imagination.  And  ‘ 
then  let  him  reflect  that  the  object  now 
existing  only  in  his  imagination  will  pre- 
sently be  brought  into  actual  physical 
existence  by  the  forces  of  the  earth  and 
of  light.  If  the  thing  contemplated  by 
him  were  an  artificially-made  object, 
though  such  a close  imitation  of  nature 


( 144  ) 

that  no  external  difference  could  be 
detected  by  human  eyesight,  no  forces 
inherent  in  the  earth  or  light  could  avail 
to  produce  from  it  a plant.  He  who 
thoroughly  grasps  this  thought  and  in- 
wardly assimilates  it  will  also  be  able  to 
form  the  following  idea  with  the  right 
feeling.  He  will  say  to  himself:  “That 
which  is  ultimately  to  grow  out  of  this 
seed  is  already  as  a force  now  secretly 
enfolded  within  it.  The  artificial  duplicate 
of  the  seed  contains  no  such  force.  And 
yet  both  appear  to  be  alike  to  my  eyes. 
The  real  seed,  therefore,  contains  some- 
thing invisible  which  is  not  present  in  the 
imitation.”  It  is  this  invisible  something 
on  which  thought  and  feeling  are  now  to 
be  concentrated.^  Let  the  student  fully 

^ Anyone  who  might  object  that  a microscopical 
examination  would  reveal  the  difference  between  the 
two  would  only  show  that  he  has  failed  to  grasp  the 
intention  of  the  experiment.  The  intention  is  not  to 
investigate  the  physical  structure  of  the  object,  but  to 
use  it  as  a means  for  the  development  of  psychic  force. 


LIBRARY 


( 145  ) 


realise  that  this  invisible  something  will 
later  on  translate  itself  into  a visible  plant, 
perceptible  by  him  in  shape  and  colour. 
Let  him  dwell  upon  the  thought : “ The 
invisible  will  become  visible.  If  I could 
not  think,  then  I could  not  realise,  already, 
that  which  will  only  become  visible  later 
on. 

Particular  stress  must  be  laid  on  the 
importance  of  feeling  with  intensity 
that  which  one  thinks.  In  calmness  of 
mind  a single  thought  must  be  vitally  ex- 
perienced within  oneself  to  the  exclusion  of 
all  disturbing  influences.  Sufficient  time 
must  be  taken  to  allow  the  thought,  and 
the  state  of  feeling  connected  therewith, 
to  become,  as  it  were,  iknbedded  in  the 
soul.  If  that  is  accomplished  in  the  right 
way — possibly  not  until  after  numerous 
attempts — an  inward  force  will  make 
itself  felt.  And  this  force  will  create 
new  powers  of  perception.  The  grain  of 

seed  will  appear  as  if  enclosed  in  a small 

10 


( 146  ) 

luminous  cloud.  The  spiritualised  vision  of 
the  student  perceives  it  as  a kind  of  flame. 
This  flame  is  of  a lilac  colour  in  the 
centre,  blue  at  the  edges.  Then  appears 
that  which  one  could  not  see  before,  and 
which  was  created  by  the  power  of  thought 
and  feeling  brought  into  life  within  oneself. 
That  which  was  physically  invisible  (the 
plant  which  will  not  become  visible  until 
later  on)  has  there  revealed  itself  to  the 
spiritual  eye. 

It  is  pardonable  if,  to  many  men,  all  this 
appears  to  be  mere  illusion.  Many  will 
say  : “ What  is  the  value  of  such  visions  or 
such  hallucinations  ? ” And  many  will  thus 
fall  away,  and  no  longer  continue  to  tread 
the  path.  But  this  is  precisely  the  import- 
ant point — not  to  confuse,  at  this  difficult 
stage  of  human  evolution,  spiritual  reality 
with  the  mere  creations  of  phantasy,  and 
to  have  the  courage  to  press  manfully  on- 
ward, instead  of  growing  timorous  and 
faint-hearted.  On  the  other  hand,  how- 


( 147  ) 

ever,  it  is  necessary  to  insist  on  the 
necessity  of  maintaining  unimpaired,  and 
of  perpetually  cultivating,  the  healthy 
attitude  of  mind  which  is  required  for 
the  distinguishing  of  truth  from  illusion. 
Never  during  all  these  exercises  must  the 
student  surrender  the  fully  conscious 
control  of  himself.  He  must  continue  to 
think  as  soundly  and  sanely  in  these  con- 
ditions as  he  does  with  regard  to  the 
things  and  occurrences  of  ordinary  life. 
It  would  be  a bad  thing  if  he  lapsed  into 
reveries.  He  must  at  every  moment  be 
clear-headed  and  sober-minded,  and  it 
would  be  the  greatest  mistake  if  the 
student,  through  such  practices,  lost  his 
mental  equilibrium,  or  if  he  were  prevented 
from  judging  as  sanely  and  clearly  as 
before  the  matters  of  work-a-day  life.  The 
disciple  should,  therefore,  examine  himself 
again  and  again  to  find  out  whether  he 
has  remained  unaltered  in  relation  to  the 
circumstances  among  which  he  lives,  or 


( 148  ) 

whether  perchance  he  has  lost  his  mental 
balance.  He  must  ever  maintain  a calm 
repose  within  his  own  individuality,  and 
an  open  mind  for  everything,  being  careful 
at  the  same  time  not  to  drift  into  vague 
reveries  or  to  experiment  with  all  sorts  of 
exercises. 

The  lines  for  development  here  indi- 
cated belong  to  those  which  have  been 
followed,  and  whose  efficacy  has  been 
demonstrated  in  the  schools  of  occultism 
from  the  earliest  ages,  and  none  but  such 
will  here  be  given.  Anyone  attempting 
to  employ  methods  of  meditation  devised 
by  himself,  or  which  he  may  have  come 
across  in  the  course  of  promiscuous  read- 
ing, will  inevitably  be  led  astray,  and  will 
lose  himself  in  a boundless  morass  of 
incoherent  fantasies. 

A further  exercise  which  may  succeed 
the  one  described  above,  is  the  following : 
Let  the  disciple  place  himself  in  front  of 
a plant  which  has  attained  the  stage  of 


( 149  ) 

full  development.  Now  let  his  mind  be 
absorbed  by  the  reflection  that  a time  is 
at  hand  when  this  plant  will  wither  and 
die.  “Nothing,”  he  should  say  to  himself, 
“ nothing  of  what  I now  see  before  me  will 
endure.  But  this  plant  will  have  evolved 
seeds  which  in  their  turn  will  grow  into 
new  plants.  I become  again  aware  that 
in  what  I see  something  lies  concealed 
which  I cannot  see.  I will  fill  my  mind 
wholly  with  the  thought  that  this  plant- 
form  with  its  colours  will  cease  to  be.  But 
the  reflection  that  the  plant  has  produced 
seeds  teaches  me  that  it  will  not  disappear 
into  nothing.  That  which  will  prevent  this 
disappearance,  I can  at  present  nomiore 
see  with  my  eyes  than  I could  originally 
discern  the  plant  in  the  grain  of  seed. 
The  'plant,  therefore,  contains  something 
which  my  eyes  are  unable  to  see.  If  this 
thought  fully  lives  in  me,  and  combines 
with  the  corresponding  state  of  feeling, 
then,  in  due  time,  there  will  again  develop 


( 150  ) 

a force  in  my  soul  which  will  ripen  into 
a new  kind  of  perception.”  Out  of  the 
plant  there  grows  once  more  a flame-like 
appearance,  which  is,  of  course,  corre- 
spondingly larger  than  that  which  was 
previously  described.  This  flame  is 
greenish  at  the  centre,  and  is  tinged 
with  yellow  at  the  outer  edge. 

He  who  has  won  this  vision  has  gained 
greatly,  inasmuch  as  he  sees  things  not 
only  in  their  present  state  of  being,  but 
also  in  their  development  and  decay.  He 
begins  to  see  in  all  things  the  spirit,  of 
which  the  bodily  organs  of  sight  have  no  ^ 
perception.  And  he  has  thus  taken  the 
initial  steps  on  that  road,  which  will 
gradually  enable  him  to  solve,  by  direct 
vision,  the  secret  of  birth  and  death.  To 
the  outer  senses,  a being  begins  to  exist 
at  its  birth,  and  ceases  to  exist  at  its 
death.  This,  however,  only  appears  to 
be  so,  because  these  senses  are  unable  to 
apprehend  the  concealed  spirit.  Birth 


( 151  ) 

and  death  are  only,  for  this  spirit,  trans- 
formations, just  as  the  unfolding  of  the 
flower  from  the  bud  is  a transformation 
enacted  before  our  physical  eyes.  But  if 
one  desires  to  attain  to  direct  perception 
of  these  facts,  one  must  first  awaken  the 
spiritual  vision  by  the  means  here  indi- 
cated. 

In  order  to  meet  an  objection  which 
may  be  raised  by  certain  people  already 
possessed  of  some  psychical  experience, 
let  it  be  at  once  admitted  that  there  are 
shorter  and  simpler  ways  than  this,  and 
that  there  are  persons  who  have  direct 
perception  of  the  actualities  of  birth  and 
death,  without  having  had  to  pass  through 
all  the  stages  of  discipline  here  set  forth. 
There  are  human  beings  endowed  with 
high  psychical  faculties,  to  whom  only  a 
slight  impulse  is  necessary  for  the  develop- 
ing of  these  powers.  But  they  are  excep- 
tional, and  the  methods  described  above 
are  safer,  and  are  capable  of  general 


( 152  ) 

application.  Similarly,  it  is  possible  to 
gain  some  knowledge  of  chemistry  by 
special  methods ; but  in  order  to  make 
safer  the  science  of  chemistry,  the  recog- 
nised, reliable  course  must  be  followed. 

An  error  fraught  with  serious  conse- 
quences would  result  from  the  assumption 
that  the  goal  could  be  reached  more 
simply  by  allowing  the  mind  to  dwell 
merely  on  an  imaginary  plant  or  a grain 
of  seed.  It  may  be  possible  by  such 
means  to  evoke  a force  which  would 
enable  the  soul  to  attain  the  inner  vision. 
But  this  vision  will  be,  in  most  cases,  a 
mere  figment  of  the  imagination,  for  the 
main  object  is  not  to  create  arbitrarily  a 
mental  vision,  but  to  allow  the  veritable 
nature  of  things  to  form  an  image  within 
one’s  mind.  The  truth  must  well  up  from 
the  depth  of  one’s  own  soul,  but  the 
necromancer  who  shall  call  up  the  truth 
must  not  be  one’s  ordinary  self,  but 
rather  must  the  objects  of  one’s  per- 


( 153  ) 

ception  themselves  exercise  their  magical 
power,  if  one  is  to  perceive  their  inner 
reality. 

After  the  disciple  has  evolved,  by  such 
means,  the  rudiments  of  spiritual  vision, 
he  may  proceed  to  the  contemplation  of 
human  nature  itself.  Simple  appearances 
of  ordinary  life  must  be  chosen  first.  But 
before  making  any  attempts  in  this  direc- 
tion, it  is  imperative  for  the  student  to 
strive  after  an  absolute  sincerity  of  moral 
character.  He  must  banish  all  thoughts 
of  ever  using  the  insight  to  be  attained  in 
these  ways  for  his  own  personal  benefit. 
He  must  be  absolutely  determined  that 
under  no  circumstances  will  he  avail  him- 
self, in  an  evil  sense,  of  any  power  which 
he  may  gain  over  his  fellow-creatures. 
This  is  the  reason  why  everyone  who  de- 
sires to  gain  direct  insight  into  the  secrets 
of  human  nature  must  follow  the  golden 
rule  of  true  Occultism.  And  the  golden 
rule  is  this : For  every  one  step  that 


( 154  ) 

you  take  in  the  pursuit  of  the  hidden 
knowledge,  take  three  steps  in  the  per- 
fecting of  your  own  character.  He  who 
obeys  this  rule  can  perform  such  exercises 
as  that  wliich  is  now  to  be  explained 
Begin  by  observing  a person  filled  with 
a desire  for  some  object.  Direct  your 
attention  to  this  desire.  It  is  best  to 
choose  a time  when  this  desire  is  at  its 
height,  and  when  it  is  not  yet  certain 
whether  the  object  of  the  desire  will  be 
attained  or  not.  Then  surrender  yourself 
entirely  to  the  contemplation  of  that 
which  you  observe,  but  maintain  the 
utmost  inner  tranquillity  of  soul.  Make 
every  endeavour  to  be  deaf  and  blind  to 
everything  that  may  be  going  on  around 
you  at  the  same  time,  and  bear  in  mind 
particularly  that  this  contemplation  is 
to  evoke  a state  of  feeling  in  your  soul. 
Allow  this  state  of  feeling  to  arise  in 
your  soul,  like  a cloud  rising  on  an  other- 
wise cloudless  horizon.  It  is  to  be  ex- 


( 155  ) 

pected,  of  course,  that  your  observation 
will  be  interrupted,  because  the  person 
on  whom  it  is  directed  will  not  remain 
in  this  particular  state  of  mind  for  a 
sufficient  length  of  time.  Presumably 
you  will  fail  in  your  experiment  hundreds 
and  hundreds  of  times.  It  is  simply  a 
question  of  not  losing  patience.  After 
many  attempts  you  will  ultimately  realise 
the  state  of  feeling  spoken  of  above  as 
fast  as  the  corresponding  mental  pheno- 
mena pass  through  the  soul  of  the  person 
under  observation.  After  a time  you  will 
begin  to  notice  that  this  feeling  in  your 
own  soul  is  evoking  the  power  of  spiritual 
vision  into  the  psychical  condition  of  the 
other.  A luminous  image  will  appear  in 
your  field  of  vision.  And  this  luminous 
image  is  the  so-called  astral  manifestation 
evoked  by  the  desire-state  when  under 
observation.  Again  we  may  describe  this 
image  as  flame-like  in  appearance.  It  is 
yellowish  red  in  the  centre  and  reddish 


( 156  ) 

blue  or  lilac  at  the  edges.  Much  depends 
upon  treating  such  experiences  of  the 
inner  vision  with  great  delicacy.  It  will 
be  best  for  you  at  first  to  talk  of  them 
to  nobody  except  your  teacher,  if  you 
have  one.  The  attempt  to  describe  such 
appearances  in  appropriate  words  usually 
only  leads  to  gross  self-deception.  One 
employs  ordinary  terms  not  applicable 
to  such  purposes,  and  therefore  much 
too  gross  and  clumsy.  The  consequence 
is  that  one’s  own  attempt  to  clothe  this 
vision  in  words  unconsciously  leads  one 
to  blend  the  actual  experience  with  an 
alloy  of  imaginary  details.  It  is,  there- 
fore, another  important  law  for  the  occult 
inquirer  that  he  should  know  how  to 
observe  silence  concerning  his  inner 
visions.  Observe  silence  even  towards 
yourself.  Do  not  endeavour  to  express 
in  words  that  which  you  see,  or  to  fathom 
it  with  reasoning  faculties  that  are  in- 
adequate. Freely  surrender  yourself  to 


{ t57  ) 

these  spiritual  impressions  without  any 
mental  reservations,  and  without  disturb- 
ing them  by  thinking  about  them  too 
much.  For  you  must  remember  that 
your  reasoning  faculties  were,  at  first, 
by  no  means  equal  to  your  faculties  of 
observation.  You  have  acquired  these 
reasoning  faculties  through  experiences 
hitherto  confined  exclusively  to  the  world 
as  apprehended  by  your  physical  senses, 
and  the  faculties  you  are  now  acquir- 
ing transcend  these  experiences.  Do  not, 
therefore,  try  to  measure  your  new  and 
higher  perceptions  by  the  old  standard. 
Only  he  who  has  already  gained  some 
certainty  in  his  observation  of  inner  ex- 
periences ought  to  speak  about  them  with 
the  idea  of  thereby  stimulating  his  fellow- 
beings. 

As  a supplementary  exercise  the  follow- 
ing may  be  set  forth.  Direct  your  obser- 
vation in  the  same  way  upon  a fellow- 
being to  whom  the  fulfilment  of  some 


( 158  ) 

wish,  the  gratification  of  some  desire  has 
just  been  granted.  If  the  same  rules  and 
precautions  are  adopted  as  in  the  previous 
instance,  you  will  once  more  attain  to 
spiritual  perception.  You  will  distinguish 
a flame-like  appearance  which  is  yellow 
in  the  centre  and  greenish  at  the  edges. 
Bv  such  observations  of  one’s  fellow- 
creatures  one  may  easily  be  led  into  a 
moral  fault — one  may  become  uncharit- 
able. All  conceivable  means  must  be 
taken  to  fight  against  this  tendency. 
Anyone  exercising  such  powers  of  obser- 
vation should  have  risen  to  the  level  on 
which  one  is  absolutely  convinced  that 
thoughts  are  actual  things.  He  may  then 
no  longer  allow  himself  to  admit  thoughts 
incompatible  with  the  highest  reverence 
for  the  dignity  of  human  life  and  of  human 
liberty.  Not  for  one  moment  must  he 
entertain  the  idea  of  regarding  a human 
being  as  a mere  object  for  observation. 
It  must  be  the  aim  of  self-education  to 


( 159  ) 

see  that  the  faculties  for  a psychic  obser- 
vation of  human  nature  go  hand  in  hand 
with  a full  recognition  of  the  rights  of 
each  individual.  That  which  dwells  in 
each  human  being  must  be  regarded  as 
something  holy,  and  to  be  held  inviolate 
by  us  even  in  our  thoughts  and  feelings. 
We  must  be  possessed  by  a feeling  of 
reverential  awe  for  all  that  is  human. 

For  the  present,  only  these  two  ex- 
amples can  be  given  as  to  the  methods 
by  which  an  insight  into  human  nature 
may  be  achieved,  but  they  will  at  least 
serve  to  point  out  the  way  which  must  be 
followed.  He  who  has  gained  the  inner 
tranquillity  and  repose  which  are  in- 
dispensable for  such  observations,  will 
already,  by  so  doing,  have  undergone  a 
great  transformation.  This  will  soon 
reach  the  point  at  which  the  increase  of 
his  spiritual  worth  will  manifest  itself  in 
the  confidence  and  composure  of  his  out- 
ward demeanour.  Again,  this  alteration 


( 160  ) 

in  his  demeanour  will  react  favourably  on 
his  inner  condition,  and  thus  he  will  be 
able  to  help  himself  further  along  the 
road.  He  will  find  ways  and  means  of 
penetrating  more  and  more  into  the 
secrets  of  human  nature,  hidden  from 
our  external  senses,  and  he  will  then  also 
become  ripe  for  a deeper  insight  into 
the  mysterious  correlations  between  the 
nature  of  man,  and  of  all  else  that  exists 
in  the  universe.  By  following  this  path, 
the  disciple  will  approach  closer  and 
closer  to  the  day  on  which  he  will  be 
deemed  worthy  of  taking  the  first  steps 
of  initiation ; but  before  these  can  be 
taken  one  thing  more  is  necessary.  At 
first  it  may  not  be  at  all  apparent  to  the 
student  why  it  should  be  necessary,  but 
he  cannot  fail  to  be  convinced  of  it  in  the 
end. 

The  quality  which  is  indispensable  to 
him  who  would  be  initiated  is  a certain 
measure  of  courage  and  fearlessness.  He 


( 161  ) 

must  absolutely  go  out  of  his  way  to  find 

opportunities  for  developing  these  virtues. 

In  the  occult  schools  they  are  cultivated 

quite  systematically ; but  life  in  this 

respect  is  itself  an  excellent  school  of 

occultism,  nay,  possibly  the  best.  To 

face  danger  calmly,  to  try  to  overcome 

difficulties  unswervingly,  this  is  what  the 

student  must  learn  to  do  ; for  instance,  in 

the  presence  of  some  peril,  he  must  rise 

at  once  to  the  conception  that  fears  are 

altogether  useless,  and  ought  not  to  be 

entertained  for  one  moment,  but  that  the 

mind  ought  simply  to  be  concentrated  on 

what  is  to  be  done.  He  must  reach  a 

point  where  it  has  become  impossible  for 

him  ever  again  to  feel  afraid  or  to  lose  his 

courage.  By  self-discipline  in  this  direction 

he  will  develop  within  himself  quite  distinct 

qualities  which  he  needs  if  he  is  to  be 

initiated  into  the  higher  mysteries.  Just 

as  man  in  his  physical  being  requires 

nervous  force  in  order  to  use  his  physical 

11 


( 162  ) 

senses,  so  also,  in  his  psychic  nature,  he 
requires  the  force  which  is  only  produced 
in  the  courageous  and  -the  fearless.  For 
in  penetrating  to  the  higher  mysteries  he 
will  see  things  which  are  concealed  from 
ordinary  humanity  by  the  illusions  of  the 
senses.  The  latter,  by  hiding  the  higher 
verities  from  our  gaze,  are  in  reality  our 
benefactors,  since  they  prevent  us  from 
perceiving  that  which,  if  realised  without 
due  preparation,  would  throw  us  into 
unutterable  consternation,  things  which 
we  could  not  bear  to  behold.  The 
disciple  must  be  able  to  endure  this  sight. 
He  loses  certain  supports  in  the  outer 
world  which  were  owing  to  the  very 
illusions  that  encompassed  him.  It  is 
truly  and  literally  as  if  his  attention  were 
suddenly  drawn  to  a certain  danger  by 
which  for  some  time  he  had  already 
been  threatened  unconsciously.  He  was 
not  afraid  hitherto,  but  now  that  he 
sees  his  peril,  he  is  overcome  by  terror. 


( 163  ) 

although  the  danger  has  not  been 
rendered  any  greater  by  his  knowledge 
thereof. 

The  forces  at  work  in  the  world  are 
both  destructive  and  creative.  The 
destiny  of  manifested  beings  is  birth  and 
death.  The  Initiate  is  to  behold  this 
march  of  destiny.  The  veil,  which  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  life  clouds  the  spiritual 
eyes,  is  then  to  be  uplifted.  The  man  is 
himself,  however,  interwoven  with  these 
forces,  with  this  destiny.  His  own  nature 
contains  destructive  and  creative  powers. 
As  undisguisedly  as  the  other  objects  of 
his  vision  are  revealed  to  the  eye  of  the 
seer,  his  own  soul  is  bared  to  his  gaze. 
In  the  face  of  this  self-knowledge,  the 
disciple  must  not  suffer  himself  to  droop, 
and  in  this  he  will  only  succeed  if  he  has 
brought  with  him  an  excess  of  the  necessary 
strength.  In  order  that  this  may  be  the 
case  he  must  learn  to  maintain  inner  calm 
and  confidence  in  the  most  difficult  circum- 


{ 164  ) 

stances ; he  must  nourish  within  himself 
a firm  faith  in  the  beneficent  forces  of 
existence.  He  must  be  prepared  to  find 
that  many  motives  which  have  actuated 
him  hitherto  will  actuate  him  no  longer. 
He  must  needs  perceive  that  he  has 
hitherto  often  thought  or  acted  in  a certain 
maimer,  because  he  was  still  in  the  toils 
of  ignorance.  Reasons  like  those  which 
influenced  him  before  will  now  disappear. 
He  has  done  many  things  out  of  personal 
vanity  ; he  will  now  perceive  how  utterly 
futile  all  such  vanity  is  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Initiate.  He  has  done  much  from  motives 
of  avarice ; he  will  now  be  aware  of  the 
destructive  effect  of  all  avariciousness. 
He  will  have  to  develop  entirely  new 
springs  for  his  thought  and  action,  and  it 
is  for  this  that  courage  and  fearlessness 
are  required. 

It  is  a matter  especially  of  cultivating 
this  courage  and  this  fearlessness  in  the 
inmost  depths  of  the  mental  life.  The 


( 165  ) 

disciple  must  learn  never  to  despair.  He 
must  always  be  equal  to  the  thought : 
‘'I  will  forget  that  I have  again  failed 
in  this  matter.  I will  try  once  more  as 
though  nothing  at  all  had  happened.”  Thus 
he  will  fight  his  way  on  to  the  firm  con- 
viction that  the  universe  contains  inex- 
haustible fountains  of  strength  from  which 
he  may  drink.  He  must  aspire  again  and 
again  to  the  Divine  which  will  uplift 
and  support  him,  however  feeble  and  im- 
potent the  mortal  part  of  his  being  may 
prove.  He  must  be  capable  of  pressing 
on  towards  the  future,  undismayed  by  any 
experiences  of  the  past.  Every  teacher 
of  Occultism  will  carefully  ascertain  how 
far  the  disciple,  aspiring  to  initiation 
into  the  higher  mysteries,  has  advanced 
on  the  road  of  spiritual  preparation.  If 
he  fulfil  these  conditions  to  a certain  point, 
he  is  then  worthy  to  hear  uttered  those 
Names  of  things  which  form  the  key 
that  unlocks  the  higher  knowledge.  For 


( 166  ) 

Initiation  consists  in  this  very  act  of 
learning  to  know  the  things  of  the  uni- 
verse by  those  Names  which  they  bear 
in  the  spirit  of  their  Divine  Author. 
And  the  mystery  of  things  lies  in  these 
Names.  Therefore  is  it  that  the  Initiate 
speaks  another  language  than  that  of 
the  uninitiate,  for  the  former  knows  the 
Names  by  which  things  were  called  into 
existence. 


VI 

INITIATION 

The  highest  point  in  an  occult  school,  of 
which  it  is  possible  to  speak  in  a book  for 
general  readers,  is  Initiation.  One  can- 
not give  public  information  concerning  all 
that  lies  beyond,  though  the  way  to  it  can 
always  be  found  by  one  who  has  previously 
pressed  forward  and  penetrated  the  lower 
secrets  and  mysteries. 

The  knowledge  and  power  which  are 
conferred  upon  a man  through  Initiation 
could  not  be  obtained  in  any  other 
manner  excepting  in  some  far  distant 
future,  after  many  incarnations,  on  quite 
another  road  and  in  quite  another 
form.  He  who  is  initiated  to-dav  ex- 

167 


( 168  ) 

periences  something  which  he  would 
otherwise  have  to  experience  at  a much 
later  period  and  under  quite  different 
circumstances. 

It  is  right  that  a person  should  learn  of 
the  secrets  of  nature  only  so  much  as 
corresponds  to  his  own  degree  of  develop- 
ment, and  for  this  reason  alone  do 
obstacles  bar  his  way  to  complete  know- 
ledge and  power.  People  should  not  be 
trusted  with  the  use  of  fire-arms  until 
they  have  had  enough  experience  to  make 
it  certain  that  they  will  not  use  them 
mischievously  or  without  care.  If  a 
person,  without  the  necessary  preparation, 
were  initiated  to-day,  he  would  lack  those 
experiences  which,  in  the  normal  course 
of  his  development,  would  come  to  him  in 
the  future  during  other  incarnations  and 
would  then  bring  with  them  the  corre- 
sponding secrets.  At  the  door  of  Initia- 
tion these  experiences  must,  therefore,  be 
supplied  in  some  other  way,  and  in  their 


( 169  ) 

place  the  candidate  has  to  undergo  the 
preliminary  teaching.  These  are  so-called 
‘‘  trials  ” which  have  to  be  passed.  These 
trials  are  now  being  discussed  in  various 
magazines  and  books,  but,  owing  to  their 
very  nature,  it  is  not  surprising  that 
quite  false  impressions  about  them  are 
received.  For  those  who  have  not  already 
gone  through  the  periods  of  Probation  and 
Enlightenment  have  seen  nothing  of  these 
trials,  and  consequently  cannot  appropri- 
ately describe  them. 

Certain  matters  or  subjects  connected 
with  the  higher  worlds  are  produced 
before  the  candidate,  but  he  is  only  able 
to  see  and  hear  these  when  he  can 
perceive  clearly  the  figures,  tones,  and 
colours,  for  which  he  has  been  prepared 
by  the  teachings  on  Probation  and 
Enlightenment. 

The  first  trial  consists  in  obtaining  a 

O 

clearer  comprehension  of  the  corporeal 
attributes  of  lifeless  things,  then  of  plants. 


( 170  ) 

of  animals,  of  human  beings  (in  the  way 
that  the  average  person  possesses  them). 
This  does  not  mean  what  is  commonly 
called  scientific  knowledge  ” ; with  that 
it  has  no  connection,  but  it  has  to  do 
with  intuition.  What  occurs  is  usually 
that  the  Initiate  discloses  to  the  can- 
didate how  the  objects  of  nature  and  the 
essence  of  living  things  reveal  themselves 
to  the  spiritual  and  mental  hearing  and 
sight.  In  a certain  way  these  things 
then  lie  revealed  — naked  — before  the 
beholder.  Attributes  and  qualities  which 
are  concealed  from  physical  eyes  and 
ears  can  then  be  seen  and  heard.  Here- 
tofore they  have  been  enwrapped  as  in 
a veil,  and  the  falling  away  of  this  veil 
for  the  candidate,  occurs  at  what  is 
called  the  Process  of  Purification  by 
Fire.  The  first  trial  is  therefore  known 
as  the  “ Fire-Trial.” 

For  some  people  the  ordinary  life  of 
every  day  is  a more  or  less  unconscious 


( 171  ) 

process  of  initiation  by  means  of  the  Fire- 
Trial.  These  persons  are  those  who  have 
passed  through  a wealth  of  developing 
experiences,  and  who  find  that  their  self- 
confidence,  courage,  and  fortitude  have 
been  greatly  augmented  in  a normal  way 
— who  have  learned  to  bear  sorrow  and 
disappointment,  from  the  failure  of  their 
undertakings,  with  greatness  of  mind,  and 
especially  with  quiet  and  unbroken 
strength.  Those  who  have  gone  through 
such  experiences  are  often  initiates,  with- 
out knowing  it,  and  it  needs  but  little 
to  open  for  them  the  spiritual  hearing 
and  sight  — to  make  them  clairvoyant. 
For  it  must  be  noted  that  a genuine 
Fire-Trial  is  not  merely  intended  to 
satisfy  the  curiosity  of  the  candidate. 
He  would  learn,  undoubtedly,  many  un- 
usual things,  of  which  others,  devoid  of 
such  experiences,  can  have  no  idea ; but 
yet  this  knowledge  is  not  the  end  or 
aim,  but  merely  the  path  to  the  end. 


( 1"2  ) 

The  real  aim  and  object  is  this — that 
the  candidate  shall  acquire  for  himself, 
through  this  knowledge  of  the  higher 
worlds,  a greater  and  truer  self-confidence, 
a higher  and  nobler  courage,  and  a per- 
severance, an  attitude  of  mind,  altogether 
different  from  what  he  could  have  ob- 
tained in  the  lower  world. 

After  the  Fire-Trial  a candidate  may 
always  turn  back ; but  because  he  has 
been  through  it,  he  will  resume  his  life, 
strengthened  in  all  his  spiritual  and  phy- 
sical relations,  and  in  his  next  incarnation 
he  will  continue  to  seek  for  initiation.  In 
his  present  life,  at  all  events,  he  will  prove 
himself  a more  useful  member  of  society, 
will  be  of  greater  service  to  humanity 
than  he  was  before,  and  in  whatever  posi- 
tion he  may  find  himself,  his  firmness, 
prudence,  and  favourable  influence  over 
his  fellows  will  have  greatly  increased. 

But  if,  after  coming  out  of  the  Fire- 
Trial,  he  should  wish  to  continue  in  the 


( 173  ) 

occult  school,  he  has  then  to  be 
instructed  in  a certain  writing-system 
which  is  used  by  those  in  the  school. 
Occult  teachings  are  written  in  this  occult 
writing-system,  because  what  is  really 
occult  can  neither  be  perfectly  spoken  of 
in  words  of  our  ordinary  speech,  nor  set 
forth  in  the  ordinary  ways  of  writing. 
Those  who  have  learned  from  the 
Initiates  endeavour  to  translate  the 
teachings  of  Occultism  as  best  they  may 
into  terms  of  ordinary  speech. 

The  symbols  or  signs  of  the  secret 
script  are  not  arbitrarily  invented  or 
imagined,  but  correspond  to  powers  which 
are  active  and  efficacious  in  the  world.  It 
is  through  these  symbols  or  signs  that  one 
learns  the  language  of  such  matters.  The 
candidate . immediately  sees  for  himself 
that  these  symbols  correspond  to  the 
figures,  tones,  and  colours  which  he  has 
learned  to  perceive  during  the  periods  of 
Probation  and  Enlightenment.  He  now 


( >74  ) 

understands  that  all  which  went  before 
was  only  like  learning  how  to  spell,  and 
that  only  now  does  he  begin  to  read  in 
the  higher  worlds.  All  that  appeared 
to  him  before  as  separate  figures,  tones, 
and  colours,  is  now  revealed  to  him  as 
a perfect  unity,  a coherent  harmony,  and 
now,  for  the  first  time,  he  attains  a real 
certainty  in  observing  and  following  the 
higher  worlds.  Hitherto  it  was  not 
possible  for  him  to  be  sure  that  what  he 
saw  had  been  clearly  or  correctly  per- 
ceived. Now,  too,  it  is  possible,  at  last, 
that  a correct  understanding,  in  the 
spheres  of  the  higher  knowledge,  can 
begin  to  arise  between  the  candidate  and 
the  Initiate.  For  no  matter  how  close 
the  connection  between  the  two  may  be, 
no  matter  what  form  their  intercourse 
may  take  in  ordinary  life,  the  Initiate  can 
only  communicate  to  the  candidate,  on 
these  planes,  in  the  direct  form  or  figures 
of  the  secret  alphabet. 


( 175  ) 

Through  this  occult  speech  the  student 
also  learns  certain  rules  of  conduct  for 
life,  certain  duties  and  obligations,  of 
which,  before,  he  knew  nothing  what- 
ever. When  he  learns  to  know  these, 
he  is  able  to  perform  actions  which  have 
a significance  and  meaning  such  as  the 
actions  of  one  who  is  not  initiated  can 
never  possess.  The  only  point  of  view 
from  which  he  is  now  able  to  look  upon 
things,  the  only  plane  from  which  he 
can  now  make  manifest  his  deeds,  is  that 
of  the  higher  worlds.  Instructions  con- 
cerning such  deeds  can  only  be  read,  or 
understood,  in  the  secret  script. 

Yet  it  must  be  emphasized'  and  clearly 
apprehended  that  there  are  persons  who, 
unconsciously,  have  the  ability  or  faculty 
of  performing  these  actions,  notwithstand- 
ing that  they  have  never  been  in  an  occult 
school.  Such  “ helpers  of  humanity  and 
the  world”  proceed  blessedly  and  bene- 
ficently through  life.  There  are  certain 


( 176  ) 

fundamental  reasons,  which  cannot  be 
here  discussed,  why  they  are  in  posses- 
sion of  seemingly  supernatural  gifts.  The 
difference  between  these  persons  and  the 
pupils  of  an  occult  school  is  only  that 
the  former  act  unconsciously,  but  the 
latter  with  a full  knowledge,  insight, 
judgment,  and  understanding  of  the 
entire  matter  in  hand.  The  candidate 
wins  by  training,  what  has  been  bestowed 
upon  his  fellow  by  a Higher  Power,  for 
the  good  of  humanity.  One  should  freely 
and  openly  honour  these  favoured  ones  of 
God  ; but  one  should  not,  on  their  account, 
consider  the  work  of  the  occult  schools 
unnecessary  or  superfluous. 

Now  that  the  student  has  learned  the 
“ Mystery  language,”  there  yet  awaits 
him  another  trial.  By  this  he  must 
prove  whether  he  can  move  with  freedom 
and  certainty  in  the  higher  worlds.  In 
ordinary  life  a man  will  be  impelled  to 
actions  by  outward  motives  and  con- 


( 177  ) 

ditions.  He  works  at  this  or  that  be- 
cause certain  duties  are  imposed  upon 
him  by  outward  circumstances.  It  need 

V 

hardly  be  mentioned  that  the  occult 
student  must  in  no  way  neglect  any  of 
the  duties  connected  with  his  ordinary 
life  because  he  is  working  in  an  occult 
school  and  in  the  higher  worlds.  None 
of  his  duties  there  can  constrain  him 
to  treat  with  inattention  or  careless- 
ness any  one  of  his  duties  in  the  lower 
world.  The  father  will  remain  just  as 
good  a father  to  his  family,  the  mother 
just  as  good  a mother,  and  neither  the 
officer  nor  the  soldier,  nor  anyone  else, 
will  be  detained  from  their  necessary 
duties  because  they  happen  to  be  students 
in  an  occult  school.  On  the  contrary, 
all  the  qualities  which  make  men  capable 
are  increased  to  a degree  of  which 
the  uninitiated  can  form  no  idea.  That 
this  may  not  always  appear  to  be  the 

case  in  the  eyes  of  the  uninitiated  is 

12 


( 178  ) 

merely  due  to  the  fact  that  he  has  not 
always  the  ability  to  correctly  judge  or 
criticise  the  Initiate.  The  deeds  of  the 
latter  are  not  always  entirely  intelligible 
to  the  former.  But,  as  we  have  said 
before,  this  only  happens  in  certain  cases. 

For  him  who  has  arrived  at  the  so- 
called  “ Steps  of  Initiation,”  there  are 
now  duties  to  be  performed  to  which  no 
outer  stimulus  is  given.  He  will  be 
moved  to  do  these  things  by  no  external 
pressure,  but  by  those  rules  of  conduct 
which  have  been  communicated  to  him 
in  the  mystery-language.  In  this  second 
trial  he  must  prove  that,  led  by  such 
rules  of  conduct,  he  can  act  from  inner 
promptings  just  as  firmly  as  an  officer 
performs  his  obligatory  duties.  For  this 
purpose  the  teacher  will  set  before  the 
pupil  certain  definite  tasks.  The  latter 
has  now  to  execute  some  deed  in  conse- 
quence of  observations  made  from  the 
basis  of  what  he  learned  during  Probation 


( 179  ) 

and  Enlightenment.  He  has  to  find  tlie 
way  to  what  he  is  now  to  perform,  by 
means  of  the  mystery-language,  which 
by  this  time  is  familiar  to  him.  If  he 
discerns  his  duty  and  executes  it  cor- 
rectly, he  has  endured  the  trial,  and  he 
recognises  the  success  which  attends  the 
fulfilment  of  the  task  by  the  changed 
manner  with  which  the  spiritual  eyes  and 
ears  now  apprehend  the  figures,  tones, 
and  colours.  The  occult  teacher  tells  him 
distinctly  how  these  must  appear  after 
the  consummation  of  the  trial,  and  the 
candidate  must  know  how  he  can  effect 
this  change.  This  trial  is  known  as  the 
“ Water-Trial,’’  because  in  consequence  of 
its  performance  taking  place  on  the  higher 
planes,  that  support  which  would  other- 
wise have  been  received  from  outward 
conditions  is  now  taken  away.  One’s 
movements  are  like  those  which  are  made 
in  water  by  someone  who  is  learning  to 
swim.  He  feels  no  support  under  his 


( 180  ) 

feet.  This  practice  must  be  often  re- 
peated until  the  candidate  attains  absolute 
poise  and  assurance. 

These  trials  are  also  dependent  upon 
a quality  which  is  produced  by  the  ex- 
periences in  the  higher  worlds.  The 
candidate  cultivates  this  quality  to  an 
extent  which,  in  so  short  a time,  he  could 
not  possibly  reach  while  developing  in  the 
ordinary  way,  but  could  only  attain  after 
many  incarnations.  In  order  to  bring 
about  the  change  here  mentioned,  the 
following  is  the  principal  necessity : The 
candidate  must  altogether  be  guided  by 
what  has  been  proven  to  him  by  the 
cultivation  of  his  higher  faculties,  by  the 
results  of  his  reading  in  the  secret  cyphers. 

Should  he,  during  these  experiences, 
attempt  to  introduce  any  of  his  own 
opinions  or  desires,  or  should  he  diverge 
for  one  moment  from  the  laws  and  rules 
which  he  has  proved  to  be  right,  some- 
thing quite  other  than  that  which  is 


( ISI  ) 

meant  will  occur.  In  such  cases  the 
candidate  loses  sight  of  the  goal  for  which 
these  matters  are  undertaken,  and  the 
result  is  only  confusion.  He  has,  there- 
fore, manifold  opportunities,  during  these 
trials,  for  the  development  of  self-control, 
and  this,  indeed,  is  the  principal  quality 
needed.  These  trials  are,  therefore,  much 
more  easily  endured  by  those  who,  before 
initiation,  have  gone  through  a life  which 
has  enabled  them  to  acquire  command  of 
themselves.  Those  who  have  developed 
the  characteristic  of  following  their  higher 
principles  and  ideals  without  thought  of 
personal  honour  or  desire,  who  discern 
always  the  duty  to  be  fulfilled,  even 
though  the  inclinations  and  sympathies 
are  too  often  ready  to  lead  them  another 
way,  are  already,  in  the  midst  of  everyday 
life,  unconscious  initiates.  They  need  but 
little  to  enable  them  to  succeed  in  the 
prescribed  trials.  Indeed,  one  may  say 
that  a certain  measure  of  initiation,  thus 


( 182  ) 

unconsciously  acquired  in  life,  will  be 
absolutely  necessary  before  entering  upon 
the  second  trial.  For  even  as  many  who 
during  youth  have  not  learnt  to  write  or 
spell,  find  much  difficulty  in  learning  to  do 
so  during  later  years,  so  is  it  also  difficult 
to  develop,  merely  from  a knowledge  of 
the  higher  worlds,  the  necessary  degree  of 
self-control,  if  one  has  not  already  acquired 
a certain  measure  of  it  in  the  course  of 
ordinary  life. 

The  things  of  the  physical  world  do 
not  alter,  however  we  may  desire  them 
to  do  so,  but  in  the  higher  worlds  our 
wishes,  inclinations,  and  desires  are  causes 
that  produce  effects.  If  we  desire  to 
bring  about  particular  changes  in  these 
worlds,  we  must  hold  ourselves  in  absolute 
control,  we  must  follow  the  right  principle, 
must  entirely  subdue  the  personal  will. 

There  is  an  attribute  which  at  this  stage 
of  initiation  has  to  be  especially  con- 
sidered,— quite  a healthy  and  sure  faculty 


( 183  ) 

of  judgment.  Attention  must  be  directed 
to  the  education  of  this  faculty  during 
all  the  previous  stages,  and  in  the  course 
of  them  it  must  be  proved  whether  the 
candidate  has  developed  this  quality 
sufficiently  to  make  him  fit  to  tread  the 
path  of  true  knowledge.  Further  pro- 
gress is  now  only  possible  for  him  if  he 
is  able  to  distinguish  illusion,  superstition, 
unsubstantial  fancies,  and  all  manner  of 
such  things,  from  the  true  realities.  At 
first,  this  is  much  more  difficult  to 
accomplish  upon  the  higher  stages  of 
existence  than  upon  the  lower.  Every 
prejudice,  every  cherished  opinion  regard- 
ing these  matters,  in  whatever  connec- 
tion, must  vanish  away.  Truth  alone  must 
guide.  There  must  be  perfect  readiness 
to  surrender  at  once  any  existing  opinion, 
idea,  or  inclination,  when  the  logical  idea 
demands  it.  Absolute  certainty  in  the 
higher  worlds  is  only  to  be  obtained  when 
one  never  obtrudes  one’s  own  opinions. 


( ) 

People  whose  mode  of  thought  inclines 
them  to  phantasy,  prejudice,  and  so  forth, 
can  make  no  progress  on  the  occult  way. 
In  truth,  it  is  a glorious  treasure  that  the 
occult  student  shall  attain.  All  doubt  as 
to  the  higher  worlds  will  be  taken  away 
from  him.  In  all  their  law  they  will 
reveal  themselves  to  his  gaze.  But  so 
long  as  he  is  blindfolded  he  cannot  win 
these  heights  and  compensations.  It 
were,  indeed,  unhappy  for  him  if  his 
phantasies  and  superstitions  ran  away 
with  his  intellect  and  reason.  Dreamers 
and  people  inclined  to  phantasies  are  as 
unfit  for  the  occult  path  as  are  super- 
stitious people ; for  in  dreams,  phantasies, 
and  superstitions  lurk  the  most  dangerous 
enemies  on  the  road  to  knowledge.  But 
because  upon  the  gateway  which  leads  to 
the  second  trial  are  written  the  words. 
All  prejudices  must  fall  away”  ; because 
the  candidate  has  already  seen  upon  the 
portals  that  opened  to  him  the  first  trial. 


( 185  ) 

the  words,  “Without  a normal  common- 
sense  all  your  efforts  are  in  vain,” — yet 
it  is  not  necessary  to  think  that  the 
capacity  for  inspiration  and  enthusiasm, 
and  all  the  poetry  of  life,  is  lost  to  the 
student  of  Occultism. 

If  he  be  now  sufficiently  advanced,  a 
third  trial  awaits  the  candidate.  No  aim, 
no  boundary  lines,  are  here  set  for  him. 
All  is  left  entirely  in  his  own  hands.  He 
finds  himself  in  a condition  where  nothing 
causes  or  induces  him  to  act.  He  must 
find  the  way  of  his  own  accord  and  from 
within  himself.  Conditions  or  people  who 
might  have  stimulated  him  to  action  are 
no  longer  there.  Nothing  and  nobody 
can  give  the  strength  which  he  now  needs, 
but  he  himself  alone.  If  he  should  not 
find  this  strength  within  himself,  he  will 
very  soon  find  himself  standing  where  he 
was  before  ; but  it  must  be  remarked  that 
very  few  of  those  who  have  endured  the 
previous  trials  will  fail  at  this  point  in 


«» 


( 186  ) 

finding  the  necessary  strength.  Either 
they  will  have  turned  back  already  or  they 
can  endure  at  this  point  also.  The  only 
thing  necessary  is  the  ability  to  make  a 
resolution  quickly.  For  here,  in  the  truest 
meaning  of  the  phrase,  one  must  find  one- 
self. In  all  matters  one  must  quickly 
resolve  to  hear  the  suggestions,  the  in- 
spirations of  the  spirit.  One  has  no  time 
for  doubt  or  delay.  Every  moment  of 
hesitation  would  add  to  the  proof  that  one 
was  not  yet  ready.  All  that  hinders  one 
from  hearing  the  voice  of  the  spirit  must 
be  boldly  conquered.  It  is  entirely  a 
matter  of  proving  one’s  presence  of  mind, 
and  it  is  this  attribute  to  which  attention 
must  be  paid  during  all  the  foregoing 
stages  of  development.  All  temptations 
to  act,  or  even  to  think,  which  hitherto 
assailed  a man,  must  now  cease ; but  in 
order  that  he  may  not  slip  into  inaction, 
he  must  not  lose  his  hold  upon  himself. 
For  only  in  himself  can  he  find  that  one 


( 187  ) 

sure  centre-point  on  which  he  can  depend. 
No  one,  without  further  familiarity  with 
the  subject,  should  feel  an  antipathy  to 
this  principle  of  self-rejection.  For  him 
who  has  endured  the  trials  already 
described,  it  indicates  the  most  perfect 
felicity. 

And  in  this,  as  in  the  other  stages  before 
mentioned,  for  many  people,  everyday  life 
itself  can  be  an  occult  school.  People 
who  have  reached  the  point  of  being  able, 
when  suddenly  confronted  with  some  task 
or  problem  demanding  immediate  action, 
to  come  to  a swift  resolution,  to  act  with- 
out delay  or  personal  consideration,  have, 
indeed,  undergone  their  occult  schooling 
in  everyday  life.  The  situation  which 
one  wishes  to  suggest  is  one  in  which  a 
successful  action  is  impossible  unless 
the  person  concerned  grasps  the  whole 
matter  and  acts  at  once.  He  is  quick 
to  act  when  misfortune  is  in  sight,  when 
a moment’s  hesitation  may  produce  a 


( 1»8  ) 

catastrophe ; and  he  who  possesses  the 
qualities  which  can  be  developed  into  a 
permanent  attribute  of  such  a kind,  has 
already  evolved,  unknown  to  himself,  the 
degree  of  ripeness  necessary  for  the  third 
trial.  For,  as  already  remarked,  at  this 
stage  it  all  depends  upon  the  development 
of  presence  of  mind. 

In  the  occult  schools  this  trial  is  known 
as  the  “ Air-Trial,”  because  while  under- 
going it  the  candidate  can  support  him- 
self neither  upon  the  firm  ground,  nor  any 
external  cause,  nor  that  which  he  has 
learned  in  Probation  and  Enlightenment 
from  the  figures  and  tones  and  colours, 
but  solely  upon  himself. 

If  the  occult  student  has  endured  these 
trials,  he  is  then  permitted  to  enter  the 
Temple  of  the  Higher  Wisdom.”  All  that 
can  be  further  said  upon  this  subject  can 
only  be  given  out  in  the  smallest  hints 
and  suggestions.  That  which  has  now  to 
be  performed  has  been  so  often  put  into 


( 1S9  ) 

words  that  many  say  that  the  pupil  has 
here  to  take  an  oath,”  promising  to  be- 
tray nothing  that  comes  from  the  teacher. 
Nevertheless  these  expressions  “ oath  ” 
and  “ betrayal  ” are  in  no  way  appropriate, 
but  are  only  misleading.  It  is  no  matter 
of  an  oath  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the 
word,  but  is  rather  an  experience  that 
comes  at  this  stage.  Here  the  candidate 
appreciates  the  true  value  of  the  occult 
teachers,  and  their  place  in  the  service 
of  humanity.  At  last  he  begins  to  under- 
stand the  world  correctly.  It  is  not  so 
much  a matter  of  “ withholding  ” the  higher 
truths  now  learned,  but  much  more  of  up- 
holding them  in  the  right  way  and  with 
the  necessary  tact.  That  about  which 
one  learns  to  “keep  silence”  is  something 
quite  different.  One  gains  possession  of 
this  fine  attribute  in  regard  to  many  things 
of  which  one  had  previously  spoken,  and 
especially  in  regard  to  the  manner  in  which 
one  has  spoken  of  them.  Yet  it  would  be 


( IfO  ) 

a bad  Initiate  who  did  not  place  all  his 
mystical  experiences,  as  adequately  and  as 
far-reachingly  as  possible,  at  the  service 
of  humanity.  The  sole  obstacle  to  com- 
munication in  such  matters  is  the  mis- 
understanding of  the  person  who  receives 
it.  Above  all,  the  higher  secrets  do  not 
allow  themselves  to  be  spoken  about 
promiscuously,  but  to  none  who  has 
passed  the  steps  of  development  above 
described,  is  it  actually  forbidden  to 
speak  of  these  matters.  No  one  is  asked 
for  a negative  oath,  but  everything  is 
placed  on  one’s  own  responsibility.  What 
one  really  learns  is  to  find  out  within 
oneself  what  should  be  done  under  all 
circumstances,  and  the  “ oath  ” means 
nothing  more  than  this,  that  one  is  found 
qualified  to  be  entrusted  with  such  a 
responsibility. 

If  the  candidate  is  found  fit,  he  is  then 
given  what  is  called,  s3^mbolically,  “the 
draught  of  forgetfulness.”  This  means 


( 191  ) 

that  he  will  be  initiated  into  the  secret 
knowledge  enabling  him  to  act  without 
being  continually  disturbed  by  the  lower 
memory.  This  is  absolutely  necessary  for 
the  Initiate,  for  he  must  possess  full  faith 
in  the  immediate  present.  He  must  be 
able  to  destroy  that  veil  of  memory  which 
extends  itself  round  humanity  more  and 
more  thickly  with  every  moment  of  life. 

If  one  judges  of  something  which 
happens  to  one  to-day,  according  to  the 
experiences  of  yesterday,  one  is  subjected 
by  so  doing  to  a multitude  of  errors.  Of 
course,  it  is  not  intended  that  the  reader 
should  think  that  one  ought  to  renounce 
all  the  experience  acquired  in  life. 

One  ought  always  to  keep  it  in  mind  as 
firmly  as  possible.  But  as  an  Initiate  one 
should  retain  the  ability  for  judging  every 
fresh  experience  from  outside  of  oneself, 
unclouded  by  all  bygone  experiences. 
One  must  be  prepared,  at  every  moment, 
that  a new  thing  or  being  shall  bring  to 


( 102  ) 

one  a new  revelation.  If  one  judges  the 
new  by  the  standard  of  the  old,  one 
necessarily  falls  into  error.  For  this 
very  reason,  the  memory  of  past  ex- 
periences is  useful,  for  they  make  one 
capable  of  seeing  the  new.  If  one  had 
not  gone  through  a certain  experience, 
one  would  probably  not  have  seen  at  all 
the  attributes  of  this  or  that  being  or 
thing ; but  such  experiences  ought  only  to 
enable  one  to  discern  the  new,  and  not  by 
any  means  to  cause  one  to  judge  it  by 
the  old.  In  this  way  the  Initiate  obtains 
certain  definite  qualities,  and  by  means  of 
these  many  things  are  revealed  to  him, 
while  they  remain  concealed  from  the 
uninitiated. 

The  second  draught  which  is  given  to 
the  Initiate  is  the  “ draught  of  remem- 
brance.” By  receiving  this  he  becomes 
capable  of  keeping  the  higher  secrets  ever- 
present in  the  soul.  Ordinary  memory 
would  not  be  sufficient  to  ensure  this  ; one 


( 193  ) 

must  be  absolutely  at  one  with  the  higher 
truths.  One  must  not  merely  know  them, 
but  be  able,  as  a matter  of  course,  to 
manifest  and  administer  them  in  living 
actions,  even  as  an  ordinary  man  eats  and 
drinks.  They  must  become  one’s  practice, 
one’s  inclinations,  one’s  habits.  It  must  be 
unnecessary  to  think  of  them  consciously 
(in  the  usual  sense  of  the  word) ; they 
must  become  a part  of  oneself  and  express 
themselves  through  one’s  very  being  ; they 
must  flow  through  one,  even  as  the  life- 
currents  run  through  one’s  organism.  So 
must  we  make  ourselves  as  perfect  in  a 
spiritual  sense  as  nature  has  made  us  in 
a physical. 


13 


VII 


THE  HIGHEE  EDUCATION  OF 
THE  SOUL 

If  a man  carries  out  the  culture  of  his 
thoughts  and  feelings  and  emotions  in  the 
way  already  described  in  the  chapters  on 
Probation,  Enlightenment,  and  Initiation, 
he  then  eftects  a change  in  his  soul  such 
as  Nature  has  effected  in  his  body. 
Before  this  training,  soul  and  spirit  are 
undifferentiated  masses.  In  such  a state 
the  clairvoyant  will  perceive  them  as  inter- 
lacing clouds,  rotating  spirally,  and  having 
usually  a dull  glimmer  of  reddish  colour 
or  reddish-brown,  or,  perhaps,  of  reddish- 
yellow  ; but  after  this  culture  they  begin 
to  assume  a brilliant  yellowish-green  or 


( 195  ) 

yellow-blue  colour,  and  become  of  a 
regular  structure.  A man  attains  to  such 
regularity  of  structure,  and  at  the  same 
time  to  the  higher  knowledge,  when  he 
brings  into  the  region  of  his  thoughts, 
feelings,  and  emotions,  an  order  such  as 
Nature  has  brought  into  his  bodily  organs, 
by  means  of  which  he  can  see,  hear,  digest, 
breathe,  speak,  and  so  forth.  Gradually 
the  student  learns,  as  it  were,  to  breathe, 
to  see  with  the  soul,  and  to  speak  and 
hear  with  the  spirit. 

In  the  following  pages  only  a few  of  the 
practical  points  pertaining  to  the  higher 
education  of  the  soul  and  spirit  will  be 
more  fully  treated.  They  are  such  as 
may  be  practically  attained  by  anyone 
without  additional  instruction,  and  by 
means  of  which  a further  step  in  occult 
science  may  be  taken. 

A particular  kind  of  discipline  must  be 
patiently  attempted.  Every  emotion  of 
impatience  produces  a paralysing,  nay. 


( 196  ) 

even  a deadening,  effect  on  the  higher 
faculties  latent  within  us.  One  must  not 
expect  immeasurable  glimpses  of  the  higher 
worlds  to  open  out  before  one  from  day 
to  day,  for  assuredly,  as  a rule,  this  does 
not  occur.  Content  with  the  smallest 
attainment,  repose  and  tranquillity  must 
more  and  more  possess  the  soul.  It 
is  conceivable,  of  course,  that  the  learner 
should  impatiently  expect  results,  but  he 
will  attain  to  nothing  so  long  as  he  fails 
to  master  this  impatience.  Nor  is  it 
of  any  use  to  struggle  against  this 
impatience  in  the  ordinary  way,  for  then 
it  will  only  become  stronger  than  ever. 
It  is  thus  that  men  deceive  themselves, 
for  in  such  a case  it  plants  itself  all  the 
more  deeply  in  the  depths  of  the  soul. 
It  is  only  by  repeatedly  surrendering 
oneself  to  a single  definite  thought,  and 
by  making  it  absolutely  one’s  own,  that 
anything  is  really  attained.  One  should 
think : “ I must  certainly  do  everything 


( 197  ) 

possible  for  the  culture  of  soul  and  spirit, 
but  I will  wait  tranquilly  until,  by  higher 
powers,  I shall  be  found  worthy  of  definite 
illumination.”  When  this  thought  has 
become  so  powerful  in  a man  that  it  is  an 
actual  trait  in  his  character,  he  is  tread- 
ing the  right  path.  This  trait  will  then 
express  itself  even  in  external  affairs. 
The  gaze  of  the  eye  becomes  tranquil ; the 
movements  of  the  body  become  sure ; 
the  resolutions  defined ; and  all  that  we 
call  nervous  susceptibility  gradually  disap- 
pears. Rules  that  seem  trifling  and  insig- 
nificant must  be  taken  into  account.  For 
example,  suppose  that  someone  aftronts 
us.  Before  this  occult  education,  we  should 
have  directed  our  resentment  against  the 
wrong-doer ; there  would  have  been  an 
uprush  of  anger  within  us.  But  in  such 
a case  the  occult  student  will  think  to 
himself : “ An  affront  of  this  kind  can 
make  no  difference  to  my  worth,”  and 
whatever  must  be  done  to  meet  the 


( 198  ) 

affront,  he  accomplishes  with  calm  and 
composure,  not  with  passion.  To  him  it 
is  not  a matter  of  how  an  affront  is  to  be 
borne,  but  without  hesitation  he  is  led 
to  punish  an  affront  to  his  own  person 
exactly  as  if  it  had  been  offered  to  another, 
in  which  case  one  has  the  right  to  resent 
it.  It  must  always  be  remembered  that 
the  occult  training  is  perfected  not  by 
coarse  external  processes,  but  by  subtle, 
silent  alterations  in  the  life  of  thought 
and  emotion. 

Patience  has  an  attractive,  impatience 
a repellent,  effect  on  the  treasures  of  the 
higher  knowledge.  In  the  higher  regions 
of  being,  nothing  can  be  attained  by  haste 
and  restlessness.  Above  all  things,  desire 
and  longing  must  be  silenced,  for  these 
are  qualities  of  the  soul  before  which 
all  higher  knowledge  recedes.  However 
precious  this  knowledge  may  be  accounted, 
one  must  not  desire  to  anticipate  the 
time  of  its  coming.  He  who  wishes  to 


( 199  ) 

have  it  for  his  own  sake  will  never  attain 
it.  Before  all  things  it  is  demanded  that 
one  should  be  true  to  oneself  in  one’s 
innermost  soul.  One  must  not  there  be 
deceived  by  anything ; one  must  encounter, 
face  to  face  and  with  absolute  truthful- 
ness, one’s  own  faults,  failings,  and  unfit- 
ness. The  moment  you  try  to  excuse  to 
yourself  any  one  of  your  weaknesses,  you 
have  placed  an  obstacle  in  the  way  which 
is  to  lead  you  upward.  Such  obstacles 
can  only  be  removed  by  self-illumination. 
There  is  only  one  way  by  which  to  get 
rid  of  our  faults  and  weaknesses,  and  that 
is  by  correctly  appreciating  them.  All 
that  is  needed  lies  latent  in  the  human 
soul  and  can  be  evoked.  It  is  even 
possible  for  a man  to  improve  his  under- 
standing and  his  reason,  if  in  repose  he 
makes  it  clear  to  himself  why  he  is  weak 
in  this  respect.  Self-knowledge  of  this 
kind  is  naturally  difficult,  for  the  tempta- 
tion to  deceive  oneself  is  immeasurably 


( 200  ) 

great.  He  who  is  accustomed  to  be 
truthful  with  himself  has  opened  the 
portals  into  a deeper  insight. 

All  curiosity  must  fall  away  from  the 
student.  He  must  wean  himself  as  much 
as  possible  from  inquiries  into  matters 
of  which  he  only  wishes  to  know  for  the 
gratification  of  his  personal  thirst  for 
knowledge.  He  must  only  ask  himself 
what  things  will  assist  him  in  the  perfec- 
tion of  his  innermost  being  for  the  service 
of  the  general  evolution.  Nevertheless, 
his  delight  in  knowledge  and  his  devotion 
to  it  must  in  no  degree  become  relaxed. 
He  must  listen  devoutly  to  all  that  con- 
tributes to  such  an  end,  and  should  seek 
every  opportunity  of  doing  so. 

For  this  interior  culture  it  is  especially 
necessary  that  the  desire -life  should  be 
carefully  educated.  One  must  not  be- 
come wholly  destitute  of  desire,  for  if  we 
are  to  attain  to  something  it  is  necessary 
that  we  should  desire  it,  and  a desire  will 


( 201  ) 

always  be  fulfilled  if  a certain  special  force 
be  behind  it.  This  particular  force  results 
from  a right  knowledge : “ Do  not  desire 
at  all  until  you  know  the  true  conditions 
of  any  sphere.”  That  is  one  of  the  golden 
rules  for  the  occult  student.  The  wise 
man  first  ascertains  the  laws  of  the  world, 
and  then  his  desires  become  powers  which 
realise  themselves.  Let  us  consider  an 
example  in  which  the  effect  is  evident. 
There  are  certainly  many  who  would  like 
to  learn  from  their  own  intuition  some- 
thing about  their  life  before  birth.  Such 
a desire  is  altogether  aimless,  and  leads  to 
no  result  so  long  as  the  person  in  question 
has  not  acquired  a knowledge  of  the  laws 
that  govern  the  nature  of  the  Eternal,  and 
a knowledge  of  them  in  their  subtlest  and 
most  intimate  character.  But  if  he  has 
actually  acquired  this  knowledge  and  then 
wishes  to  pass  onward,  he  is  able  to  do  so 
by  his  elevated  and  purified  desire. 

Moreover,  it  is  of  no  use  to  say  to  one- 


( 202  ) 

self : “ Yes,  I will  forthwith  examine  my 
previous  life,  and  learn  witli  that  very  aim 
in  view.”  One  must  rather  be  ready  to 
abandon  this  desire,  to  eliminate  it  alto- 
gether, and  learn,  first  of  all,  without  con- 
sidering this  aim.  One  should  cultivate 
devotion  to  what  is  learnt  without  regard 
to  such  an  end.  It  is  only  then  that  one 
begins  to  possess  the  desire  which  we  are 
considering,  in  such  a way  that  it  leads  to 
its  own  fulfilment. 

If  one  is  angry  or  vexed,  a wall  arises 
in  the  spiritual  world,  and  those  forces 
which  would  open  the  eyes  of  the  soul 
are  shut  away.  For  example,  if  someone 
should  annoy  me,  he  sends  forth  a current 
into  the  world  of  the  soul.  So  long  as 
one  is  capable  of  annoyance,  one  cannot 
see  this  current.  One’s  own  annoyance 
clouds  it.  But  neither  must  it  be 
supposed  that  when  one  feels  annoyed  no 
longer,  one  will  see  an  astral  vision.  For 
this  it  is  indispensable  that  the  eye  of  the 


( 203  ) 

soul  should  be  already  developed  ; but  the 
capacity  for  sight  of  this  kind  is  latent  in 
everyone.  It  is  true  that  so  long  as  one 
is  capable  of  being  annoyed  it  remains 
inoperative  ; but  at  the  same  time  it  is  not 
immediately  present  as  soon  as  one  has 
overcome  to  a small  extent  this  feeling 
of  annoyance.  One  must  continue  to  per- 
severe in  the  struggle  with  such  a feeling, 
and  patiently  make  progress  : then,  some 
day,  one  will  find  that  this  eye  of  the  soul 
has  become  developed.  Of  course  annoy- 
ance is  not  the  only  quality  with  which 
we  have  to  struggle  before  attaining  this 
end.  Many  people  grow  impatient  or 
sceptical,  because  they  have  for  years 
combated  certain  qualities  of  the  soul 
and  yet  clairvoyance  has  not  ensued. 
They  have  only  developed  some  qualities 
and  have  allowed  others  to  run  wild. 
The  gift  of  clairvoyance  first  manifests 
itself  when  all  those  qualities  which  do 
not  permit  the  development  of  the  latent 


( 204  ) 

faculties  are  suppressed.  Undoubtedly 
the  beginnings  of  such  hearing  and  seeing 
may  appear  at  an  earlier  period,  but  these 
are  only  young  and  tender  shoots  which 
are  subject  to  all  possible  error,  and  which, 
if  they  be  not  carefully  fostered,  may 
quickly  die  off. 

To  the  qualities  which,  like  anger  and 
vexation,  have  to  be  combated,  belong 
such  as  ambition,  timidity,  curiosity,  super- 
stition, conceit,  the  disease  of  prejudice, 
a needless  love  of  gossip,  and  the  making 
of  distinctions  in  regard  to  human  beings 
according  to  the  merely  outward  marks 
of  rank,  sex,  race,  and  so  forth.  In  our 
time  it  is  difficult  for  people  to  compre- 
hend that  the  combating  of  such  qualities 
can  have  any  connection  with  an  increase 
of  capacity  for  knowledge.  But  every 
devotee  of  Occultism  is  aware  that  much 
more  depends  upon  such  matters  than 
upon  the  expansion  of  the  intellect  or  the 
employment  of  artificial  practices.  It  is 


( 205  ) 

particularly  easy  for  a misunderstanding 
of  this  point  to  arise,  inasmuch  as  many 
believe  that  one  should  cultivate  fool- 
hardiness because  one  must  be  fearless ; 
that  one  ought  to  ignore  altogether  the 
differences  in  men  because  one  has  to 
combat  the  prejudices  of  race,  rank,  and 
so  forth.  Eather  does  one  first  learn 
to  appreciate  these  differences  correctly, 
when  one  is  no  longer  entangled  in  pre- 
judice. Even  in  the  usual  sense  it  is  true 
that  a fear  of  any  phenomenon  baulks  one 
from  estimating  it  rightly  ; that  a race- 
prejudice  prevents  one  from  looking  into 
a man’s  soul.  The  student  of  Occultism 
must  bring  his  common-sense  to  perfec- 
tion in  all  its  exactitude  and  subtlety. 

Even  everything  that  a man  says  with- 
out having  clearly  thought  it  out  will 
place  an  obstacle  in  the  path  of  his  occult 
education.  At  the  same  time  we  must 
here  consider  one  point  which  can  only  be 
elucidated  by  giving  an  example.  Thus, 


( 206  ) 

if  anyone  should  say  something  to  which 
one  must  reply,  one  should  be  careful  to 
consider  rather  the  intention,  the  feelings, 
even  the  prejudices  of  this  other  person, 
than  what  one  has  to  say  at  the  moment 
on  the  subject  under  discussion.  In  other 
words,  the  student  must  apply  himself 
keenly  to  the  cultivation  of  a certain  fine 
tact.  He  must  learn  to  judge  how  much 
it  may  mean  to  this  other  person  if  his 
opinion  be  opposed.  But  he  ought  not, 
for  this  reason,  to  withhold  his  own 
opinion.  This  must  not  be  imagined  for 
a moment.  One  must  give  to  the  speaker 
as  careful  a hearing  as  possible,  and  from 
what  one  has  heard  should  formulate 
one’s  own  reply.  In  such  cases  there  is 
a certain  thought  which  will  constantly 
recur  to  the  student,  and  he  is  treading 
the  true  path  if  this  thought  becomes  so 
vital  within  him  that  it  grows  into  a trait 
of  his  character.  The  thought  is  as 
follows  : It  is  not  a question  of  whether 


( 207  ) 


my  view  be  different  from  his,  but  whether 
he  will  discover  the  right  view  for  himself 
if  I am  able  to  coi;itribute  something  to- 
wards it.”  By  thoughts  of  such  a kind, 
the  mode  of  action  and  the  character  of 
the  student  will  be  permeated  with  gentle- 
ness, one  of  the  most  essential  qualities 
for  the  reception  of  occult  teaching. 
Harshness  only  scares  away  that  internal 
image  which  ought  to  be  evoked  by  the 
eye  of  the  soul,  but  by  gentleness  are 
obstacles  cleared  from  the  way,  and  inner 
organs  opened. 

Along  with  this  gentleness  another  trait 
will  presently  be  developed  in  the  soul. 
He  will  make  a quiet  estimate  of  all  the 
subtleties  in  the  soul-life  around  him, 
without  considering  the  emotions  of  his 
own  soul.  And  if  this  condition  has  been 
attained,  the  soul-emotions  in  the  environ- 
ment of  anyone  will  have  such  an  effect 
on  him  that  the  soul  within  him  grows, 
and,  growing,  becomes  organised,  as  a plant 


( 208  ) 

expands  in  the  sunlight.  Gentleness 
and  quiet  reserve,  and  along  with  these 
true  patience,  open  the  soul  to  the  world 
of  souls,  and  the  spirit  to  the  region  of 
spirits.  Persevere  in  repose  and  retire- 
ment ; close  the  senses  to  that  which  they 
brought  you  before  you  began  your  train- 
ing ; bring  into  utter  stillness  all  those 
thoughts  which,  in  accordance  with  your 
previous  habits,  were  tossed  up  and  down 
within  you ; become  quite  still  and  silent 
within,  wait  in  patience,  and  then  will  the 
higher  worlds  begin  to  develop  the  sight 
of  your  soul  and  the  hearing  of  your  spirit. 
Do  not  suppose  that  you  will  immediately 
see  and  hear  in  the  worlds  of  soul  and 
spirit,  for  all  that  you  are  doing  does 
but  help  the  development  of  your  higher 
senses,  and  you  will  not  be  able  to  see 
with  the  soul  and  to  hear  with  the  spirit 
before  you  have  acquired  those  senses. 
When  you  have  persevered  for  a time 
in  repose  and  retirement,  then  go  about 


( 209  ) 

your  daily  affairs,  having  first  imprinted 
upon  your  mind  the  thought : Some  day, 
when  I am  ready,  I shall  attain  what  I am 
to  attain.”  Finally  : “ Make  no  attempt 
whatever  to  attract  any  of  these  higher 
powers  to  yourself  by  an  effort  of  the 
will.”  These  are  instructions  which  every 
occult  student  receives  from  his  teacher 
at  the  entrance  of  the  way.  If  he  observes 
them,  he  then  perfects  liimself ; and  if  he 
does  not  observe  them,  all  his  labour  is  in 
vain  ; but  they  are  only  difficult  of  achieve- 
ment for  him  who  has  not  patience  and 
perseverance.  No  other  obstacles  exist 
save  only  those  which  one  sets  for  oneself, 
and  these  may  be  avoided  by  anyone  if 
he  really  wills  it.  It  is  necessary  to  con- 
tinually insist  upon  this  point,  because 
many  people  form  an  altogether  wrong 
conception  of  the  difficulty  that  lies  in 
the  path  of  occultism.  In  a certain  sense, 
it  is  easier  to  accomplish  the  earlier  steps 

of  this  way  than  it  is  for  one  who  has  re- 

14 


( 210  ) 

ceived  no  occult  instruction  to  get  rid  of 
the  difficulties  of  every-day  life.  In  addi- 
tion to  this,  it  must  be  understood  that 
only  such  things  are  here  imparted  as  are 
attended  by  no  danger  to  the  health  of 
soul  or  body.  There  are  certain  other 
ways  which  lead  more  quickly  to  the  goal, 
but  it  is  not  well  to  treat  of  them  publicly, 
because  they  may  sometimes  have  certain 
effects  on  a man  which  would  necessitate 
the  immediate  intervention  of  an  experi- 
enced teacher,  and  at  all  events  would 
require  his  continual  supervision.  Now, 
as  something  about  these  quicker  ways 
frequently  forces  itself  into  publicity,  it 
becomes  necessary  to  give  express  warning 
against  entering  upon  them  without  per- 
sonal guidance.  For  reasons  which  only 
the  initiated  can  understand,  it  will  never 
be  possible  to  give  public  instruction  con- 
cerning these  other  ways  in  their  real 
form,  and  the  fragments  which  here  and 
there  make  their  appearance  can  never 


( 211  ) 

lead  to  anything  profitable,  but  may  easily 
result  in  the  undermining  of  health, 
fortune,  and  peace  of  mind.  He  who 
does  not  wish  to  put  himself  in  the  power 
of  certain  dark  forces,  of  whose  nature 
and  origin  he  can  know  nothing,  had  far 
better  avoid  meddling  in  such  matters. 

Something  may  here  be  added  concern- 
ing the  environment  in  which  the  practices 
of  occult  instruction  ought  to  be  under- 
taken. For  this  is  not  without  importance, 
though  for  almost  every  man  the  case  is 
different.  He  who  practises  in  an  environ- 
ment which  is  only  filled  with  selfish 
interests,  as,  for  example,  the  modern 
struggle  for  existence,  ought  to  be  sure 
that  these  interests  are  not  without  their 
influence  upon  the  development  of  his 
spiritual  organs.  It  is  true  that  the  inner 
laws  of  these  organs  are  so  powerful  that 
this  influence  cannot  be  fatally  injurious. 
J ust  as  a lily,  though  placed  in  an  environ- 
ment, however  inappropriate,  can  never 


( 212  ) 

become  a thistle,  so  too  can  the  eye  of 
the  soul  never  grow  to  anything  but  its 
destined  end,  even  although  it  be  subjected 
to  the  influence  of  modern  cities.  But 
it  is  well  if,  under  all  circumstances, 
the  student  should  now  and  then  seek  for 
his  environment  the  quietude,  the  inner 
dignity,  the  sweetness  of  Nature  herself. 
Especially  fortunate  are  the  conditions  of 
him  who  is  able  to  carry  on  his  occult 
instruction  altogether  in  the  green  world 
of  plants,  or  among  the  sunny  mountains 
or  the  delightful  interplay  of  simple  things. 
This  develops  the  inner  organs  in  a 
harmony  which  can  never  be  present  in  a 
modern  city.  He  also  is  more  favourably 
situated  than  the  mere  townsman,  who, 
during  his  childhood  at  least,  was  able  to 
breathe  the  perfume  of  the  pines,  to  gaze 
on  the  snowy  peaks,  or  observe  the  silent 
activity  of  woodland  creatures  and  insects. 
Yet  no  one  who  is  obliged  to  live  in  a city 
should  fail  to  give  his  evolving  soul  and 


( 213  ) 

spirit  the  nurture  that  comes  from  the 
inspired  utterances  of  the  mighty  teachers 
of  man.  He  who  cannot  every  spring- 
time follow  day  by  day  the  unfolding  of 
the  greenwood,  ought  in  its  place  to  draw 
into  his  heart  the  sublime  doctrines  of  the 
Bhagavad  GUd,  or  of  St.  John's  Gospel^ 
or  of  Thomas  a Kenipis.  There  are  many 
paths  to  the  summit  of  insight,  but  a 
right  selection  is  indispensable. 

The  adept  in  occultism  could,  indeed, 
say  much  concerning  these  paths — much 
that  might  seem  strange  to  an  uninitiated 
hearer.  For  example,  suppose  that  some- 
one has  advanced  far  along  the  occult  path : 
he  may  be  standing  at  the  very  entrance 
to  the  sight  of  the  soul  and  the  hearing 
of  the  spirit,  and  then  he  has  the  good 
fortune  to  pass  over  the  peaceful,  or  it 
may  be  the  tempestuous,  ocean,  and  a 
bandage  falls  away  from  the  eyes  of  his 
soul.  Suddenly  he  can  see,  suddenly  he 
attains  to  vision.  Another,  it  may  be,  has 


( 214  ) 

advanced  so  far  that  this  bandage  only 
needs  to  be  loosened,  and  by  some  stroke 
of  destiny  this  occurs.  On  someone  else 
this  very  stroke  might  actually  have  the 
effect  of  paralysing  his  powers  and  under- 
mining his  energy,  but  for  the  occult 
student  it  becomes  the  occasion  of  his 
enlightenment.  Perhaps  a third  has 
patiently  persevered  for  years,  and  with- 
out any  marked  result.  Suddenly,  while 
tranquilly  seated  in  his  quiet  chamber, 
light  envelops  him,  the  walls  become 
transparent,  they  vanish  away,  and  a new 
world  expands  before  his  opened  eyes,  or 
is  audible  to  his  awakened  spirit. 


VIII 

THE  CONDITIONS  OF 
DISCIPLESHIP 

The  conditions  of  entrance  into  an  occult 
school  are  not  of  a nature  to  be  formu- 
lated by  anyone  in  an  arbitrary  way.  They 
are  the  natural  outcome  of  occult  know- 
ledge. Just  as  a man  will  never  become 
a painter  if  he  does  not  choose  to  handle  a 
paint-brush,  so  can  no  one  receive  occult 
training  if  he  is  unwilling  to  fulfil  the 
claims  which  are  put  forward  by  the 
occult  teacher.  In  fact,  the  teacher  can 
give  nothing  except  advice,  and  it  is  as 
such  that  everything  he  states  ought  to 
be  considered.  He  has  already  trodden 

the  probationary  path  which  leads  to  the 

216 


( 216  ) 

knowledge  of  higher  worlds.  From  ex- 
perience he  knows  what  is  necessary, 
and  it  all  depends  on  the  free  will  of  each 
particular  person  whether  he  chooses  to 
follow  the  same  path  or  not.  If  anyone, 
without  intending  to  satisfy  the  con- 
ditions, should  demand  occult  training 
from  a teacher,  such  a demand  would  be 
as  much  as  to  say:  “Teach  me  to  paint, 
but  do  not  ask  me  to  handle  a brush.” 
The  occult  teacher  never  goes  a step 
further,  unless  it  be  in  accord  with  the 
free  will  of  the  recipient.  But  it  must 
be  emphasised  that  a general  desire  for 
higher  knowledge  is  not  sufficient,  and 
many  will  probably  have  such  a desire. 
With  him  who  has  merely  this  vague 
desire,  and  is  not  prepared  to  accept  the 
special  conditions  of  the  occult  teacher, 
the  latter,  for  the  present,  can  do  nothing. 
This  ought  to  be  kept  in  mind  by  those 
who  complain  that  occult  teachers  do  not 
“ meet  them  half  way.”  He  who  cannot, 


( 217  ) 

or  will  not,  fulfil  the  severe  conditions 
necessary,  must  for  the  present  abandon 
occult  training.  It  is  true  that  the  con- 
ditions are,  indeed,  severe,  and  yet  they 
are  not  hard,  since  their  fulfilment  not 
only  ought  to  be,  but  must  be,  an 
altogether  voluntary  deed. 

To  him  who  does  not  remember  this 
it  is  easy  for  the  claims  of  the  occult 
teacher  to  seem  a coercion  of  the  soul  or 
the  conscience  ; for  the  training  here  men- 
tioned is  founded  on  a development  of 
the  inner  life,  and  it  is  the  work  of  the 
teacher  to  give  advice  concerning  it. 
And  yet  if  something  be  demanded  as 
the  result  of  free  choice,  it  cannot  be 
considered  as  a fetter.  If  anyone  says  to 
the  teacher : “ Give  me  your  secrets,  but 
leave  me  my  customary  sensations,  feel- 
ings, and  thoughts,”  he  is  then  making 
an  impossible  demand.  Such  a one 
desires  no  more  than  to  satisfy  his 
curiosity,  his  thirst  for  knowledge,  and 


( 218  ) 

by  one  who  takes  an  attitude  like  this, 
occult  knowledge  can  never  be  obtained. 

Let  us  now  consider  in  their  right 
order  the  conditions  of  discipleship.  It 
should  be  emphasised  that  the  complete 
fulfilment  of  any  one  of  these  conditions 
is  by  no  means  demanded,  but  only  the 
effort  after  such  fulfilment.  No  one  can 
altogether  fulfil  these  conditions,  but  the 
path  which  leads  to  their  fulfilment  may 
be  entered  by  everyone.  It  is  the  will 
that  matters,  the  attitude  taken  when 
entering  the  path. 

1.  The  first  condition  is  the  directing 
of  the  attention  to  the  advancement  of 
bodily  and  spiritual  health.  Of  course, 
discipleship  does  not  in  the  first  place 
depend  on  the  health  of  a man,  but  every- 
one can  endeavour  to  improve  in  this 
respect,  and  only  from  a healthy  man  may 
proceed  a healthy  perception.  No  occult 
teacher  would  refuse  a man  who  is  not 
healthy,  but  it  is  demanded  that  the 


( 219  ) 

pupil  should  have  the  desire  for  a healthy 
life.  In  this  respect  he  must  attain  the 
greatest  possible  independence.  The  good 
counsels  of  others,  which,  though  generally 
unsought,  are  received  by  everybody,  are 
as  a rule  superfluous.  Each  must  en- 
deavour to  take  care  of  himself  From 
the  physical  aspect  it  will  be  more  a 
matter  of  warding  off  harmful  influeiices 
than  of  anything  else.  For  in  carrying 
out  one’s  duty  one  has  often  to  do  things 
which  are  disadvantageous  to  health.  One 
must  learn  how,  at  the  right  moment,  to 
place  duty  higher  than  the  care  of  health  ; 
but  with  a little  good-will,  what  is  there 
that  cannot  be  omitted  ? Duty  must  in 
many  cases  be  accounted  higher  than 
health,  often,  indeed,  than  life  itself,  but 
the  disciple  must  never  put  pleasure 
higher  than  these.  Pleasure  for  liim  can 
only  be  a means  to  health  and  life,  and  in 
respect  of  this  it  is  absolutely  necessary 
that  we  should  be  quite  honest  and  truth- 


( 220  ) 

ful  with  ourselves.  It  is  of  no  avail  to 
lead  an  ascetic  life  so  long  as  it  is  born  of 
motives  like  those  that  give  rise  to  other 
enjoyments.  There  are  some  people  who 
hncl  satisfaction  in  asceticism  as  others  in 
wine-bibbing,  but  they  must  not  imagine 
that  asceticism  of  this  kind  will  assist 
them  to  attain  the  higher  knowledge. 
Many  ascribe  to  their  unfavourable  circum- 
stances everything  which  apparently  pre- 
vents them  from  making  progress  in  this 
direction.  They  say  that  with  their  con- 
ditions of  life  they  cannot  develop  them- 
selves. For  other  reasons  it  may  be 
desirable  for  many  to  change  their  con- 
ditions of  life,  but  no  one  need  do  so  for 
the  purpose  of  occult  training.  For  this 
it  is  only  necessary  that  one  should  do  for 
one’s  health  so  much  as  one  finds  possible 
in  the  position  one  holds.  Every  kind  of 
work  may  serve  the  whole  of  humanity, 
and  it  is  a surer  sign  of  greatness  in 
the  human  soul  to  perceive  clearly  how 


( 221  ) 

necessary  for  the  whole  is  a petty — per- 
haps even  an  unlovely — employment  than 
to  think  : This  work  is  not  good 

enough  for  me  : I am  destined  for  some- 
thing else.”  It  is  especially  important 
for  the  disciple  to  strive  after  complete 
spiritual  health.  In  any  case,  an  unhealthy 
emotional  or  thought -life  leads  one 
away  from  the  path  to  higher  knowledge. 
The  foundations  here  consist  of  clear, 
calm  thinking,  reliable  conceptions,  and 
stable  feelings.  Nothing  should  be  more 
alien  to  the  disciple  than  an  inclination 
toward  a whimsical,  excitable  life,  toward 
nervousness,  intoxication,  and  fanaticism. 
He  should  acquire  a healthy  outlook  on 
all  the  circumstances  of  life  ; he  should 
go  through  life  steadily  and  should  let 
things  act  on  him  and  speak  to  him  in  all 
tranquillity.  Wherever  it  is  possible  he 
should  endeavour  to  do  justice  to  life. 
Everything  in  his  tastes  and  criticisms 
which  is  one-sided  or  extravagant  ought 


( 222  ) 

to  be  avoided.  If  this  be  not  so,  the 
disciple  will  strand  himself  in  a world  of 
his  own  imagination,  instead  of  touching 
the  higher  worlds,  and  in  place  of  truth 
his  own  favourite  opinions  will  assert 
themselves.  It  is  better  for  the  disciple 
to  be  “ matter-of-fact  ” than  overwrought 
and  fanciful. 

2.  The  second  condition  is  that  one 
should  feel  oneself  as  a link  in  the  general 
life.  Much  is  included  in  the  fulfilment 
of  this  condition,  but  each  can  only 
fulfil  it  after  his  own  manner.  If  I am 
a school  teacher  and  my  pupil  does  not 
answer  what  is  desired  of  him,  I must 
first  direct  my  feeling  not  against  the 
pupil  but  against  myself.  I ought  to  feel 
myself  so  much  at  one  with  my  pupil  that 
I ask  myself : “ May  not  that  in  the 
pupil  which  does  not  satisfy  my  demand 
be  perhaps  my  own  fault  % ” Instead  of 
directing  my  feelings  against  him,  I shall 
rather  cogitate  on  the  way  in  which  I 


( 223  ) 

ought  myself  to  behave,  so  that  the  pupil 
may  in  the  future  be  better  able  to  satisfy 
my  demands.  From  such  a manner  of 
thinking  there  will  come  gradually  a 
change  over  the  whole  mental  attitude. 
This  holds  good  for  the  smallest  as  well 
as  for  the  greatest.  From  this  point  of 
view  I look  on  a criminal,  for  instance,  al- 
together differently  from  the  way  I should 
have  looked  upon  him  of  old.  I suspend 
my  judgment  and  think  to  myself : “I 
am  only  a man  as  he  is.  Perhaps  the 
education  which,  owing  to  favourable 
circumstances,  has  been  mine,  and  nothing 
else,  has  saved  me  from  a similar  fate.'’ 
I may  even  come  to  the  conclusion  that  if 
the  teachers  who  took  pains  with  me  had 
done  the  same  for  him,  this  brother  of 
mine  would  have  been  quite  different.  I 
shall  reflect  on  the  fact  that  something 
which  has  been  withheld  from  him  has 
been  given  to  me,  and  that  I may,  perhaps, 
owe  my  goodness  to  the  fact  that  he  has 


( 224  ) 

been  thus  deprived  of  it.  And  then  will 
it  no  longer  be  difficult  to  grasp  the  con- 
ception that  I am  only  a link  in  the  whole 
of  humanity,  and  that  consequently  I, 
too,  in  part,  bear  the  responsibility  for 
everything  that  happens.  By  this  it  is 
not  implied  that  such  a thought  should 
be  translated  immediately  into  external 
action.  It  should  be  quietly  cultivated 
in  the  soul.  It  will  then  express  itself 
gradually  in  the  outward  behaviour  of  a 
person,  and  in  such  matters  each  can 
begin  only  by  reforming  himself  It  were 
futile,  from  such  a standpoint,  to  make 
general  claims  on  all  humanity.  It  is 
easy  to  form  an  idea  of  what  men  ought 
to  be,  but  the  disciple  works,  not  on  the 
surface,  but  in  the  depths.  And,  there- 
fore, it  would  be  wrong  if  one  should 
endeavour  to  bring  these  demands  of  the 
occult  teacher  into  relation  with  any 
external  or  political  claims.  As  a rule, 
political  agitators  know  well  what  can  be 


( 225  ) 

demanded  of  other  people,  but  they  say 
little  of  demands  on  themselves. 

3.  Now  with  this  the  thh'd  condition 
for  occult  training  is  intimately  connected. 
The  student  must  be  able  to  realise  the 
idea  that  his  thoughts  and  feelings  are  as 
important  for  the  world  as  his  deeds.  It 
must  be  recognised  that  it  is  as  pernicious 
to  hate  a fellow-being  as  to  strike  him. 
One  can  then  discern  also  that  by  per- 
fecting oneself  one  accomplishes  some- 
thing not  only  for  oneself  but  for  the 
whole  world.  The  world  profits  by  one’s 
pure  thoughts  and  feelings  as  much  as 
by  one’s  good  behaviour,  and  as  long  as 
one  cannot  believe  in  this  world-wide  im- 
portance of  one’s  inner  Self,  one  is  not  fit 
for  discipleship.  Only  when  one  works 
at  one’s  inner  Self  as  if  it  were  at  least 
as  important  as  all  external  things,  only 
then  is  one  permeated  with  a true  con- 
ception of  the  soul’s  importance.  One 

must  admit  that  one’s  feelings  produce 

15 


( 226  ) 

an  effect  as  much  as  the  action  of  one’s 
hand. 

4.  In  so  saying  we  have  already  men- 
tioned the  fourth  condition  : the  idea  that 
the  real  being  of  man  does  not  lie  in  the 
exterior  but  in  the  interior.  He  who 
regards  himself  as  merely  a product  of 
the  outer  world,  a result  of  the  physical 
world,  cannot  succeed  in  this  occult  train- 
ing. But  he  who  is  able  to  realise  this 
conception  is  then  also  able  to  distinguish 
between  inner  duty  and  external  success. 
He  learns  to  recognise  that  the  one  cannot 
at  once  be  measured  by  the  other.  The 
student  must  learn  for  himself  the  right 
mean  between  what  is  demanded  by  his 
external  conditions  and  what  he  recognises 
to  be  the  right  conduct  for  himself.  He 
ought  not  to  force  upon  his  environment 
anything  for  which  it  can  have  no  apprecia- 
tion, but  at  the  same  time  he  must  be  al- 
together free  from  the  desire  to  do  merely 
what  can  be  appreciated  by  those  around 


( 227  ) 

him.  In  his  own  sincere  and  wisdom- 
seeking soul,  and  only  there,  must  he  look 
for  the  recognition  of  his  truths.  But 
from  his  environment  he  must  learn  as 
much  as  he  possibly  can,  so  that  he  may 
discern  what  those  around  him  need,  and 
what  is  of  use  to  them.  In  this  way  he 
will  develop  within  himself  what  is  known 
in  occultism  as  the  “spiritual  balance.” 
On  one  of  the  scales  there  lies  a heart 
open  for  the  needs  of  the  outward  world, 
and  on  the  other  lies  an  inner  fortitude 
and  an  unfaltering  endurance. 

5.  And  here,  again,  we  have  hinted  at 
the  fifth  condition : firmness  in  the  carry- 
ing out  of  any  resolution  when  once  it 
has  been  made.  Nothing  should  induce 
the  disciple  to  deviate  from  any  such 
resolution  when  once  it  has  been  made, 
save  only  the  perception  that  he  has  made 
a mistake.  Every  resolution  is  a force, 
and -even  if  such  a force  does  not  produce 
immediate  effect  on  the  point  at  which  it 


( 228  ) 

was  directed,  nevertheless  it  works  in  its 
own  way.  Success  is  only  of  great  im- 
portance when  an  action  arises  from 
desire,  but  all  actions  which  are  rooted 
in  desire  are  worthless  in  relation  to  the 
higher  worlds.  There  the  love  expended 
on  an  action  is  alone  of  importance.  In 
this  love,  all  that  impels  the  student  to 
perform  an  action  ought  to  be  implanted. 
Thus  he  will  never  grow  weary  of  again 
and  again  carrying  out  in  action  some 
resolution,  even  though  he  has  repeatedly 
failed.  And  in  this  way  he  arrives  at  the 
condition  in  which  he  does  not  first  wait 
for  the  external  effect  of  his  actions,  but  is 
contented  with  the  doing  of  them.  He 
will  learn  to  sacrifice  for  the  world  his 
actions,  nay,  more,  his  whole  being,  with- 
out caring  at  all  how  it  may  receive  his 
sacrifice.  He  who  wishes  to  become  a 
disciple  must  declare  himself  ready  for  a 
sacrifice,  an  offering,  such  as  this. 

6.  A dxih  condition  is  the  development 


( 229  ) 

of  a sense  of  gratitude  with  regard  to 
everything  which  relates  to  Man.  One 
must  realise  that  one’s  existence  is,  as 
it  were,  a gift  from  the  entire  universe. 
Only  consider  all  that  is  needed  in  order 
that  each  of  us  may  receive  and  maintain 
his  existence  ! Consider  what  we  owe  to 
Nature  and  to  other  men  ! Those  who 
desire  an  occult  training  must  be  inclined 
toward  thoughts  like  these,  for  he  who 
cannot  enter  into  such  thoughts  will  be 
incapable  of  developing  within  himself  that 
all-inclusive  love  which  it  is  necessary  to 
possess  before  one  can  attain  to  higher 
knowledge.  That  which  we  do  not  love 
cannot  manifest  itself  to  us.  And  every 
manifestation  must  fill  us  with  gratitude, 
as  we  ourselves  are  the  richer  for  it. 

7.  All  the  conditions  here  set  forth 
must  be  united  in  a seventh  : to  regard  life 
continually  in  the  manner  demanded  by 
these  conditions.  The  student  thus  makes 
it  possible  to  give  to  his  life  the  stamp  of 


( 230  ) 

uniformity.  All  his  many  modes  of  ex- 
pression will,  in  this  way,  be  brought  into 
harmony,  and  cease  to  contradict  each 
other.  And  thus  he  will  prepare  himself 
for  the  peace  which  he  must  attain  during 
the  preliminary  steps  of  his  training. 

If  a person  intend,  earnestly  and  sin- 
cerely, to  fulfil  the  conditions  mentioned 
above,  he  may  then  address  himself  to  a 
teacher  of  Occultism.  The  latter  will  then 
be  found  ready  to  give  the  first  words  of 
counsel.  Any  external  formality  will  only 
consist  of  giving  to  these  conditions  a 
complete  expression,  but  such  formalities 
can  only  be  imparted  to  each  individual 
candidate,  and  are  not  without  their  own 
value,  since  everything  interior  must 
manifest  itself  in  an  exterior  way.  Even 
as  a picture  cannot  be  said  to  be  here 
when  it  exists  only  in  the  brain  of  the 
painter,  so,  too,  there  cannot  be  an 
occult  training  without  an  external  ex- 
pression. 


( 231  ) 

External  forms  are  regarded  as  worth- 
less only  by  those  who  do  not  know  that 
the  internal  must  find  expression  in  the 
external.  It  is  true  that  it  is  the  spirit 
and  not  the  form  that  really  matters ; but 
just  as  the  form  is  void  without  the  spirit, 
so  would  the  spirit  remain  inactive  so 
long  as  it  should  not  create  a form. 

The  stipulated  conditions  are  so  designed 
that  they  may  render  the  disciple  strong 
enough  to  fulfil  the  further  demands  which 
the  teacher  must  make.  If  he  be  faulty 
in  the  fulfilment  of  these  conditions,  then 
before  each  new  demand  he  will  stand 
hesitating.  Without  this  fulfilment  he 
will  be  lacking  in  that  faith  in  man  which 
it  is  necessary  for  him  to  possess ; for  on 
faith  in  man  and  a genuine  love  for  man, 
all  striving  after  truth  must  be  founded. 
And  the  love  of  man  must  be  slowly 
widened  out  into  a love  for  all  living 
creatures,  nay,  indeed,  for  all  existence. 
He  who  fails  to  fulfil  the  conditions  here 


( 232  ) 

given  will  not  possess  a perfect  love  for 
all  up-building,  for  all  creation,  nor  a 
tendency  to  abstain  from  all  destruction 
and  annihilation  as  such.  The  disciple 
must  so  train  himself  that,  not  in  deeds 
only,  but  also  in  words,  thoughts,  and  feel- 
ings, he  will  never  destroy  anything  for 
the  sake  of  destruction.  He  must  find 
his  pleasure  in  the  growing  and  creating 
aspect  of  things,  and  is  only  justified  in 
assisting  the  destruction  of  anything  when 
by  destroying  he  is  able  to  promote  a new 
life.  Let  it  not  be  thought  that  in  so 
saying  it  is  implied  that  the  disciple  may 
suffer  the  triumph  of  evil,  but  rather  that 
he  must  endeavour  to  find  even  in  the 
bad  those  aspects  through  which  he  may 
change  it  into  good.  He  will  see  more 
and  more  clearly  that  the  best  way  to 
combat  imperfection  and  evil  is  the 
creation  of  the  perfect  and  the  good.  The 
student  knows  that  nothing  can  come 
from  nothing,  but  also  that  the  imperfect 


( 233  ) 

may  be  changed  into  the  perfect.  He 
who  develops  in  himself  the  tendency  to 
create,  will  soon  find  the  capacity  for 
facing  the  evil. 

He  who  enters  an  occult  school  must  be 
quite  sure  that  his  intention  is  to  construct 
by  means  of  it,  and  not  to  destroy.  The 
student  ought,  therefore,  to  bring  with 
him  the  will  for  sincere  and  devoted  work 
and  not  the  desire  to  criticise  and  destroy. 
He  ought  to  be  capable  of  devotion,  for 
one  should  be  anxious  to  learn  what 
one  does  not  yet  know  ; he  should  look 
reverently  on  that  which  discloses  itself. 
Work  and  devotion,  these  are  the  funda- 
mental attributes  which  must  be  claimed 
from  the  disciple.  Some  have  to  learn  that 
they  do  not  make  real  progress  in  the 
school,  even  if  in  their  own  opinion  they 
are  unceasingly  active ; they  have  not 
grasped  in  the  right  manner  the  meaning 
of  work  and  meditation.  Tlie  work  which 
is  done  for  the  sake  of  success  will  be  the 


( 234  ) 

least  successful,  and  that  kind  of  learning 
which  is  undertaken  without  meditation 
will  advance  the  student  least.  Only  the 
love  of  work  itself,  and  not  of  its  fruit, 
only  this  brings  any  advance.  If  he  who 
is  learning  seeks  for  wholesome  thoughts 
and  sound  judgment,  he  need  not  spoil 
his  devotion  with  doubts  and  suspicions. 

The  fact  that  one  does  not  oppose 
some  communication  which  has  been 
made,  but  gives  to  it  due  attention  and 
even  sympathy,  does  not  imply  a lack  of 
independent  judgment.  Those  who  have 
arrived  at  a somewhat  advanced  stage 
of  knowledge  are  aware  that  they  owe 
everything  to  a quiet  attention  and 
assimilation,  and  not  to  a stubborn  per- 
sonal judgment.  One  should  always  re- 
member that  one  does  not  need  to  learn 
what  one  is  already  able  to  understand. 
Therefore,  if  one  only  desires  to  judge, 
one  cannot  learn  any  more.  What  is  of 
importance  in  an  occult  school,  however, 


( 235  ) 

is  study  : one  ought  to  desire,  with  heart 
and  soul,  to  be  a student : if  one  cannot 
understand  something  it  is  far  better  not 
to  judge,  lest  one  wrongly  condemn ; far 
better  to  wait  until  later  for  a true  under- 
standing. The  higher  one  climbs  on  the 
ladder  of  knowledge,  the  more  does  one 
require  this  faculty  of  calm  and  devotional 
listening.  All  perception  of  truths,  all 
life  and  activity  in  the  world  of  spirit, 
become  in  these  higher  regions  delicate 
and  subtle  in  comparison  with  the 
activities  of  the  ordinary  mind,  and  of 
life  in  the  physical  world.  The  more 
the  sphere  of  a man’s  activity  widens 
out  before  him,  the  more  transcendent  is 
the  nature  of  the  task  to  be  accomplished 
by  him.  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
although  there  is  in  reality  only  one 
possible  opinion  regarding  the  higher 
truths,  men  come  to  see  them  from  such 
different  points  of  view.  It  is  possible 
to  arrive  at  this  one  true  standpoint  if, 


( 236  ) 

through  work  and  devotion,  one  has  so 
risen  that  one  can  really  behold  the  truth. 
Only  he  who,  without  sufficient  prepara- 
tion, judges  in  accordance  with  precon- 
ceived ideas  and  habitual  ways  of  thought, 
can  arrive  at  any  opinion  which  differs 
from  the  true  one.  Just  as  there  is  only 
one  correct  opinion  concerning  a mathe- 
matical problem,  so  also  with  regard  to 
things  of  the  higher  worlds;  but  before 
one  can  arrive  at  this  opinion  one  must 
first  prepare  oneself.  If  this  were  only 
sufficiently  considered,  the  conditions  laid 
down  by  the  occult  toacher  would  be  sur- 
prising to  no  one.  Truth  and  the  higher 
life  do,  indeed,  abide  in  every  human  soul, 
and  it  is  true  that  everyone  can  and  must 
find  them  for  himself ; but  they  lie  deeply 
hidden,  and  may  only  be  brought  up  from 
their  deep  shafts  after  the  clearance  of 
certain  obstacles.  Only  he  who  has  had 
experience  in  occult  science  can  advise 
how  this  may  be  done.  It  is  advice 


( 237  ) 

of  this  kind  that  is  given  by  the  occult 
teacher.  He  does  not  urge  a truth  on  any- 
one ; he  proclaims  no  dogma,  but  points 
out  a way.  It  is  true  that  everyone 
could  find  this  way  alone,  but  only, 
perhaps,  after  many  incarnations.  By 
this  occult  training  the  way  is  shortened. 
A person,  by  means  of  it,  more  quickly 
reaches  a point  from  which  he  becomes 
able  to  co-operate  in  those  worlds  wherein 
the  salvation  and  evolution  of  man  are 
assisted  by  spiritual  work.  Thus  we  have 
outlined  as  much  as  may  at  present  be 
communicated  concerning  the  attainment 
of  knowledge  relating  to  the  higher  worlds. 


PBINTID  BT  NKILL  AND  CO..  LTD.,  KDINBUROH 


ORPHEUS 

^ Quarterly  ^EMagaxine  of  ^Mystical  (tArt 

Edited  by  CLIFFORD  BAX 

Price  IS.  per  copy,  or  4s.  6d.  post  free  per  annum 

Contributors  : A*  Jean  Delville,  Edouard 
Schur^  Franz  Evers,  etc*,  etc* 


To  be  obtained fro?n  . . . 

J.  M.  Watkins,  21  Cecil  Court,  London,  W.C.  ; 
Herbert  C.  Sidley,  Strathleven,  Oakleigh  Park,  London,  N. ; 

Theosophical  Publishing  Society,  London, 
Benares,  Adyar. 


Books  by  Dr  Rudolf  Steiner* 


TheOSOphiO.  Versuch  einer  ubersinnlichen  Welterkenntnis 
und  Menschenbestimmung.  Zweite  erweiterte  Auflage. 

Brosch.  3. — Mk.,  geb.  4. — Mk. 
Die  Mystik  im  Aufgange  des  neuzeitlichen  Geisteslebens  und 
ihr  Verhaltnis  zur  modernen  Weltanschauung. 

Brosch.  2. — Mk.,  geb.  3. — Mk. 

Das  Christentum  als  mystische  Tatsache. 

Brosch.  2.50  Mk.,  geb.  3.50  Mk. 

Geheimwissenschaft.  [/« the  Press. 


By  Edouard  Schure. 

Les  Grands  Initios Frs.  3.50 

Femmes  inspiratriees  et  Poetes  annon- 

eiateurs Frs.  3.50 

Le  Mystere  Chretien  et  les  Mysteres 
Antiques.  Translated  from  the  German 
(by  Rudolf  Steiner)  .....  Frs.  3.50 

All  the  above  books  may  be  obtained  from 
Theosophischer  Verlag,  17  Motzstrasse,  Berlin,  W. 


By  Annie  Besant. 


The  Path  of  Diseipleship.  Cloth,  8vo  . 20  net 

In  the  Outer  Court.  Cloth,  8vo  . . . 20  net 

An  Introduction  to  Yoga.  Cloth,  8vo  . 20  net 

Thought  Power : its  Control  and  Culture. 

Cloth,  8vo  .......  16  net 

Thought  Forms.  (In  collaboration  with  C.  W. 

Leadbeater.  ) Cloth,  Royal  8vo.  Illustra- 
ted with  30  full-page  Coloured  Plates  . . 106  net 


Man  Visible  and  Invisible.  By  C.  W. 

Leadbeater.  full- page  Coloured  Plates.)  10  6 net 


Published  by 

THE  THEOSOPHICAL  PUBLISHING  SOCIETY, 
161  New  Bond  Street,  London,  W. 


i 


- - • *■  5?-  ■.  ’w 

‘ ' • ' iiis.V 


*'  ^alR?’  ■-■*v_  .'■•  4>'  *■%'  1 

i.  ■ . . i':  ■ *;.r'ffiii;v-  ■ 


1.  ' t ’Jl:  4%^. '«tlL'  t«44
