Rudolf Steiner, Theosophy: An Introduction to the Supersensible Knowledge of the World (1904)
==========================================================================
Steiner's systematic exposition of the human constitution — body, soul, and spirit — and the path of supersensible knowledge. The foundational text of Anthroposophy. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http : //books . google . com/|


,Google


CONTENTS

PAOE

Translator's Foreword ix

Preface to the First Edition xi

Preface to the Third Edition xv

Introduction i

CHAPTER

I. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE

HUMAN BEING . . ,
I. The Corporeal Bbing op Man .
a. The Soul Being of Man
3- The Spiritual Being of Man
4. Body, Soul, and Spirit
II. RE-EMBODIMENT OF THE SPIRIT
AND DESTINY . . .
Re-incarnation and Karma
[II. THE THREE WORLDS .... 87

1. The Soul World 87

2. The Soul in the Soul World after

Death 109

3. The Spirit-land .... 139

4. The Spirit in the Spirit-land after

Death 141

5. The Physical World and its Con-

nection WITH the Soul and
Spirit-lands 161

6. Thought-Forms and the Human

Aura 178

IV. THE PATH OP KNOWLEDGE . . 195
Notes and Amplifications 225


>y Google


,Google


THEOSOPHY

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE SUPERSENSIBLE

KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD AND THE

DESTINATION OF MAN


RUDOLF STEINER


TRANSLATED WITH THE PERUISSION

OF THE AUTHOR
PROM THE THIRD CERUAN EDITION


RAND McNALLY & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS
CHICAGO 1910 NEW YORK


,Google


,Google


,Google


,Google


THEOSOPHY


,Google


,Google


CONTENTS

PAGE

Translator's Foreword ix

Preface to the First Edition xi

Preface to the Third Edition xv

Introduction i


CHAPTER

I. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
HUMAN BEING . .
I. The Corporeal Being of Man
a. The Soul Being of Man

3. The Spiritual Being op Man

4. Body, Soul, and Spirit
II. RE-EMBODIMENT OF THE SPIRIT

AND DESTINY . . .
Re-incarnation and Karua


III. THE THREE WORLDS . . .
I. The Soul World ....
a. The Soul in the Soul World after

Death 109

3. The Spirit-land .... 139

4. The Spirit in the Spirit-land after

Death 141

5. The Physical World and its Con-

nection WITH the Soul and
Spirit-lands i6r

6. Thouoht-Forus and the Human

Aura 178

IV. THE PATH OP KNOWLEDGE . . 195
Notes and Amplications ... aas


>y Google


,Google


CONTENTS

PAGE

Translator's Foreword ix

Preface to the First Edition xi

Preface to the Third Edition xv

IntrodticHon i

CHAPTER

I. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE

HUMAN BEING . . .

1. The Corporeal Being of Man .

2. The Soul Being of Man

3. The Spiritual Being of Man .

4. Body, Soul, and Spirit
II. RE-EMBODIMENT OP THE SPIRIT

AND DESTINY . . .
Re-incarnation and Karha
[XI. THE THREE WORLDS . . .
The Soul World ....
The Soul in the Soul World after

Death

The Spirit-land ....
The Spirit in the Spirit-land after

Death

The Physical World and its Con-
nection WITH THE Soul and

Spirit- LAN OS

6. Thought-Forms and the Human

Aura

IV. THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE . .
Notes and Amplifications


>y Google


,Google


CONTENTS

PAGE

Translator's Foreword ix

Preface to the First Edition xi

Preface to the Third Edition xv

Introduction i

CHAPTER

I. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE

HUMAN BEING . . .

1. The Corporeal Being of Man .

2. The Soul Being of Man

3. The Spiritual Being of Man .

4. Body, Soul, and Spirit
II. RE-EMBODIMENT OP THE SPIRIT

AND DESTINY . . .
Re-incarnation and Karma

III. THE THREE WORLDS .... 87

I. The Soul World 87

a. The Soul in the Soul World after

Death 109

3. The Spirit-land .... 139

4. The Spirit in the Spirit-land after

Death 141

5. The Physical World and its Con-

nection WITH THE Soul and
Spirit-lands 161

6. Thought-Forms and the Human

Aura 178

IV. THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE . . 19S
Notes and Amplifications aas


>y Google


,Google


CONTENTS

PAGE

Translator's Foreword ix

Preface to the First Edition xi

Preface to the Third Edition xv

Introduction i

CHAPTER

I. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE

HUMAN BEING . . .
I. The Corporeal Being op Man .
a. Thb Soul Being of Man

3. The Spiritual Being of Man .

4. Body, Soul, and Spirit
n. RE-EMBODIMENT OF THE SPIRIT

AND DESTINY . . .
Re-incarnation and Karua

III. THE THREE WORLDS .... 87

I. The Soul World 87

a. The Soul in the Soul World after

Death 109

3. The Spirit-land .... lag

4. The Spirit in the Spirit-land after

Death 141

5. The Physical World and its Con-

nection with the Soul and
Spirit-lands 161

6. Thougrt-Porms and the Human

Aura 178

IV. THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE . . 195
Notes and Amplifications aa;

vii


>y Google


,Google


CONTENTS

PAGE

Translator's Foreword ix

Preface to the First Edition xi

Preface to the Third Edition xv

Introduction i

CHAPTER

I. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE

HUMAN BEING . . .

1. The Corporeal Being op Man .

2, The Soul Being of Man

3. The Spiritual Being of Man .

4, Body, Soul, and Spirit
11. RE-EMBODIMENT OF THE SPIRIT

AND DESTINY . . .
RB'Imcarnation and Karua
til. THE THREE WORLDS . . .
I. The Soul World ....
a. The Soul in the Soul World after

Death 109

3. The Spirit-land .... lag

4. The Spirit in the Spirit-land after

Death 141

5. The Physical World and its Con-

nection with the Soul and
Spirit-lakds 161

6. Thought-Forms and the Human

Aura 178

IV. THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE . . 195
Notes and Amplijicalions 295


>y Google


,Google


TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD

It is significant of the movement of thought
in our time that, although the previous works
of Rudolf Steiner, Ph.D. Vienna, such as
his penetrating and suggestive "Erkenntniss
Theorie" (Theory of Knowledge), his works
in the field of philosophy such as "Wahrheit
und fVissenschaft" {Truth and Science), and
his volumes on the natural science of Goethe,
are well known in Germany, it is another class
of books by him, "Die Mystik" (Mysticism),
"Das Christentum ah Mystische Tatsache"
(Christianity as a Fact in Mysticism), and
his distinctively theosophic writings, which
are the first to be called for by foreign readers
in their own language.

This work, though now appearing for the
first time in English dress, has not only passed
into three editions in Germany, but has been
translated into Russian, Swedish, Dutch,
Czechish, and Italian, while a French trans-
lation is being prepared.

* * «

It were perhaps well to mention that in


>y Google


X TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD

this work the words "know" and "knowledge,"
\dien used in reference to the supersensible
worlds, involve actual experience of them
gained by man through his higher organs of
perception.

The names chosen by the author to describe
the higher bodies of man, and other theosophic
facts, have been, as far as possible, retained
here. Readers will find that they revert with
primitive strength to the ancient power of
names, and are word pictures and also
mnemonics of what they represent. They thus
constitute distinct forces too valuable to be
withheld from the English reading public.

Grateful acknowledgment must be expressed
here to I. M. M. for her chivalrous help —
which indeed made this translation possible —
and to others who have rendered invaluable
and willing assistance. E. D. S.


>y Google


PREFACE

TO THE FIRST EDITION

This book will give a description of some of
the regions of the supersensible world. The
reader who is willing to admit the existence
of the sensible world only will regard this
delineation as a mere unreal production of the
imagination. He, however, who looks for
paths that lead beyond this world of the senses
will soon learn to understand that human life
only gains in worth and significance through
sight into another world. Such a man wilt not,
as many fear, be estranged from the "real"
world through this new power of vision. For
only through it does he learn to stand fast and
firm in this life. He learns to know the CAUSES
of life, while without it he gropes like a blind
man through their EFFECTS. Only through the
understanding of the supersensible does the
sensible "real" acquire meaning. One there-
fore becomes more, and not less, fit for life
through this understanding. Only he who


>y Google


xii PREFACE

understands life can become a truly practical
man.

The author of this book describes nothing
to which he cannot bear witness from experi-
ence, that kind of experience which one has in
these regions. Only that which in this sense
has been personally experienced will be dealt
with.

One cannot read this book as one is accus-
tomed ordinarily to read books at the present
day. In certain respects every page, and even
many a sentence, will have to be WORKED OUT
by the reader. This has been intentionally
aimed at. For only in this way can the book
become to the reader what it ought to become.
He who merely reads it through will not have
read it at all. Its truths must be experienced,
lived. Only in this sense has theosophy any
value.

The book cannot be judged from the stand-
point of science if the point of view adopted
in forming such a judgment is not gained from
the book itself. If the critic will adopt this
point of view, he will certainly see that the
presentation of the facts given in this book will
in no way conflict with the truly scientific


>y Google


PREFACE xiii

methods. The author is satisfied that he has
been on the alert not to come into conflict with
his own scientific scrupulousness, even by a
single word.

Those who feel more drawn to another
method of searching after the truths here set
forth will find one in my "Pkilosopkie der
Freiheit" {Philosophy of Freedom), Berlin,
1892. The lines of thought taken in these two
books, though different, lead to the same goal.
For the understanding of the one the other is
by no means necessary, although undoubtedly
helpful for some persons.

He who looks for "ultimate" truths in this
book will, perhaps, lay it aside unsatisfied.
The primary intention of the author has been
to give the FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS underlying
the whole domain of theosophy. It lies in the
very nature of man to ask at once about the
beginning and the end of the world, the pur-
pose of existence, and the nature and being of
God. Anyone, however, who looks, not for
mere phrases and concepts for the INTELLECT,
but for a real understanding of life, knows that
in a work which deals with the elements of
wisdom, things may not be said which belong


>y Google


"he present age requires knowledg
Lipersensible because all that a man c
3 know by current methods about tl
nd life arouses in him numerous (
/^hich can only be answered by means
;nsible truths. For one ought not tt
neself in regard to the fact that the
ion concerning the fundamental t
xistence given within the intellect
piritual currents of to-day is, for the s
eel deeply, a source not of answer
lUESTiONS regarding the great prol
lie universe and of life. Some peo
or a time, hold firmly to the opinion
an find a solution of the problems of
,'ithin the "results of strictly scientif
nd within the conclusions of this
liinker of the day. But when the s


>y Google


to THIS question is not intended to be brought
forward merely as a response to human curios-
ity; on it, rather, depend the inner calm and
completeness of the soul life. The attainment
of such an answer does not satisfy merely the
thirst for knowledge; it makes a man capable
of practical work and fitted for the duties of
life, while the lack of a solution of these ques-
tions lames his soul, and finally his body also.
In fact, the knowledge of the supersensible is
not merely something that meets a theoretical
requirement; it supplies a method for leading
a truly practical life. Exactly on account of
the nature of the intellectual and spiritual life
of the present time, therefore, theosophy is a
domain of knowledge indispensable for our
age.

On the other hand, it is an evident fact that
many to-day reject most strongly what they
most sorely need. The dominating influence
exercised by many theories built up on the
basis of "exact scientific experience" is so great
on some people that they cannot do otherwise
than regard the contents of a book like this as
a boundless absurdity. The exponent of super-
sensible truths can view such facts entirely


>y Google


,Google


THEOSOPHY


INTRODUCTION

When Johann Gottlieb Fichte, in the
autumn of 1813, gave to the world his "Intro-
duction to the Science of Knowledge" as the
ripe fruit of a life wholly devoted to the serv-
ice of truth, he said, at the very beginning;
"This science presupposes an entirely new
inner sense organ or instrument, by means of
which there is revealed a new world which
does not exist for the ordinary man." And he
proceeded to give the following comparison
to show how incomprehensible this doctrine of
his must be when judged by means of concep-
tions founded on the ordinary senses: "Think
of a world of people born blind, who therefore
know only those objects and relations which
exist through the sense of touch. Go among
them and speak to them of colors and the other


>y Google


,Coogle


^■When Johann" Gottli eb Fichte, in the
autumn of 1813, gave to the world his "Intro-
duction to the Science of Knowledge" as the
ripe fruit of a life wholly devoted to the serv-
ice of truth, he said, at the very beginning:
"This science pr entirely new

inner sense organ :, by means of

which there is re ■ world which

does not exist for I nan." And he

proceeded to give .ng comparison

to show how incon .-..aible this doctrine of
his must be when judged by means of concep-
tions founded on the ordinary senses: "Think
of a world of people born blind, who therefore
know only those objects and relations which
exist through the sense of touch. Go among
them and speak to them of colors and the other


>y Google


THEOSOPHY

=Iations which exist only through light and
3r the sense of sight. Either you convey nolh-
ig to their minds, and this is the more fortu-
ate if they tell you so, for you will in that way
uickly notice the mistake and, if unable to
pen tlieir eyes, will cease the useless speak-
ig. . . ."' Now those who speak to people
bout such things as Fichte deals with in this
istance find themselves only too often in a
osition like that of a man who can see among
le born blind. But these are things that refer
J man's true being and highest goal, and to
elieve it necessary "to cease the useless speak-
ig" would amount to despairing of humanity.
)n the contrary, one should not for one
loment doubt the possibility of opening the
yes of everyone to these things, provided that
e is in earnest in the matter. On this suppo-
tion have all those written and spoken who
:lt that within themselves the "inner sense-


>y Google


INTRODUCTION 3

thing of it feel just as sure of their possession
as people with normal eyes feel sure that they
possess the conception of color. For them this
"Hidden Wisdom" requires no "proof."
They know also that it requires no proof for
any other person who, like themselves, has
unfolded the "higher sense." Such a one can
speak as a traveler can about America to peo-
ple who have not themselves seen that country,
but who can form a conception of it because
they would see all that he has seen if the oppor-
tunity presented itself to them.

But not only to such has the investigator of
the higher truth to speak. He must address
his words to all mankind. For he has to make
known things that concern all humanity.
Indeed he knows that without a knowledge of
these things no one can, in the true sense of the
word, be a "human being." And he speaks to
all mankind because he knows that there are
different grades of understanding for what he
has to say. He knows that even those who are
still far from the moment in which they will
themselves be capable of spiritual investiga-
tion can bring a certain measure of under-
standing to meet him. For the feeling for


>y Google


essential to the unfolding of
sense." It can be developed in
minded person just as in the scie


>y Google


INTRODUCTION 5

Standing. Indeed, what is often called at the
present time "the only trae science" can, for
the attainment of this goal, be a hindrance
rather than a help. For this science too often
permits to be considered "real" only what is
perceptible to the ordinary senses. And how-
ever great its merit is in regard to the knowl-
edge of THAT reality, it creates at the same
time a mass of prejudices which close the
approach to higher realities.

In objection to what is said here it is often
brought forward that "insurmountable limits"
have been once and forever set to human
knowledge, and that, since one cannot pass
beyond these limits, all branches of investiga-
tion and knowledge which do not take them
into account must be rejected. And a person
who wishes to make assertions about things
which many regard as proved to lie beyond
the limits that have been set to human capac-
ities of knowledge, is looked upon as highly
presumptuous. Those who make such objec-
tions entirely disregard the fact that a DEVEL-
OPMENT of the human powers of knowledge
has to precede the higher knowledge. What
lies beyond the limits of knowledge BEFORE


>y Google


such a development is, after the awakening of
faculties slumbering in each human being,
cnti rely WITHIN the realm of knowledge. One
point in this connection must, indeed, not be
neglected. One could say, "Of what use is it
to speak to people about things for which their
powers of knowledge are not yet awakened,
and which are therefore still closed to them?"
But that is also the wrong way to look at it.
One requires certain faculties to FIND OUT the
tilings referred to; but if, after having been
found out, they are made known, every PER-
SON can understand who is willing to bring to
bear upon them unprejudiced logic and a
healthy instinct for truth. In this book the
things made known are of no other kind than
such as can produce the impression that
through them the riddle of human life and the
phenomena of the world find a satisfying
explanation. This it can do on anyone who
allows thinking that looks at all sides of a sub-


>y Google


INTRODUCTION 7

ing explanation of life?" and one will find that
the life of each human being supplies the con-
firmation.

In order to be a "teacher" in these higher
regions of existence, it is by no means sufiicient
that a person has developed the sense for them.
For that purpose "science" is necessary, just as
much as it is necessary for the teacher's calling
in the region of ordinary reality. "Higher
seeing" alone makes a "knower" in the spiritual
just as little as healthy sense organs make a
"scholar" in regard to the sensible realities.
And because in truth ALL reality, the lower
and the higher spiritual, are only two sides of
one and the same fundamental essence, anyone
who is unlearned in the lower branches of
knowledge will as a rule remain so in regard
to the higher. This fact creates a feeling of
responsibility that is immeasurable in him
who, by a spiritual call, is destined to be a
teacher in the spiritual regions of existence.
It creates in him humility and reservedness.
But it should deter no one from occupying
himself with the higher truths, not even him
whose other circumstances of life afford no
opportunity for the study of ordinary science.


>y Google


p he calls tlie "Divine." And he has in some
/ay or other to bring his highest destination
ito connection with this Divinity. For this
eason the higher wisdom which reveals to him
is own being, and with it his destination, may
ery well be called "Divine Wisdom," or
HEOSOPHY.

From the point of view here indicated there
.'ill be sketched in this book an outline of the
beosophical interpretation of the universe,
^he writer of it will present nothing that is
ot a FACT for him, in the same sense as an
xperience of the outer world is a fact for eyes
nd ears and the ordinary intelligence. Indeed,
xperiences will be dealt with which become
ccessible to eacli person who is determined to
read the "path of knowledge" described in a
pecial section of this wo^y m m ^ - -


>y Google


CHAPTER I

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
HUMAN BEING

The following words of Goethe's describe,
in a beautiful manner, the starting point of
one of the ways by which the constitution of
man can be known: "When a person first
becomes aware of the objects surrounding him,
he observes them in relation to himself, and
rightly so, for his whole fate depends on
whether they please or displease him, attract
or repel, help or harm him. This quite natural
way of looking at and judging things appears
to be as easy as it is necessary. Nevertheless,
a person is exposed through it to a thousand
errors which often cause him shame and
embitter his life. A far more difficult task do
those undertake whose keen desire for knowl-
edge urges them to strive to observe the objects
of nature in themselves and in their relations
to each other, for they soon miss the gauge
which helped them when they, as persons,


>y Google


lo THEOSOPHY

regard the objects in reference to THEMSELVES
personally. They lack the gauge of pleasure
and displeasure, attraction and repulsion, use-
fulness and harmfulness; this gauge they have
to renounce entirely. They should, as dispas-
sionate and, so to speak, divine beings, seek and
examine what is, and not what gratifies. Thus
the true botanist should not be affected either
by the beauty or by the usefulness of the plants.
He has to study their structure and their rela-
tion to the rest of the vegetable kingdom; and
just as they are one and all enticed forth and
shone upon by the sun, so should he with an
equable, quiet glance look at and survey them
all and obtain the gauge for this knowledge,
the data for his deductions, not out of himself,
but from within the circle of things which he
observes."

The thought thus expressed by Goethe
directs attention to three kinds of things.
First, the objects concerning which informa-
tion continually flows to man through the
doors of his senses, those that he touches, smells,
tastes, hears, and sees. Second, the impressions
which these make on him, and which record
themselves as his pleasure and displeasure, his


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING u

desire or abhorrence, according as he finds one
harmonious, another inharmonious, one useful,
another harmful. Third, the knowledge and
the experiences which he, as a so-to-speak
"divine being," gains concerning the objects —
the secrets of their activities and their being
which unveil themselves to him.

These three regions are distinctly separate in
human life. And man thereby becomes aware
that he is interwoven with the world in a three-
fold way. The first way is something that he
finds present and accepts as a given fact.
Through the second way he makes the world
into his own affair, into something that has a
significance for himself. The third way he
regards as a goal toward which he has unceas-
ingly to strive.

Why does the world appear to man in this
threefold way? The simplest consideration
will explain that I cross a meadow covered
with flowers. The flowers make their colors
known to me through my eyes. That is the
fact wiiich I accept as given. I rejoice in the
splendor of the colors. Through this I turn
the fact into an affair of my own. By means
of my feelings I link the flowers with my own


>y Google


la THEOSOPHY

existence. A year after I go again over the
same meadow. Other flowers are there. New
joy arises in me through them. My joy of the
former year will appear as a memory. It is in
me; the object which aroused it in me is gone.
But the flowers which I now see are of the
same species as those I saw the year before;
they have grown in accordance with the same
laws as did the others. If I have enlightened
myself regarding this species and these laws,
I And them again in the flowers of this year as
I recognized them in those of the former year.
And I shall perhaps muse as follows: "The
flowers of last year are gone; my joy in them
remains only in my remembrance. It is bound
up with MY existence alone. That, however,
which I recognized in the flowers of the former
year and recognize again this year, will remain
as long as such flowers grow. That is some-
thing that revealed itself to me, but which is
not dependent on my existence in the same way
as my joy is. My feelings of joy remain in me ;
the laws, the BEING of the flowers, remain out-
side of me in the world."

Man continually links himself in this three-
fold way with the things of the world. One


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 13

should not for the time being read anything
into this fact, but merely take it as it presents
itself. It makes it evident that man has THREE
SIDES TO HIS NATURE. This and nothing else
will for the present be indicated here by the
three words BODY, SOUL, and SPIRIT. He who
connects any preconceived meanings, or even
hypotheses, with these three words will neces-
sarily misunderstand the following explana-
tions. By BODY is here meant that by which the
things in the environment of a man reveal
themselves to him, as in the example just cited,
the flowers of the meadow. By the word SOUL
is signified that by which he links the things to
his own being, through which he experiences
pleasure and displeasure, desire and aversion,
joy and sorrow. By SPIRIT is meant that which
becomes manifest in him when, as Goethe ex-
pressed it, he looks at things as "a so-to-speak
divine being." In this sense the human being
consists of BODY, SOUL, and SPIRIT.

Through his body man is able to place him-
self for the time being in connection with the
things; through his soul he retains in himself
the impressions which they make on him;
through his spirit there reveals itself to him


>y Google


14 THEOSOPHY

what the things retain in themselves. Only
when one observes man in these three aspects
can one hope to gain light on his whole being.
For these three aspects show him to be related
in a threefold way to the rest of the world.

Through his body he is related to the objects
which present themselves to his senses from
without. The materials from the outer world
compose this body of his; and the forces of the
outer world work also in it. And just as he
observes the things of the outer world with his
senses, he can also observe his own bodily exist-
ence. But it is impossible to observe the soul
existence in the same way. All occurrences
connected with my body can be perceived with
my bodily senses. My likes and dislikes, my
joy and pain, neither I nor anyone else can
perceive with bodily senses. The region of the
soul is one which is inaccessible to bodily per-
ception. The bodily existence of a man is
manifest to all eyes; the soul existence he car-
ries within himself as HIS world. Through
the SPIRIT, however, the outer world is revealed
to him in a higher way. The mysteries of the
outer world, indeed, unveil themselves in his
inner being; but he steps in spirit out of him-


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 15

self and lets the things speak about themselves,
about that which has significance not for him
but for THEM. Man looks up at the starry
heavens ; the delight his soul experiences
belongs to him; the eternal laws of the stars
which he comprehends in thought, in SPIRIT,
belong not to him but to the stars themselves.

Thus man is citizen of Three woru)S.
Through his BODY he belongs to the world
which he perceives through his body; through
his SOUL he constructs for himself his own
world; through his SPIRIT a world reveals
itself to him which is exalted above both the
others.

It is evident that because of the essential
differences of these three worlds, one can
obtain a clear understanding of them and of
man's share in them only by means of three
different modes of observation.

/. THE CORPOREAL BEING OF MAN .

One learns to know the body of man
through the bodily senses. And the way of
observing it can diflfer in no way from that
by which one learns to know other objects per-
ceived by the senses. As one observes min-


>y Google


t6 THEOSOPHY

erals, plants, animals, so can one observe man
also. He is related to these three forms of
existence. Like the minerals he builds his
body out of the materials in nature; like the
plants he grows and propagates his species;
he perceives the objects around him and, like
the animals, forms on the basis of the impres-
sions they make his inner experiences. One
may therefore ascribe to man a mineral, a
plant, and an animal existence.

The difference in the structure of minerals,
plants, and animals corresponds with these
three forms of existence. And it is this struc-
ture, this shape which one perceives through
the senses, and which alone one can call body.
But the human body is different from that of
the animal. This difference everybody must
recognize whatever may be his opinion in other
respects regarding the relationship of man to
animals. Even the most radical materialist
who denies all soul will not be able to avoid
agreeing with the following sentence which
Carus utters in his "Organon der Natur und
des Geistes": "The finer, inner construction of
the nervous system, and especially of the brain,
remains as yet an unsolved problem to the


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 17

physiologist and the anatomist; but that this
concentration of the structure increases more
and more in the animal, and in man reaches a
stage unequaled in any other being, is a fully
established fact, a fact which is of the deepest
significance in regard to the spiritual evolu-
tion of man, of which, indeed, we may frankly
say it is a sufficient explanation. Where,
therefore, the structure of the brain has
not developed properly, where its smallness
and poverty show themselves, as in the case of
microcephali and idiots, it goes without say-
ing that one can as little expect the appearance
of original ideas and of knowledge, as one can
expect propagation of species in persons with
completely stunted organs of generation. On
the other hand, a strong and beautiful con-
struction of the whole person, especially of the
brain, will certainly not in itself take the place
of genius, but it will at any rate supply the first
and indispensable requirement for higher
knowledge." Just as one ascribes to the hu-
man body the three forms of existence, min-
eral, plant, animal, one must now ascribe to it
yet a fourth, the distinctively HUMAN form.
Through his mineral form of existence man


>y Google


i8 THEOSOPHY

is related to everything visible, through his
plant- like form of existence to all beings that
grow and propagate their species, through his
animal existence to all those that perceive their
surroundings, and by means of external im-
pressions have inner experiences. Through
his human form of existence he constitutes,
even in regard to his body alone, a kingdom
by himself.

2. THE SOUL BEING OF MAN

The soul being of man differs from his cor-
porality through being his own inner world.
This inner world peculiar to each person faces
one the moment one directs one's attention to
the simplest sensation. One finds, in the first
place, that no one can know if another person
perceives even the simplest sensation in
exactly the same way as one does oneself. It
is known that there are people who are color-
blind. They see things only in different
shades of gray. Others are partially color-
blind. They are unable, because of this, to
perceive certain shades of colors. The pic-
ture of the world which their eyes give them is
diflerent from that of so-called normal per-


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 19

sons. And the same holds good in regard to
the other senses. It will be seen, therefore,
without further elaboration, that even simple
sensations belong to the inner world. I can
perceive with my bodily senses the red table
which another person also perceives; but I
cannot perceive his sensation of red. One
must therefore describe sensation as belonging
to the SOUL. If one grasps this fact alone
quite clearly, he will soon cease to regard inner
experiences AS MERE brain processes or some-
thing similar. The first result of sensation is
FEELING. One sensation causes man pleasure,
another displeasure. These are stirrings of
his inner, his soul life. Man creates in his
feelings a second world in addition to that
which works on him from without. And a
third is added to this — the will. Through it
man reacts on the outer world. And he
thereby stamps the impress of his inner being
on the outer world. The soul of man, as it
were, flows outward in the activities of his
will. The actions of the human being difl'er
from the occurrences of outer nature in that
they bear the impress of his inner life. In this
way the SOUL represents what is man's own in


>y Google


30 THEOSOPHY

contradistinction to the outer world. He
receives from the outer world the incitements;
but he creates, in responding to these incite-
ments, a world of his own. The corporality
becomes the foundation of the soul being of
man.

3. THE SPIRITUAL BEING OF MAN

The soul being of man is not determined by
the body alone. Man does not wander aim-
lessly and without a goal from one sensation to
another; neither does he act under the influ-
ence of every casual incitement directed on
him either from without or through the pro-
cesses of his body. He THINKS about his
perceptions and his acts. By thinking about
his perceptions he gains knowledge of things;
by thinking about his acts he introduces a rea-
sonable coherence into his life. He knows
also that he will fulfill his duty as a human
being only when he lets himself be guided
by CORRECT THINKING in knowledge as well
as in acts. The soul of man, therefore, faces
a twofold necessity. The laws of the body
govern it in accordance with the necessities of
nature, but it allows itself to be governed by


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 21

the laws which guide it to exact thinking
because it voluntarily acknowledges their
necessity. Nature subjects man to the laws of
the change of matter, but he subjects himself
to the laws of thought. By this means he
makes himself a member of a higher order
than that to which he belongs through his body.
And this order is the SPIRITUAL. The soul is
as different from the body as the body is differ-
ent from the soul. So long as one speaks only
of the particles of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen,
and oxygen which stir in the body, one has not
the soul in view. The soul life begins only
when within the motion of these particles sen-
sation arises, and one can say: "I taste sweet-
ness" or "I feel pleasure." Just as little has
one the spiritual in view when one considers
merely the soul experiences which course
through a man who gives himself over entirely
to the outer world and his bodily life. Rather
is this soul life merely the basis for the spirit-
ual, just as the body is the basis of the soul life.
The naturalist, or investigator of nature, has
to do with the body, the investigator of the
soul (the psychologist) with the soul, and the
investigator of the spirit with the SPIRIT. To


>y Google


THEOSOPHY


realize what one is in oneself, and thus become
clear as to the difference between body, soul,
and spirit, is a requirement which must be
demanded from those who wish by thinking
to enlighten themselves regarding the consti-
tution of man.

4. BODY. SOUL. AND SPIRIT

Man can enlighten himself in a correct way
concerning himself only when he grasps the
significiince of THINKING within his being.
The brain is the bodily instrument for think-
ing. Just as man can only see colors with a
properly constructed eye, so the suitably con-
ixi bra in serves him for thought. The
led that it receives


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 23

rest of the body. There are many prejudices
prevalent regarding such statements about
THINKING as arc brought forward here.
Many persons are inclined to undervalue
THINKING, and to place higher the "warm life
of feeling" or "emotion." Some, indeed, say
it is not by "dry thinking" but by warmth of
feeling, by the immediate power of "the emo-
tions," that one raises oneself to higher knowl-
edge. Persons who speak thus fear to blunt
the feelings by clear thinking. This certainly
results from the ordinary thinking that refers
only to matters of utility. But in the case of
thoughts that lead to higher regions of exist-
ence, the opposite is the result. There is no
feeling and no enthusiasm to be compared
with the sentiments of warmth, beauty, and
exaltation which are enkindled through the
pure, crystal-clear thoughts which refer to the
higher worlds. For the highest feelings are,
as a matter of fact, not those which come "of
themselves," but those which are gained by
energetic and persevering thinking.

The human body has a construction adapted
to THINKING. The same materials and forces
which are present in the mineral kingdom are


>y Google


called in the following pages the
BODY of man. (In theosophical lite
called "Sthula sharira.")

This organized mineral construe
the brain as its center comes into ex
PROPAGATION, and reaches its devek
through GROWTH. Propagation ar
man has in common with plants an<
Propagation and growth distinguis
living from the lifeless mineral. \
comes forth from the living by me
germ. The descendant follows
fathers in the succession of the liv
forces through which a mineral orij
must look for in the materials t
which compose it. A quartz crystal
by the forces united in it, and inhei
silicon and oxygen. The forces wl


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 25

descendants. There are INNER DETERMINING
FORCES INNATE in all that is living. It was a
crude view of nature which held that lower
animals, even fishes, could evolve out of mud.
The form of the living passes itself on by
means of HEREDITY. The manner in which a
living being develops depends on what father
and mother beings it has sprung from or, in
other words, on the SPECIES to which it
belongs. The materials of which it is com-
posed change continually; the SPECIES remains
during life, and is transmitted to the descend-
ants. Thus the SPECIES is that which condi-
tions the organizing and molding of the
materials. This species-forming force will
here be called life-force (in theosophical lit-
erature it is called "Prana"). Just as the
mineral forces express themselves in crystals,
so the life-force expresses itself in the species
or form of plant and animal life.

The mineral forces are perceived by man by
means of the bodily senses. And he can only
perceive that for which he has such senses.
Without the eye there is no perception of
light, without the ear no perception of sound.
The lowest order of organic beings has only a


>y Google


the higher animals is the surround
richer and more varied for them. I
therefore, on the organs of a bein
that which exists in the outer world
for the being itself, as perception, as
What is present in the air as a cert;
becomes In man the sensation o:
Man does not perceive the manife
the life-force through the ordina
He SEES the colors of the plants; 1
their perfume; the life-force rema
from THIS form of observation. Bu
nary senses have just as little right t
existence of the life-force as has the
blind to deny that colors exist, i
there for the person born blind just
he has been operated upon; in the
the life-force, as creating the variou!


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 27

the unfolding of this organ. He now per-
ceives, not merely the colors, the odors, etc.,
of the beings, but THESE BEINGS THEM-
SELVES. In each plant, in each animal, he
perceives, besides the physical form, the LIFE-
FILLED SPIRIT-FORM. In order to have a name
for this spirit-form let it be called the ETHER-
BODY, or LIFE-B(M)Y.

To the investigator of spiritual life this
matter presents itself in the following manner:
The ether-body is for him not merely a prod-
uct of the materials and forces of the physical
body, but a real independent entity which first
calls forth these physical materials and forces
into life. One speaks in harmony with spirit-
ual science when one says: a mere physical
body, a crystal for example, has its form by
means of the physical formative forces dwell-
ing within it. A living body does NOT have
its form by means of THESE forces, for in the
moment in which life is extinct in it, and it is
given over to the physical forces ONLY, it falls
to pieces. The ether-body is an organism
which preserves the physical body every
moment during life from dissolution. In
order to SEE this body, to perceive it in another


>y Google


ing, one requires the awakened "SPIRITUAL
"E." Without tliis, one can accept its exist-
ce as a fact on logical grounds; but one can
E it with the spiritual eye as one sees a color
th the physical eye. One should not take
"ense at the expression "ether-body."
i^ther" here designates something different
3m the hypothetical ether of the physicist.
ie should regard the thing simply as a name
r what is described here. And just as the
lysical body of man is constructed in con-
rmity with its set task, so is it also in
nformity with the ether-body of man. One
n understand it also only when one observes
in relation to [he thinking spirit. The ether-
dy of man differs from that of plants and
imals through being organized so as to serve
^ requirements of the thinking spirit. Just
man belongs to the mineral world through
; physical body, he belongs through his
ler-body to the life-world. After death the


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 29

being "shape" or "form." The word used in
this sense must not be confused with the word
body when used to designate physically sensi-
ble bodies. Used in this sense die term body
can also be applied to forms which soul and
spirit may assume.

In the life-body we still have something
external to man. With the first stirrings of
sensation the inner self responds to the excita-
tions of the outer world. You may trace what
one is justified in calling the outer world ever
so far, but you will not be able to find the sen-
sation. Rays of light stream into the eye, pene-
trating till they reach the retina. There they
call forth chemical processes (in the so-called
visual-purple) ; the effect of this stimulus is
passed on through the optic nerve to the brain ;
there further physical processes arise. Could
one observe these one would see more physical
processes, just as elsewhere in the physical
world. If I am able to observe the ether-
body, I will see how the physical-brain process
is at the same time a life-process. But the sen-
sation of blue color which the recipient of the
rays of light has, I can find nowhere in this
manner. It arises only within the soul of the


>y Google


30 THEOSOPHY

recipient. , If, therefore, the being of the
recipient consisted only of the physical body
and the ether-body, sensation could not exist.
The activity by which sensation becomes a fact
iliilcrs essentially from the operations of the
life-force. By diat activity an inner experi-
ence is called forth from these operations.
Without this activity there would be a mere
life-process, such as one observes in plants. If
one tries to picture how a human being
receives impacts from all sides, one must think
of him at the same time as the source of the
above-mentioned activity which streams out
toward every point from which he received
these impacts. Sensations respond in all
directions to the impacts. This fountain of
activity is to be called the sentient-soul.
{It is the same as that which in theosophical
literature is called "Kama.") This sentient-


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 31

regard to perceiving the sentient-soul as was
previously made in reference to the ether-
body. The bodily organs are "blind" to it
And blind to it is also the organ by which life
as life can be perceived. But just as the ether-
body is seen by means of this organ, the inner
world of sensation itself can be seen through
a still higher organ. A man then not only
senses the impressions of the physical and life
worlds, but he BEHOLDS the sensations them-
selves. Before a man with such an organ the
world of the sensations of another being is
spread out like an open and, for him, a legible
book. One must distinguish between experi-
encing one's own sensation world and looking
at the sensation world of another. Every man
of course can see into his own sensation world ;
only the SEER with the opened "spiritual eye"
can SEE the sensation world of another.
Unless a man be a seer he knows the sensation
world only as an "inner" one, only as the
peculiar hidden experiences of his own soul;
with the opened "spiritual eye" there shines
out before the external spiritual gaze what
otherwise lives only in the "inner" being of
another.


>y Google


t.jc ssttxtstC'Sid. ^cponds. as regards its
4Ctn[7, JO dtt aber-bodr because it draws
Tonr ;t Siff «ita±: itwill oose to gleam forth
■ct sasawiL Ami sacs the etfacr-body is the
.lbs wicma dte phTscal body, the sentieat-
aniL :£ ImsxectiT dependent on the latter.
Chi.? wicfi: ojrrectlT-functioning and well-
cni£tniicti»i eves are correct color sensations
[tv«»tKie. Ic is m this war diat the corporality
.kAiCts cfae scatient-Wttl. The latter is thus
«£wrnntiK\i and limited in its efficaciousness
Iht t)b)( boitr. It lives therefore within the
tJmiCactMxs lixed for it by the corporality.
Tbtt KOT accordingly is built up of mineral
WMtfiabv i$ vttaliaed by the ether-body, and
^iMtt luutB the sentient-soul. He, therefore,
>nIi» Imi$ the above-mentioned organ for "see-
^'*' tbe sentient-soul, sees it limited by the
liftdtjN But the limits of die sentient-soul do
DM ctMttCtde with those of the physical body.
TW »oul extends somewhat beyond it. fiy
llkil one wes rtmt it proves itself more power-
Kii th«n the physical body. But the force
l)vnm)ih which its limits are set proceeds from
tlw physical Uidy. So Aat between the phys-

t (nnly aud the ether-body on the one hand,


>yGootle


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 33

and the sentient-soul on the other, there inserts
itself another distinct member of the human
constitution. This is the SOUL-body, or sentient
body. (It is called in theosophical literature
"astral shape," or "Kama Rupa;" "Rupa" sig-
nifies form or shape.) One can also say: a
part of the ether-body is finer than the rest,
and this finer part of the ether-body forms a
unity with the SENTIENT-SOUL, whereas the
coarser part forms a kind of unity with the
physical body. Nevertheless, the sentient-
soul extends, as has been said, beyond the soul-
body.

What is here called sensation is only a part
of the soul being. (The expression sentient-
soul is chosen for the sake of simplicity.)
Connected with sensations are the feelings
of desire and aversion, impulses, instincts, pas-
sions. All this bears the same character of
individualized life as do the sensations, and is,
like them, dependent on the corporality.

Just as the sentient-soul enters into mutual
action and reaction with the body, so does it
also with thinking, with the spirit. Thought,
among other things, is of immediate service to
it. Man forms thoughts about his sensations.


>y Google


In tnis way Jie eniigntens nimseit regaraing
the outside world. The child that has burnt
itself thinks it over, and reaches the thought
"fire burns." Also man does not follow
l)lindly his impulses, instincts, passions; his
thought over them brings about the opportu-
nity by which he can gratify them. What one
calls material civilization moves entirely in
this direction. It consists in the services
which thinking renders to the sentient-soul.
Immcasureable quantities of thought-power
are directed to this end. It is thought-power
that has built ships, railways, telegraphs, tele-
phones; and by far the greatest proportion of
all this serves only to satisfy the needs of the
sentient-soul. Thought-force permeates the
sentient-soul in a similar way to that in which
the life-force permeates the physical body.
Life-force connects the physical body with
forefathers and descendants, and thus brings
it under a system of laws with which the


>y Google


^tv ivaiiia iiiaiiuii. }

The intellectual-soul permeates the sentient-
soul. He who has the organ for "seeing" the
soul sees, therefore, the intellectual-soul as a
separate entity, distinct from the mere sen-


>y Google


the world because this conformity exists. This
conformity is one of the important facts
through which man learns to know his own
nature. iMan searches in his soul for truth ; and
through this truth it is not only the soul that
speaks, but the things of the world. That
which is recognized as truth by means of
thought has an INDEPENDENT SIGNIFICANCE,
which refers to the things of the world, and
not merely to one's own soul. My delight in
the starry heavens is part of my own inner
being; the thoughts which I form for myself
about the courses of the heavenly bodies have
the same significance for the thinking of every
other person as they have for mine. It would
be absurd to speak of MY delight were I not in
existence ; but it is not in the same way absurd
to speak of my thoughts, even WITHOUT REF-
liRExCL; to myself. For the truth which I
think to-day was true yesterday also, and will
be Tiu'E to-morrow, although I concern myself


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 37

soul connects itself with something that carries
its worth in itself. And this worth does not
vanish with the feeling in the soul any more
than it arose with it. What is really truth
neither arises nor passes away; it has a signifi-
cance which cannot be destroyed. This is not
contradicted by the fact that certain human
"truths" have a value which is transitory, inas-
much as they are recognized after a certain
period as partial or complete errors. For
man must say to himself that truth after all
exists in itself, although HIS conceptions are
only transient forms of manifestation of the
eternal truth. Even he who says, like Lessing,
that he contents himself with the eternal striv-
ing toward truth because the full pure truth
can, after all, only exist for a God, does not
deny the eternity of truth, but establishes it
by such an utterance. For only that which


>y Google


38 THEOSOPHY

cedes its INDEPENDENT BEING by the very fact
that one wishes to strive after it.

And as it is with the truth, so it is with the
TRULY GOOD. The moral good is independent
of inclinations and passions, inasmuch as it
does not allow itself to be commanded by
them, but commands them. Likes and dislikes,
desire and loathing belong to the personal
soul of man. Duty stands higher than likes
and dislikes. Duty may stand so high in the
eyes of a man that he will sacrifice his life for
its sake. And a man stands the higher the
more he has ennobled his inclinations, his likes
and dislikes, so that, without compulsion or
subjection, they themselves obey the recog-
nized duty. The moral good has, like truth,
its eternal value in itself, and does not receive
it from the sentient-soul.

In causing the self-existent true and good
to come to life in his inner being, man raises
himself above the mere sentient-soul. The
eternal spirit shines into this soul. A light is
kindled in it which is imperishable. In so
far as the soul lives in this light, it is a partici-
pant of the eternal. It unites its own exist-
ence with an eternal existence. What the soul


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 39

carries within itself of the true and the good is
IMMORTAL in it. That which shines forth in
the soul as eternal is to be called here CON-
SCIOUSNESS-SOUL. Consciousness can be
spoken of even in connection with the lower
soul stirrings. The most ordinary everyday
sensation is a matter of consciousness. To this
extent animals also have consciousness. The
kernel of human consciousness, that is, THE
SOUL WITHIN THE SOUL, is here meant by CON-
sciousN ESS-SOUL. The consciousness-soul is
accordingly differentiated from the intellect-
ual-soul as yet another distinct member of the
human soul. The intellectual-soul is still
entangled in the sensations, the impulses, the
passions, etc. Everyone knows how at first a
man holds that to be true which he, owing to
his feelings, prefers. Only THAT truth, how-
ever, is PERMANENT which has freed itself
from ALL taint of such feelings as sympathy
and antipathy. The truth is true, even if all
personal feelings revolt against it. The part
of the soul in which THIS truth lives will be
called consciousness-soul.

So that even as one had to distinguish three
members in the body, one has also to distin-


>y Google


4* THEOSOPHY

guish three in the soul ; SENTIENT-SOUL, INTEL-

LECTUAL-SOUL,CONSCIOUSNESS-SOUL. And JUSI

as the corporality works from below upward
with a LIMITING effect on the soul, so the
spiritual works from above downward into
it, EXPANDING it. For the more the soul fills
itself with the True and the Good, the wider
and the more comprehensive becomes the
eternal in it. To him who is able to "see" the
soul, the splendor which goes out from a
human being, because his eternal is expanding,
is just as much a reality as the light which
streams out from a flame is real to the physical
eye. For the "seer" the corporeal man is only
a part of the WHOLE MAN. The body as the
coarsest structure lies within others, which
interpenetrate both it and each other. The
ether-body fills the physical body as a double
form; extending beyond this on all sides is to
be seen the soul-body (astral shape). And
beyond this, again, extends the sentient-soul,
then the intellectual- soul, which grows the
larger the more it receives into itself of the
True and the Good. For this True and Good
cause the expansion of the intellectual-soul. A
man living only and entirely according to his


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 41

inclinations, his likes and dislikes, would have
an intellectual-soul whose limits coincide with
those of his sentient-soul. These organiza-
tions, in the midst of which the physical body
appears as if in a cloud, are called the HUMAN
AURA.

In the course of the childhood of a human
being, there comes a moment in which, for the
first time, he feels himself to be an independent
being distinct from the whole of the rest of the
world. For persons with finely-strung natures
it is a significant experience. The poet Jean
Paul says in his autobiography, "I shall never
forget the event which took place within me,
hitherto narrated to no one, and of which I
can give place and time, when I stood present
at the birth of my self- consciousness. As a very
small child I stood at the door of the house
one morning, looking toward the wood pile
on my left, when suddenly the inner revelation
'I am an I' came to me like a flash of lightning
from heaven and has remained shining ever
since. In that moment my ego had seen itself
for the first time and forever. Any deception
of memory is hardly to be conceived as possible
here, for no narrations by outsiders could have


>y Google


introduced additions to a
took place in the holy ol
being, and of which the
permanence to such ever
It is known that little ch
selves, "Charles is good,
have this." They speak
of others because they h
conscious of their ind'
because the consciousness
born in them. Throug
man describes himself
being, separate from all ot
"I" man brings together
ences as a being in body a
soul are the carriers of the
it acts. Just as the physic,
in the brain, so has the s
ego. Man is aroused to s
from without; feelings m
the effects of the outer w(


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 43

an "occurrence taking place only in the veiled
holy of holies of a man," for with his "I"
man is quite alone. And this "I" is the
man himself. That justifies him in regarding
his ego as his true being. He may, therefore,
describe his body and his soul as the
"SHEATHS" or "VEILS" within which he lives;
and he may describe them as his TOOLS through
which he acts. In the course of his evolution
he learns to regard these tools ever more and
more as the servants of his ego. The little
word "I" (German ich) as it is used, for
example, in the English and German lan-
guages, is a name which differs from all other
names. Anyone who reflects in an appropri-
ate manner on the nature of this name will
find that it forms an avenue to the understand-
ing of the human being in the deeper sense.
Any other name can be applied to its corre-
sponding object by all men in the same way.
Anybody can call a table "table" or a chair
"chair," but this is not so with the name I.
No one can use it in referring to another per-
son; each one can call only himself "I."
Never can the name "I" reach my ears from
outside when it refers to ME. Only from


>y Google


46 THEOSOPHY

an I and living as I will be called SPIRIT-
SELF, because it manifests as the I, or ego,
or "self" of man. ("Spirit-self" signifies the
same as that which in theosophical literature
is called "Higher manas." The Sanscrit
word "manas" is related to the English word
"man," and the German word "Mensch," and
signifies the human being in so far as he is a
spiritual being.) The difference between the
"spirit-self" and the "consciousness-soul" can
be made clear in the following way. The
consciousness-soul is the bearer of the self-
existent truth which is independent of all
antipathy and sympathy, the spirit-self bears
within it the SAME truth, but taken up into and
enclosed by the I, individualized by the latter
and absorbed into the independent being of
the man. It is through the eternal truth
becoming thus individualized and bound up
into one being with the I, that the I itself
attains to eternity.

The spirit-self is a revelation of the spiritual
world within the I, just as from the other side
sensations are a revelation of the physical
world within the I. In that which is red,
green, light, dark, hard, soft, warm, cold, one


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 45

it may be filled by it. The I lives in body and
soul; but the spirit lives in the I. And what
there is of spirit in the I is eternal. For the I
receives its nature and significance from that
with which it is bound up. Inasmuch as it
lives in the physical body, it is subject to the
laws of the mineral world; through its ether-
body to the laws of propagation and growth;
by virtue of the sentient and intellectual souls
to the laws of the soul world; in so far as it
receives the spiritual into itself it is subject
to the laws of the spirit. That which the
mineral laws and the life laws construct comes
into being and vanishes; but the spirit has
nothing to do with becoming and perishing.

The I lives in the soul. Although the high-
est manifestation of the I belongs to the con-
sciousness-soul, one must nevertheless say that
this I, raying out from it, fills the whole
of the soul, and through the soul affects the
body. And in the I the spirit is alive. It
rays into it and lives in it as in a "sheath" or
veil, just as the I lives in its sheaths, the bcdy
and the soul. The spirit develops the I from
within, outward; the mineral world develops
it from without, inward. The spirit forming


>y Google


an I and living as I will be called SPIRIT-
SELF, because it manifests as the I, or ego,
or "self" of man. ("Spirit-self* signifies the
same as that which in theosophical literature
is called "Higher manas." The Sanscrit
word "manas" is related to the English word
"man," and the German word "Mensch," and
signifies the human being in so far as he is a
spiritual being.) The difference between the
"spirit-scif" and the "consciousness-soul" can
be made clear in the following way. The
consciousness-soul is the bearer of the self-
exlstcnt truth which is independent of all
antipatliy and sympathy, the spirit-self bears
within it the SAME truth, but taken up into and
enclosed by the I, individualized by the latter
and absorbed into the independent being of
the man. It is through the eternal truth
becoming thus individualized and bound up
into one being with the I, that the I itself
altains to eternity.


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 47

recognizes the revelations of the corporal
world; in what is true and good, the revela-
tions of the spiritual world. In the same sense
in which the revelation of the corporal world
is called SENSATION, let the revelation of the
spiritual be called INTUITION. Even the
most simple thought contains intuition, for
one cannot touch it with the hands or see it
with the eyes; one must receive its revelation
from the spirit through the I. If an unde-
veloped and a developed man look at a plant,
there lives in the I of the one something quite
different from that which is in the ego of the
other. And yet the sensations of both are
called forth by the same object. The differ-
ence lies in this, that the one can make far
more perfect thoughts about the object than
the other can. If objects revealed themselves
through sensation alone, there could be no
progress in spiritual development. Even the
savage is affected by nature, but the laws of
nature reveal themselves only to the thoughts,
fructified by intuition, of the more highly
developed man. The excitations from the
outer world are felt even by the child as incen-
tives to the will: but the commandments of


>y Google


48 THEOSOPHY

the morally good disclose themselves to him
in the course of his development only as he
learns to live in the spirit and understand its
revelations.

Just as there could be no color sensations
without physical eyes, there could be no intui-
tions without the higher thinking of the spirit-
self. And as little as sensation creates the
plant on which the color appears, does intui-
tion create the spiritual realities about which
it is merely giving information.

The I of man, which comes to life in the
soul, draws in messages from above, from the
spirit world through intuitions, just as through
sensations it draws in messages from the phys-
ical world. By doing this it makes the spirit
world the individualized life of its own soul,
even as it does the physical world by means
of the senses. The soul, or the I flaming forth
in it, opens its portals on two sides, toward the
corporal and toward the spiritual. Now as
just the physical world can only give informa-
tion about itself to the ego, because it builds
out of physical materials and forces a body in
which the conscious soul can live and possess
organs for perceiving the corporal world out-


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 49

side itself, so the spiritual world builds, with
its spiritual materials and spiritual forces,
a spirit-body in which the I can live and
through intuitions perceive the spiritual. (It
is evident that the expression SPIRIT-BODY con-
tains a contradiction, according to the literal
meaning of the word. It is only to be used
in order to direct attention to what, in the
spiritual regions, corresponds to the body of
man in the physical.)

Just as within the physical world each
human body is built up as a separate being,
so is the spirit-body within the spirit world.
In the spirit world there is for man an inner
and an outer, just as there is in the physical
world. As man takes in the materials of the
physical world around him and assimilates
them within his physical body, so does he take
the spiritual from the spirtiual environment
and make it into hts own. The spiritual is
the eternal nourishment of man. And as man
is born of the physical world, he is also born
of the spirit through the eternal laws of the
True and the Good. He is separated from
the spirit world outside of him, as he is
separated from the whole physical world, as


>y Google


50 THEOSOPHY

an independent being. This independent
spiritual being will be called SPIRIT-MAN.
(It is the same as that which is called Atma
in theosophical literature.)

If we examine the human physical body,
we find the same materials and forces in it as
we find outside it in the rest of the physical
worid. It is the same with the spirit-man.
In it pulsate the elements of the external spirit
worid. In it the forces of the rest of the
spirit world are active. As a being within
the physical skin becomes a self-contained
entity, living and feeling, so also in the spirit
worid. The spiritual skin which separates
the spirit man from the uniform spirit world
makes him an independent being within it,
living a life within himself and perceiving
intuitively the spiritual content of the world.
This "spiritual skin" will be called SPIRIT-
SHEATH. ( In theosophical literature it is
called AURIC SHEATH.) It must be kept
clearly in mind that the spiritual skin expands
continually with the advancing human evolu-
tion, so that the spiritual individuality of man
(his auric sheath) is capable of enlargement
to an unlimited extent.


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 51

The spirit-man LIVES within this spirit-
sheath. It is built up by the spirtual life-
force in the same way as is the physical body
by the physical life-force. In a similar way to
that in which one speaks of an ether-body one
must therefore speak of an ether-spirit in
reference to the spirit-man. Let this ether-
spirit be called life-spirit. The spiritual
being of man therefore is composed of three
parts, SPIRIT-MAN, LIFE-SPIRIT, and SPIRIT-
SELF. (Atma, budhi, manas are the corre-
sponding expressions in theosophical litera-
ture. For Budhi is the separated special
life-spirit which is formed by the spiritual
LIFE-FORCE, or Budhi.)

For him who is a "seer" in the spiritual
regions, this spiritual being of man is a per-
ceptible reality as the higher, truly spiritual
part of the AURA. He "sees" the spirit-man
as life-spirit within the spirit-sheath, and he
"sees" how this "life-spirit" grows continually
larger by taking in spiritual nourishment
from the spirtual external world. Fur-
ther, he sees how the spirit-sheath continually
increases, widens out through what is brought
into it, and how the spirit-man becomes ever


>y Google


rger and larger. For the difference between
E spiritual and the physical being of man is
at the latter has a limited size while the
rmer can grow to an unlimited extent.
hatever nf spiritual nourishment is absorbed
.s an eternal worth. The human aura is
cordingly composed of two interpenetra-
ig parts. Color and form are given to the
e by the physical existence of man, and to
e other by his spiritual existence. The ego
rms the separation between them in this way
at, while the piiysical after its own manner
i'ES ITSELF to building up a body which
lows a soul to live and expand in it, and the
o GIVES ITSELF to allowing to live and de-
lop in it the spirit which now for its part
rrmeates the soul and gives it the goal in the
irit world. Through the body the soul is
closed in the physical; through the spirit-
an there grow wings for its moving in the
iritual world.


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 53

to the requirements of the thinking ego. It
is penetrated with life- force, and thereby
becomes the ether or life-body. As such it
opens itself through the sense organs toward
the outer world and becomes the soul-body.
This the sentient-soul permeates and becomes
one with. The sentient-soul does not merely
receive the impacts of the outer world as sen-
sations. It has its own inner life which it
fructifies through thinking on the one hand,
as it does through sensations on the other. In
this way it becomes the intellectual -soul. It
is able to do this by opening itself up to intui-
tions from above, as it does to sensations from
below. Thus it becomes the consciousness-soul.
This is possible to it because the spirit world
builds into it the organ of intuition, just as
the physical body builds in it the sense organs.
As the senses transmit sensations by means of
the soul-body, the spirit transmits to it intui-
tions through the organ of intuition. The
spirit-man is therefore linked into a unity
with the consciousness-soul, just as the physical
body is with the sentient-soul in the soul-body.
Consciousness-soul and spirit-self form a
unity. In this unity the spirit-man LIVES as


>y Google


1. opint-man. ^^^^^^^^^
Soul-body (C) and sentient-soul (D) are a
unity in the earthly man; in the same way
are consciousness-soul (F) and spirit-self (G)
a unity. Thus there come to be seven parts
in the earthly man. The expressions used in
theosophical literature are as follows:

1. Physical-body (Sthula sharira).

2. Ether or life-body (Linga sharira),

3. Sentient-soul-body (Astral body, Kama

rupa).

4. Intellectual-soul (Lower manas, Kama

manas).


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 55

5. Spirit-filled Consciousness-soul (Higher

manas) .

6. Life-spirit (Spiritual-body, Budhi).

7. Spirit-man (Atma).

The "I" flashes forth in the soul, receives
the infusion from out the spirit and thereby
becomes the bearer of the spirit-man.
Through this, man participates in the "three
worids," the physical, the soul, and the spir-
itual. He takes root in the physical world
through his physical body, ether-body, and
soul-body and flowers through the spirit-self,
life-spirit, and spirit-man up into the spir-
itual world. The stalk, however, which
takes root in the one and flowers in the other,
is the soul itself.

One can express this arrangement of the
members of man in a simplified way, but one
entirely consistent with the above. Although
the human I flashes forth in the conscious-
ness-soul, it nevertheless penetrates the whole
soul-being. The parts of this soul-being are
not as distinctly separate as are the limbs of
the body; they penetrate each other, in a
higher sense. If then, one hold clearly in
view the intellectual -soul and the conscious-


ly Googlc


56 THEOSOPHY

ness-soul as the two members united to fonn
the bearer of the I, and this I as their kernel,
one can divide man into physical body, life-
body, astral-body, and I. The expression
astral-body designates here what is formed
by soul-body and sentient-soul together,
although the sentient-soul is in a certain
respect energized by the I. When now the I
penetrates itself with spirit-self, this spirit-
self comes into evidence in the transmutation
of the astral-body by a force within the soul.
In the astral-body there are primarily active
the impulses, desires, and passions of man,
in so far as they are felt by him; the physical
perceptions also take effect in it. Physical
perceptions arise through the soul-body as a
member in man which comes^ to him from the
external world. Impulses, desires, and pas-
lions, etc., arise in the sentient-soul, in so far
U it is energized by the soul before the latter
has yielded itself to the spirit. If the I pene-
trates itself with spirit-self, the soul proceeds
to energize the astral-body with this spirit-
self. This expresses itself in the illumination
of the impulses, desires, and passions by what
the I has received from the spirit. The I has


>y Google


CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMAN BEING 57

then, through the power it gains as partaker
of the spiritual world, become ruler in the
world of impulses, desires, etc. In proportion
to the extent to which it has become this the
spirit-self appears in the astral-body. And
the astral-body becomes thereby transmuted.
The astral-body itself then becomes visible as
a two-membcred body, an untransmuted and
a transmuted. One can therefore designate
the spirit-self, as manifested in man, as trans-
muted astral-body.

A similar process takes place in a person
when he receives the life spirit into his I.
The Life-body then becomes transmuted. It
becomes penetrated with the life-spirit. And
the Life-spirit reveals itself in that the life-
body becomes quite other than it was. For
this reason one can also say that life-spirit
is transmuted life-body. And if the I receives
the spirit-man, it thereby receives the strong
force with which to penetrate the physical
body. Naturally, that part of the physical
body thus transmuted is NOT perceptible to
the physical senses. It is, in fact, just that
part of the physical body which has been
spiritualized that has become the spirit-man.


>y Google


58 THEOSOPHY

The physical body is then present to the
physical senses as physical, and in so far as
this physical is spiritualized, it has to be
perceived by spiritual faculties of perception.
To the external senses the physical, even when
penetrated by the spiritual, appears to be
merely sensible.

Taking all this as a basis, one can have also
the following arrangement of the members
of man :

1. Physical-body.

2. Life-body.

3. Astral-body.

4. I, as soul kernel.

5. Spirit-self as transmuted astral-body.

6. Life-spirit " " life-body.

7. Spirit-man " " physical-body.


>y Google


CHAPTER II

RE-EMBODIMENT OF THE SPIRIT
AND DESTINY

REINCARNATION AND KARMA

In the midst between body and spirit lives
the SOUL. The impressions which come to it
through the body are transitory. They are
present only as long as the body opens its
organs to the things of the outer world. My
eye perceives the color of the rose only so
long as the rose is opposite to it and my eye
is itself open. The presence of the things of
the outer world as well as of the bodily organs
is necessary in order that an impression, a
sensation, or a perception can take place.
But what I have recognized in my spirit as
TRUTH concerning the rose does not pass
with the present moment. And, as regards
its truth, it is not in the least dependent on
me. It would be true even although I had
59


>y Google


6o THEOSOPHY

never stood in front of the rose. What I know
through the spirit is timeless or ETERNAL.
The soul is placed between the present and
eternity, in that it holds the middle place
between body and spirit. But it is also
the INTERMEDIARY between the present and
eternity. It preserves the present for the
REMEMBRANCE. It thereby rescues it from
impermanence, and brings it nearer to the
eternity of the spiritual. It stamps eternity
on the temporal and impermanent by not
merely yielding itself up to the transitory
incitements, but by determining things from
out its own initiative, and embodying its own
nature in them by means of the actions it
performs. By remembrance the soul pre-
serves the yesterday, by action it prepares the
to-morrow.

My soul would have to perceive the red of
the rose always afresh if it could not store it
up in remembrance. What remains after an
external impression, what can be retained by
the soul, is the CONCEPTION. Through the
power of forming conceptions the soul makes
the corporal outer world so far into its own
inner world that it can. then retain the latter


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 6i

in the memory for remembrance and, inde-
pendent of the gained impressions, lead with
it thereafter a life of its own. The soul-life
thus becomes the enduring result of the
transitory impressions of the external world.

But an action also receives permanence
when once it is stamped on the outer world.
If I cut a branch from a tree something has
taken place by means of my soul which
completely changes the course of events in
the outer world. Something quite different
would have happened to the branch of the
tree if I had not interfered by my action. I
have called forth into life a series of effects
which, without my existence, would not
have been present. What I have done TO-DAY
endures for TO-MORROW ; it becomes permanent
through the DEED, as my impressions of yes-
terday have become permanent for my soul
through memory.

Let us first consider memory. How does
it originate? Evidently in quite a different
way from sensation or perception, because
these are made possible by the corporality.
Without the eye I cannot have the sensation
"blue." But in no way do I have the


>y Google


62 THEOSOPHY

remembrance of "blue" through the eye.
If the eye is to give me this sensation now,
a blue thing must come before it. The
corporality would always allow impressions
to sink back into nothingness if it alone
existed. I remember; that is, I experience
something which is itself no longer present.
I unite a past experience with my present
life. This is the case with every remembrance.
Let us say, for instance, that I meet a man
and recognize him again because I met him
yesterday. He would be a complete stranger
to me were I not able to unite the picture
perception with my impression of him to-day.
The picture of to-day is given me by the
perception, that is to say, by my corporality.
But who conjures that of yesterday into my
soul? It is the same being in me that was
present during my experience yesterday, and
that is also present in that of to-day. In the
previous explanations it has been called
SOUL. Were it not for this faithful preserver
of the past each external impression would be
always new to a man.

As preserver of the past the soul con-
tinually gathers treasures for the spirit. That


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 63

I can distinguish right from wrong follows
because I, as a human being, am a thinking
being, able to grasp the truth in my spirit.
Truth is eternal; and it could always reveal
itself to me again in things, even if I were
always to lose sight of the past and each
impression were to be a new one to me. But
the spirit wiithin me is not restricted to the
impressions of the present alone; the soul
extends its horizon over the past. And the
more it is able to bring to the spirit out of the
past, the richer does it make the spirit. In
this way the soul transmits to the spirit what
it has received from the body. The spirit of
man therefore carries each moment of its life
a twofold possession within itself, firstly,
the eternal laws of the good and the true;
secondly, the remembrance of the experiences
of the past. What he does, he accomplishes
under the influence of these two factors. If
we wish to understand a human spirit we
must therefore know two different things
about him, first, how much of the eternal
has revealed itself to him; second, how much
treasure from the past is stored up within
him.


>y Google


64 THEOSOPHY

The treasure by no means remains in the
spirit in an unchanged shape. The concep-
tions which man extracts from his experiences
fade gradually from the memory. Not so,
however, their fruits. One does not remember
all the experiences one had during childhood
when acquiring the arts of reading and
writing. But one could not read or write if
one had not had the experiences, and if their
fruits had not been preserved in the form of
abilities. And that is the transmutation
which the spirit effects on the treasures of
memory. It consigns the pictures of the
separate experiences to their fate, and only
extracts from them the force necessary for
enhancing and increasing its abilities. Thus
not one experience passes by unused; the soul
preserves each one as memory, and from each
the spirit draws forth all that can enrich its


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 65

Thus far spirit and soul have been con-
sidered only within the period lying between
life and death. One cannot rest there. Any-
one wishing to do that would be like the
man who observes the human body also
within the same limits only. Much can cer-
tainly be discovered within these limits. But
the HUMAN FORM can never be explained by
what lies between birth and death. It can-
not build itself up unaided out of mere phys-
ical matter and forces. It takes rise in a
form like its own, which has been passed on
to it by propagation. Physical materials
and forces build up the body during life; the
forces of propagation enable another body,
inheriting its form, to proceed from it; that is
to say, one which is able to be the bearer of
the same life-body. Each life-body is a repeti-
tion of its forefathers. Only BECAUSE it is
such does it appear, not in any chance form,
but in that passed on to it. The forces which
have given me human form lay in my fore-
fathers. But the spirit also of a man appears
in a definite form. And the forms of the spirit
are the most varied imaginable in different
persons. No two men have the same spiritual


>y Google


66 THEOSOPHY

form. One ought to make investigations in
this region in just as quiet and matter-of-fact
a manner as in the physical world. It cannot
be said that the differences in human beings
in spiritual respects arise only from the differ-
ences in their environment, their upbring-
ing, etc. No, this is by no means the case,
for two people under similar influences as
regards environments, upbringing, etc.,
develop in quite different ways. One is there-
fore forced to admit that they have entered
on their path of life with quite different pre-
dispositions. Here one is brought face to face
with an important fact which, when its full
bearing is recognized, sheds light on the
nature of man.

Human beings differ from their animal
fellow-creatures on the earth as regards
their physical form. But among each other
human beings are, within certain limits, the
same in regard to their physical form. There
is only one human species. However great
may be the differences between races, peoples,
tribes, and personalities as regards the phys-
ical body, the resemblance between man and
man is greater than between man and any


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 67

brute species. All that expresses itself as
human species passes on from forefather to
descendants. And the human form is bound
to this heredity. As the lion can inherit its
physical form from lion forefathers only, so
the human being inherits his physical body
from human forefathers only.

Just as the physical similarity of men is
quite evident to the eye, the difference of
their spiritual forms reveals itself to the
unprejudiced spiritual gaze. There is one
very evident fact which shows this clearly. It
consists in the existence of the biography of
a human being. Were a human being merely
a member of a species, no biography could
exist. A lion, a dove, lay claim to interest in
so far as they belong to the lion, the dove
genus. One has understood the separate being
in all its ESSENTIALS when one has described
the genus. It matters little whether one has
to do with father, son, or grandson. What is
of interest in them, father, son, and grandson
have in common. But what a human being
signifies begins, not where he is a mere mem-
ber of a genus, but only where he is a separate
being. I have not in the least understood the


>y Google


68 THEOSOPHY

nature of Mr. Smith of Crowcorner if I have
described his son or his father. I must know
his own biography. Anyone who reflects
accurately on the essence of biography
becomes aware that in regard to spiritual

things EACH MAN IS A SPECIES BY HIMSELF.

Those people, to be sure, who regard a biog-
raphy merely as a collection of external inci-
dents in the life of a person, may claim that
they can write the biography of a dog in the
same way as that of a man. But anyone who
depicts in a biography the real individuality
of a man, grasps the fact that he has in the
biography of ONE human being something
that corresponds to the description of a whole
genus in the animal kingdom.

Now if genus or species in the physical
sense becomes intelligible only when one
understands it as the result of heredity, the
spiritual being can be intelligible only through
a similar SPIRITUAL HEREDITY. I have
received my physical human form from my
forefathers. Whence have I that which
comes to expression in my biography? As
physical man, I repeat the shape of my
forefathers. What do I repeat as spiritual


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 69

man? Anyone claiming that what is com-
prised in my biography requires no further
explanation has to be regarded as having no
other course open to Mm than to claim
equally that he has seen, somewhere, an
earth mound on which the lumps of matter
have aggregated quite by themselves into a
living man.

As physical man I spring from other
physical men, for I have the same shape as
the whole human species. The qualities of
the species, accordingly, could be bequeathed
to me within the genus. As spiritual man I
have my own shape as I have my own
biography. I therefore can have obtained
this shape from no one but myself. Since I
entered the world not with undefined but with
defined predispositions; and since the course
of my life as it comes to expression in my biog-
raphy is determined by these predispositions,
my work on myself cannot have begun with
my birth. I must, as spiritual man, have
existed before my birth. In my forefathers
I have certainly not been existent, for they as
spiritual human beings are different from me.
My biography is not explainable through


>y Google


yo THEOSOPHY

theirs. On the contrary, I must, as spiritual
being, be the repetition of one through whose
biography mine can be explained. The phys-
ical form which Schiller bore he inherited
from his forefathers. But just as little as
Schiller's physical form can have grown out
of the earth, so little can his spiritual being
have done so. It must be the repetition of
another spiritual being through whose biog-
raphy his will be explainable as his physical
human form is explainable through human
propagation. In the same way, therefore, that
the physical human form is ever again and
again a repetition, a reincarnation of the dis-
tinctively human species, the spiritual human
being must be a reincarnation of the SAME
spiritual human being. For as spiritual human
being, each one is in fact his own species.

It might be said in objection to what has
been stated here that it is pure spinning of
thoughts, and such external proof might be
demanded as one is accustomed to in ordinary
natural science. The reply to this is that the
reembodiment of the spiritual human being
is, naturally, a process which does not belong
to the region of external physical facts, but


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 71

is one that takes place entirely in the spiritual
region. And to this region no other of our
ORDINARY powers of Intelligence has entrance,
save that of THINKING. He who is unwilling
to trust to the power of thinking cannot, in
fact, enlighten himself regarding higher spir-
itual facts. For him whose spiritual eye is
opened the above train of thoughts acts with
exactly the same force as does an event that
takes place before his physical eyes. He who
ascribes to a so-called "proof," constructed
according to the methods of natural science,
greater power to convince than the above
observations concerning the significance of
biography, may be in the ordinary sense of the
word a great scientist, but from the paths of
true SPIRITUAL investigation he is very far
distant.

One of the gravest prejudices consists in
trying to explain the spiritual qualities of a
man by inheritance from father, mother,
or other ancestors. He who contracts the
prejudice, for example, that Goethe inherited
what constitutes his essential being from
father or mother will at first be hardly
approachable with arguments, for there lies


>y Google


72 THEOSOPHY

within him a deep antipathy to unprejudiced
observation. A materialistic spell prevents
him from seeing the relations of phenomena
in the true light.

In such observations as the preceding, the
presuppositions are supplied for following the
human being beyond birth and death. Within
the boundaries formed by birth and death
the human being belongs to the three worlds,
of corporality, of soul, and of spirit. The
soul forms the link between body and spirit
because it penetrates the third member of
the body, the soul-body, with a capacity for
sensation, and because it permeates the first
member of the spirit, the spirit-self, as
consciousness-soul. In this way it takes
part and lot during life with the body as well
as with the spirit. This comes to expression
in its whole existence. It will depend on the
construction of the soul-body how the
sentient-soul can unfold its capabilities. And,
on the other hand, it will depend on the life
of the consciousness-soul to what extent the
spirit-self can develop itself in it. The more
highly developed the soul-body is, the more
complete is the intercourse which the sentient-


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 73

soul will be able to develop with the outer
world. And the spirit-self will become so
much the richer and more powerful, the more
the consciousness-soul brings it nourishment.
It has been shown that during life this
nourishment is supplied to the spirit-self
through assimilated experiences, and the
fruits of these experiences. For the inter-
action of soul and spirit described above,
can, of course, only take place where soul
and spirit are within each other, penetrating
each other, that is, within the union of
"spirit-self" with "consciousness-soul."

Let us consider, first, the interaction uf
the soul-body and sentient-soul. The soul-
body is, as has become evident, the most finely
elaborated part of the corporality; but it,
nevertheless, belongs to it and is dependent on
it. Physical- body, ether-body, and soul-body
compose, in a certain sense, one whole. Hence
the soul-body is also drawn within the laws of
physical heredity through which the body
receives its shape. And since it is the most
mobile and, so to speak, volatile form of cor-
porality, it must also exhibit the most mobile,
volatile manifestations of heredity. While,


>y Google


74 THEOSOPHY

therefore, the difference in the physical body
is smallest, corresponding to races, peoples,
and tribes; and while the ether-body presents,
on the whole, a preponderating likeness
although a greater divergence in single indi-
viduals, in the soul-body the difference is a
very great one. In it is expressed what one
already feels to be the EXTERNAL, PERSONAL,
uniqueness of a man. It is therefore also the
bearer of that part of this personal uniqueness
which is passed on from parents, grand-par-
ents, etc., to descendants. The soul as such
leads, as has been explained, a completely self-
contained life of its own ; it shuts itself up with
its inclinations and disinclinations, its feelings
and passions; but, as a whole being, it is
nevertheless active, and therefore this whole
comes to expression also in the sentient-soul.
And because the sentient-soul penetrates and,


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 75

from the little mother the joyous disposition
and the love of romance." Genius, of course,
he did not receive from either. In this way
we are shown what part of a man's soul
qualities he hands over, as it were, to the line
of physical heredity.

The matter and forces of the physical body
are in the whole external physical nature
around us. They are continually being taken
from it and given back to it. In the space
of a few years the matter which composes
our physical body is entirety renewed. That
this matter takes the form of the human body,
and that it always renews itself again within
this body, is due to the fact that it is held
together by the ether-body. And the form
of the latter is not determined by events
between birth — or conception — and death
atone, but is dependent on the taws of
heredity which extend beyond birth and death.
That soul qualities also can be transmitted by
heredity, that is, that the process of physical
heredity receives an infusion from the sout,
is due to the fact that the soul-body can be
influenced by the sentient-soul.

Now how does the interaction between body


>y Google


76 THEOSOPHY

and soul proceed? During life the spirit is
bound up with the soul in the way shown
above. The soul receives from it the power
of living in the Good and the True, and of
thereby bringing in its own life, in its tend-
encies, impulses, and passions, the spirit itself
to expression. The spirit-self brings to the I,
from the world of the spirit, the eternal laws
of the True and the Good. These link them-
selves through the consciousness-soul with the
experiences of the soul's own life. These
experiences themselves pass away, but their
fruits remain. The spirit-self receives an
abiding impression by having been linked
with them. When the human spirit
approaches an experience similar to one with
which it has already been linked, it sees in it
something familiar, and is able to take up a
different attitude toward it than if it were
facing it for the first time. This is the basis
of all learning. And the fruits of learning are
acquired capacities. The fruits of the transi-
tory life are in this way graven on the eternal
spirit. And do we not see these fruits?
Whence spring the innate predispositions and
talents described above as characteristic of the


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 77

spiritual man? Surely only from capacities
of one kind or another which the human being
brings with him when he begins his earthly
life. These capacities, in certain respects,
resemble exactly those which we can also
acquire for ourselves during life. Take the
case of a genius. It is known that Mozart,
when a boy, could write out from memory a
long musical composition after hearing it only
once. He was able to do this only because he
could survey the whole at one glance. Within
certain limits a man is also able during life
to increase his capacity of rapid survey, of
grasping combinations to such an extent that
he then possesses new faculties. Lessing,
indeed, has said of himself that by means of
a talent for critical observation he had
acquired for himself something that came
near to being genius. One has either to regard
such abilities founded on innate capacities
with wonder as miracles, or one must consider
them as fruits of experiences which the spirit-
self has had through a soul. They have been
graven on the spirit-self. And since they have
not been implanted in this life, they have
been in a former one. The human spirit is


>y Google


;8 THEOSOPHY

its own species. And just as man as a phys-
ical being belonging to a species bequeaths
his qualities within the species, so does the
SPIRIT within ITS species, that is, within itself.
In each life the human spirit appears as
A repetition of itself with the fruits of
ITS former experiences in previous lives.
This life is consequently the repetition of
another, and brings with it what the spirit-
self has, by work, acquired for itself in the
previous life. When the spirit-self absorbs
something that can develop into fruit, it pene-
trates itself with the life-spirit. Just as the
life-body reproduces the form, from genus to
genus, so does the life-spirit reproduce the soul
from personal existence to personal existence.
Thus the experiences of the soul become
enduring not only within the boundaries of
birth and death, but out beyond death. But
the soul does not stamp its experiences only
on the spirit which flashes up in it, it stamps
them, as has been shown, on the outer world,
also, through the DEED. What a man did yes-
terday is to-day still present in its effects. A
picture of the connection between cause and
effect is given in the simile of sleep and death.


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 79

Sleep has often been called the younger
brother of death. I get up in the morning.
Night has interrupted my consecutive activity.
Now, under ordinary circumstances, it is not
possible for me to begin my activity again just
as I like. I must connect it with my doings of
yesterday if there is to be order and coherence
in my life. My actions of yesterday are the
conditions predetermining those I have to do
to-day. I have created my fate of to-day by
what I did yesterday. I have separated myself
for a while from my activity; but this activity
belongs to me and dravi^ me again to itself
after I have withdrawn myself from it for a
while. My past remains bound up with me;
it lives on in my present, and will follow me
into my future. If the effects of my deeds of
yesterday were not to be my fate to-day, I
should have had, not to awake this morning,
but to be newly created out of nothing. It
would be absurd if under ordinary circum-
stances I were not to occupy a house that I
have had built for me.

The human spirit is just as little newly
created when it begins its earthly life as is a
man newly created every morning. Let us try


>y Google


to make clear to ourselves what happens when
an entrance into this life takes place. A phys-
ical body, receiving its form through the laws
of heredity, comes upon the scene. This body
becomes the bearer of a spirit which repeats a
previous life in a new form. Between the two
stands the soul, which leads a self-contained
life of its own. Its inclinations and disinclina-
tions, its wishes and desires minister to it; it
takes thought into its service. As sentient-soul
it receives the impressions of the outer world
and carries them to the spirit, in order that the
spirit may extract from them the fruits that
are for eternity. It plays, as it were, the part
of intermediary; and its task is fully accom-
plished when it is able to do this. The body
forms impressions for the sentient-soul which
transforms them into sensations, retains thorn
in the memory as conceptions, and hands them
over to the spirit to hold throughout eternity.
The soul is really that through which man


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 8i

The soul binds the two worlds for a time
together.

But the physical world on which the
human spirit enters is no strange field of action
to it. On it the traces of its actions are
imprinted. Something in this field of action
belongs to the spirit. It bears the impress of
its being. It is related to it. As the soul
formerly transmitted the impressions from the
outer world to the spirit in order that they
might become enduring in it, so now the soul,
as the spirit's organ, converts the capacities
bestowed by the spirit into deeds which are
also enduring through their effects. Thus the
soul has actually flowed into these actions. In
the effects of his actions man's soul lives on in
a second independent life. And it is inevita-
ble that the human spirit should meet again
the effect of these actions. For only the one
part of my deed is in the outer world; the
other is in myself. Let us make this clear by
a simple example taken from natural science.
Animals that once could see migrated to the
caves of Kentucky, and have, through their
life in them, lost their powers of sight. The
existence in darkness has caused the eyes to


>y Google


8s THEOSOPHY

be inactive. Consequently the physical and
chemical activity that is present when seeing
takes place is no longer carried on in these
eyes. The stream of nourishment which was
formerly expended on this activity now flows
to other organs. These animals CAN NOW live
only in these caves. They have by their act,
by the immigration, created the conditions
of their later lives. The immigration has
become a part of their fate. A being that once
acted has united itself with the results of the
action. It is so also with the human spirit. It
is only by having been active that the soul
could have transmitted certain capacities to it.
And these capacities correspond to the actions.
By means of his actions, therefore, the
human spirit has really carved his fate. In a
new life he finds himself linked to what he did
in a former one. One may ask, "How can that
be, when the human spirit on reincarnating
finds itself in an entirely different world from
that which it left at some earlier time?" This
question is based on a very superficial concep-
tion of the linkings of fate. If I change my
scene of action from Europe to America I
find myself in entirely new surroundings.


>y Google


^" RE-EMBODIMEl\T AND DESTINY 83

Nevertheless, my life in America depends
entirely on my previous life in Europe. If I
have been a mechanic in Europe, my life in
America will shape itself quite differently
from the way in which it would had I been a
bank clerk. In the one case I should probably
be surrounded in America by machinery, in the
other by bank offices. In each case it is my
previous life that decides my environment; it
attracts to itself, as it were, out of the whole
surrounding world, those things that are
related to it. So it is with the spirit-self. It
inevitably surrounds itself in a new life with
that to which it is related from previous lives.
And it is on this account that sleep is a good
likeness for death. For the man during sleep
is withdrawn from the field of action in which


>y Google


84 THEOSOPHY

day, as it were, spread out around us. So it
is with the actions of the former embodiments
or incarnations of man. They are bound to
him as his destiny, as the life in the dark caves
remains bound up with the animals who,
through migration into them, have lost their
powers of sight. Just as these animals can
only live in the surroundings in which they
have placed themselves, so the human spirit
CAN only live in the surroundings which by
its acts it has created for itself. There can be
no more appropriate comparison than that of
sleep with death. That I find in the morning
a state of affairs which I on the previous day
created, is brought about by the immediate
progress of the events themselves. That I,
when I reincarnate myself, find surroundings
which correspond with the results of my deeds
in a previous life, is brought about by the rela-
tionship of my reincarnated spirit with the
things in the world around. From this it
stands out clearly how the SOUL forms a mem-
ber of the constitution of man. The physical
body is subject to the laws of heredity. The
human spirit, on the contrary, has to incarnate
over and over again, and its law consists in its


>y Google


RE-EMBODIMENT AND DESTINY 85

bringing over the fruits of the former lives
into the following ones. The soul lives in the
present. But this life in the present is not inde-
pendent of the previous lives. For the incar-
nating spirit brings its destiny with it from its
previous incarnations, and this destiny decides
the kind of life. Whatever impressions the
soul will be able to have, with what wishes it
will be able to be gratified, what sorrows and
joys spring forth for it, depend on the nature
of the actions in the past incarnations of the
spirit. The life of the soul is therefore the
result of the self-created destiny of the human
spirit. The course of man's life between birth
and death is therefore determined in a three-
fold way. And he is by these means depend-
ent in a threefold way on factors which lie OX
THE OTHER SIDE of birth and death. The body
is subject to the laws of heredity; the soul is
ubject to the self-created fate. One calls this


>y Google


86 THEOSOPHY

ion over the corporality according to the laws
of the physical world; the soul-life, which is
subject to destiny, links them together during
an earthly life.

All further knowledge of the being of man
has to be preceded by acquaintance with the
"three worlds" to which he belongs. They
are dealt with in the following chapters.

Thinking which takes up an unprejudiced
attitude toward the phenomena of life, not
afraid to follow the thoughts resulting to their
final consequences, can, by pure logic, arrive
at the conviction of the law of karma and rein-
carnation. Just as it is true that for the seer
with the opened "spiritual eye," past lives,
like an opened book, face him as experience,
_ so is it true that the TRUTH of it all becomes
obvious to the unprejudiced REASON.


>y Google


CHAPTER III

THE THREE WORLDS

I. THE SOUL WORLD

Study of man has shown that he belongs
e worlds. From the world of physical
ality are taken the materials and
building up his body. He has knowl-
f this world through the perceptions of
:rnal physical senses. Anyone trusting to

senses ALONE, and developing his per-
: abilities alone, can gain for himself no
:enment concerning the two other
, the SOUL and the spiritual. A man's

to convince himself of the reality of a
ir a being depends on whether he has an
3f perception, a sense for it. It may, of

easily lead to misunderstandings if one
e higher organs of perception spirit-
VSES, as is done here, for in speaking
VSES" one involuntarily connects with


>y Google


88 THEOSOPHY

them the thought "physical." The physical
world is in fact designated the "sensible," in
contradistinction to the "spiritual." In order
to avoid this misunderstanding, one must take
into account that "higher senses" are spoken
of here only in a comparative or metaphorical
sense. As the physical senses perceive the
physical world, the soul and spiritual senses
perceive the soul and spiritual worlds. The
expression "sense" will be used as meaning
simply "organ of perception." Man would
have no knowledge of light and color had he
not an eye able to sense light; he would know
nothing of sound had he not an ear able to
sense sound. In this connection the German
philosopher Lotze rightly says, "Without a
light-sensing eye, and a sound-sensing ear, the
whole world would be dark and silent. There
would be in it just as little light or sound as
there could be toothache without the pain-
feeling nerve of the tooth." In order to see
what is said here in the right light, one need
only think how entirely different the world
must reveal itself to man on the one hand, and
on the other to the lower forms of animal life
that have only a kind of touch sense or sense of


>y Google


I the world of
mt by Goethe
in that we try
We become
ete history of
nature of that
) describe the
I we systemat-
deeds, a pic-
it itself to us.
, actions and
^ht are indeed


>y Google


po THEOSOPHY

linked in closest relationship, but we must
think of them both as belonging to the whole
of nature; for through them the whole of
nature is engaged in revealing herself to the
sense of the eye especially. In like manner
nature reveals herself to another sense . . .
nature thus speaks downward to OTHER SENSES,
to known, misunderstood, unknown senses;
she thus speaks with herself and to us through
a thousand phenomena. To THE ATTENTIVE
SHE IS NOWHERE EITHER DEAD OR SILENT."
It would not be correct were one to interpret
this saying of Goethe's as though by it the
possibility of knowing the ESSENTIAL nature
of a thing were being denied. Goethe does not
mean that one perceives only the effects of
a thing, and that the being hides Itself behind
them. He means rather that one should not
speak at all of a "hidden being." The being
is not behind its revelation; it comes, on the
contrary, into view through the revelation.
But this being is in many respects so rich that
it can reveal itself to other senses in yet other
forms. That which reveals itself belongs to
the being ONLY — on account of the limitations
of the senses — it is not the whole being. This


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 91

point of view of Goethe's is entirely the theo-
sophical one.

As in the body, eye and car develop into
organs of perception, into senses for corporal
occurrences, so is man able to develop in him-
self soul and spiritual organs of perception,
through which the soul and spiritual worlds
will be opened to him. For those who have
not such higher senses, these worlds are "dead
and silent," just as for a being without eyes
and ears the corporal world is "dark and
silent." It is true that the relation of man to
these higher senses is rather different from his
relations to the corporal senses. It is good
Mother Nature who sees to it as a rule that
these latter are developed in him. They come
into existence without his help. But on the
development of his higher senses he must work
himself. If he wishes to perceive the soul and
spirit worlds, he must develop soul and spirit
as nature has developed his body so that he
might perceive the corporal world around
him and guide himself in it. Such a develop-
ment of the higher organs not yet developed
for us by nature herself is not unnatural; for
in the HIGHER SENSE all that man accom-


>y Google


92 THEOSOPHY

plishes belongs also to nature. Only he who
wishes to maintain that man should remain
standing at the stage at which he left the hand
of nature could call the development of the
higher senses unnatural. By him the sig-
nificance of these organs is misunderstood,
as indicated in the quotation from Goethe.
Such a one might just as well oppose all
education of man, for it also develops further
the work of nature. And he would have to
oppose especially operations upon those born
blind. For almost the same thing happens to
him who awakens his higher senses in himself
as to the person born blind and operated upon.
The world appears to him with new qualities,
events, and facts, of which the physical senses
reveal nothing to him. It is clear to him that
through these higher organs he adds nothing
arbitrarily to the reality, but that without them
the essential part of this reality would have
remained HIDDEN from him. The soul and
spiritworlds are nothing ALONGSIDE or OUTSIDE
the physical world; they are not separated in
space from it. Just as for persons born blind
and operated upon, the previously dark world
rays out light and colors, so the things which


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 93

previously were only corporal phenomena
reveal their soul and spirit qualities to him
who is, soul and spirit, AWAKENED. In addi-
tion to this, however, this world then becomes
filled with still other occurrences and beings
that remain completely unknown to him
whose soul and spirit senses are not awakened.
The development of the soul and spirit
senses will be spoken of in a more detailed way
further on in this book. Here these higher
worlds themselves will be described. Anyone
who denies the existence of these worlds says
nothing more than that he has not yet
developed his higher organs. This is still the
case with the greater part of mankind at the
present stage of the world's evolution. But
the evolution of man is not terminated at any
one stage; it must always progress. What
will be here called the SOUL world, is called
in current theosophical literature the "astral,"
the spirit world is called in it the "mental"
world.

One often involuntarily pictures the
"higher organs" as too similar to the phys-
ical ones. One should understand quite clearly
that in these organs one has to do with spir-


>y Google


94 THEOSOPHY

itual or soul formations. One ought not to
expect, therefore, that what one perceives in
the higher worlds is only a vaporous, rarefied
matter. So long as one EXPECTS something of
this kind, one can come to no clear idea as
to what is exactly meant by "higher worlds."
For many persons it would not be at all as diffi-
cult as it actually is to know something about
these higher worlds, the elementary part, that
is to say, if they did not form the idea that
what they are to see is again merely physical
matter rarefied. Because they presuppose
something of this kind they, as a rule, do not
at all wish to acknowledge the reality of that
which is the essential part. They look upon
it as unreal, refuse to acknowledge it as some-
thing that satisfies them, and so on. The higher
stages of spiritual development are certainly
not easily accessible; but the lower, and that
is already a great deal, would not be at all
so difficult to reach if people would from the
first free themselves from the prejudice
which consists in picturing to themselves
the soul and spiritual merely as a finer phys-
ical.

Just as we do not wholly know a man when


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 95

we have formed a picture of his physical
exterior only, so also we do not know the
world around us if we only know in it what
the physical senses reveal to us. And just
as a photograph becomes intelligible and
living to us when we have become so inti-
mately acquainted with the person photo-
graphed as to know his soul, so we can really
understand the corporal world only if we
learn to know its soul and spiritual basis.
For this reason it is advisable to speak here,
first about the higher, the soul and spirit
worlds, and only then judge of the physical
from the theosophical standpoint.

Certain difficulties are met with at this
present stage of civilization by anyone speak-
ing about the higher worlds. For this age is
great above all Uiings in the knowledge and
conquest of the physical world. Our words
have, in fact, received their stamp and sig-
nificance through being applied to this phys-
ical world. Nevertheless we have to make
use of these current words so as to form a
link with something known. This opens Ac
door to many misundertan dings on the part of
those who wish to trust to their external senses


>y Google


96 THEOSOPHY

only. Much also can be expressed and indi-
cated only by means of similes and resem-
blances. This must be so, for such similes
are a means by which a man is at first directed
to these higher worlds, and through which his
own ascent to them is furthered. (This will
become evident in a later chapter, in which
the development of the soul and spiritual
organs of perception will be spoken of. To
begin with, one MUST gain knowledge of the
higher worlds by means of similes. Only then
is man ready to acquire for himself the power
to see into them.)

As the matter and forces which compose
and govern our stomach, our heart, our brain,
our lungs, etc., come from the physical
world, so do our soul qualities, our impulses,
desires, feelings, passions, wishes, sensations,
etc., come from the soul world. The soul of
the human being is a member of this world,
just as his body is part of the physical world
of bodies. Should one wish to begin by
pointing out a difference between the cor-
poral and soul worlds, one would say that
the latter is in all its objects and entities much
finer, more mobile, and plastic than the


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 97

former. But it must be kept clearly in mind
that on entering the soul world one enters a
world entirely different from the physical.
If, therefore, "coarser" and "finer" be spoken
of in this respect, readers must be fully aware
that one SUGGESTS by means of a comparison
what is fundamentally different. It is the same
with all that is said about the soul world in
words borrowed from the world of physical
corporality. Taking this into account, one
can say that the formations and beings of the
soul world consist in the same way of soul
materials, and are directed in the same way by
soul forces, as is the case in the physical world
with physical materials and physical forces.

Just as spacial extension and spacial move-
ment are peculiar to corporal formations, so
are excitability and impelling desire peculiar
to the things and beings of the soul world.
For this reason one describes the soul world
as the world of desires or wishes, or as the
world of longing. These expressions are bor-
rowed from the human soul world. One must
therefore hold clearly in view that the things
in those parts of the soul world which lie out-
side the human soul are just as different from


>y Google


9B THEOSOPHY

the soul forces within it as the physical matter
and forces of the external corporal world are
different from the parts which compose the
physical human body. (Impulse, wish, long-
ing are names for the material of the soul
world. To this matter theosophical literature
gives the name of "astral." If one wishes to
refer specifically to the FORCES of the soul
world, one speaks in Theosophy of "kama."
But it must, not be forgotten that the distinc-
tion between "matter" and "force" cannot be
as sharply drawn as in the physical world.
An instinct, an impulse, can be called "force"
just as well as "matter.")

On him who obtains a view of the soul world
for the first time, the differences between it
and the physical have a bewildering effect.
But that is also the case when a previously
inactive physical sense is being opened. The
man born blind, when operated upon, has first
to learn to guide himself through the world
which he has previously known only by
means of the sense of touch. Such a one, for
example, sees the objects at first IN his own
eyes, then he sees them outside himself, but at
first they appear to him as if painted on a fiat


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 99

surface. Only gradually does he grasp per-
spective and the spacial distance between
things. In the soul world entirely different
laws prevail from those in the physical. Now
there are many soul formations bound to those
of the other worlds. The soul of man, for
instance, is bound to the human body and to
the human spirit. The occurrences one can
observe in it are therefore influenced at the
same time by the bodily and the spiritual
worlds. One has to take this into account in
observing the soul world, and one must take
care not to ascribe to a law of the soul world
occurrences due to the influence of another
world. When, for example, a man sends out
a wish, it is produced by a thought, a concep-
tion of the spirit whose laws it accordingly fol-
lows. One can formulate the laws of the phys-
ical world while ignoring, for example, the
influence of man on its occurrences, and the
same thing is possible with regard to the soul
world.

An important difference between soul and
physical occurrences can be expressed by say-
ing that the interaction in the former is much
more INWARD than in the latter. In phys-


>y Google


100 THEOSOPHY

ical space there reigns, for example, the law
of "impact." When an ivory ball strikes
another which is at rest, the latter moves in a
direction which can be calculated from the
motion and elasticity of the first. In the soul
space the interaction of two forms which meet
depends on their inner qualities. If they are
in affinity they mutually interpenetrate each
other and, as it were, grow together. They
repel each other if their beings conflict. In
physical space there are, for example, definite
taws of vision. One sees distant objects per-
spectively diminishing. When one looks down
an avenue, the distant trees appear, according
to the laws of perspective, to stand at shorter
distances from each other than the near ones.
In the soul space, on the contrary, all objects
near and far appear to the clairvoyant at those
distances from each other which are due to
their inner nature. This is naturally a source
of the most varied mistakes for those who enter
the soul world, and wish to become at home
there by the help of the rules which they bring
with them from the physical world.

One of the first things that a man must do in
order to make his way about the soul world


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS loi

is to realize that one distinguishes the various
kinds of its forms in a similar manner to that
in which one distinguishes solid, liquid, air,
or gaseous bodies in the physical world. In
order to be able to do that it is necessary to
know the two basic forces which are the most
important in it. They may be called SYM-
PATHY and ANTIPATHY. The order to which
a soul formation belongs is decided by the
manner in which these basic forces work in
it. The force with which one soul formation
attracts others, seeks to fuse with them, to make
its afSnity with them effectual, must be desig-
nated as SYMPATHY. Antipathy, on the
other hand, is the force with which soul for-
mations repel, exclude each other in the soul
world, with which they assert their separate
identity. The part played in the soul world
by a soul formation depends upon the propor-
tions in which these basic forces are present
in it. One has to distinguish, in the first place,
between three kinds of soul formations accord-
ing to the manner in which sympathy and
antipathy work in them. These kinds differ
from each other in that sympathy and antipa-
thy have in them definitely fixed mutual rela-


>y Google


I03 THEOSOPHY

donships. In all three BOTH basic forces are
present. Let us take, to begin with, a forma-
tion of the first kind. It attracts other for-
mations in its neighborhood by means of the
sympathy ruling in it; but, besides this sym-
pathy, there is at the same time present in it
antipathy, through which it repels certain
things in its surroundings. From the outside
such a formation appears to be endowed with
the forces of antipathy ONLY. This, however,
is not the case. There is sympathy and antipa-
thy in it, but the latter predominates. It has
the upper hand over the former. Such for-
mations play a SELF-SEEKING role in the soul
space. They repel much that is around them,
and lovingly attract but little to themselves.
They therefore move through the soul space
as unchangeable forms. The force of sympa-
thy which is in them appears GREEDY. This
GREED appears at the same time insatiable, as
if it could not be satisfied, because the pre-
dominating antipathy repels so much of what
approaches that no satisfaction is possible.
(Here we have to do with what is described
in theosophical literature as the lowest part
of the astral world.) Should one wish to


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 103

compare this kind of soul formation with
something in the physical world, one can say
that it corresponds with the solid physical
bodies. This region of soul matter may be
called Burning Desire. The manner in
which this Burning Desire is mingled in the
souls of animals and men determines in them
what one calls the lower sensual impulses,
their dominating selfish instincts.

The second kind of soul formations is that
in which the two basic forces preserve a bal-
ance, in which, accordingly, antipathy and
sympathy act with equal strength. They
approach other formations with a certain
neutrality and act on them as if related, but
without especially attracting or repelling.
They, as it were, erect no solid barrier between
themselves and their surroundings. They
constantly allow other formations in their
surroundings to act on them; one can there-
fore compare them with the liquids of the
physical world. And there is nothing of greed
in the way in which such formations attract
others to themselves. The activity meant here
is in process, for example, when the human
soul receives the sensation of a certain color.


>y Google


t04 THEOSOPHY

If I have the sensation of a red color, I receive
to begin with a NEUTRAL EXCITATION from
my surroundings. Only when there is added
to this excitation pleasure in the red color
does another soul activity come into play.
That which effects the neutral excitation
is the action of soul formations standing in
such mutual relationship that sympathy and
antipathy preserve an equal balance. One
will have to describe the soul matter which
comes under observation here as perfectly
plastic and flowing. Not self-seeking like
the first does it move about the soul space, but
in such a way that its being receives impres-
sions from all directions, and that it shows
itself to have affinity with much that
approaches it. An expression that may be
used to designate it is Flowing Excitability.
The third stage of soul formations is that
in which sympathy has the upper hand over
antipathy. Antipathy produces the self-
seeking self-assertion; this, however, retires in
face of the liking for the things in the sur-
roundings. Let us picture such a formation
within the soul space. It appears as the center
point of an attracting sphere which spreads


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 105

over the objects in its surroundings. Such
formations one must designate in a special
sense as Wish Substance. This designation
appears to be the right one, because the attrac-
tion so acts, even through the existing antipa-
thy, as to bring the attracted objects within the
soul formation's own sphere. The sympathy
thus receives a tone of selfishness. This wish
substance may be likened to the air or gaseous
bodies of the physical world. As a gas strives
to expand on all sides, so does the wish sub-
stance spread itself out in all directions.

Higher grades of soul substance render
themselves distinguishable by the fact that in
them one of the basic forces, namely antipathy,
retires completely, and sympathy alone shows
itself as the one really effective. Now this is
able to make its power felt within the parts of
soul formation itself. These parts mutually
attract each other. The force of sympathy
within a soul formation comes to expression in
what one calls LIKING. And each lessening of
this sympathy is DISLIKING. Disliking is only
a lessened liking, as cold is only a lessened
warmth. Liking and disliking compose what
lives in man as the world of EMOTIONS in


>y Google


io6 THEOSOPHY

the narrow sense of the word. Feeling is the
life and activity of the soul within itself.
What one calls the COMFORT of the soul de-
pends on the way in which the feelings of lik-
ing and disliking — attraction and repulsion —
interact within the soul.

A still higher grade is occupied by those
soul formations whose sympathy does not
remain enclosed within the region of their own
life. They differ from the three lower grades,
as does in fact the fourth also, in that in them
the force of sympathy has no antipathy oppos-
ing it to overcome. It is only through these
higher orders of soul substance that the mani-
fold variety of soul formations can unite and
form a common soul world. In cases where
antipathy comes into play, the soul formation
strives toward another thing for sake of its
own life, and in order to strengthen and enrich
itself by means of the other. Where antipa-
thy is silent the other thing is received as
revelation, as information. This higher form
of soul substance plays in the soul space a simi-
lar role to that played by light in physical
space. It causes a soul formation to suck in,
as it were, the being or essence of others for


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 107

their sakes; one could also say to let itself be
rayed upon by them. Only by drawing upon
these higher regions are the soul beings
awakened to the true soul life. Their dull life
in the darkness opens outward, and begins it-
self to shine and ray out into the soul space;
the sluggish, dull movement of the inner life
which wishes to shut itself off through antipa-
thy when the substances of the lower regions
only are present, becomes force and mobility
which arises from within, and, streaming,
pours itself outward. The Flowing Excita-
bility of the second region is only effective
when formations meet each other. Then,
indeed, the one streams over into the other.
But CONTACT is here necessary. In the higher
regions there prevails a free out-raying and
out-pouring. ( Rightly does one describe the
essential nature of this region as an "out-ray-
ing," for the sympathy which is developed acts
in such a way that one can use as symbol for it
the expression taken from the action of light.)
The soul pines from lack of the soul substances
of the higher regions which give it life, as a
plant degenerates in a dark cellar.
Soul Light, Active Soul Force and the


>y Google


[o8 THEOSOPHY

true Soul Life in the narrower sense belong
to these regions, and thence pour themselves
out to the soul beings.

One has therefore to distinguish between
three lower and three higher regions of the
soul world. These are linked by a fourth, so
that there results the following division of the
soul world:

1. Region of Burning Desire.

2. " " Flowing Excitability.

3. " " Wishes.

4. ' " Attraction and Repulsion.

5. " " Soul Light.

6. " " Active Soul Force.

7. ■' " Soul Life. ,

Through the first three regions the soul for-
mations receive their qualities according to the
proportion of sympathy and antipathy in them ;
through the fourth region sympathy is prevail-


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 109

For the sake of clearness it is here empha-
sized, though it should be superfluous, that
these seven divisions of the soul world do not
represent regions separated from one another.
Just as in the physical regions solid, liquid, and
air or gaseous substances interpenetrate, so do
Burning Desire, Flowing Excitability, and the
forces of the World of Wishes in the soul
world. And as in the physical world, warmth
penetrates bodies and light illumines them, so
is it the case in the soul world with desire and
aversion, and with the Soul Light. Some-
thing similar takes place with regard to the
Active Soul Force and the true Soul Life.

2. THE SOUL IN THE SOUL WORLD AFTER


>y Google


;ind the spiritual. While the soul lives in the
body it participates to a certain extent in all
that takes place in it. When the physical
functions of the body proceed with regularity,
there arise in the soul desire and comfort. If
these functions are disturbed aversion and pain
arise. And the soul has its share in the activi-
ties of the spirit also; one thought fills it with
joy, another with repulsion; a correct judg-
ment has the approval of the soul, a false one
its disapproval. The stage of evolution of a
man depends, in fact, on whether the inclina-
tions of his soul move more in one direction or
in another. A man is the more perfect the more
his soul sympathizes with the manifestations
of the spirit; he is the more imperfect the more
the inclinations of his soul are satisfied by the
functions of the body.

The spirit is the central point of man, the
body the instrument by which the spirit
observes and learns to understand the physical


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS ni

tone. All this it communicates to the spirit,
which thus attains to the UNDERSTANDING of
the physical world. A thought which arises
in the spirit is changed by the soul into the
WISH to realize it, and only through this can
it became DEED, with the help of the body as
instrument. Now man can fulfill his destiny
only by allowing his spirit to direct the course
of all his activity. The soul can (of itself)
direct its inclinations just as well to the phys-
ical as to the spiritual. It sends, as it were,
its feelers down into the physical as well as up
into the spiritual. By sinking them into the
physical world its own being becomes pene-
trated and colored by the nature of the phys-
ical. But the spirit, because able to act in
the physical world only through it as interme-
diary, receives also in this way the direction
toward the physical. Its formations are drawn
to the


>y Google


[12 THEOSOPHY

thoughts serve only to satisfy his demands on
the physical life. The spiritual Self by living
from incarnation to incarnation is intended to
receive its direction ever increasingly out of
the spiritual; its knowledge to be determined
by the spirit of eternal Truth, its action by
the eternal Goodness.

Death, when regarded as a fact in the phys-
ical world, signifies a change in the functions
of the body. It ceases to be through its organ-
ization the instrument of the soul and the
spirit. It shows itself henceforth to be entirely
subject, as regards its functions, to the physical
world and its laws. And it passes over into it
in order to dissolve in it. Only these physical
processes in the body can be observed after
death by the physical senses. What happens
then to soul and spirit escapes them. For even
during life soul and spirit can be observed by


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 113

a higher knowledge steps in, based on observa-
tion of the events in the soul and spirit worlds.
After the spirit has released itself from the
body it continues to be united with the soul.
And as, during physical life, the body chains
it to the physical world, the soul now chains
it to the soul world. But it is not in this
soul world that the spirit's true primordial
being is to be found. The soul world is
intended to serve merely as its connecting link
with the scene of its actions, the physical
world. In order to appear in a new incarna-
tion with a more perfect form it must draw
force and strength from the spiritual world.
But through the soul it has become entangled
in the physical world. It is bound to a
soul being which is penetrated and colored
by the nature of the physical, and through
this it has itself acquired a tendency in this
direction. After <


>y Google


same way as it is bound to the body during
physical incarnation. The time when the
body is to die is determined by the laws of the
BODY. Speaking generally, in fact, it must be
said it is not that the soul and spirit forsake
the body, but that the body is set free by them
when its forces are no longer able to act after
the manner of the human organization. The
same relationship exists between soul and
spirit. The soul sets the spirit free to pass
into the higher, the spiritual world, when its
forces are no longer able to function as after
the manner of the human soul-organism. The
spirit is set free the moment the soul has
handed over to dissolution what it can only
experience in the body, and retains only that
which remains over, which can live on with
the spirit. This retained extract, which,
although experienced in the body, can, never-
theless as fruit, be stamped on the spirit, con-
nects the soul with the spirit in the pure,


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 115

physical. The moment it has fulfilled THIS
task the soul takes the direction to the spirit-
ual. In fact, the nature of its task would cause
it to be henceforth only spiritually active when
the body falls away from it, that is, when it
can no longer be a CONNECTING link. And so
it would be, had it not, owing to its life in the
body, been influenced by it and in its inclina-
tions attracted to it. Were it not for this color-
ing received through the body it would at
once, on being disembodied, follow the laws
of the spiritual soul world only, and manifest
no further inclination to the sensible world.
This is what would happen if a man on dying
lost completely all interest in the earthly
world, if all desires, wishes, etc., attaching to
the existence he has left had been completely
satisfied. To the extent to which this is not
the case, the unsatisfied part of the soul per-
sists in its longings for the physical.

To avoid confusion we must here carefully
distinguish between what chains man to the
world in such a way that it can be made good
in any following incarnation, and that which
chains him to one particular incarnation, that
is, to the immediately preceding one. The


>y Google


ii6 THEOSOPHY

first is made good by means of the law of des-
tiny or Karma; but the other can only be got
rid of by the soul after death.

After death there follows, for the human
spirit, a time during which the soul is shaking
off its inclinations toward the physical exist-
ence, in order once more to follow the laws of
the spiritual soul world only and set the spirit
free. It is natural that this time will last
the longer the more the soul was bound to the
physical. It will be short in the case of a
man who has clung little to the physical life,
long, on the other hand, for one who has so
completely bound up his interests with it that
at death many desires, wishes, etc., still live in
the soul.

The easiest way to gain an idea of the con-
dition in which the soul lives during the time
immediately after death is afforded by the
following consideration. Let us take the
somewhat crass example, the enjoyment of the
ban vivant. His pleasure consists in the tick-
ling of the palate by food. The pleasure is
naturally not bodily, but belongs to the soul.
The pleasure lives in the soul, as also does
the desire for the pleasure. But for the


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 117

SATISFACTION of the desire the corresponding
bodily organs, the palate, etc., are necessary.
After death the soul has not immediately
lost such a desire, but it no longer possesses the
bodily organ which provides the means for
satisfying the desire. For another reason,
but one which acts in the same way only far
more strongly, the man is now as if he were
suffering burning thirst in a region in the
length and breadth of which there is no
water. The soul thus suffers burning pain
from the deprivation of the pleasure because
it has laid aside the bodily organ by which it
can experience it. It is the same with all that
the soul yearns for and that can only be satis-
fied through the bodily organs. This con-
dition {of burning privation) lasts until the
soul has learned not to long any more for that
which can only be satisfied through the body.
The time passed in this condition is usually
called in Theosophy "Kamaloca" {region of
desires, although it has of course nothing to
do with a locality).

When the soul enters the soul world after
death it becomes subject to the laws of that
world. The laws act on it, and on their action


>y Google


Ii8 THEOSOPHY

depends the manner in which its inclinations
toward the physical are destroyed. The ways
in which they act on it must differ according
to the kinds of soul substances and soul forces
in whose domain it is placed at the time. Each
of these kinds will make its purifying, cleans-
ing influence felt. The process which takes
place here consists in the gradual conquering
of all antipathy in the soul by the forces of
sympathy, and in bringing this sympathy itself
to its highest pitch. For through this highest
degree of sympathy with the whole of the rest
of the soul world, the soul will, as it were,
merge into it, become one with it; then is it
utterly emptied of its self-seeking; it ceases
to exist as a being inclined to the physically
sensible existence ; the spirit is set free
through it. The soul therefore purifies itself
through all the regions of the soul world
described above until, in the region of perfect
sympathy, it becomes one with the whole
soul world. That the spirit itself is in bondage
until the last moment of the liberation of its
soul is due to the fact that, through its
life with it, it has developed a complete
affinity. This relationship is much greater


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 119

than the one with the body. For the spirit
is bound directly to the soul, but only indi-
rectly through the soul to the body. The
soul is, in fact, the spirit's own life. For this
reason the spirit is not bound to the decaying
body, though it is bound to the soul gradually
freeing itself. On account of the immediate
bond between the spirit and the soul, the spirit
can feel free with the soul only when the lat-
ter has itself become one with the whole soul
world.

In so far as the soul world is the abode of
man immediately after death it is called
"Kamaloca," the "Region of Desires." The
different religious systems which have embod-
ied in their doctrines a knowledge of these
conditions know this "Region of Desires" by
the name of "purgatory," "cleansing fire," and
soon.

The lowest region of the soul world is that
of Burning Desire. By it everything in the
soul that has to do with the coarsest, lowest,
selfish desires of the physical life is rooted
out of the soul after death. For through such
desires it is exposed to the eflfects of the
forces of this soul region. The unsatisfied


>y Google


I20 THEOSOPHY

desires which have remained from physical
life furnish the points of attack. The sym-
pathy of such souls extends only to what can
nourish their selfish natures; it is greatly
exceeded by the antipathy which floods every-
thing else. Now the desires aim at physical
enjoyments which cannot be satisfied in the
soul world. The craving is intensified to its
highest degree by this impossibility of satis-
faction. But at the same time owing to this
impossibility it is forced to die out gradually.
The burning lusts gradually exhaust them-
selves, and the soul has learned by experience
that the only means of preventing the suffer-
ing that must come from such longings lies in
killing them out. During the physical life
satisfaction is constantly being repeated. By
this means the pain of the burning lusts is
covered over by a kind of illusion. After


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 121

with few lusts go through it without noticing
it, for they have no affinity with it. It must
be stated that, in general, souls are the longer
influenced by the Burning Desire the more
closely they have become bound up with that
fire during life, and the more they require on
that account to be purified in it.

A second class of things in the soul world
is of such a nature that sympathy and
antipathy preserve an equal balance in them.
In so far as a human soul is in a similar con-
dition after death it will be influenced by
these things for a time. The giving of one-
self up entirely to the external glitter of life
and to joy in the swiftly- succeeding impres-
sions of the senses, brings about this condi-
tion. Many people live in it. They allow
themselves to be influenced by each worth-
less trifle of everyday life; but, as their sym-
pathy is attached to no one thing in particular,
the influences quickly pass. Everything that
does not belong to this region of empty noth-
ings is repellent to such persons. If the soul
experiences this condition after death without
the presence of the physical objects which are
necessary for its satisfaction, the condition


>y Google


123 THEOSOPHY

must needs die out ultimately. Naturally the
privation which precedes its complete extinc-
tion in the soul is full of suffering. This state
of suffering is the school for the destruction
of the illusion in which such persons are com-
pletely wrapped up during physical life.

Thirdly there come under consideration
in the soul world the things with predominat-
ing sympathy, those in whose natures WISH
predominates. The effects of their activity
are experienced by souls that retain an
atmosphere of wishes after death. These
wishes also gradually die out on account of
the impossibility of their being satisfied.

The region of Attraction and Repulsion
which has been described above as the
fourth, exposes the soul to special trials.
As long as the soul dwells in the body
it shares all that concerns it. The inner surge
life of attraction and repulsion is bound up
with the body. It causes the soul's feeling of
well-being and comfort, dislike and discom-
fort. Man feels during his physical life that
his body is himself, what one calls the FEELING
OF SELF Springs from this. And the more sen-
sually inclined people are, the more does their


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 123

feeling of self take on this characteristic.
After death the body, the object of this feeling
of self, is lacking. On this account the soul,
with which the feeling has remained, feels as
if EMPTIED OUT. A feeling as if it had lost
itself befalls it. This continues until the soul
has recognized that the true man does not
lie in the physical.. The operations of this
fourth region on the soul accordingly destroy
the illusion of the bodily self. The soul, at
length, learns to stop feeling that this cor-
porality is an essential reality. It is cured and
purified of its attachment to embodiment. In
this way it has conquered that which chains
it strongly to the ph^ical world, and can
unfold fully the forces of sympathy which flow
outward. It has, so to say, broken free from
itself, and is ready to pour itself with full
sympathy into the common soul world.

It should not pass unnoted that the tor-
ments of this region are suflfered to an
especial degree by suicides. They leave their
physical body in an artificial way, while all
the feelings connected with it remain
unchanged. In the case of a natural death the
'decay of the body is accompanied by a


>yGoogl(^


124 THEOSOPHY

partial dying out of the feelings of attachment
to it. In the case of suicides there are, in
addition to the torment caused by the
feeling of having been suddenly emptied out,
the unsatisfied desires and wishes on account
of which they have deprived themselves of
their bodies.

The FIFTH stage of the soul world is that of
Soul Light. In it sympathy with others has
already reached a high degree of power.
Souls are connected with it in so far as they
have not during their physical lives entirely
devoted themselves to satisfying lower neces-
sities, but have had joy and pleasure in their
surroundings. Enthusiasm for nature, for
example, in so far as it has borne something
of a sensuous character undergoes cleansing'
here. It is necessary, however, to distinguish
clearly THIS kind of love of nature from that
higher living in nature which is of the spirit-
ual kind, and which seeks for the spirit that
reveals itself in the things and events of
nature. This kind of feeling for nature is one
of the things that develop the spirit itself and
establish something permanent in the spirit.
But one must distinguish between THIS feel-


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 125

ing for nature and such pleasure in nature as
is based on the senses. In regard to this the
soul requires purification just as well as in
regard to other inclinations based on the mere
physical existence. Many people hold, as a
kind of ideal, arrangements which minister to
sensuous welfare, and a system of education
which results above all in the production of
sensuous comfort. One cannot say of them
that they further only their selfish impulses,
but their souls are, nevertheless, directed to
the physical world, and must be cured of this
by the prevailing force of sympathy in the
fifth region of the soul world in which these
external means of satisfaction are lacking.
The soul here recognizes gradually that this
sympathy must take other directions, and
these are found in the outpouring of the soul
into the soul region, which is brought about
by sympathy with the soul surroundings.
Those souls also that demand from their
religious observances mainly an enhancement
of their sensuous welfare, whether it be that
their longing goes out to an earthly or a
heavenly paradise, are purified here. They
find this paradise in the "Soul-land," but only


>y Google


126 THEOSOPHY

for the purpose of seeing through its worth-
lessness. These are, of course, merely a few
detached examples of purifications which
take place in this fifth region. They could
be multiplied indefinitely.

By means of the SIXTH region, that of
Active Soul Force, the purification of souls
thirsting for action takes place, souls whose
activity does not bear an egotistical character,
but springs, nevertheless, from the sensuous
satisfaction it affords them. Such natures,
viewed superficially, quite convey the impres-
sion of being idealists; they show themselves
to be persons capable of self-sacrifice. In a
deeper sense, however, the chief thing with
them is the enhancement of a sensuous feeling
of pleasure. Many artistic natures and such
as give themselves up to scientific activity
because it pleases them, belong to this class.


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 127

Life, frees man of his last inclination to the
sensibly physical world. Each preceding
region divests the soul of whatever has affinity
with it. What now still envelops the spirit
is the belief that its activity should be entirely
devoted to the physical world. There are
individuals who, though highly gifted, do not
think about much over and above the occur-
rences of the physical world. This belief can
be called materialistic. It must be destroyed,
and this is done in the seventh region. There
these souls see that they have no objects for
their materialistic thinking. Like ice in the
sun this belief of the soul melts away. The
soul being is now absorbed into its own world.
The spirit, free from all fetters, rises to the
regions where it lives in its own surroundings
only. The soul has completed its previous
earthly task, and after death any traces of this
task that remained fettering the spirit have dis-
solved. By overcoming the last trace of the
earth, the soul is itself given back to its ele-
ments.

One sees by this description that the experi-
ences in the soul world, and also the condi-
tions of the soul life after death, gain an ever


>y Google


128 THEOSOPHY

friendlier appearance the more a man has
shaken off the low elements that adhere to him
from his earthly union with the physical cor-
porality. The soul will belong for a longer or
shorter time to one or another region according
to its physical life. Where the soul feels itself
to be in affinity, there it remains until the affin-
ity is extinguished. Where no relationship
exists, it goes on its way untouched.

It was intended that only the fundamental
characteristics of the soul world, and the out-
standing features of the life of the soul in this
world, should be described here. This applies
also to the following descriptions of the spirit
land. I would exceed the prescribed limits
of this book were further characteristics of
these higher worlds to be gone into. For the
special relationships and the lapse of time,
which are quite different there from those in
the physical world, can only be spoken about
intelligibly when one is prepared to deal with
them in full detail. References of importance
in this connection will be found in my "Out-
line of Occult Science" {"Gehetmwissenschaft
im Umriss," Altmann's Verlag, Leipsig).


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 129

3. THE SPIRIT LJND

Before the spirit can be observed on its fur-
ther pilgrimage the land which it enters must
first be examined. It is the "World of the
Spirit." (In theosophical literature this is
called the "mental" world. Here, the expres-
sion "World of the Spirit" or "Spirit-land"
will be used.) This world is so unlike the
physical that all that is said about it will
appear fantastic to him who is willing to trust
his physical senses only. And what has already
been said in regard to the world of the soul
holds good here to a still higher degree; that
is, that one has to use analogies in order to
describe it. For our speech, which for the
most part serves only for the realities of the
senses, is not richly blessed with expressions
for the "Spirit-land." It is therefore espe-
cially necessary here to ask the reader to under-
stand much that is said as an indication only.
For everything that is described here is so
unlike the physical world that it can only in
this way be depicted. The author is ever con-
scious of how little this account can really
resemble the experiences of this region owing


>y Google


130 THEOSOPHY

to the imperfection of our speech, calculated,
as it is, to be our medium of expression for
the physical world.

It must above all things be emphasized that
^is world is woven out of the material of
which human thought consists. But thought,
as it lives in man, is only a shadow picture, a
phantom of its true being. As the shadow of
an object on the wall is related to the real
object which throws this shadow, so is the
thought that springs up in man related to the
being in the spirit land which corresponds to
this thought. Now when the SPIRITUAL sense
of man is awakened he really perceives this
thought-being just as the eye of the senses per-
ceives the table or the chair. He goes about in
a region of thought-beings. The corporeal eye
perceives the lion, and the corporeal thinking
THINKS merely the thought "lion" as a phan-
tom, a shadow picture. The SPIRITUAL eye
sees in Spirit-land the thought "lion" as really
and actually as the corporeal eye sees the phjrs-
ical lion. Here we may refer to the analogy
already used regarding the soul land. Just
as the surroundings of a man born blind and
operated upon appear all at once with the new


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 131

qualities of color and light, so are the sur-
roundings of the person who leams to use his
SPIRITUAL eye seen to be filled with a new
world, the world of LIVING thoughts or SPIRIT
BEINGS.

There are to be seen in this world, first, the
SPIRITUAL ARCHETYPES of all things and
beings which are present in the physical and
in the soul world. Imagine the picture of a
painter existing in the mind before it is
painted. This gives an analogy to what is
meant by the expression Akchetype. It does
not concern us here that the painter has per-
haps not had such an Archetype in his mind
before he paints, and that it only gradually
develops and becomes complete during the
practical work. In the real "World of Spirit"
there are such Archetypes for all things, and
the physical things and beings are COPIES of
these Archetypes. When any person who
trusts only his outer senses denies this
archetypal world, and holds Archetypes to be
merely abstractions which the intellect, by
comparing the objects of the senses, arrives at,
it is quite to be understood; for such a one
simply cannot see in this higher world; he


>y Google


knows the thought world only in its shadowy
abstractness. He does not know that the per-
son with spiritual vision is as familiar with the
spirit beings as he is with his dog or his cat,
and that the archetypal world has a far more
intense reality than the world of the physical
senses.

The first look into this "Spirit-land" is still
more bewildering than that into the soul
world. For the Archetypes in their true form
are very unlike their sensible copies. They
are, however, just as unlike their SHADOWS,
the abstract thoughts. In the spiritual world
all is in continuous, mobile activity, a ceaseless
creating. A state of rest, a remaining in one
place, such as one has in the physical world,
does not exist here. For the Archetypes are
CREATIVE BEINGS. They are the master build-
ers of all that comes into being in the physical
world and the soul world. Their forms
change rapidly; and in each Archetype lies


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 133

related to each other in varying degrees of
closeness. They do not work singly. The
one requires the help of the other in its cre-
ating. Often innumerable Archetypes work
together in order that this or that being in the
soul or physical world may arise.

Besides what is to be perceived by "spirit-
ual sight" in this "Spirit-land," there is some-
thing else experienced that is to be regarded as
"spiritual hearing." As soon, that is to say, as
the clairvoyant rises out of the soul world into
the spirit world the Archetypes that are per-
ceived become sounding as well. The observer
feels as if he were in an ocean of tones. And
in these tones, in these spiritual chimes, the
Beings of the spirit world express themselves.
The primordial laws of their existence express
their mutual relationships and affinities in the
intermingling of their sounds, their harmo-
nies, melodies, and rhythms. What the intel-
lect perceives in the physical world as law, as
idea, reveals itself to the "spiritual ear" as a
kind of music. (Hence the Pythagoreans
called these perceptions of the spiritual world
the "music of the spheres." To the possessor
of the "spiritual ear" this "music of the


>y Google


134 THEOSOPHY

spheres" is not something merely figurative,
allegorical, but a SPIRITUAL REALITY well
known to him.) If one wishes to gain a con-
ception of this "spiritual music" one has to lay
aside all ideas of the music of the senses as per-
ceived by the material ear. For it is here a
matter of "spiritual perception" and therefore
of a kind which must remain silent for the
"ear of the senses." In the following descrip-
tions of the "Spirit-land" reference to this
"spiritual music" will for the sake of simplic-
ity be omitted. One has only to form a men-
tal picture in which everything described as
"Type " as "shining with light " is at the same
time SOUNDING. Each color, each perception
of light represents a spiritual tone, and every
combination of colors corresponds with a har-
mony, a melody, etc. For one must hold
clearly in mind that even where die sounding
prevails, perception by means of the "spirit-
ual eye" by no means ceases. The sounding is
merely added to the shining. Where, there-
fore. Archetypes, the Primal Types, are
spoken of in the following pages, the Primal
Tones are to be thought of as also present.
Now it is necessary in die first place to


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 135

distinguish the different kinds of Archetypes.
In the "Spirit-land" also one has to differ-
entiate numerous grades or regions in order to
steer one's way among them. Here also, as in
the soul world, the different regions are not to
be thought of as laid one above the other like
strata, but mutually interpenetrating and suf-
fusing each other. The first region contains
the "Archetypes" of the physical world in so
far as it is not endowed with life. The Arche-
types of the minerals are to be found here —
also those of the plants; but the latter only in
so far as they are purely physical, that is, in
so far as one does not take into account the
life in them. In the same way one finds here
the physical forms of the animals and of
human beings. This does not exhaust all that
is to be found in this region, but merely illus-
trates it by the readiest examples. This region
forms the basic structure of the "Spirit-land."
It can be likened to the solid land of our phys-
ical earth. It forms the continental masses of
the "Spirit-land." Its relationship with the
physical, corporal world can only be described
by means of an illustration. One gains some
idea of it in the following way. One has to


>y Google


picture a limited space filled with physical
bodies of the most varied kinds. Then think
these bodies away and conceive in their place
cavities in space having their forms. The
intervening spaces, on the other hand, which
were previously empty one must think of as
filled with the most varied forms, having mani-
fold relationships with the former bodies.
This is somewhat like the appearance pre-
sented by the lowest region of the Archetypal
world. In it the things and beings which
become embodied in the physical world are
present as "spacial cavities." And in the
intervening spaces the mobile activity of the
Archetypes (and the "spiritual music") plays
out its course. During their formation into
physical forms the spacial cavities become,
as it were, filled up with physical matter. He
who looks into space with both physical and
spiritual eyes sees the physical bodies and, in
between, the mobile activity of the creative


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 137

ment, as it were, like blood pulsating through
all. It may be likened to the sea and the water
systems of the physical earth. The manner
in which it is distributed, however, is more
like the distribution of blood in the animal
body than that of the seas and rivers. One
could describe this second stage of the "Spirit-
land" as Flowing Life, formed of thought ma-
terial. In this element are the creative Primal
Forces producing everything that appears in
the physical reality as living being. Here it
is evident that all life is a unity, that the life
in me is related to the life of all my fellow
creatures.

The Archetypes of all soul formations must
be designated as the THIRD region of the
"Spirit-land." Here one finds oneself in a
much finer and rarer element than in the first
two regions. To use a comparison, one can
call it the air or atmosphere of the "Spirit-
land." Everything that goes on in the souls
of both the other worlds has here its spiritual
counterpart. Here all feelings, sensations,
instincts, passions, etc., are again present, but
in a spiritual way. The atmospheric events
in the air region correspond with the sorrows


>y Google


138 THEOSOPHY

and joys of the creatures in the other worlds.
The longing of the human soul is here per-
ceived as a gentle zephyr; an outbreak of pas-
sion is like a stormy blast. He who has the
ability to perceive here notes the sigh of every
creature should he direct his attention to it.
One can, for example, observe at times some-
thing like a loud storm with flashing light-
ning and rolling thunder; and, if one investi-
gates the matter, one finds that the passions of
a battle waged on earth arc expressed in such
"spirit tempests."

The Archetypes of the FOURTH region are
not immediately related to the other worlds.
They are in certain respects Beings who gov-
ern the Archetypes of the three lower regions
and render possible their working together.
They are accordingly occupied with the
ordering and grouping of these more sub-
ordinate Archetypes. From this region,
therefore, a more comprehensive activity
issues than from the lower ones.

The FIFTH, SIXTH, and SEVENTH regions
differ essentially from the preceding ones.
For the Beings in them supply the Arche-
types with the IMPULSES to their activity. In


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 139

them one finds the creative forces of the
Archetypes themselves. He who is able to
rise to these regions makes acquaintance with
the PURPOSES which underly our world. The
Archetypes lie here, as yet, like living germ-
points, ready to assume the most manifold
forms of thought-beings. If these germ-points
are guided into the lower regions they well
out, as it were, and manifest themselves in
the most varied shapes. (It is for this reason
that in theosophical literature these three
higher regions of the "Spirit-land" arc called
the Arupa, in contrast with the four lower,
which are called the Rupa regions. Arupa
means formless; Rupa, having form.) . The
ideas through which the human spirit mani-
fests itself creatively in the physical world
are the reflection, the shadow, of these Germ
Thought-beings of the higher spiritual world.
The observer with the spiritual ear who rises
from the lower regions of the "Spirit-land" to
these higher ones, becomes aware that sounds
and tones are changed into a "spiritual lan-
guage." He begins to perceive the "spirit-
ual word" through which the things and
beings do not now make known to him their


>y Google


I40 THEOSOPHY

nature in music alone, but express it In
"words." They say to him what one calls in
"spirit science" their "eternal name."

One must picture to oneself that these
Germ Thought-beings are of a composite
nature. Out of the element of the thought
world only the germ-sheath, as it were, is
taken. And this surrounds the true LIFE
KERNEL. With it we have reached the con-
fines of the "three worlds." For the
"kernel" has its origin in still higher worlds.
When man was described above according to
his components this "Life kernel" of the
human being was mentioned, and its com-
ponents were called "life spirit" and "spirit
man." (Theosophical literature applies to
these the names budhi and atma.) There are
similar "Life kernels" for other Beings in the
Cosmos, They originate In higher worlds and


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 141

distinguishing characteristics of this "land"
will once more come clearly into view.

4. THE SPIRIT IN SPIRIT-LAND AFTER
DEATH

When the human spirit on its way between
two incarnations has passed through this
"world of souls" (Kamaloca), it enters the
"Land of Spirits" to remain there until it is
ripe for a new bodily existence. (The theo-
sophical name for this region is "Devachan.")
One can only understand the significance of
this sojourn in "Spirit-land" when able to
interpret in the right way the aim and end of
the pilgrimage of man during his incarna-
tions. While man is incarnated in the phys-
ical body he works and creates in the physical
world. And he works and creates in it as a
SPIRITUAL BEING. He imprints on the phys-
ical forms, on corporeal materials and forces,
that which his spirit thinks out and develops.
He has therefore, as a messenger of the spir-
itual world, to incorporate the spirit in the
corporal world. Only by being embodied can
a man work in the world of bodies. He
must wrap physical matter around his spirit


>y Google


142 THEOSOPHY

so that, through the body, he can act on the
other bodies around, and so that they can act
on him. But what acts through this physical
corporality of man is the SPIRIT. From it flow
the PURPOSES, the direction its work is to take
in the physical world. Now, as long as the
spirit works in the physical body, it cannot as
a spirit live in its true form. It can, as it were,
only shine through the VEIL OF THE PHYSICAL
existence. For, as a matter of fact, the
thought life of man really belongs to the spir-
itual world; and, as it appears in the physical
existence, its true form is veiled. One can also
say that the thought life of the physical man
is a shadow, a reflection of the true, spiritual
being to whom it belongs. Thus, during phys-
ical life, the spirit, through the physical body
as an instrument, interacts with the earthly
corporal world.


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 143

just as little developed and gained within the
earthly incarnation as the plan of a house
comes into existence on the site on which the
laborers work. Just as this plan is worked
out in the offices of the architect, so are the
aims and purposes of the earthly creative
activities worked out and developed in the
"Land of Spirits." The spirit of man has
always to live again in this land between two
incarnations in order to be able to equip him-
self with what he takes with him on leaving it
and, armed with that, to approach the work in
the physical life. As the architect without
working with brick and mortar designs the
plan of the house in his workroom in accord-
ance with architectural and other rules, so
has the architect of human creations, the spirit
or Higher Self, to develop in the "Spirit-
land" capacities and aims in accordance with
the laws of this land, in order to bring them
over into the physical world. Only if the
human spirit sojourns over and over again in
its own region will it be also able to bring the
spirit, by means of the physical corporal
instruments, into the earthly world.
On the physical scene of action man learns


>y Google


to know the qualities and forces of the phys-
ical world. He gathers there during his cre-
ative activity experiences regarding the
demands made by the physical world on any
one wishing to work in it. He learns there to
know, as it were, the qualities of the matter in
which he wishes to embody his thoughts and
ideas. The thoughts and ideas themselves he
cannot extract from the matter, so that the
physical world is both the scene of his creating
and of his LEARNING. What has been learned
is then transmuted in the "Spirit-land" into
living faculties of the spirit.

One can carry the above comparison fur-
ther, in order to make the matter clearer. The
architect designs the plan of the house. It
is carried out. While this goes on he gains a
number of the most varied experiences. All
of these experiences enhance his capacities.
When he designs his next plan all these experi-
ences have an influence on it. And this plan,


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 145

can give itself up entirely to the requirements
of the spirit life; freed from the physical cor-
porality, it develops in every direction. And
it calls to its aid in this development the fruits
of its experiences in former earthly careers.
In this way its attention is always directed to
the scene of its earthly tasks. And in this way
it works continually at making the earth, its
present field of action, more and more per-
fect. It works upon itself, so as to be able in
each incarnation to carry out its service dur-
ing its earthly pilgrimage more and more per-
fectly.

This is of course only a GENERAL OUTLINE
of the successive human lives. The reality
will never be quite the same, but will only
more or less correspond with it. Circum-
stances may bring it about that a subsequent
life of a man is much less perfect than a pre-
vious one. But taken as a whole such ir-
regularities equalize themselves in a natural
manner during the course of the succession of
lives.

The development of the spirit in "Spirit-
land" takes place through the man's throw-
ing himself completely into the life of the


>y Google


different regions of this land. His own life,
as it were, dissolves into each region succes-
sively; he takes on, for the time being, their
characteristics. Through this they penetrate
his being with theirs, in order that his may be
able to work, strengthened by theirs, in his
earthly life.

In the FIRST region of the "Spirit-land" man
is surrounded with the spiritual Archetypes
of the earthly things. During life on earth
he learns to know only the shadows of these
Archetypes which he grasps in his thoughts.
What is merely THOUGHT on earth is in this
region experienced, LIVED. Man moves among
thoughts; but these thoughts are REAL BEINGS.
What he has perceived with his senses during
life on earth acts on him now in its thought
form. But the thought does not appear as the
shadow which hides itself behind the things;
it is on the contrary the life-filled reality pro-
ducing the things. Man is, as it were, in the


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 147

structive. One sees how that which one has
experienced during the earthly existence is
CONSTRUCTED. Just as in the physical body
one experiences the things of the senses as
reality, so now as spirit one experiences the
spiritual constructive forces as real. Among
the thought-beings to be found there is also
the thought of one's own physical corporality.
One feels separated from this. One feels only
the spiritual being as belonging to oneself.
And when we no longer regard the body as
physical but as thought-being, there already
enters into our view of it its relation to the
external world. We learn to look at it as
something belonging to the external world, a
member of this external world. We conse-
quently no longer separate our OWN corpo-
rality from the rest of the external world as
something more nearly related to ourself. We
feel the unity in the whole external world
including our own bodily incarnations. Our
own embodiments dissolve here into a unity
with the rest of the world. Thus we here look
upon the ARCHETYPES of the physical corpo-
ral reality as a unity, to which we ourselves
belong. We learn therefore gradually to


>y Google


148 THEOSOPHY

know our relationship, our unity with the sur-
rounding world by observation. We learn to
say to it, "That which is here spread out
around thee, thou art that thyself." And that
is one of the fundamental thoughts in the
ancient Indian Vedanta Wisdom. The
"sage" accustoms himself to do, even during
his earth life, what others experience after
death ; namely, to grasp the thought that he
himself is related to all things, the thought
*'Thou art that." During the physical life
this is an ideal to which the thought life can
be devoted; in the "Land of Spirits" it is a
plain fact, one which grows ever clearer to us
through spiritual experience. And the man
himself comes to know ever more and more
clearly in this land that he in his own inner
being belongs to the spirit world. He per-
ceives himself to be a spirit among spirits, a
iiher of the Primordial Spirit, and he


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 149

thought and toward which all wisdom strives,
is in the "Spirit-land" an immediate experi-
ence. Indeed, it is only THOUGHT during the
earth life because it is a FACT in the spiritual
existence.

Thus man during his spiritual existence sees
the relationships and facts in the midst of
which he stands during his earthly career
from a high watch tower, as if from outside.
And during his life in the lowest regions of
"Spirit-land" he has this attitude toward the
earthly relationships immediately connected
with the physical corporal reality. On earth
man is born into a family, a race; he lives in
a certain country. His earthly existence is
determined by all these relationships. He
finds this or that friend because relationships
in the physical world bring it about. He car-
ries on this or that business. All this decides
the conditions of his earthly life. All this
presents itself to him during his life in the
first region of "Spirit-land" as LIVING thought
being. He lives it all through again in a
certain way. But he lives it through from the
active spiritual side. The family love he has
extended, the friendship he has offered, are


>y Google


ISO THEOSOPHY

made living from within, made to spring from
inner sources, and his capacities in this direc-
tion are enhanced. The force in the spirit of
man which acts as the power of love of fam-
ily and friend is strengthened. He enters his
earthly existence later a more perfect man in
these respects. It is to a certain extent the
everyday relationships of the earth life which
ripen as the fruitage of this lowest region of
the "Spirit-land." And those persons whose
interests are wholly absorbed by these every-
day relationships will feel themselves in afGn-
ity with this region for the greater part of
their spiritual life between two incarnations.
The next region is that in which the COM-
MON LIFE of the earth world flows as Thought-
being, as the fluid clement, so to speak, of the
"Spirit-land." So long as we observe the
world during physical embodiment life
appears to us to be conflned within separate
LIVING BEINGS. In "Spirit-land" it is loosed
from them and, like life blood, flows as it were
through the whole land. It is there the living
Unity which is present in everything. Of this
also only a reflection appears to us during the
earthly life. And this reflection expresses


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 151

itself in every form of reverence we pay to the
Whole, to the Unity and Harmony of the uni-
verse. The religious life of man is derived
from this reflection. Man becomes sensible
of the fact that the significance of existence
does not lie in what is transitory and separate.
He regards the transitory as a "similitude,"
a likeness of an Eternal, of a harmonious
Unity. He looks up to this Unity in rever-
ence and worship. He offers up before it
religious rites and ceremonies. In "Spirit-
land" appears, not the reflection, but the real
form, as living Thought-being. Here man
can really unite himself with the Unity that
he has reverenced on earth. The fruitage of
the religious life and all connected with it
appears in this region. Man now learns
through spiritual experience to recognize that
his individual fate is not to be separated from
the community to which he belongs. The
capacity to know oneself as a member of a
whole develops itself here. Religious natures,
and such as have already during life striven
after a pure and noble morality, will draw
strength out of this region during a great part
of their spiritual life between incarnations.


>y Google


152 THEOSOPHY

And they will reincarnate with heightened
capacities in this direction.

The THIRD region of "Spirit-land" contains
the Archetypes of the soul world. All that
lives in this world is present as living thought-
being. One finds in it the Archetypes of
desires, wishes, feelings, etc. But here, in the
spirit world, nothing of self-seeking attaches
itself to the soul. Like all life in the second
region, in this third region all longings,
wishes, all likes and dislikes, form a unity.
The desires and wishes of others are not separ-
able from my desires and wishes. The sensa-
tions and feelings of all beings are a common
world enclosing and surrounding everything
else, just as our physical atmosphere surrounds
the earth. This region is, as it were, the atmos-
phere or air of the "Spirit-land." All that a
person has carried out in his life on earth in
the service of the community, in selfless devo-
tion to his fellowmen, will bear fruit here.
For through this service, through this self-
giving, he has lived in a reflection of the third
region of the "Spirit-land." The great bene-

'itors of the human race, the philanthropists
I render great services to communities,


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 153

have gained their ability to render them in
this region, after having made themselves
worthy of a special relationship with it during
their previous earthly careers.

It is evident that the three regions of "Spirit-
land" above described have a certain connec-
tion with those below them, the physical and
the soul worlds. For they contain the Arche-
types, the living Thought-beings that take up
their corporal and soul existence in these
worlds. Only the FOURTH region is the "pure
Spirit-land." But even it is not that in the
fullest sense of the word. It differs from the
three lower regions owing to the fact that in
them we meet with the Archetypes of those
physical and soul relations which man finds
existing in the physical and soul worlds before
he himself begins to take any part in them.
The circumstances of the ordinary everyday
life link themselves with things and beings
which man finds already present in the world :
the transitory things of THIS WORLD direct his
gaze to their eternal primal foundation; nor
do the fellow creatures of man to whom he
selflessly devotes himself owe their existence
to him. But it is through him that there are


>y Google


154 THEOSOPHY

in the world all the creations of the arts,
sciences, engineering, states, governments, etc.;
in short all that he has embodied in the world
as original works of his spirit. Without his
cooperation none of the physical reproductions
of all these would be in die world. The Arche-
types of these purely human creations arc in
the fourth region of the "Spirit-land." What
man during the earthly life develops in the
way of scientific discoveries, of artistic ideas
and forms, of technical conceptions, bears
fruit in this fourth region. It is out of this
region, therefore, that artists, scientists, great
inventors, draw nourishment during their stay
in "Spirit-land" and increase their genius, in
order, during another incarnation, to be able
to assist with greater weight the further evolu-
tion of human progress. It has been said above
that even this region cannot be called the "pure
Spirit-land" in the full sense of the word.
This is because the stage at which men have
left civilization on earth continues to influ-
ence their spiritual existence. They can
ajoy in "Spirit-land" only the fruits of that
iriiich it was possible for them to carry out in
'cordance with their gifts and the stage of


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 155

development of the race, state, etc., into which
they were born.

In the still higher regions of the "Spirit-
land" the human spirit is freed from every
earthly fetter. It rises to the "pure Spirit-
land" in which it experiences the intentions,
the aims, which the spirit set itself to accom-
plish by means of the earthly life. All that
has been realized in the world brings into
earthly existence only a more or less weak copy
of the highest intentions and aims. Each
crystal, each tree, each animal, and all that is
being realized in the domain of human crea-
tions, all this only gives of that which the
spirit intends. And man, during his incarna-
tions, can only set to work with these imper-
fect copies of the perfect intentions and aims.
Thus during one of his incarnations he him-
self can only be a copy of that which, in the
kingdom of the spirit, he is intended to be.
What he as spirit in "Spirit-land" really is
comes therefore into view only when he rises
in the interval between two incarnations,
to the fifth region of "Spirit-land." What
he is here is really he himself, that which
receives an external existence in the numerous


>y Google


156 THEOSOPHY

and varied incarnations. In this region
the true Self of man can freely live its true
life and expand in all directions. And this
Self is that which appears ever anew in
each incarnation as the one. This Self
brings with it the faculties which have devel-
oped in the lower regions of the "Spirit-land."
It carries, consequently, the fruits of former
lives over into those following. It is the bearer
of the results of former incarnations. There-
fore one can call it the "Bearer of Causes."
(In theosophicar literature it is for this rea-
son called the "Causal Body.")

When the Self lives in the FIFTH region
of the "Spirit-land" it is accordingly in the
kingdom of intentions and aims. As the arch-
itect learns from the imperfections which
show themselves in his work, and as he only
brings into his new plans what he was able
to change from imperfections to perfections,
so the Self, in the fifth region, shakes off the
results of its experiences in former lives
related to the imperfections of the lower
worlds, and fructifies the purposes of
the "Spirit-land" — purposes with which it
now lives — ^with the perfect results of its


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 157

former lives. It is clear that the force which
can be drawn from this region will depend
upon how much the Self, during its incarna-
tion, has acquired in the form of results suited
to being received into the world of Purposes.
The self that has sought to realize the purposes
of the spirit during the earthly life through
an active thought life or through wise love
expressed in deeds, will establish a strong
claim to this region. The self that has
expended itself entirely on the events of the
everyday life, that has lived only in the transi-
tory, has sown no seeds that can play a part in
the purposes of the eternal World Order.
Only that small portion of the activities of
the self which had extended beyond the inter-
ests of everyday life can unfold as fruitage
in this higher region of the "Spirit-land." In
general it will hold good that a man's affinity
with this region will be the greater the more
developed he is. Since a man in this region
lives in his own true Self, he is raised above
everything that, as a part of the lower worlds,
envelops him during his incarnations. He is
what he ever was and ever will be during the
course of his incarnations. He lives in the


>y Google


IS8 THEOSOPHY

governing power of the Purposes which pre-
vail during these incarnations, and which he
grafts into his own Self. He looks back od
his own past, and feels that all that he has
experienced in it will be brought into service
in the purposes he has to bring to realization
in the future. A kind of remembrance of his
earlier lives and the prophetic vision of his
future ones flash forth. We see, therefore, that
what in this book (pp. 46 et seq.) is called
"spirit self" lives in this region, as far as it is
developed, in that measure of reality with
which it is able to unite itself; it develops itself
still further and prepares itself to make pos-
sible in a new incarnation the fulfillment of
the spiritual purposes in the region of earthly
reality.

If this "spirit self" has evolved so far during
a succession of sojourns in "Spirit-land" that he
can move about quite freely in this land, he
will evermore seek his true home in it. Life
in the spirit will be as familiar to him as life
in the physical reality is to the earthly man.
The viewpoints of the spirit world can from
now on be the only ones which he makes his
own during his succeeding earth lives. Such


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 159

a Self feels himself uninterruptedly to be a
member of the divine World Order. The
limitations and laws of the earthly life affect
him in his innermost being no more. Power
for all that he carries out comes to him from
this spiritual world. But the spiritual world
is a Unity. He who lives in it knows how the
Eternal has produced the past, and he can,
from out the Eternal, discern which direction
the future is to take. The view over the past
widens into a perfect one. A man who has
reached this stage sets before himself the aims
which he should carry out in the approaching
incarnation. From out the "Spirit-land" he
influences his future so that it runs its course
in harmony with the true and the spiritual.
Such a man during the stages between two
incarnations is in the presence of all those
exalted Beings before whose gaze the Divine
Wisdom lies spread out unveiled. For he has
climbed up to the stage at which he can under-
stand them. And, should he return to the
earth, he acts in harmony with them. His
word is itself a reflection of divine revelation
and his deed a link in the divine World Order.
Only he who during an earth life has freed


>y Google


i6o THEOSOPHY

himself to a high degree from the transient
trifles and the worthless turmoil of existence
can hope that he shall rise in "Spirit-land" into
the SIXTH region, through which he shall
receive a "DIVINE MISSION" for a coming earth
life. Through this divine mission he becomes
"a stranger on this earth" only in so far as he
himself in his innermost being is not moved
by inclinations and disinclinations springing
from the transitory nature of things, but allows
himself to be guided by what the spirit recog-
nizes as necessary. Because he does this, he
will accomplish through all his actions that
which is most in conformity with the TRUE
Being of the Universe. For he has reached
the point of seeking not that which will be of
use to him but only and entirely that which
ought to take place; that which is in accord-
ance with the true progress of the World
Order. His interest in the world, his devo-
tion to it, are the greater the less he himself
is attached through his sympathies and antipa-
thies to transient matters. His understand-
ing of all that goes on around him will be
great because his soul observes all without
desires and in quiet composedness.


>yGoogl


THE THREE WORLDS i6i

The SEVENTH region of the "Spirit-land"
brings one to the confines of the "three worlds."
The man who can feel himself attracted to it
stands here in the presence of the "Life ker-
nels" which are transplanted from the higher
worlds into the three which have been
described, in order that in them they may ful-
fill their missions. When a man therefore is
on the confines of the three worlds he recog-
nizes himself in his own Life kernel. This
implies that for him the problems of these
three worlds have been solved. He has a com-
plete view of the entire life of these worlds.
He has solved the great "Why" of existence.
(The great guides of the human race who will
be spoken of in the chapter on "The Path of
Knowledge" are recognized by means of
forces originating in this region of the "Spirit-
land.")

5. THE PHYSICAL WORLD AND ITS
CONNECTION WITH THE SOUL
AND SPIRIT LANDS

The formations of the Soul World and the
"Spirit-land" cannot be the objects of external
sense perception. The objects of THIS per-


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 163

worlds; and they stand out from these owing
to particular qualities which make them per-
ceptible to the senses. They are, to speak half
metaphorically, condensed spirit and soul for-
mations; and the condensation makes it possi-
ble for the senses to acquire knowledge of them.
In fact, as ice is only a form in which the
water exists, so are the objects of the senses
only a form in which soul and spirit beings
exist. If one has grasped this, one can also
understand that as water can pass over into ice,
so the spirit world can pass over into the soul
world, and the latter into that of the senses.
Looking at the matter from this point of view
leads us to the reason why man can form
thoughts about the things of the senses. For
there is a question which everyone who thinks
would have to ask himself, namely, in what
relation does the thought which a man has
about a stone stand to the stone itscU? Thi


>y Google


i64 THEOSOPHY

way about this harmony, "True it is that the
divine call which bids man study astronomy
is written in the world, not indeed in words
and syllables, but in the very fact that human
conceptions and senses are fitted to gauge the
relationships of the heavenly bodies and their
conditions." Only because the things of the
sensible world are nothing else than condensed
spirit beings is the man who raises himself
through his thought to these spirit beings able
by thinking to understand the things. Sense
objects originate in the spirit world; they are
only another FORM of the spirit beings. And
when man forms thoughts about things he
merely looks up from the sensible form to the
spiritual Archetypes of the things. To under-
stand an object by means of thought is a proc-
ess which can be likened to that by which a
solid body is first liquefied by fire in order that
the chemist may be able to examine it in its
liquid fonn.

The spiritual Archetypes of the sensible
world are to be found (pp. 131 et seq.) in the
different regions of the "Spirit-land." In the
fifth, sixth, and seventh regions these Arche-
types remain in the condition of living Germ


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 165

points; in the four lower regions they shape
themselves into spiritual formations. The
human spirit perceives a shadowy reflection of
these spiritual formations when, by thinking,
he tries to gain understanding of the things
of the senses. How these formations have con-
densed until they form the sensible world is
a question for him who strives toward a spirit-
ual undertsanding of the world around him.
For human sense perception this surrounding
world is divided into four distinctly sepa-
rated stages, the mineral, the plant, the ani-
mal, and the human.

The mineral kingdom is perceived by the
senses and comprehended by thought. Thus
when one forms a thought about a mineral
body one has to do with two things, the sense
object and the thought. In accordance with
this, one is brought to the conception that this
sense object is a condensed thought being.
Now one mineral being acts on another in an
external way. It impinges on it and moves it;
it warms it, lights it up, dissolves it, etc. This
external kind of action can be expressed
through thoughts. A man forms thoughts as
to the way in which mineral things act on each


>y Google


i66 THEOSOPHY

Other externally and in accordance with their
laws. By this means his separate thoughts
expand to a thought picture of the whole min-
eral world. And this thought picture is a
gleam, a reflection of the Archetype of the
whole mineral world of the senses. It is to be
found AS A COMPLETE WHOLE in the spirit
world.

In the plant kingdom there is added to the
external action of one thing on another, the
phenomena of growth and propagation. The
plant grows and brings forth from itself beings
like itself. Life is here added to what man
meets with in the mineral kingdom. A sim-
ple recollection of this fact leads to an expres-
sion which is enlightening in this connection.
The plant has in itself the power to give itself
its LIVING shape, and to reproduce this shape
in a being of its own kind. And in between
the shapeless kinds of mineral matter, as we
meet them in gases, liquids, etc., and the living
'wpe of the plant world, stand the forms of
e crystal. In the crystal we have the transi-
on from the shapeless mineral world to the
lant kingdom, which has the capacity for
orming living shapes. In this externally


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 167

sensible formative process in both kingdoms,
the mineral and the plant, one sees condensed
to its sensible expression the purely spiritual
process which takes place when the spiritual
Germs of the higher regions of the "Spirit-
land" form themselves into the spirit shapes
of the lower regions. The process of crystal-
lization corresponds to its Archetype in the
spirit world, the transition from the formless
spirit Germ to the SHAPED FORMATION. If
this transition condenses so that the senses can
perceive it, it exhibits itself in the world of
the senses as the process of crystallization.

Now there is in the plant being a shaped
spirit Germ also. But here the living, shap-
ing capacity is still retained in the shaped
being. In the crystal the spirit Germ has lost
its constructing power during the process of
shaping. It has exhausted its energies in the
shape produced. The plant has shape and, in
addition to that, it has the capacity of produc-
ing a shape. The characteristic of the spirit
Germs in the higher regions of the "Spirit-
land" has been preserved in the plant life.
The plant is therefore shape, as is the crystal,
and, added to that, shaping or formative force.


>y Google


i68 THEOSOPHY

Besides the form which the Primal Beings
have taken in the plant shape there works at
the latter yet another form which bears the
impress of the spirit being of the higher
regions. Only that which expends itself on
the produced shape of the plant is sensibly per-
ceptible; the formative Beings who give life
to this shape are present in the plant kingdom
in a way not perceptible to the senses. The
physical eye sees the lily small to-day, and
after some time grown larger. The forming
force which elaborates the latter out of the
former cannot be seen by this eye. This form-
ative Force Being is that part of the plant
world which acts imperceptibly to the senses.
The spirit Germs have descended a stage in
order to work in the kingdom of shapes. In
Thcosophy, Elementary Kingdoms are spoken
of. I f one designate the Primal Forms, which
as yet have no shape, as the FIRST ELEMEN-
TARY Kingdom, then the sensibly invisible
Force Beings, who work as the craftsmen of
plant growth, belong to the SECOND ELEMEN-
TARY Kingdom.

In the animal world sensation and impulse
are added to the capacities for growth and


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 169

propagation. These are extern aliz aliens of
the SOUL WORLD. A being endowed with
these belongs to the soul world, receives
impressions from it and reacts on it. Every
sensation, every impulse, which arises in an
animal is brought forth from the foundations
of the animal soul. The shape is more endur-
ing than the feeling or impulse. One may say
the sensation life bears the same relation to the
more enduring living shape that the self-chang-
ing plant shape bears to the rigid crystal. The
plant to a certain extent exhausts itself as the
shape-forming force; during its life it goes on
constantly adding new shapes to itself. First
it sends out the root, then the leaf structure,
then the flowers, etc. The animal possesses a
shape complete in itself and develops within
this the ever-changing life of feeling and
impulses. And this life has its existence in
the soul world. Just as the plant is that which
grows and propagates itself, the animal is that
which feels and develops its impulses. They
constitute for the animal the formless which
is always developing into new forms. Their
Archetypal processes when traced to their pri-
mal source are found in the highest regions of


>y Google


170 THEOSOPHY

"Spirit-land." But they carry out their activ-
ities in the soul world. There are thus in the
animal world, in addition to the Force Beings
who, invisible to the senses, direct growth and
propagation, others that have descended into
the soul world, a stage still deeper. In the
animal kingdom formless Beings, who clothe
themselves in soul sheaths, are present as the
master builders, bringing about sensations and
impulses. They are the real architects of the
animal forms. In theosophy one calls the
region to which they belong the THIRD ELE-
MENTARY Kingdom.

Man, in addition to having the capacities
named as those of plants and animals, is fur-
nished also with the power of working up his
sensations into ideas and thoughts and of con-
trolling his impulses by thinking. The
thought which appears in the plant as shape


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 171

is present within the human sensible body^.
And because it appears in a sensible garment,
it can appear only as that shadowy gleam
or reflection which the thought of the Spirit
Being affords. The spirit manifests in man
through the apparatus of the physical brain
mechanism. But at the same time it has
become the inner being of man. The animal
feels and moves as it chooses, but exhibits no
thoughts. Thought is the form which the
formless Spirit Being assumes in man just as
it is shape in the plant and soul in the animal.
Consequently man, in so far as he is a think-
ing being, has no Elementary Kingdom con-
structing him from without. His Elementary
Kingdom works in his physical body. Only
in so far as man is shape and sentient being,
do Elementary Beings work at him in the same
way as they work at plants and animals. The
thought organism of man is developed entirely
from within his physical body. In the spirit
organism of man, in his nervous system which
has developed into the perfect brain, we have
sensibly visible before us that which works on
plants and animals as supersensible Force
Being. This brings about the fact that the


>y Google


172 THEOSOPHY

animal shows feeling of self, but man con-
sciousness of self. In the animal, spirit feels
itself to be soul; it does not yet comprehend
itself as spirit. In man the spirit recognizes
itself as spirit, although, owing to the physical
apparatus, merely as a shadowy gleam or
reflection of the spirit, as thought.

Accordingly, the threefold world falls into
the following divisions: i. The Kingdom of
the Archetypal formless Beings (First Ele-
mentary Kingdom) ; 2. The Kingdom of the
Shape-creating Beings (Second Elementary
Kingdom) ; 3. The Kingdom of the Soul
Beings {Third Elementary Kingdom) ; 4. The
Kingdom of the Created Shapes (crystal
forms) ; 5. The Kingdom that becomes per-
ceptible to the senses in shapes, but in which
the Shape-creating Beings are working (Plant
Kingdom) ; 6. The Kingdom which becomes


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 173

in soul life, and in which the spirit itself takes
shape in the form of thought within the world
of the senses (Human Kingdom).

From this can be seen how the basic constit-
uents of the human being living in the body
are connected with the spiritual world. The
physical body, the ether body, the sentient soul
body, and the intellectual soul, are to be
regarded as Archetypes of the "Spirit-land"
condensed in the sensible world. The phys-
ical body comes into existence in that the
Archetype of man is so condensed that it can
manifest itself to the senses. For this reason
one can call this physical body also a Being of
the First Elementary Kingdom, condensed to
sensible perceptibility. The ether-body comes
into existence in that the shape that has arisen
in this way has its mobility' retained by a Being
that extends its activity into the kingdom of
the senses but is not itseU visible to the senses.
If one wishes to characterize this Being fully,
one must say it has its primal origin in the
highest regions of the "Spirit-land" and then
shapes itself in the second region into an Arche-
type of life. It works in the sensible world
as such an Archetype of life. In a similar


>y Google


174 THEOSOPHY

way the Being that constructs the sentient soul-
body has its origin in the highest regions of
the "Spirit-land," forms itself in the third
region of the same into the Archetype of the
soul world and worlts as such in the sensible
world. But the intellectual soul is formed in
that the Archetype of thinking man shapes
itself in the fourth region of the "Spirit-land"
into thought, and as such acts directly as think-
ing human being in the world of the senses.
Thus man stands within the world of the
senses; thus works the spirit on his physical-
body, on his ether-body, and on his sentient
soul-body. Thus comes this spirit into mani-
festation in the intellectual soul. Archetypes
in the form of Beings who in a certain sense
are external to man work upon the three lower
components of his being; in his intellectual
SQiil he liimself becomes a (conscious) worker


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS I75

senses, but who extend their activity into these
kingdoms.

Thus do the different worlds combine in
action. The universe in which man lives is
the expression of this combined activity.

When a person has thoroughly grasped this
view of the sensible world he gains also an
understanding of Beings of another kind than
those that have their existence in the above
mentioned four kingdoms of nature. One
example of such Beings is what one calls the
Folk Spirit, or National Spirit. This Being
does not manifest himself directly in a sensi-
bly perceptible way. He lives and carries on
his activities entirely in the sensations, feel-
ings, tendencies, etc., which one observes as
those common to a whole nation. He is there-
fore a Being that does not incarnate physically,
but forms his body out of the matter of the
soul world, even as man forms his body out of
sensibly visible matter. This soul body of the
National Spirit is like a cloud in which the
members of a nation live. The effects of his
activity come into evidence in the souls of the
human beings concerned, but he does not orig-
inate in these souls themselves. The National


>y Google


176 THEOSOPHY

Spirit remains merely a shadowy conception
of the mind without being or life, an empty
abstraction, to him who does not picture it in
this way. And the same may be said in refer-
ence to what one calls the Spirit of the Age
{Zeitgeist). The spiritual outlook, in fact,
is through this, extended over a variety of
other beings, both lower and higher, who live
in the environment of man without his being
able to perceive them with his bodily senses.
But those who have powers of spiritual sight
perceive such beings and can describe them.
To the lower kinds belong those designated
by the spiritual investigator, as salamanders,
sylphs, undines, and gnomes. It is quite to be
understood that anyone who is inclined to
admit the validity of physical vision only,
regards such beings as the offspring of a wild
hallucination and superstition. They can of


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 177

them as soon as one enters the higher regions
closed to the bodily senses. Mention must
also be made of those beings who do not
descend to the soul world, but whose vestment
is composed of the formations of the "Spirit-
land" alone. Man perceives them and
becomes their companion when he opens his
spiritual eye and spiritual ear to them. Many
things at which without these organs man can
only gaze uncomprehendingly, become, when
he has brought them into use, understandable
to him. It becomes bright around him, he
sees the Primal Causes of that which is work-
ing itself out as effects in the world of the
senses. He comprehends what he either
denied entirely when he had no spiritual eye,
or in reference to which he had to content
himself with saying, "There are more things
in heaven and earth than are dreamed of in thy
philosophy." People with fine— with spirit-
ual — feelings become uneasy when they begin
to have a glimmering, become vaguely aware
of another world than the sensible one around
them, and one within which they have
to grope about as the blind grope among
visible objects. Nothing but the clear


>y Google


1/8 THEOSOPHY

vision of these higher regions of existence and
a thorough understanding and penetration of
what takes place in them can really fortify a
man and lead him to his proper goal. Only
through insight into that which is hidden from
the senses does the human being understand
the world and himself.

6. THOUGHT-FORMS AND THE HUMAN
AURA

It has become evident that the formations of
any one of the three worlds can have reality
for a man only when he has the capacities or
the organs for perceiving them. A man per-
ceives certain occurrences in space as light
phenomena only because he has a correctly-
constructed eye. It depends on the receptivity
of a being how much of what really is, reveals
itself to it. Never therefore may a man say


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 179

by means of his outer senses has the corporal
world before him as an object of perception,
so do feelings, impulses, instincts, thoughts,
etc., become objects of perception for his spir-
itual senses. Exactly as occurrences in space
can be seen with the sensible eye as color phe-
nomena, the above-named soul and spiritual
occurrences can become, by means of the inner
senses, perceptions which are analogous to the
sensible color phenomena. To understand
perfectly in what way this is meant is only
possible for one who has trod the path of
knowledge described in the following chapter
and has thereby developed his inner senses.
For such a one the soul phenomena in the
soul region around him and the spiritual phe-
nomena in the spiritual region become super-
sensibly visible. For him, feelings ray out
from tiie feeling being as light phenomena;
thoughts surge, through the spiritual space.
For him, the thought of one man about another
is not something imperceptible but a percep-
tible occurrence. The thought streams out as
an actual reality from one human being and
flows to the other. And the way in which
this thought acts on the other person becomes


>y Google


i8o THEOSOPHY

similarly a perceptible occurrence in the spir-
itual world. Thus the physically perceptible
human being is only part of the whole man
for him whose spiritual senses are unfolded.
This physical man becomes the center of soul
and spiritual outpourings. It is impossible to
do more than faintly indicate the richly varied
world which discloses itself here to the seer.
A human thought, for example, appears as a
spiritually perceptible color phenomenon. Its
color corresponds with the character of the
thought. A thought which springs forth from
a sensual impulse in a person has a different
color from a thought conceived in the service
of pure knowledge, noble beauty, or the eternal
good. Thoughts which spring from the sen-
sual life course through the soul world in red
shades of color. A thought by which the
thinker rises to higher knowledge appears in


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS i8i

a formation with definite outlines; the con-
fused idea appears as a wavering, cloudy
formation.

In this way the soul and spirit being of man
appears as the supersensible part of the WHOLE
human being.

The color effects which the "spiritual eye"
can perceive raying out round the physical
man and enveloping him like a cloud (some-
what egg-shaped) are called the HUMAN aura.
The size of this aura differs in different peo-
ple. But one can form an idea of it by pic-
turing that the WHOLE man is in the average
twice as long and four times as broad as the
physical man.

The most varied tones of colors surge in the
aura. And this surging is a true picture of
the inner life of the man. Single color-tones
are just as changing. But certain permanent
qualities, such as talents, habits, traits of char-
acter, express themselves in a foundation of
permanent color-tones.

The aura varies greatly according to the
different temperaments and dispositions of
people; it varies also in accordance with the
stages of spiritual development. A man who


>y Google


i82 THEOSOPHY

yields completely to his animal impulses has
an entirely different aura from one who lives
much in the world of thought The aura of
a nature with a religious tone differs essen-
tially from one that expends itself on the trivial
experiences of the day. In addition to this,
all varying moods, all inclinations, jojre and
pains, find their expression in the aura.

One has to compare the auras of different
human types with each other in order to learn
to understand the meaning of the color-tones.
Take, to begin with, people who have strongly
marked passions. They may be divided into
two kinds; those who are impelled to these
feelings by the animal nature chiefly, and
those with whom these passions take a more
subtle form in which they are, so to speak,
strongly influenced by thought. In the first
person brown and brown-red streams
hrough the aura


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 183

give themselves over to the satisfying of their
animal impulses, have much green in their
aura. But this green will always have more
or less of an admixture of brown or brownish
red. Unintelligent people show a great part
of their aura coursed through by brownish red
or even by dark blood-red streams.

The auras of quiet, deliberate, thoughtful
people are essentially different from those of
such passionate natures. The brownish and
reddish tones become less prominent, and dif-
ferent shades of green come out. With
thoughtful natures the aura shows a pleasing
green undertone. This is to an especial degree
the appearance of those natures of whom one
can say, "They know how to adapt themselves
to every condition of life."

Blue tones of color appear iii natures full of
devotion. The more a man places his Self
in the service of a thing the more pronounced
become the blue shades. In this class, also,
one finds two quite different kinds of people.
There are natures with a mediocre power of
thought, passive souls who, as it were, have
nothing to throw into the stream of events in
the world but their "good nature." Their aura


>y Google


i84 THEOSOPHY

glimmers with beautiful blue. One observes
the same in the auras of religious and devo-
tional natures. Compassionate souls and
those who find pleasure in giving themselves
up to a life of benevolence have similar auras.
If such people are intelligent in addition to
this, green and blue currents alternate, or the
blue itself perhaps take a greenish shade. It
is the peculiarity of the active souls in contrast
to the passive, that their blue saturates itself
from within with bright color-tones. Richly
inventive natures, such as have fruitful
thoughts, ray out bright tones of color as if
from an inner point. This is the case in the
highest degree with those persons whom one
calls "wise," and especially with those full of
fruitful ideas. Generally speaking, all that
implies spiritual activity takes more the form
of rays which spread out from within, while
everything that arises from the animal life has
the form of irregular clouds which surge
through the aura.

Auric formations show colorings which dif-
fer according to whether the conceptions
which spring up in an active soul are placed
at the service of the person's own animal


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 185

impulses or of an idealistic interest outside of
himself. The inventive person who applies
all his thoughts to the satisfaction of his sen-
sual passions shows dark, blue-red shades; he,
on the contrary, who places his thoughts self-
lessly at the service of an interest outside of
himself, shows light reddish-blue color-tones.
A spiritual life combined with noble devotion
and capacity for sacrifice shows rose pink or
light violet colors.

Not only does the fundamental disposition of
the soul show its color surgings in the aura but
also transient passions, moods, and other inner
experiences. An anger that breaks out sud-
denly creates red streams. Feelings of injured
dignity which expend themselves in a sudden
welling up can be seen appearing in dark green
clouds. Color phenomena, however, do not
appear only in iregular cloud forms but also in
distinctly defined, regularly shaped figures. A
fit of terror, for example, shows the aura
lined from top to bottom by undulating stripes
of blue color suffused with a reddish shimmer.
In a person who expects with anxiety some
particular event, one can see continuous red-


>y Google


i86 THEOSOPHY

blue stripes like rays streaming from within
the aura to the circumference.

Every sensation which a man receives from
without can be observed by one who has devel-
oped a faculty of exact spiritual perception.
Persons who are greatly excited by every
external impression show a continuous flick-
ering of small reddish spots and flecks in the
aura. In people who do not feel intensely,
these flecks have an orange yellow or even a
beautiful yellow coloring. So called "absent-
minded" people show bluish flecks more or less
changing in form.

A highly developed spiritual seer can dis-
tinguish three species of color phenomena
within the aura, radiating and surging round
a man. First there are the colors which bear
more or less the character of opaqueness and
dullness, although if we compare them with
those that our physical eyes see, they appear
in comparison fugitive and transparent. But
within the supersensible world itself they
make the space which they fill comparatively
opaque; they fill it like mist forms. The sec-
ond species of colors consists of those which
are, as it were, light itself. They light up the


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 187

space which they fill so that it becomes itself,
through them, a shining or lighted space. The
third kind of color phenomena is quite differ-
ent from these two. They have a raying,
sparkling, glittering character. They fill
space not merely with light but with glisten-
ing, glittering rays. There is something
active and inherently mobile in these colors.
The others are somewhat quiet and lack
brilliance. These on the contrary continu-
ously produce themselves out of themselves,
as it were. By the two first species of colors,
the space is filled up with a subtle fluid which
remains quietly in it. By the third it is filled
with life ever enflaming itself anew with
never-resting activity.

Now these three species of colors arc not
ranged, as it were, strictly alongside each
other in the human aura; they are not each
enclosed in a separate section of space. On
the contrary, they interpenetrate and suffuse
each other in the most varied ways. One can
see all three species playing through each other
in one region of the aura, just as one can simul-
taneously hear and see a physical body such
as a bell. The aura thereby becomes an


>y Google


i88 THEOSOPHY

exceedingly complicated phenomenon, for one
has, as it were, to do with three auras within
each other and interpenetrating each other.
One can, however, overcome the difficulty by
directing one's attention to the three species
alternately. One then does in the supersen-
sible world something similar to what one
does in the sensible, for example, when one
closes one's eyes in order to give oneself up
fully to the impression of a piece of music.
The "seer" has, as it were, three different
organs for the three species of colors. And, in
order to observe undisturbed, he can open or
close to impressions any one of the organs. As
a rule only the one kind of organ can at first
be developed by a "seer," namely for the first
kind of colors. A person at this stage can see
only the one aura. The other two remain .
invisible to him. In the same way a person
may be accessible to impressions from the two
first but not the third. The higher stage of the
"gift of seeing" consists in a person's being
able to see all three auras and, for the purpose
of study, to direct his attention to the one of
the other.
The threefold aura i> the supersensibly


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 189

visible expression of the being of man. The
three members, body, soul, and spirit, come to
expression in it.

The first aura is a mirror of the influence
which the body exercises on the soul of man;
the second signifies the life of the soul itself,
the soul that has raised itself above what affects
the senses directly, but is not yet devoted to the
service of the eternal; the third mirrors the
lordship which the eternal spirit has won over
the transitory man. When descriptions of the
aura are given, as here, it must be emphasized
that these things are not only difficult to observe
but above all difficult to describe. No one,
therefore, should see in a description like this
anything more than a stimulus to thought.

The "seer" therefore can judge the stage
of development of a person by the nature of
his aura. When an undeveloped person
approaches him, one who is given up entirely
W his impulses, passions, and momentary
external incitements, he sees the first aura in
the loudest colors. The second, on the con-
trary, is only slightly developed. He sees in
it only scanty color formations, while the third
is barely indicated. Only, here and there, a


>y Google


190 THEOSOPHY

small, glittering spark of color shows itself,
indicating that even in this human being the
eternal already lives as a germ, but that it will
require a long course of evolution, extending
over many incarnations, before it can gain a
predominating influence on the outer life of
its bearer. The more the man puts from him
his lower impulses, the less obtrusive becomes
the first part of the aura. The second part
grows larger and larger, filling the color body
within which the physical man lives, ever
more and more completely, with its Illumin-
ing force. And the highly developed persons,
"Servants of the Eternal," show the wonderful
third aura, that part which bears witness how
far the human being has become a citizen of
the spiritual world. For the divine Self rays
through this part of the human aura into the
earthly world. Persons in whom this aura is
developed are the flames through whom the
Divine illumines this world. They have
learned to live not for themselves but for the
eternally True, the nobly Beautiful and Good;
they have wrung from their narrower self the
power to offer themselves up on the altar of
the great World Work.


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 191

Thus there comes to expression in the aura
what the man has made of himself in the
course of his incarnations.

All three parts of the aura contain colors of
the most varied shades. Btit the character of
these shades changes with the stage of devel-
opment of the man. One can see in the first
part of the aura of the undeveloped man of
impulse all shades from red to blue. With
him these shades have a dull, dirty character.
The obtrusive red shades point to the sensual
desires, to the fleshly lusts, to the passion for
the enjoyments of the palate and the stomach.
Green shades appear to be found especially in
those lower natures that incline to obtuseness
and indifference, greedily giving themselves
over to each enjoyment but nevertheless shun-
ning the exertions necessary to satisfy them.
Where the desires are passionately bent on
any goal beyond the reach of the capacities
already acquired, brownish-green and yellow-
ish-green colors appear. Certain modern
modes of life actually breed this kind of aura.

A personal conceit which is entirely rooted
in low inclinations, that is to say the lowest
stage of egoism, shows itself in tones from


>y Google


192 THEOSOPHY

dirty yellow to brown. Now it is clear that
even the animal life of impulse can take on a
pleasing character. There is a purely natural
capacity for self-sacrifice, a high form of
which is to be found in the animal kingdom.
This development of an animal impulse finds
its most beautiful consummation in the natural
mother love. These selfless natural impulses
come to expression in the first aura in light
reddish to rose-red shades of color. Cowardly
fear and timidity in the face of external causes
show themselves in the aura in brown-blue and
gray-blue colors.

The second aura also shows the most varied
grades of colors. Brown and orange colored
formations point to strongly developed conceit,
pride, and ambition. Inquisitiveness also
announces its presence through red-yellow
flecks. A bright yellow mirrors clear think-
ing and intelligence, green expresses under-
standing of life and the world. Children who
learn easily have much green in this part of
their aura. A green yellow in the second
aura seems to betoken a good memory. Rose-
red indicates a well-meaning affectionate
nature. Blue is the sign of piety. The more


>y Google


THE THREE WORLDS 193

the piety approaches to religious fervor, the
more does blue pass over into violet. Ideal-
ism and an earnest view of life in a higher
sense one sees as indigo blue.

The fundamental colors of the third aura
are yellow, green, and blue. YELLOW appears
here if the thinking is filled with lofty, wide-
reaching ideas that comprehend the details
as part of the whole of the divine World
Order. If the thinking is intuitive and is also
completely purified of all conceptions spring-
ing from the world of the senses, the yellow
has a golden brilliance. GREEN indicates love
toward all beings ; BLUE is the sign of a capac-
ity for selfless sacrifice for all beings. If this
capacity for sacrifice is brought to the height
of the strong Willing, which devotes itself to
the active service of the world, the blue bright-
ens to light violet If pride and desire for
honor as last remnants of personal egoism are
still present in a more highly developed per-
son there appear beside the yellow shades oth-
ers verging on orange. It must, however, be
remarked that in THIS part of the aura the
colors arc very different from the shades one


>y Google


194 THEOSOPHY

is accustomed to see in the world of the senses.
It displays to the "seer" a beauty and an exalt-
edness with which nothing in the ordinary
world can be compared.


>y Google


CHAPTER IV

THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE

Knowledge of the truths made known by
Theosophy can be gained by each man for
himself. Descriptions of the kind given in this
book present a thought- picture of the higher
worlds. And they are in a particular respect
the FIRST STEP toward personal vision. For
man is a thought-being. He can only find his
path of knowledge when he makes thinking
his starting point. A picture of the higher
worlds given to his intellect is not unfruitful
for him even if for the time being it were
only as an account of higher facts into which
he has not yet gained insight through his own
vision. For the thoughts which are given him
represent in themselves a force which con-
tinues working in his thought world. This
force will be active in him, and it will awaken
slumbering capacities. He who is of the
opinion that it is superfluous to make oneself
receptive to such a thought-picture is mistaken.


>y Google


196 THEOSOPHY

He regards thought as something unreal and
abstract. But thought is a living force. It
is for him who has the higher knowledge a
direct expression of what can be seen in the
spirit, and it therefore acts in him to whom it
is communicated like a GERM, which brings
forth from itself the fruit of knowledge.

Anyone disdaining the application of strenu-
ous intellectual exertion to the attainment of
the higher knowledge, and preferring to make
use of other forces in man to that end, fails to
take into account that thinking is the highest
of the faculties possessed by man in the world
of the senses.

To him who asks, "How can I gain per-
sonal knowledge of the higher truths of The-
osophy?" the answer must be given, "Begin by
making yourself acquainted with what is com-
municated by others concerning such truths."
And should he reply, "I wish to see for myself,
I do not wish to know anything about what
others have seen," one must answer, "It is in
the very assimilating of the communications
of others that the first step toward personal
knowledge consists." And if he should
answer, "Then I am forced to have blind faith


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 197

to begin with," one can only reply that in
regard to something communicated it is not a
case of belief or unbelief but merely of an
unprejudiced consideration of what one hears.
The theosophist never speaks with the inten-
tion of awakening blind faith in what he says.
He merely says, "I have experienced this in
the higher regions of existence, and I narrate
these my experiences." But he knows also
that the reception of these experiences by
another and the penetrating of his thoughts
with such an account are living forces making
for spiritual development.

One cannot, in fact, emphasize strongly
enough how necessary it is that anyone who
wishes to develop his capacity for higher
knowledge should undertake the earnest
cultivation of his powers of thinking. This
emphasis must be all the stronger because
many persons who wish to become "seers"
actually estimate lightly this earnest, self-deny-
ing labor of thinking. They say, "Thinking
cannot help me to reach anything; the chief
thing is 'sensation, feeling,' or something simi-
lar." In reply it must be said that no one
can in the higher sense (and that means in


>y Google


198 THEOSOPHY

truth) become a "seer" who has not previously
accustomed himself to the life of trained
thought. In this connection a certain inner
laziness plays an injurious role with many
persons. They do not become conscious of
this laziness because it clothes itself in a con-
tempt of "abstract thought" and "idle specu-
lations," etc.

But one completely misunderstands what
thinking is if one confuses it with a spinning
of idle, abstract trains of thought. For while
this "abstract thinking" can easily kill super-
sensible knowledge, vigorous thinking, full of
life, must be the groundwork on which it is
based.

It would indeed be more comfortable if one
could reach the higher power of seeing while
shunning the labor of thinking. Many would
like this. But in order to reach it there is


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 199

higher worlds. Further, if one considers what
great changes take place in the man who
really enters the higher world, one will under-
stand that the matter has still another aspect.
Absolute HEALTHINESS of thesoul life belongs
to the condition of being a "seer." There is
no better means of developing this healthiness
than the true kind of thinking. In fact, it is
possible for the health to suffer seriously if the
exercises for higher development are not based
on thinking. Although it is true that the
power of spiritual sight makes a healthy and
correctly thinking man still healthier and
more capable in life, it is also true that vague
dreamings about these things, all attempts to
develop while shirking the effort of thought,
are dangerous to the health both of body and
soul. No one who wishes to develop himself
to higher knowledge has anything to fear if he
pay heed to what is said here, but the attempt
should only be made under the above condi-
tions.

Unfounded disbelief is injurious. It works
in the recipient as a repelling force. It hin-
ders him from receiving the fructifying
thoughts. Not faith, but just this reception


>y Google


200 THEOSOPHY

of the theosophic conceptions and teachings,
is the requisite for the development of the
higher senses. The theosophist approaches
his scholar with the injunction, "You are NOT
required to believe what I tell you but to think
about it, make it part of the contents of your
own thought world, then my thoughts will
work in you and of themselves enable you to
recognize them as true." This is the attitude
of the teacher of Theosophy. He gives the
stimulus; the power to accept as true what is
given him springs forth from the inner being
of the learner himself. And it is with this
attitude of mind that the theosophic views of
life should be studied. Anyone who has the
self-control to steep his thoughts in them may
be sure that in a shorter or longer time they
will lead him to personal vision.

In what has been said here there is already
indicated one of the first qualities which every-
one wishing to arrive at a personal vision of
higher facts has to develop. It is the UNRE-
SERVED, UNPREJUDICED, LAYING OF ONESELF

OPEN to that which is revealed by human
beings or the world external to man. If a
man approaches a fact in the world around


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 201

him with a judgment arising from his previ-
ous experiences, he shuts himself off by this
judgment from the quiet, complete effect
which this fact can have on him. The learner
must be able each moment to make himself a
perfectly empty vessel into which the new
world flows. Knowledge is received only in
those moments in which every judgment, every
criticism coming from ourselves, is silent. For
example, when we meet a person, the question
is not at all whether we are wiser than he.
Even the most unreasoning child has something
to reveal to the greatest sage. And if he
approach the child with his prejudgment, be
it ever so wise, he pushes his wisdom like a
dulled glass in front of what the child ought
to reveal to him. Complete inner selflessness
is necessary for this constant accessibility to
the revelations of the new world. And if a
man test himself to find out in what degree
he possesses this accessibility he will make
astonishing discoveries regarding himself.
Anyone who wishes to tread the path of higher
knowledge must train himself to be able each
moment to obliterate himself with all his
prejudices. As long as he obliterates himself


>y Google


202 THEOSOPHY

the other flows into him. Only a high grade
of such selfless accesstbtUty enables one to
receive the higher spiritual facts which sur-
round man on all sides. One can develop this
capacity in oneself of set purpose. One tries,
for example, to refrain from passing any judg-
ment on people in one's neighborhood. One
should obliterate within oneself the gauge of
good and bad, of stupid or clever, which one
is accustomed to apply, and try without this
gauge to understand persons purely through
themselves. The best exercises can be made
with people for whom one has an aversion.
One should suppress this aversion with all
one's power and let everything that they do
affect one unbiased. Or, if one is in an envi-
ronment that excites this or that judgment,
one should suppress the judgment and, free
from criticism, lay oneself open to impres-
sions. One should allow things and events to
speak TO ONESELF rather than speak oneself
about them. And one should extend this even
to one's thought world. One should suppress
in ONESELF that which prompts this or that
thought and allow only what is ou^tde to pro-
duce the thoughts. Only when such exer-


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 203

cises are carried out with holiest earnestness
and perseverance, do they lead to the goal of
higher knowledge. He who undervalues such
exercises knows nothing of their worth. And
he who has experience in such things knows
that selfless accessibility and freedom from
prejudice are true producers of force. Just
as heat conducted to the steam boiler is trans-
formed into the motive power of the engine,
the habitual exercise of selfless, spiritual
accessibility in man is transformed into the
power of seeing in the spiritual worlds.

By this exercise a man makes himself recep-
tive to all that surrounds him. But to this
receptivity correct valuation must also be
added. As long as a man is inclined to value
himself too highly, at the expense of the world
around him, he closes up the approach to
higher knowledge. He who in regard to
each thing or event in the world yields him-
self up to the pleasure or pain which they
cause HiM^ is enmeshed by such an overvalu-
ation of himself. For through his pleasure
and HIS pain he learns nothing about the things
but merely something about himself. If I feel
sjrmpathy with a man, I fee! to begin with


>y Google


M4 THEOSOPHY

nothing but my relation to him. If I make
myself entirely dependent on this feeling of
pleasure, of sympathy, as regards my judg-
ment and my conduct, I place my personality
in the foreground, I obtrude it upon the world.
I wish to thrust myself into the world just as
I am, instead of accepting the world in an
unbiased way and allowing it to play itself
out in accordance with the forces acting in it.
In other words, I am tolerant only of what
harmonizes with my personality. Toward
everything else I exercise a repelling force.
As long as a man is enmeshed by the sensible
world, he acts in an especially repelling way
on all influences that are supersensible. The
learner must develop in himself the capacity
to conduct himself toward things and people
in accordance with their peculiar natures and
to give to each its due worth and significance.
Sympathy and antipathy, liking and disliking
must be made to play quite new roles. There
can be no thought of eradicating these, of
blunting oneself to sympathy and antipathy.
On the contrary, the more a man develops in
himself the capacity to refrain from allowing
each feeling of sympathy and antipathy to be


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 205

followed immediately by a judgment, an
action, the more fine will be the sensitiveness
he develops in himself. He will find that
sympathy and antipathy of a higher kind
awaken in him if he curb those which he
already has. Even something that is at first
most unattractive has hidden qualities; it
reveals them if a man does not in his conduct
obey his selfish feelings. He who has devel-
oped himself in this respect feels more finely
in every direction than one who has not,
because he does not allow his own personality
to lead him into lack of receptivity. Each
inclination that a man follows blindly blunts
the power to see the things in his environment
in their true light. By obeying inclination we
thrust ourselves, as it were, through the envi-
ronment instead of laying ourselves open to it
and feeling its true worth.

A man becomes independent of the CHANG-
ING impressions of the outer world when each
pleasure and each pain, each sympathy and
each antipathy, no longer calls forth in him
an egotistical response and egotistical conduct.
The pleasure one feels in a thing makes one at
once dependent on it. One loses oneself in


>y Google


2o6 THEOSOPHY

the thing. A man who loses himself in the
pleasure or pain caused by each varying
impression cannot tread the path of higher
knowledge. He must accept pleasure and
pain with EQL'.\NIMIT^'. Then he ceases to lose
himself in them; he begins instead to under-
stand them. A pleasure to which I surrender
myself devours my being in the moment of
surrender. I ought to use the pleasure only
in order through it to arrive at an understand-
ing of the thing that arouses pleasure in me.
The important point ought not to be that the
thing has aroused the pleasure in me; I ought
to experience the liking and through it the
NATURE of the thing. The pleasure should
only be an announcement to me that there is in
the thing a quality calculated to give pleasure.
This qualit>- I must learn to understand. If
I go no further than the pleasure, if I allow
myself to be entirely absorbed in it, it is only
that I am expending myself; if the pleasure is
to me only the opportunity of experiencing a
quality or property of the thing itself, I enrich
my inner being through this experience. To
the learner pleasure and displeasure, joy and
pain, must be OPPORTL'N'ITIES for learning


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 207

about things. The learner does not become
blunted to pleasure or pain through this, he
raises himself above them in order that they
may reveal to him the nature of the things.
He who develops himself in this respect will
learn to understand what instructors pleasure
and pain are. He will feel with every being,
and thereby receive the revelation of its inner
nature. The learner never says to himself
merely, "Oh, how I suffer" or "Oh, how glad I
am," but always "How suffering speaks ! How
joy speaks 1" He eliminates the element of self
in order that pleasure and joy from the outer
world may work on him. By this means a com-
plete change takes place in the man. Formerly
he responded to this or that impression by this
or that action, because these impressions
caused him joy or dislike. But now he allows
pleasure and displeasure to become merely the
organs by which things tell him how he should
conduct himself toward them. IN HIM,
pleasure and pain change from being mere
feelings to being organs of sense by which the
external world is perceived. Just as the eye
does not act itself when it sees something, but
allows the hand to act, so pleasure and pain


/O


,Google


208 THEOSOPHY

bring about nothing in the learner, but merely
receive impressions ; and what is learned
through pleasure and displeasure is that
which brings about the action.

When a man uses pleasure and displeasure
in such a way that they become mere organs
of transmission, they build up for him within
his soul the very organs through which the
soul world opens up to view. The eye can
serve the body only by being an organ for the
transmission of sensible impressions; pleasure
and pain become the eyes of the soul when
they cease to have any value in themselves
and begin to serve one purpose alone, that of
revealing to the inner soul the souls outside it.

By means of the faculties mentioned the
seeker of the Path places himself in such a con-
dition as to enable what is really present in the
world around him to affect him without dis-
turbing influences from his own personality.
But he has also to adapt himself to the spirit-
ual world around him in the right way. For
he is, as thinking being, a citizen of the spir-
itual world. He can be this in a right way
only if he guides his thoughts in accordance
with the eternal laws of truth, the laws of the


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 209

"Spirit-land." For only in this way can that
land act on him and reveal its facts to him.
A man never reaches the truth as long as he
yields to the thoughts continuously coursing
through his ego. For if he does, his thoughts
take a course imposed on them by the fact that
they come into existence within the bodily
nature. The thought world of a man who is
absorbed in an intellectual activity, deter-
mined primarily by his physical brain, has an
appearance of irregularity and confusion. In
it a thought enters, breaks off, is driven out
of the field by another. Any one who tests this
by listening to a conversation between two peo-
ple, or who observes himself in an unpreju-
diced way, will gain an idea of this mass of
will-o'-the-wisp thoughts. As long as a man
devotes himself only to the calls of the life of
the senses, his confused succession of thoughts
will always be brought into order again by the
facts of the reality. I may think ever so con-
fusedly, but in my actions everyday facts force
upon me the laws corresponding to the reality.
My mental picture of a town may be most con-
fused, but if I wish to walk along a certain
road in the town I must accommodate myself


>y Google


»o THEOSOPHY

to exiiting facts. The mechanic can enter his
workihop with ever so varied a vdiirl of ideas,
but the lawi of his engines compel him to
adopt the correct procedure in his work.
Within the world of the senses facts exercise
their continuous corrective on thought If I
think out a false opinion about a physical
phenomenon or the shape of a plant the reality
confronts me and sets my thinking right. It
is quite different when I consider my relations
to the higher regions of existence. They
reveal themselves to me only if I enter their
worlds with already strictly controlled think-
ing. Unless my thinking shows me the right,
sure standpoint, I cannot find the proper paths.
For the spiritual laws prevailing within these
worlds are not condensed into the sensibly per-
ceptible kind, and therefore they do not exert
on me the compulsion referred to above. I am
able to obey these laws only when they are
related to those which govern me personally
as a thinking being. Here I must be my own
sure guide. The seeker of the Path must there-
fore make his thinking strictly regulated in
character. His thoughts must by degrees dis-
accustom themselves entirely from taking the


>y Google


THE PATH OP KNOWLEDGE ait

ordinary daily course. They must in their
whole sequence take on the inner character of
the spiritual world.

The seeker of the Path must constantly keep
watch over himself in this respect and have
himself in hand. With him one thought must
not link itself arbitrarily with another but
only in the way that corresponds with the
severely exact contents of the thought world.
The transition from one idea to another must
correspond with the strict laws of thought. He
must as thinker be to a certain extent con-
stantly a copy of these thought laws. He must
shut out from his train of thought all that does
not flow out of these laws. Should a favorite
thought present itself to him, he must put it
aside if the correct sequence will be disturbed
by it. If a personal feeling tries to force upon
his thoughts a direction not inherent in them,
he must suppress it. Plato required of those
who wished to be in his school that they
should first go through a course of mathemat-
ical training. And mathematics with their
strict laws, which do not yield to the course of
ordinary sensible phenomena, form a good
preparation for the seeker of the Path. If he


>y Google


212 THEOSOPHY

wishes to make progress in the study of mathe-
matics he has to strike out all personal, arbi-
trary choice, all disturbances. He learns by it
to follow purely the requirements of the
thought. And he has to learn to do this in all
his thinking. His THOUGHT-life must itself be
a copy of the unchanging mathematical meth-
ods of stating premises and forming con-
clusions . He must strive wherever he goes and
whatever he does to think after this manner.
Then the intrinsic lawfulness of the spirit
world will flow into him instead of passing
over and through him without leaving a trace,
as it does when his thinking bears the ordinary
confused character. Regulated thinking
brings him from sure starting points to the
most hidden truths. What has been said,
however, must not he looked at in a one-sided
way. Although mathematics act as a good


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 213

disturbing influences from his personality.
These laws must constantly direct him.
Should he begin to do something that he has
recognized as right and fail to content his
personal feelings, he may not FOR THAT REASON
forsake the road he has entered on. B:ut, on
the other hand, he may not pursue it because
it gives him joy if he finds that it is not in
accordance with the laws of the eternally
Beautiful and True. In everyday life peo-
ple allow their actions to be decided by what
contents them personally, by what bears fruit
FOR THEMSELVES. In this way they force
upon the course of the world's events a direc-
tion influenced by their personality. They
do not bring to realization the True that is
already prescribed in the laws of the spirit
world, they realize the demands of their self-
will. They act in harmony with the spiritual
world only when they follow its laws alone.
The Path seeker may not ask, "What brings
me advantages, what will bring me success?"
but only, "What have I recognized as the
Good?" Renunciation of the fruits of action
in the interest of his personality, renunciation
of all self-will, these are the weighty laws


>y Google


214 THEOSOPHY

which he must prescribe for himself. Then
he treads the paths of the spiritual world, his
whole being becomes penetrated by these laws.
He becomes free from all compulsion from
the sensible world; his Spirit-man raises itself
out of the sensible sheath. Thus he makes
actual progress on the path toward the spirit-
ual, and thus he spiritualizes himself. One
cannot say, ".Of what use to me are all my
resolutions to follow purely the laws of the
True when I am perhaps mistaken as to what
is the True?" The important thing is the
striving and the spirit in which one strives.
Even he who is mistaken possesses in his very
striving after the True a force which turns
him away from the wrong road. This force
seizes him should he be mistaken and guides
him to the right road. The very objection,
"But I can be mistaken," is itself harmful


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 215

self-seeking will of man that can prescribe for
the True; oa the contrary THIS TRUE ITSELF
must become lord in man, must penetrate his
whole being, make him a copy of the eternal
laws of the Spirit-iand. He must fill himself
with these eternal laws in order to let them
stream out into life. As the Path seeker must
hold strict guard over his thinking, so must
he also over his WILL. Through this he
becomes in life a messenger from the world of
the True and the Beautiful. And through
becoming this he rises to be a participant in
the spirit world. Through this he is raised
from stage to stage of development. For one
cannot reach the spiritual life by merely see-
ing it; on the contrary, one has to reach it by
experiencing, by living it.

If the Path seeker observes the laws here
described his soul experiences will take on an
entirely new form. He will not longer live
merely IN THEM. They will no longer have
a significance merely for his personal life.
They will develop into soul perceptions of the
higher world. In his soul the feelings of pleas-
ure and displeasure, of joy and pain, grow into
soul organs, just as in his body eyes and ears


>y Google


2i6 THEOSOPHY

do not lead a life for themselves merely, but
selflessly allow external impressions to pass
through them. As a result CALMNESS and
ASSURANCE become inherent qualities in the
soul of the Path seeker. A great pleasure will
no longer make him jubilant, but will be the
messenger to him of qualities in the world
which have hitherto escaped him. It will
leave him calm, and through the calm the
characteristics of the pleasure-giving beings
will reveal themselves to him. Pain will
no longer fill him with grief, but will tell him
the qualities of the being which causes the
pain. Just as the eye does not desire any-
thing for itself but shows man the direction of
the road he has to take, so will pleasure and
pain guide the soul safely along its path.
This is the state of balance of soul which the
Path seeker must reach. The less pleasure


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 217

them his feeling of self, then they become his
organs of perception, then he sees by means
of them, and through them attains to knowl-
edge. It is incorrect to think that the Seeker
of the Path becomes a dry, colorless being,
incapable of pleasure or suffering. Pleasure
and suffering are present in him but in a trans-
formed shape; they have become "eyes and
ears."

So long as one lives in a personal relation-
ship with the world, things reveal only that
which links them with our personality. But
that is the transitory part of them. If we
withdraw ourselves from the transitory part
of us and live with our feeling of self, with our
"I," in our permanent part, then our transi-
tory parts become intermediaries for us; and
that which reveals itself through them is an
Imperishable, an Eternal in the things. This
relationship between HIS own Eternal and
the Eternal in the things must be estab-
lished by the seeker of the Path. Even before
he begins other exercises of the kind described,
and also during them, he should direct his
thought to this imperishable part. When
I observe a stone, a plant, an animal, a man, I


>y Google


2i8 THEOSOPHY

should remember that in each of them an Eter-
nal declares itself. I must ask myself what
is the permanent that lives in the transitory
stone, what will outlast the transient, sensible
phenomenon? One ought not to think that
such a directing of the spirit to the eternal
destroys the power of devoted observation and
our feeling for the qualities of everyday
affairs, and estranges us from the immediate
realities. On the contrary every leaf, every
little insect will unveil to us innumerable mys-
teries, when not our EY^S only but THROUGH
THE EYES the spirit is directed upon them.
Every sparkle, every shade of color, every
cadence will remain vividly perceptible to
the senses ; nothing will be lost ; only an infini-
tude is gained. Indeed, the person who is not
able to observe even the meanest thing in
nature with interest will only attain to pale,
bloodless thoughts, not to spiritual sight. All
depends on the ATTITUDE OF MIND we acquire
in this direction.

What stage we will succeed in reaching
depends on our capacities. We have each
moment to do what is right and leave every-
thing else to the future. It must be enough


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 319

for us at first to direct our minds to the perma-
nent. If we do this the knowledge of the per-
manent will THROUGH THIS awaken in us. We
must wait until it is given. And it is given
at the right time to each one who with patience
waits and works. A man soon notices during
such exercises what a powerful transformation
takes place within him. He learns to consider
each thing as important or unimportant only
in so far as he recognizes it to be related to
a Permanent, to an Eternal. He comes to a
different appreciation and estimate of the
world from tfie one he has hitherto had. His
whole feeling takes on a new relationship
toward the entire surrounding world. The
transitory no longer attracts him for its own
sake as formerly ; it becomes for him a member,
an image of the Eternal. And this Eternal,
that lives in all things, he learns to love. It
becomes familiar to him, just as the transitory
was formerly familiar to him. This again
does not cause him to become estranged from
life, he only learns to value each thing at its
true worth. Even the vain trifles of life will
not leave him quite unaffected; but the man
no longer loses himself in them, he recognizes


>y Google


220 THEOSOPHY

them at their limited worth. He sees them in
their true light. He is a poor discerner who
prefers to go awandering in the clouds and
lose sight of life; a true discerner from his
high summit, with his power of clear survey
and his just and healthy feeling for every-
thing, will be able to assign to each thing its
proper place.

In this way there opens out to the Path
seeker the possibility of ceasing to obey the
incalculable influences of the external world
of the senses, which turn his will now here,
now there. Through higher knowledge he has
seen the Eternal Being in things. By means
of the transformation of his inner world he
has gained the capacity to perceive this eternal
being. When he now acts from out himself,
he acts also from out the Eternal Being of the
things. For the things give utterance IN HIM
to this being of theirs. He therefore acts in
harmony with the eternal World Order when
he directs his action from out the Eternal liv-
ing within him. He becomes in this way no
longer impelled by the things, he impels them
according to the laws implanted within them
which have become the laws of his own being.


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 221

This ability to act from out his inner being
can only be an ideal toward which one strives.
The attainment of the goal lies in the far dis-
tance. But the Path seeker must have the will
to tread this road. This is his WILL FOR FREE-
DOM. For freedom is action from out of one's
inner being. And only he may act from out of
his inner being who draws his motives from
the Eternal. He who does not do this acts
according to other motives than those
implanted in the things. Such a one opposei
the World Order. And this must prevail
against him. That is to say, what he plans
to carry through by his will can not take place.
He can not become free. The arbitrary choice
of the individual annihilates itself through the
effects of its deeds.

« * •

He who directs his inner life In such a
way steps upward from stage to stage. The
fruits of his exercises will be that certain vistas
of the supersensible world will unfold to his
spiritual perception. He learns the real mean-
ing of the truth communicated about this
world; and he will receive confirmation of
them through his own experience. If this


>y Google


222 THEOSOPHY

stage is reached, an experience comes to him
which can only be his through treading this
path.

Through Beings whose significance can now
for the first time become clear to him through
the "great Guides of the Human Race" there
is bestowed on him what is called consecration
(initiation). He becomes a "Disciple of the
Wisdom." What the Seeker of the Path now
experiences can only be indicated here. He
receives a new home. He becomes a conscious
dweller in the supersensible world. The River
of Wisdom flows to him now from a higher
source. The Light of Knowledge from this
time forth does not shine upon him from with-
out; he is himself placed in the fountain eye
of this Light. In it the problems which the
world supplies are solved. Henceforth he
holds converse no longer with the things which


>y Google


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE 223

And since the "Disciple of the Wisdom" is
able to hold intercourse with the spirit itself,
each false form in which he had before imag-
ined the spirit vanishes. The false form
which man ascribes to the spirit in his concep-
tions is superstition. The initiate is above
all superstition, for he knows what the true
form of the spirit is. FREEDOM from person-
ality, doubt, and superstition, these are the
characteristics of him who has attained to
discipleship in the Path of the higher knowl-
edge. One must not confuse this state in which
the personality becomes one with the compre-
hensive spirit of life with a disappearance of
THE PERSONALITY in the "All-Spirit." Such
a disappearance does not take place in a true
development of the personality. It remains
preserved as personality at the highest stage
of its perfection. It is not the subjection of the
personality but its highest development that
takes place. If one wishes to have a simile for
this coincidence or union of the individual
spirit with the "All-Spirit" one cannot choose
that of different circles which, coinciding, are
lost in the One, but one must choose the pic-
ture of many circles of which each has a quite


>y Google


234 THEOSOPHY

distinct shade of color; these differently col-
ored circles coincide, but each separate shade
preserves its existence within the whole. Not
one loses the fullness of its individual power,
and the whole is the resultant of these individ-
ual powers.

The further description of the Path will not
be given here. It is given so far as is possible
in "Occult Science," which forms a continu-
ation of this book.

The Way of Man passes through many lives
(incarnations). Patience ought to flow out
of the real understanding of this fact. He
who uses his present incarnation for his devel-
opment prepares for those stages in which he
will attain to (intuitive) seeing, to clairvoy-
ance, to the full possession of his higher being
(Spirit-self, Life-spirit) as well as to the
remembrance of his former lives and to still
higher experiences. It is possible for this to
take place in his present life or perhaps, it
may be, in a following one.

THE END


>y Google


NOTES AND AMPLIFICATIONS

I. To page 23. To speak of "life-force"
(Lebenskraft) was regarded a short time back
as the mark of an unscientific mind. But one
begins to find here and there in science to-day
a tendency which is not averse from the idea
of a "life-force" such as was accepted in
former times. Anyone who really understands
the course of contemporary science will, how-
ever, recognize that the superior logic lies with
those who in considering this tendency refuse
to find any trace of "life-force." "Life-force"
is by no means the same as what is to-day
called the "forces of nature {Naturkrafte) "
and he who will not pass over from the modes
of thought and conception characteristic of
modern science to higher modes ought not to
speak of "life-force," Only the mode of think-
ing and the presuppositions of spiritual science
(Geisieswissenschaft) or Theosophy make it
possible to deal with such things without
inconsistency.

225


>y Google


226 THEOSOPHY

2. To page 26. When the "sense of touch"
of the lower organisms is spoken of here, it is
not intended to convey what is expressed by
this phrase in the ordinary expositions of the
"Senses." From the theosophical point of
view much could, in fact, be urged in objec-
tion to the use of this expression. What is
meant here by "sense of touch" is rather a gen-
eral BECOMING AWARE of an external impres-
sion, in contrast to the special becoming
aware which consists in seeing, hearing, etc.

3. To page 35. It is necessary to read theo-
sophical presentations of a subject with strict
accuracy. For it is only in the accurate state-
ment of ideas that they have a value. For
example in the statement, "They (the sensa-
tions, etc.) do not in its case (namely, that of
the animal) become interwoven with inde-
pendent thoughts transcending the immediate
experience," one could easily fall into the
mistake of thinking that it was claimed here
that there are no thoughts contained in the sen-
sations or the instincts of animals. Now The-
osophy is actually based on a knowledge which
says that all inner experience on the part of
animals (and all existence of any kind) is


>y Google


NOTES AND AMPLIFICATIONS 227

interwoven with thought. But the thoughts
of the animal are not those of an independent
I, or ego, living in the animal, but are those of
the animal group ego, which must be regarded
as a being governing the animal from without.
This group ego is not present in the physical
world as is the I, or ego, of a man, but works
down into the animal from the soul world
described on pages 87 et seq. {Further details
regarding this are to be found in my "Outline
of Occult Science.") The real point at issue
in the case of man is that thoughts attain
to an independent existence IN HIM — that
thoughts are not experienced immediately in
sensation, but mediately as thoughts which are
experienced also in the soul.

4. To page 42. When it is said that little
children say, "Charles is good," "Mary wishes
to have this," it must be carefully noted that
the important point is not so much how soon
children use the word "I" but when they con-
nect the proper conception with that word.
When children hear adults use the word, they
can continually use it without having the con-
ception of the "I." Nevertheless, the fact that
the use of the word begins late as a rule points


>y Google


228 THEOSOPHY

to an important feature of evolution, namely
the gradual unfolding of the I-concept out of
the vague I-feeling.

5- To pages 47 and 48. A description of
the intrinsic nature of "Intuition" is to be
found in my books "A Way of Initiation" and
"Occult Science." One might through inac-
curate observation of the matter detect a con-
tradiction between the use of this word in those
books and what is said in this book on page 47.
This, however, will be found not to exist when
one takes into account that what reveals itself
through intuition in full reality to supersen-
sible knowledge makes itself known, in its
LOWEST revelation, to the spirit-self, even as
the external existence of the physical world
makes itself known in sensation.

6. To page 91. The subject of the spirit-
ual organs of perception which is only alluded


>y Google


NOTES AND AMPLIFICATIONS 229

world because there is not in it "a state of
rest, a remaining in one place, as in the phys-
ical world." There, where the Beings are who
create the Archetypes, there is not indeed
what can be called "rest in one place," but
there is that rest which is spiritual in its
nature, and consistent with active mobility. It
may be likened to the restful satisfaction and
bliss of the spirit which is revealed in deeds
and not in a state of inaction.

8. To page 139. One is obliged to use the
word "Purposes" in regard to the impelling
or motive Powers of the world evolution,
although it opens the door to a temptation to
conceive of these Powers simply as human
purposes. In the case of such words — which
had naturally to be taken from the sphere of
human life — this temptation can be averted
only by the raising of oneself when using them
to a significance from which every connection
with human limitation is banished, and there
is assigned to them what man approximately
imbues them with on those occasions in his
life when he, to a certain degree, rises above
himself.

9. To page 139. Further particulars in


>y Google


ajo THEOSOPHY

regard to the "Spiritual Word" are to be found
in my "Outline of Occult Science."

Munich, August 28, 1910.


,Google


,Google


,Google


4


STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES

CECIL H. GREEN LIBRARY

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004

(415) 723-1493

All books may be recoiled afler 7 days

DATE DUE


>y Google
