An Agnostic's Apology, and Other Essays
Leslie Stephen (1893)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Leslie Stephen's An Agnostic's Apology (1876) and other essays — the classic Victorian statement of agnosticism.

========================================================================

AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


AND OTHER ESSAYS


BY

LESLIE STEPHEN


LONDON

SMITH, ELDEB, & CO., 16 WATERLOO PLACE

1893


[All right i reservetil


NOTE

Fouk of the following; chapters an‘ re])iiblislied (with
alterations) from articles which originally iippcarcd in the
* J^^ortnightly Review,’ one from two articles in the ‘ Nine-
teenth Century,’ and one from an article in the ‘North
American Review.’ The author thanks the proprietors of
those periodicals for permission to republish.


CONTENTS

VjHiK

1.

An Agnostic’s Apology

1

11.

The ScEPTicisAi of J>EriiEVEKs .

42

III.

Dreams and Realities ....

86

IV.

What is Material ? . . .

. 127

V.

Newman’s Theory of Bp:lief

. 108

VI,

Poisonous Opinions ....

. 242

VIJ.

liiE Religion of all Sensible Men .

. 668


AN AGNOSTIC'S APOLOGY


The name Agnostic, originally coined by Professor
Huxley about 1869, lias gained general acceptance.
It is sometimes used to indicate the philosophical
theory which Mr. Herbert Spencer, as he tells us,
developed from the doctrine of Hamilton and Mansel.
Upon that theory I express no opinion. I take the
word in a vaguer sense, and am glad to Iwlieve that
its use indicates an advance in the courtesies of
controversy. The old theological phrase for an in-
tellectual opponent was Atheist — a name which still
retains a certain flavour as of the stake in this world
and hell-fire in the next, and which, moreover, im-
plies an inaccuracy of some importance. Dogmatic
Atheism — the doctrine that there is no God, whatever
may bo meant by God — is, to say the fe^ast, a rare
phase of opinion. The word Agnosticism, on the
other hand, seems to imply a fairly aedhrate appi'e-
ciation of a form of creed already commto and daily
spreading. The Agnostic is one who asserts — what
• no Rne denies — that there are limits to the spjiere of
? human intelligencei. He asserts, further, what many


B


2


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


t

theologians have expressly maintained, that those
limits are'^sach as to exclude at least what Lewes
called ‘ metempirical ’ knowledge. But hg goes fur-
ther, and asserts, in opposition to theologians, that
theology lies Vithin this forbidden sphere. This last
assertion raises the important issue; and, though
I have no pretension to invent an opposition nick-
name, I may venture, for the purposes of this article,
to describe the rival school as Gnostics.

The Gnostic holds that our reason can, iii some
sense, transcend the narrow limits of experience. He
holds that we can attain truths not capable of veri-
fication, and not needing verification, by actual
experiment or observation. Ho holds, further, that
a knowledge of those truths is essential to the highest
interests of mankind, and enables us in some sort to
solve the dark riddle of the universe. A corajfiete
solution, as everyone admits, is beyoird our power.
But some answer may bo. given to the doubts wliich
harass and perplex us when we try to frame any
adequate conception of the vast order of which we
form an insignificant portion. We cannot say why
this or th^t arrangement is what it is ; we can say,
though obscurely, that some answer exists, and would
be satisfactolry, if we could only find it. Overpowered,
as every holiest and serious thinker is at times over-
powered, by the sight of pain, folly, and helplessness,
by the jarring discords which run through the Vast •
harmony of the universe, we are yet enabled to bear


AN AGNOSTIC'S APOLOGY


8


at times a whisper that all is well, to trost to it as
coming from the most authentic source, and to know
that only»the temporary bars of sense prevent us
from recognising with certainty that the harmony
beneath the discords is a reality and not a dream.
This knowledge is embodied in the central dogma of
theology. God is the name of the harmony; and
God is knowable. Wlio w'ould not be happy in
accepting this belief, if he could accept it honestly ?
Who would not be glad if he could say with con-
fidence, the evil is transitory, the good eternal : our
doubts are due to limitations destined to be abolished,
and tlie world is really an embodiment of love and
wisdom, however dark it may appear to our faculties ?
And yet, if tho so-called knowledge be illusory, arc
>ve not bound by the most sacred obligations to
recognise the facts ? Our brief path is dark enough on
any hypothesis. We cannot afford to turn aside after
every h/nis fatuvs without asking whether it leads to
sounder footing or to hopeless quagmires. Dreams
may be pleasanter for the moment than realities;
but happiness must be won by adapting qjir lives to
the realities. And who, that has felt the burden of
existence, and suffered under well-meant efforts at
consolation, will deny that such consolations are the
bitterest of mockeries'? Pain is not an evil; death
is n<^ a separation; stekness is but a blessing in
Hisgiiise. Have the gloomiest speculations of avowed
pessimists ever tortured sufferers like those kindly


2


AS AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


C

theologians have expressly maintained, that tliose
limits arc ‘^such as to exclude at least what Lewes
called ‘ raetempirical ’ knowledge. But hg goes fur-
ther, and asserts, in opposition to theologians, that
theology lies Vithin this forhidden sphere. This last
assertion raises the important issue; and, though
I have no pretension to invent an opposition nick-
name, I may venture, for the purposes of this article,
to describe the rival school as Gnostics.

The Gnostic holds that our reason can, in some
sense, transcend the narrow limits of experience. He
holds that wc can attain truths not capable of veri-
fication, and not needing verification, by actual
experiment or observation. He holds, further, that
a knowle,dge of those truths is essential to the highest
interests of mankind, and enables us in some sort to
solve the dark riddle of the universe. A complete
solution, as everyone admits, is beyoml our power.
But some answer may be given to the doubts which
harass and perplex us when we try to frame any
adequate conception of the vast order of which we
form an insignificant portion. Wc cannot say why
this or thi^t arrangement is what it is ; we can say,
thoirgh obscurely, that some answer exists, and would
be satisfactoty, if we could only find it. Overpowered,
as every hoftest and serious thinker is at times over-
powered, by the sight of pain, folly, and helplessness,
by the jarring discords which run through the Vast
harmony of the universe, we are yet enabled to hear


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


8


at times a whisper that all is well, to trust to it as
coming from the most authentic source, and to know
that only# the temporary bars of sense prevent us
from recognising with certainty that the harmony
beneatli the discords is a reality and not a dream.
This knowledge is embodied in the central dogma of
theology. God is the name of the harmony; and
God is knowable. Who would not be happy in
accepting this belief, if he could accept it honestly ?
Who would not be glad if he could say with con-
fidence, the evil is transitory, the good eternal : our
doubts arc due to limitations destined to be abolished,
and the world is really an embodiment of love and
wisdom, however dark it may ai)pear to our faculties ?
And yet, if the so-called knowledge be illusory, are
>ve not bound by the most sacred obligations to
recognise the facts ? Our brief path is dark enough on
any hypothesis. We cannot afford to turn aside after
every iynis fatms without askmg whether it leads to
sounder footing or to hopeless quagmires. Dreams
may be pleasanter for the moment than realities;
but happiness must be won by adapting egar lives to
the realities. And who, that has felt the burden of
existence, and suffered under well-meant efforts at
consolation, will deny that such consolations are the
bitterest of mockeries ? Pain is not an evil ; death
is not a separation; sickness is but a blessing in
flisguise. Have the gloomiest speculations of avowed
pessimists ever tortured sufferers like those kindly


4


AN AaNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


platitudes ? Is there a more cutting piece of satire
in the language than the reference in our funeral
service to the ‘sure and certain hope of^a blessed
resurrection’? To dispel genuine hopes might be
painful, however salutary. To suppress these spas*
modic efforts to fly in the face of facts would be
some comfort, even in the distress which they are
meant to alleviate.

Besides the important question whether the Gnostic
can prove his dogmas, there is, therefore, the further
question whether the dogmas, if granted, have any
meaning. Do they answer our doubts, or mock us
with the appearance of an answer? Tlie Gnostics
rejoice in their knowledge. Have they anything to
tell us ? They rebuke what they call the ‘ pride of
reason ’ in the name of a still more exalted pride.
The scientific reasoner is arrogant because he sets
limits to the faculty in which he trusts, and denies
the existence of any other faculty. They are humble
because they dare to tread in the regions which he
declares to be inaccessible. But without bandying
such accusations, or asking which pride is the greatest,
the Gnosljjcs are at least bound to show some ostensible
justification for their complacency. Have they dis-
covered a 'firm resting-place from which they are
entitled td look down in compassion or contempt
upon those who hold it to be «a mere edifice of moon-
shine ^ If they have diminished by a scruplb the
weight of one passing doubt, wq should be grateful :


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


5


perhaps we should be converts. If not, why condemn
Agnosticism ? •

1 hav^ said that our knowledge is in any case
limited. I may add that, on any showing, there is a
danger in failing to recognise the limits of possible
knowledge. The word Gnostic has some awkward
associations. It once described certain heretics who
got into trouble from fancying that men could frame
theories of the Divine mode of existence. The sects
have been dead for many centuries. Their funda-
mental assumptions can hardly bo quite extinct. Not
long ago, at least, there appeared in the papers a
string of ])ropositions framed — so we were assured —
by some of the most candid and most learned of
living theologians. These propositions defined by
the help of various languages the precise relations
which exist between the persons of the Trinity. It
is an odd, though far from an unprecedented, cir-
cumstance that the unl)eliever cannot quote them
for fear of profanity. If they were transplanted into
the pages of the ‘ Fortnightly Review,’ it would be
impossible to convince anyone that the intention
was not to mock the simple-minded persons who, we
must suppose, were not themselves intentionally
irreverent. It is enough to say that *they defined
the nature of God Almighty w'ith an accuracy from
which modest naturalists would shrink in describing
the* genesis of a black-beetle. I know not whether
these dogmas were, put forward as articles of faith,


6


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


as pious conjectures, or as tentative contifbutions to
a sound theory. At any rate, it was supposed that
they were interesting to beings of dcsh and blood.
If so, one can only ask in wonder whether an utter
want of reverence is most strongly implied in this
mode of dealing with sacred mysteries ; or an utter
ignorance of the existing state of the world in the
assumption that the question which really divides
mankind is the double procession of the Holy Ghost ;
or an utter incapacity for speculation in the confusion
of these dead exuviae of long-past modes of thought
with living intellectual tissue ; or an utter want of
imagination, or of even a rudimentary senst* of
humour, in the hypothesis that the promulgation
of such dogmas could produce anything but the
laughter of sceptics and the contempt of the healthy
human intellect ?

The sect which requires to be encountered in these
days is not one which boggles over the filioqiie, but
certain successors of those Ephesians who told Paul
that they did not even know ‘ whether there were any
Holy Ghost.’ But it explains some modern pheno-
mena when 'we find that the leaders of theology hope
to reconcile faith and reason, and to show that the
old symbols* have still a right to the allegiance of
our hearts and brains, by putting forth these porten-
tous propositions. We are struggling with hard facts,
and they would arm us with the forgotten flbola
of scholasticism. We wish for spiritual food, and are


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


7


to be put off with these ancient mummeries of for-
gotten dogma. If Agnosticism is the frame of mind
which summarily rejects these imbecilities, and would
restrain the human intellect from wasting its powers
on the attempt to galvanise into sham activity this
capvt mortiuuii of old theology, nobody need be afraid
of the name. Argument against such adversaiies
would be itself a foolish waste of time. Let the
dead bury their dead, and Old Catholics decide
whether the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father
and the Son, or from the Father alone. Gentlemen,
indeed, who still read the i^thanasian Creed, and
profess to attach some meaning to its statements,
have no right to sneer at their brethren who persist
in taking things sc'riously. But for men who long
for facts instead of phrases, the only possible course
is to allow such vagaries to take their own course to
the limbo to which they are naturally destined, simply
notmg, by the way, that modern Gnosticism may lead
to puerilities which one blushes oven to notice.

It is not with such phenomena that we have
seriously to deal. Nobody maintains that the unas-
sisted human intellect can discover the true theory
of the Trinity ; and the charge of Agnosticism refers,
of course, to the sphere of reason, not to the sphere of
revelation. Yet those who attack the doctrine are
chiefly believers in revelation; and as such they
•shotfld condescend to answer one important question.
Is not the denunciation of reason a commonplace with


u


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


theologians ? What could be easier than to form a
catena of the most philosophical defenders of Chris-
tianity who have exhausted language in dgclaring the
impotence of the unassisted mtellect? Comte has
not more explicitly enounced the incapacity of man
to deal with the Absolute and the Infinite than a
whole series of orthodox writers. Trust your reason,
we have been told till we arc tired of the phrase, and
you will become Atheists or Agnostics. We take you
at your word; we become Agnostics. What right
have you to turn round and rate us for being a degree
more logical than yourselves ? Our right, you reply,
is founded upon a l')ivine revelation to ourselves or
our Church. Let us grant — it is a very liberal con-
cession — that the right mayconceivably be established ;
but still you are at one with us in philosophy. You say,
as we say, that the natural man can know nothing of
the Divine nature. That is Agnosticism. Om* funda-
mental principle is not only granted, but asserted.
By what logical device you succeed in overleaping the
barriers which you have declared to be insuperable is
another question. At least you have no primd facie
ground for attacking our assumption that the limits
of the human intellect are what you declare them to
be. This is no mere verbal retort. Half, or more
than half, of our adversaries agree formally with our
leading principle. They caifnot attack us without
upsettinfg the very ground upon which the ablest*
advocates of their own ease rely. The last English


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOIA)OY

writer who professed to defend Christianity with
weapons drawn from wide and genuine philosophical
knowledge jvas Dean Hansel. The whole substance
of his argument was simply and solely the assertion
of the first principles of Agnosticism. Mr. Herbert
Spencer, the prophet of the Unknowable, the foremost
representative of Agnosticism, professes in his pro-
gramme to be carrying ‘ a step further the doctrine
put into shape by Hamilton and Manse!.’ Nobody,
I suspect, would now deny, nobody except Dean
Mansel himself, and the ‘ religious ’ newspapers, ever
denied very seriouslj% that the ‘ further step ’ thus
taken was the logical step. Opponents both from
within and without the Church, Mr. Maurice and
Mr, Mill, agreed that this affiliation was legitimate.
The Old Testament represents Jehovah as human,
as vindictive, as prescribing immoralities ; therefore,
Jehovah was not the true God ; that was the contention
of the infidel. We know nothing whatever about the
true God was the reidy, for God means the Absolute and
the Infinite. Any special act may come from God,
for it may be a moral miracle; any attribute may
represent the character of God to man, for, we know
nothing whatever of His real attributes, and cannot
even conceive Him as endowed with attributes. The
doctrine of the ^to^ieJ^ient cannot be revolting, be-
cause it cannot have jmy meaning. Mr. Spencer
hardly goes a step beyond his original, except, indeed,
in candour. .


10 AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY

Most believers repudiate Dean Mansef s arguments.
They were an anachronism. Th(fy were fatal to the
decaying creed of pure Theism, and powerless against
the growing creed of Agnosticism. When theology
had vital power enough to throw out fresh branches,
the orthodox could venture to attack the Deist, and
the Deist could assail the traditional beliefs. As the
impulse grows fainter, it is seen that such a warfare
is suicidal. The old rivals must make an alliance
against the common enemy. The theologian must
appeal for help to the metaidiysician whom he reviled.*
Orthodoxy used lo call Spinoza an Atheist ; it is now
glad to argue that even Spinoza is a witness on its
own side. Yet the most genuine theology still avows
its hatred of reason and distrusts sham alliances.
Newman was not, like Dean Mansel, a profound meta-
physician, but his admirable rhetoric expressed a far
finer religious instinct. He felt more keenly, if he
did not reason so systematically; and the force of
one side of his case is undeniable. He holds that the
unassisted reason cannot afford a sufiicient support
for a belief in Hod. He declares, as innumerable
writers of less power have declared, that there is ‘ no
medium, in true philosophy, between Atheism and
Oatholicit}*, and that a perfectly consistent mind,
under those circumstances in which it finds itself
here below, must embrace either the one or the other.’ '
He lopks in vain for any antagonist, except the Catholic

’ History of my BelAgious Opifiions, pp. 322-8.


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGy


11


Church, capable of baffling and withstanding ‘ the
fierce energy of passion, and the all-corroding, all-
dissolving scepticism of the intellect in religious
matters.’ ' Some such doctrine is in fact but a
natural corollary from the doctrine of human cor-
ruption held by all genuine theologians. The very
basis of orthodox theology is the actual separation
of the creation from the Creator. In the ‘ Grammar of
Assent,’ Newman tells us that we ‘ can only glcau from
the surface of the world some faint and fragmentary
views ’ of God. ‘ I see,’ he proceeds, ‘ only a choice of
alternatives in ^iew of so critical a fact ; either there
is no Creator, or He has disowned His creatures.’*
The absence of God from His own world is the
one prominent fact which startles and appals him.
Newman, of course, does not sec or does not admit
the obvious consequence. He asserts most em-
phatically that he believes in the existence of God
as firmly as in his own existence ; and he finds the
ultimate proof of this doctrine — a proof not to be put
into mood and figure — in the testimony of the con-
science. But ho apparently admits that Atheism is
as logical, that is, as free from self-contradiction,
as Catholicism. He certainly declares that though
the ordinary arguments are conclusive, they are not
in practice convincing. Smrnd reason would, of
course, establish theology.; but corrupt man does not
and cannot reason soundly. Newman, however,,goes

* Ibid, p. 379. * Grammar of .Usenty p. 392.


12


AN AGNOSTIC'S APOLOGY


further than this. His Theism can only be supported
by help of his Catholicity. If, therefore, Newman had
never heard of the Catholic Church — jf, that is, he
were in the position of the great majority of men now
living, and of the overwhelming majority of the race
which has lived since its first appearance, ho would
be driven to one of two alternatives. Either he would
be an Atheist or he would be an Agnostic. His con-
science might say, thoi’e is a God ; his observation
would say, there is no God. Moreover, the voice
of conscience has been very differently interpreted.
Newman’s interpretation has no force for anyone
who, like most men, does not share his intuitions.
To such persons, therefore, there can be, on NeAvman’s
own showing, no refuge except the admittedly logical
refuge of Atheism. Even if they shared his intui-
tions, they would be necessarily sceptics until the
Catholic Church came to their aid, for their intuitions
would bo in hopeless conflict with them experience.
I need hardly add that, to some minds, the proposed
alliance with reason of a Church which admits that its
tenets arc corroded and dissolved wherever free reason
is allowed to play upon them, is rather suspicious. At
any rate, Newman's arguments go to prove that man,
as guided by reason, ought to be an Agnostic, and
that, at the present moment. Agnosticism is the only
reasonable faith for at least three -quarters of the race..

All, then, who think that men should not be dog-
matic about matters beyond the sphere of reason or


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


13


•even conceivability, who hold that reason, however
weak, is our sole guide, or who find that their oon>
science does not testify to the divinity of the Catholic
God, but declares the moral doctrines of Catholicity
to be demonstrably erroneous, are entitled to claim
such orthodox writers as sharing their fundamental
principles, though refusing to draw the legitimate
inferences. The authority of Bean Mansel and
Newman may of course be repudiated. In one sense,
however, they are simply stating an undeniable fact.
<rhe race collectively is agnostic, whatever may be the
case with individuals. Newton might be certain of the
truth of his doctrines, whilst other thinkers were still
convinced of their falsity. It could not be said
that the doctrines were certainly true, so long as they
were doubted in good faith by competent reasoners.
Newman may be as much convinced of the truth of his
theology as Professor Huxley of its error. But speak-
ing of the race, and not of the individual, there is no
plainer fact in history than the fact that hitherto no
knowledge has been attained. There is not a single
proof of natural theology of which the negative has
not been maintained as vigorously as the affirmative.

You tell us to be ashamed of professing ignorance.
Where is the shame of ignorance in matters still in-
volved in endless and hopeless controversy ? Is it not
rather a duty ? Why should a lad who has just run
the gauntlet of examinations and escaped to a country
parsonage be dogmatic, when his dogmas are de-


14


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


nounced as erroneous by half the philosophers of the
world ? What theory of the universe am I to accept
as demonstrably established? At the yery earliest
dawn of philosophy men were divided by earlier forms
of the same problems which divide them now. Shall
I be a Platonist or an Aristotelian ? Shall I admit or
deny the existence of innate ideas ? Shall I believe
in the possibility or in the impossibility of transcend-
ing experience? Go to the mediaeval philosophy,
says one controversialist. To which mediajval philo-
sophy, pray ? Shall 1 be a nominalist or a realist f
And why should I believe you rather than the great
thinkers of the seventeenth century, who agreed with
one accord that the first condition of intellectual
progress was the destruction of that philosophy?
There would be no difificulty if it were a question of
physical science. I might believe in Galileo and
Newton and their successors down to Adams and
Leverrier without hesitation, because they all sub-
stantially agree. But when men deal with the old
problems there are still the old doubts. Shall I be-
lieve in Hobbes or in Descartes ? Can I stop where
Descarteg stopped, or must I go on to Spinoza ? Or
shall I follow Locke’s guidance, and end with Hume’s
scepticism ? Or listen to Kant, and, if so, shall I de-
cide that Me is right in destroying tlipology, or in recon-
structing it, or in both performances ? Does Hegel
hold the key of the secret, or is he a mere spinner of
jargon? May not Feuerbach or Schopenhauer ro-


AN" AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


15


present the true development of metaphysical inquiry ?
Shall 1 put faith in Hamilton and Hansel, and, if
so, shall I jead their conclusions by the help of
Mr. Spencer, or shall I believe in Mill or in Green ?
State any one proposition in which all philosophers
agree, and I will admit it to be true ; or any one
which has a manifest balance of authority, and I will
agree that it is probable. But so long as every philo-
sopher flatly contradicts the first principles of his pre-
decessors, why affect certainty ? The only agreement
> can discover is, that there is no philosopher of whom
his opponents have not said that his opinions lead
logically either to Pantheism or to Atheism.

When all the witnesses thus contradict each other,
the priuut Jade result is pure scepticism. There is no
^’prtainty. Who am I, if I were the ablest of modern
thinkers, to say summarily that all the great men who
differed from me are wrong, and so wrong that their
difference should not even raise a doubt in my mind ?
From such scepticism there is indeed one, and, so far
as I can see, but one, escape. The very hopelessness
of the controversy shows that the reasoners have been
transcending the limits of reason. They have reached
a point whore, as at the pole, the compass points in-
differently to every quarter. Thus there is*a chance
that I may retain what is valuable in the bhaos of
speculation, and reject what is bewildering by confining
the mind to its proper limits. But has any limit Qver
been suggested, except, a limit which comes in sub-


16


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


stance to an exclusion of all ontology ? In short, if
I would avoid utter scepticism, must I not be an
Agnostic ?

Let us suppose, however, that this difficulty can
be evaded. Suppose that, after calling witnesses from
all schools and all ages, I can find ground for ex-
cluding all the witnesses who make against me. Let
me say, for example, that the whole school which re-
fuses to transcend experience errs from the wickedness
of its heart and the consequent dulnessof its intellect.
Some people seem to think that a plausible and happy
suggestion. Let the theologian have his necessary
laws of thought, which enable liim to evolve truth
beyond all need of verification from experience.
Where will the process end ? The question answers
itself. The path has been trodden again and again,
till it is as familiar as the first rule of arithmetic.
Admit that the mind can reason about the Absolute
and the Infinite, and you will get to Spinoza. No
refutation of his arguments, starting from his pre-
misses, has ever been even apparently successful. In
fact, the chain of reasoning is substantially too short
and simple to be for a moment doubtful. Theology,
if logical, leads straight to Pantheism. The Infinite
God is oterything. All things are bound together as
cause and effect. God, the first cause, is the cause
of all effects down to the most remote. In one form
or Qther, that is the conclusion to which all theology
approximates as it is pushed tg its legitimate result.


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


17


Here, then, we have an apparent triumph over
Agnosticism. But nobody can accept Spinoza witli-
out rejecting^all the doctrines for which the Gnostics
really contend. In the first place, revelation and the
God of revelation disappear. The argument accord-
ing to Spinoza against supernaturalism differs from
the argument according to Hume in being more
peremptory. Hume only denies that a past miracle
can be proved by evidence : Spinoza denies that it
could ever have happened. As a fact, miracles and a
local revelation were first assailed by Deists- more
effectually than by sceptics. The old Theology was
seen to be unworthy of the God of nature, before it
was said that nature could not be regarded through
the theological representation. And, in the next
place, the orthodox assault upon the value of Pantheism
is irresistible. Pantheism can give no ground for
morality, for nature is as much the cause of vice as
the cause of virtue ; it can give no ground for an
optimist view of the universe, for nature causes evil
as much as it causes good. We no longer doubt, it is
true, whether there be a God, for our God means all
reality ; but every doubt which we entertaine(J about
the universe is transferred to the God upon whom the
universe is moulded. The attempt to transfer to pure
being or to the abstraction Kature the feelifigs with
wliich we are taught to regard a person of transcendent
wisdom and benevolence is, as theologians assort,
hopeless. To deny the existence of God is in this


c


18


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


sense the same as to deny the existence of no-God.
We keep the old word ; we have altered the whole of
its contents. A Pantheist is, as a rule, ope who looks
upon the universe through his feelings instead of his
reason, and who regards it with love because his
habitual frame of mind is amiable. But he has no
logical ai’gument as against the Pessimist, who regards
it with dread unqualified by love, or the Agnostic,
who finds it impossible to regard it with any but a
colourless emotion.

The Gnostic, then, gains nothing by admitting the
claims of a faculty wliicli at once overturns his con-
clusions. His second step is invariably to half-retract
his first. We are bound by a necessary law of
thought, he tells us, to believe in universal causation.
Very well, then, let us be Pantheists. No, he says ;
another necessary law of thought tolls us that causa-
tion is not universal. We know that the will is free,
or, in other words, that the class of phenomena most
important to us arc not caused. 'Ihis is the position
of the ordinary Deist; and it is of vital importance to
him, for otherwise the coiincction between Deism and
morality is, on his own ground, untenable. The
ablest and most logical thinkers have declared that
the free-will doctrine involves a fallacy, and have un-
ravelled \;he fallacy to their own satisfaction. Whether
right or wrong, they have at least this advantage, that,
on their showing, reason is on this point consistent
with itself. The advocate of, free-will, on the other


AN AGNOSTIC'S APOLOGY


19


hand, declares that an insoluble antinomy occurs at
the very threshold of his speculations. An uncaused
phenomenon is unthinkable ; yet consciousness testifies
that our actions, so far as they are voluntary, are un-
caused. In face of such a contradiction, the only
rational state of mind is scepticism. A mind balanced
between two necessary and contradictory thoughts must
be in a hopeless state of doubt. The Gnostic, there-
fore, starts by proclaiming that we must all be Agno-
stics in regard to a matter of primary philosophical
’importance. If by free-will ho means anything else
than a denial of causation, his statement is irrelevant.

For, it must bo noticed, this is not one of the
refined speculative problems which may be neglected
in our ordinary reasoning. The ancient puzzles
about the one and the many, or the infinite and the
finite, may or may not be insoluble. They do not
affect our practical knowledge. Familiar difficulties
have been raised as to our conceptions of motion :
the hare and tortoise problem may be revived by
modern metaphysicians ; but the mathematician may
continue to calculate the movements of the planets and
never doubt whether the quicker body will, in fact, over-
take the slower. The free-will problem cannot be thus
shirked. We all admit that a competent reasoner
can foretell the motions of the moon ; and we admit
it because wo know tliaf there is no element of ob-
jective chance in the problem. But the deteriAinist
asserts, whilst the libertarian denies, that it would be


20


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOCA’


m

possible for an adequate intelligence to foretell the
actions of a man or a race. There is or is not an
element of objective chance in the question ; and
whether there is or is not must be decided by reason
and observation, independently of those puzzles about
the infinite and the finite, which affect equally the
man and the planet. The anti-determinist asserts
the existence of chance so positively, that he doubts
whether Ood Himself can foretell the future of
humanity; or, at least, he is unable to reconcile
Divine prescience with his favourite doctrine.

In most practical questions, indeed, the difference
is of little importance. The believer in free-will
admits that we can make an approximate guess ; the
determinist admits that our faculty of calculation is
limited. But when we turn to the problems with
which the Gnostic desires to deal, the problem is of
primary importance. Free-will is made responsible
for all the moral evil in the world. God made man
perfect, but He gave His creature free-will. The exer-
cise of that free-will has converted the world into a
scene in which the most striking fact, as Newman
tells us, is the absence of the Creator. It follows,
then, that all this evil, the sight of which leads some
of us to Atheism, some to blank despair, and some to
epicurean indifference, and the horror of which is at
the root of every vigorous religious creed, results from
accident. If even God could have foretold it. He fore-
told it in virtue of faculties inconceivable to finite


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


21


minds ; and* no man, however exalted his faculties,
could by any possibility have foretold it. Here, then,
is Agnosticism in the highest degree. An inexorable
necessity of thought makes it absolutely impossible
for us to say whether this world is the ante-room
to heaven or hell. We do not know, nay, it is
intrinsically impossible for us to know, whether the
universe is to be a source of endless felicity or a
ghastly and everlasting torture-house. The Gnostic
invites us to rejokic because the existence of an
•infinitely good and wise Creator is a guarantee for our
happiness. Ho adds, in the .'j,iiue breath, that this
good and wise Being has left it to chance whether His
creatures shall all, or in any proportion, go straight
to the devil. Ho reviles the Calvinist, who dares to
think that God has settled the point by His arbitrary
will. Is an arbitrary decision better or worse than
a trusting to chance ? We know that there is a
great Fu’st Cause ; but \yc add that there are at this
moment in the world some twelve hundred million
little first causes which may damn or save themselves
as they please.

The free-will hypothesis is the device Ijy which
theologians try to relieve God of the responsibihty
for the sufferings of His creation. It is required for
another purpose. It enables the Creator fb be also
the judge. Man must be partly independent of God,
or God would be at once pulling the wires, and
punishing the puppets. So far the argument is un-


22


AN AaNOSTICS APOLOGY


impeachable ; but the device justifies ' God at the
expense of making the universe a moral chaos.
Grant the existence of this arbitrary force called free-
will, and we shall be forced to admit that, if justice
is to be found) anywhere, it is at least not to bo found
in this strange anarchy, where chance and fate are
struggling for the mastery.

The fundamental proposition of the anti-determinist,
that which contains the whole pith and substance of
his teaching, is this : that a determined action cannot
be meritorious. Desert can only accrue in respect of*
actions which are self-caused, or in so far as they are
self-caused ; and self-caused is merely a peri2dirasis for
uncaused. Now no one dares to say that our conduct
is entirely self-caused. The assumption is implied in
every act of our lives and every speculation about
history that men’s actions are determined, exclusively
or to a, great extent, by their character and their
circumstances. Only so far as that doctrine is true
can human nature be the subject of any reasoning
whatever ; for reason is but the reflection of external
regularity, and vanishes with the admission of chance.
Our conduct, then, is the resultant of the two forces,
which we may call fate and free-will. Fate is but
the name lor the will of God. He is responsible for
placing ufe with a certain character in a certain posi-
tion ; He cannot justly punisk us for the consequences ;
we are responsible to Him for the effects of our free-
will alone, if free-will exists. That is the very con-


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY * 2 »

tention of tlic anti-dcterminist ; let ub look for a
moment at the consequences.

The ancient difficulty which has perplexed men
since the days of Job is this ; Why are happiness and
misery arbitrarily distributed ? W^hy do the good so
often suffer, and the evil so often flourish ? The diffi-
culty, says the determinist, arises entirely from ap-
plying the conception of justice where it is manifestly
out of place. The advocate of free-will refuses this
escape, and is perplexed by a further difficulty. Why
•arc virtue and vice arbitrarily distributed ? , Of all
the puzzles of this dark world, or of all forms of the
one great puzzle, the most appalling is that which
meets us at the corner of every street. Look at the
children growing up amidst moral iwison ; see the
brothel and the public-house turning out harlots and
drunkards by the thousand ; at the brutalised elders
preaching cruelty and shamelessness by example ; and
deny, if you can, that lust and brutality are generated
as certainly as scrofula and typhus. Nobody dares
to deny it. All philanthropists admit it ; and every
hope of improvement is based on the assumption that
the moral character is determined by its surroundings.
W'liat does the theological advocate of frce-wiil say to
reconcile such a spectacle with our moral coheeptions ?
Will God damn all those wretches for faults due to
causes as much beyond tlieir power as the shape of
their limbs or as the orbits of the planets ? Oy will
He make some allowance, and decline to ask for


24 AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY

grapes from thistles, and exact purity* of life from
beings born in corruption, breathing corruption, and
trained in corruption ? Let us try each jilternative.

To Job’s difficulty it has been replied that, though
virtue is not always rewarded and vice punished, yet
virtue as such is rewarded, and vice as such is punished.
If that be true, God, on the free-will hypothesis, must
be unjust. Virtue and vice, as the facts irresistibly
prove, arc caused by fate or by God’s will as well as
by free-will — that is, our own will. To punish a man
brought up in a London slum by the rule applicable*
to a man brought up at the feet of Christ is manifestly
the height of injustice. Nay, for anything we can tell
— for we know nothing of the circumstances of
their birth and education — the effort which Judas Is-
cariot exerted in restoring the price of blood may have
required a greater force of free-will than would have
saved Peter from denying his Master. Ikloll Flanders
may put forth more power to keep out of the
lowest depths of vice than a girl brought up in a con-
vent to kill herself by ascetic austerities. If, in short,
reward is proportioned to virtue, it cannot be pro-
portioned to merit, for merit, by tlu' hypothesis, is
proportioned to the free-will, which is only one of
the factors* of virtue. The apparent injustice may, of
course, be* remedied by some unknowable compensa-
tion ; but for all that appears, it is the height of in-
justiae to reward equally equal attainments under
entirely different conditions. In other words, the


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


25


theologian has raised a difficalty from which he can
only escape by tine help of Agnosticism. Justice is
not to be fjund in the visible arrangements of the
universe.

Let us, then, take the other alternative. Assume
that rewards are proportioned, not to virtue, but to
merit. God will judge us by what we have done for
ourselves, not by the tendencies which He has im-
pressed upon us. The difficulty is disguised, for it is
not diminished, and morality is degraded. A man
•should be valued, say all the deepest moralists, -by his
nature, not by his external aets ; by what he is, not
by how he came to be what he is. Virtue is heaven,
and vice is hell. Divine rewards and punishments are
not arbitrarily annexed, but represent the natural
ritate of a being brought into harmony with the
supreme law, or in hopeless conflict with it. We
need a change of nature, not a series of acts uncon-
nected with our nature. Virtue is a reality precisely
in so far as it is a part of nature, not of accident ; of
our fate, not of our free-will. The assertion in some
shape of these truths . has been at the bottom of all
great moral and religious reforms. The aiitempt to
patch up some compromise between this and the op-
posite theory has generated those endless contro-
versies about grac*) and free-will on which'no Chris-
tian Church has ever been able to make up its mmd,
and which warn us that we are once more plunging
into Agnosticism. In order to make the Creator the


26


AN AGNOSTIC'S APOIiOGV


judge, you assume that part of man’s actions are
his own. Only on that showing caij^ he have merit as
against his Maker. Admitting this, and only if we
admit this, we get a footing for the debtor and
creditor theories of morality — for the doctrine that
man runs up a score with Heaven in respect of that
part of his conduct which is uncaused. Thus wo
have a ground for the vaiious theories of merit by
which priests have thriven and Churches been cor-
rupted ; but it is at the cost of splitting human nature
in two, and making happiness depend upon those acts
which are not really part of our true selves.

It is not, however, my purpose to show the im-
morality or the unreasonableness of the doctrine. I
shall only remark that it is essentially agnostic.
Only in so far as phenomena embody fixed ‘ laws ’
can we have any ground for inference in this world,
and, a fortiori, from tliis world to the next. If happi-
ness is the natural consequence of virtue, we may
plausibly argue that the virtuous will be happy here-
after. If heaven be a bonus arbitrarily bestowed
upon the exercise of an inscrutable power, all analogies
break down. The merit of an action as between men
depends upon the motives. The actions for which
God rewards and punishes are the actions or those
parts of fictions which are independent of motive.
Punishment amongst men is regulated by some con-
siderations of its utility to the criminal or his fellows.
No conceivable measure of Di%;inc punishment can


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


27


even be suggested when once we distinguish between
divine and naturaj ; and the very essence of the theory
is that such^a distinction exists. For whatever may
be true of the next world, we begin by assuming that
new principles are to be called into play hereafter.
The new world is summoned into being to redress the
balance of the old. The fate which here too' often
makes the good miserable and the bad happy, which
still more strangely fetters our wills and forces the
strong will into wickedness and strengthens the weak
will to goodness, will then be suspended. The motive
which persuades us to believe in tbe good arrange-
ment hereafter is precisely the badness of this. Such
a motive to believe cannot itself be u reason for be-
lief. That would be to believe because belief was
unreasonable. This ^Yorld. once more, is a chaos, in
which the most conspicuous fact is the absence
of the Creator. Nay, it is so chaotic that, accord-
ing to theologians, infinite rewards and penalties
are required to square the account and redress the
injustice here accumulated. What is this, so far as
the natural reason is concerned, but the very super-
lative of Agnosticism ? The appeal to experience can
lead to nothing, for our very object is to contradict
experience. We appeal to facts to show that facts are
illusory. The appeal to a itriori reason is liot more
hopeful, for you begin by showing that reason on
these matters is self-contradictory, and you insist
that human nature ig radically irregular, and there-


28


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


fore beyond the sphere of reason. If you could suc-
ceed in deducing any theory by reason, reason would,
on your showing, be at hoiieless issue witjji experience.

There are two questions, in short, about the
universe which must be answered to .escape from
Agnosticism. The great fact which puzzles the mind
is the vast amount of evil. It may be answered that
evil is an illusion, because God is benevolent ; or it
may bo answered that evil is deserved, because God
is just. In one case the doubt is removed by denying
the existence of the difficulty, in the other it is made
tolerable by satisfying our consciences. We have
seen what natural reason can do towards justifying
these answers. To escape from Agnosticism we be-
come Pantheists ; then the divine reality must be the
counterpart of phenomenal nature, and all the diffi-
culties recur. Wo escape from Pantheism by the
illogical device of free-will. Then God is indeed good
and wise, but God is no longer omnipotent. By His
side we erect a fetish called free-will, which is potent
enough to defeat all God’s good purposes, and to
make His absence from His own universe the most
conspicqous fact given by observation ; and which, at
the same time, is by its own nature intrinsically
arbitrary m its action. Your Gnosticism tells us that
an almighty benevolence is watchijig over everything,
and bringing good out of* all evil. Whence, then,
comes the evil ? By free-will ; that is, by chance ! It
is an exception, an exception which covers, say, half


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOIX)GY


29


the phenomena, and includes all that puzzle us. Say
boldly at once no explanation can be given, and then
proceed to d^iounce Agnosticism. If, again, we take
the moral problem, the Pantheist view shows desert
as- before God to be a contradiction in terms. We
are what He has made us ; nay, we are but manifesta-
tions of Himself — how can He complain? Escape
from the dilemma by making us independent of God,
and God, so far as the observed universe can tell us,
becomes systematically unjust. He rewards the good
And the bad, and gives equal reward to the free agent
and the slave of fate. Where ate we to turn for a
solution ?

Let us turn to revelation ; that is the most obvious
reply. By all means, though this is to admit that
natural reason cannot help us ; or, in other words, it
directly produces more Agnosticism, though indirectly
it makes an opening for revelation. There is, indeed,
a difficulty here. Pure theism, as we have observed,
is in reality as vitally opposed to historical revelation
as simple scepticism. The word God is used by the
metaphysician and the savage. It may mean any-
thing, from ' pure Being ’ down to the most degraded
fetish. The ‘ universal consent ’ is a consent to use
the same phrase for antagonistic conceptions — for
order and chaos, fpr absolute unity or utteV hetero-
geneity, for a universe governed by a human will, or
by a will of which man cannot form the slightest
conception. This is, gf course, a difficulty which runs


30


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


off the orthodox disputant like water from a duck’s
back. He appeals to his conscience, and his con-
science tells him just what he wants, fit reveals a
Being just at that point in the scale between the two
extremes which is convenient for his purposes. I
open, for example, a harmless little treatise by a
divine who need not be named. He knows intuitively,
so ho says, that there is a God, who is benevolent and
wise, and endowed with personality, that is to say,
conceived anthropomorphieally enoiigh to be capable
of acting upon the universe, and yet so far different
from man as to be able to throw a decent veil of
mystery over His more questionable actions. Well, I
reply, my intuition tolls me of no such Being. Then,
says the divine, I can’t prove my statements, but you
would recognise their truth if your heart or your
intellect were not corrupted : that is, you must be a
knave or a fool. This is a kind of argument to which
one is perfectly accustomed in theology. I am right,
and you are wrong ; and I am right because I am
good and wise. By all means ; and now let us see
what your wisdom and goodness can tell us.

ThCjChristian revelation makes statements which,
if true, arc undoubtedly of the very highest im-
portance. God is angry with man. Unless we
believe and repent we shall all he damned. It is
impossible, indeed, for its advocates even to say this
without instantly contradicting themselves. Their
doctrine frightens them. They explain in various


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


81


-ways that a great many people will be saved without
believing, and that eternal damnation is not eternal
nor danmat^n. It is only the vulgar who hold such
views, and who, of course, must not be disturbed in
them ; but they are not for the intelligent. God
grants ‘uncovenanted mercies’ — that is. He some-
times lets a sinner off, though He has not made a legal
bargain about it — an explanation calculated to exalt
our conceptions of the Deity ! But let us pass over
these endless shufflings from the horrible to the
•meaningless. Christianity tells us in various- ways
how the wrath of the Creator may be appeased and
His goodwill ensured. The doctrine is manifestly
important to believers ; but does it give us a clearer
or happier view of the universe? That is what is
required for the confusion of Agnostics ; and, if the
mystery wore in part solved, or the clouds thinned in
the slightest degree, Christianity would triumph by
its inherent merits. Let us, then, ask once more.
Docs Christianity exhibit the ruler of the universe as
benevolent or as just ?

If I were to assert that of every ten beings born
into this world nine would be damned, thajj aU who
refused to believe what they did not hold to be proved,
and all who sinned from overwhelming temptation,
and all who had not had the good-fortune *to be the
subjects of a miraculous* conversion or the recipients
of a grace conveyed by a magical charm, would be
tortured to all etesnity, what would an orthodox


82


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


theologian reply ? He could not say, ‘ That is false ’ ;
I might appeal to the highest authorities for my justi-
fication ; nor, in fact, could he on his own showing
deny the possibility. Hell, ho says, exists ; he does
not know who will be damned ; though he does know
that all men are by nature corrupt and liable to be
damned if not saved by supernatural grace. He
might, and probably would, now say, ‘ That is rash.
You have no authority for saying how' many will be
lost and how many saved : you cannot even say what
is meant by hell or heaven ; you cannot tell how far-
God may be better than His word, though you may be
sure that He won’t be worse than His word.’ And
what is all this but to say. We know nothing about it ?
In other words, to fall back on Agnosticism. The
difliculty,’ as theologians truly say, is not so much
that evil is eternal, as that evil exists. That is in
substance a frank admission that, as nobody can
explain evil, nobody can explain anything. Your
revelation, which was to prove the benevolence of
God, has proved only that God’s benevolence may
be consistent with the eternal and infinite misery of
most of His creatures; you escape only by saying
that it is also consistent with their not being eternally
and infinitely miserable. That is, the revelation re-
veals nothing.

But the revelation shows .God to be just. Now, if
the fijee-will hypothesis be rejected — and it is rejected,
not only by infidels, but by the most consistent theo-


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGV


88


logians — this* question cannot really arise at all.
Jonathan Edwards will prove that there cannot be a
question of justice as between man and God. The
creature has no rights against his Creator. The
question of justice merges hi the question of benevo-
lence ; and Edwards will go on to say that most men
are damned, and that the blessed will thank God for
their tortures. That is logical, but not consoling.
Passing this over, can revelation prove that God is
just, assuming that justice is a word applicable to
•dealings between the potter and the pot ?

And here wc are sent te the ‘ great argument of
Butler.’ Like some other theological arguments
already noticed, tliat great argument is to many
minds — those of James Mill and of Dr. Martineau,
for example -a direct assault upon Theism, or, in
other words, an argument for Agnosticism. Briefly
stated, it comes to this. The God of revelation can-
not be the God of nature, said the Deists, because the
God of revelation is unjust. The God of revelation,
replied Butler, may be the God of nature, for the God
of nature is unjust. Stripped of its various involu-
tions, that is the sum and substance of this celebrated
piece of reasoning. Butler, I must say in passing,
deserves high credit for two things. THe first is
that he is the only theologian who has cvef had the
courage to admit that any difficulty existed when he
was struggling most desperately to meet the difficulty ;
though even Butler^ could not admit that such a


84


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


difficulty should affect a man’s conduct Secondly,
Butler’s argument really rests upon a moral theory,
mistaken indeed in some senses, but possessing a
stoical grandeur. To admit, however, that Butler
was a noble and a comparatively candid thinker is
not to admit that he ever faced the real difficulty. It
need not be asked here by what means he evaded it.
His position is in any case plain. Christianity tells
us, as he thinks, that God damns men for being bad,
whether they could help it or not ; and that Ho lots them
off, or lets some of them off, for the sufferings of others^
He damns the helpless and punishes the innocent.
Horrible ! exclaims the infidel. Possibly, replies Butler,
but nature is just as bad. All suffering is punishment.
It strikes the good as well as the wicked. The father
sins, and the son suffers. I drink too much, and my
son has the gout. In another world we may suppose
that the same system will be carried out more
thoroughly. God will pardon some sinners because
He pmiished Christ, and He will damn others ever-
lastingly. That is His way. A certain degree of
wrongdoing here leads to irremediable suffering, or
rather to suffering remediable by death alone. In
the next world there is no death ; therefore, the
suffering Von’t be remediable at all. The world is a
scene of ‘probation, destined to fit^us for a better life.
As a matter of fact, most men make it a discipline of
vice. instead of a discipline of virtue; and most men,
therefore, will presumably be damned. We see the


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOI-OGY


86


game thing ih the waste of seeds and animal life, and
may suppose, therefore, that it is part of the general
scheme of Providence.

This is the Christian revelation according to
Butler. Does it make the world better? Does it
not, rather, add indefinitely to the terror produced by
the sight of all its miseries, and justify James Mill
for feeling that rather than such a God he would
have no God ? Wliat escape can be suggested ?
The obvious one : it is all a mystery ; and what is
mystery but the theological phrase for Agnosticism ?
God has spoken, and endorsed all our most hideous
doubts. He has said, lot there be light, and there is
no light — no light, but rather darkness visible, serving
only to discover sights of woe.

The believers who desire to soften away the old
dogmas — in other words, to take refuge from the un-
pleasant results of their doctrine with the Agnostics,
and to retain the pleasant results with the Gnostics
— ^have a different mode of escape. They know
that God is good and just ; that evil will somehow
disappear and apparent injustice be somehow re-
dressed. The practical objection to this amiable
creed suggests a sad comment upon the whole con-
troversy. We fly to religion to escape from our dfirk
. forebodings. But^ a religion which stifles these fore-
bodings always fails to satisfy us. We long to hear that
they are groundless. As soon as we are told that^they
are groundless we mistrust our authority. No poetry


86 AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY

lives which reflects only the cheerfal emotions. Our
sweetest songs are those which tell of saddest thought.
We can bring harmony out of melancholy^; we cannot
banish melancholy from the world. And the religious
utterances, which are the highest form of poetry, are
bound by the same law. There is a deep sadness in
the world. Turn and twist the thought as you may,
there is no escape. Optimism would be soothing if it
were possible ; in fact, it is impossible, and therefore
a constant mockery ; and of all dogmas that ever
were invented, that which has least vitality is the
dogma that whatever is, is right.

Let us, however, consider for a moment what is
the net result of this pleasant creed. Its philosophical
basis may be sought in pure reason or in experience ;
but, as a rule, its adherents are ready to admit that
the pure reason requires the support of the emotions
before such a doctrine can be established, and are
therefore marked by a certain tinge of mysticism.
They feel rather than know. The awe with which
they regard the universe, the tender glow of reverence
and love with which the bare sight of nature affects
them, is to them the ultimate guarantee of their
beliefs. Happy those who feel such emotions ! Only,
when thej^ try to extract definite statements of fact
from theSe impalpable sentiments, they should beware
how far such statements are apt to come into terrible
collision with reality. And, meanwhile, those who
have been disabused with Candido, who have felt the


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


87


weariness and pain of all * this unintelligible world,’
and have not been able to escape into any mystic
rapture, hare as much to say for their own version of
the facts. Is happiness a dream, or misery, or is it
all a dream? Does not our answer vary with our
health and with our condition ? When, rapt in the
security of a happy life, we cannot even conceive that
our happiness will fail, we are practical optimists.
When some random blow out of the dark crushes the
pillars I'ound which our life has been entwined as
‘recklessly as a boy sweeps away a cobweb, wlien at
a single step we plunge through the flimsy crust
of happiness into the deep gulfs beneath, we are
tempted to turn to Pessimism. Whef shall decide,
and how ? Of all questions that can be asked, the
most important is surely this: Is the tangled web
of this world composed chiefly of happiness or of
misery ? And of all questions that can be asked, it
is surely the most unanswerable. For in no other
problem is the ditBculty of discarding the illusions
arising from our own experience, of eliminating ‘ the
personal error’ and gaining an outside standing-
point, so hopeless.

In any case the real appeal must be to experience.
Ontologists may manufacture libraries of jargon with-
out touching the point. They have never *made, or
suggested the barest possibility of making, a bridge
from the world of pure reason to the contingent
world in which wo live. To the thinker who tries to


88


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


construct the universe out of pure reason, the actual
existence of error in our minds and disorder in the
outside world presents a difficulty as hopdess as that
•which the existence of vice and misery presents to the
optimist who tries to construct the universe out of
pure goodness. To say that misery does not exist is to
contradict the primary testimony of consciousness ; to
argue on a priori grounds that misery or happiness pre-
dominates, is as hopeless a task as to deduce from the
principle of the excluded middle the distance from St,
Paul’s to Westminster Abbey. Questions of fact can only
be solved by examining facts. Perhaps such evidence
would show — and if a guess were worth anything, I
should add that I guess that it would show — that happi-
ness predominates over misery in the composition of the
known world. I am, therefore, not prejudiced against
the Gnostic’s conclusion ; but 1 add that the evidence
is just as open to me as to him. The whole world in
which we live may be an illusion—a veil to be with-
drawn in some higher slate of being. But be it what
it may, it suppUes all the evidence upon which wc can
rely. If evil predominates here, we have no reason
to suppose that good predominates elsewhere. All
the ingentiity of theologians can never shake our con-
viction tljat facts are what we feel tliem to bo, nor
invert the plain inference from fauts ; and facts are
just as open to one school ol thought as to another.

What, then, is the net result ? One insoluble doubt
has haunted men’s minds since thought began in the


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


89


world. No answer has ever been suggested. One
school of philosophers hands it to the next. It is
denied in op^ form only to reappear in another. The
question is not which system excludes the doubt, but
how it expresses the doubt. Admit or deny the com-
petence of reason in theory, we all agree that.it fails
in practice. Theologians revile reason as much as
Agnostics ; they then appeal to it, and it decides against
them. They amend their plea by excluding certain
questions from its jurisdiction, and those questions
•include the whole difficulty. They go to revdation,
and revelation replies by calling doubt, mystery.
They declare that their consciousness declares just
what they want it to declare. Ours declares some-
thing else. Who is to decide V The only appeal is
to experience, and to appeal to experience is to
admit the fundamental dogma of Agnosticism.

Is it not, then, the very height of audacity, in
face of a difficulty which meets us at every turn,
which has perplexed all the ablest thinkers in pro-
portion to their ability, which vanishes in one shape
only to show itself in another, to declare roundly,
not only that the difficulty can be solved, but that it
does not exist? Why, when no honest man will
deny in private that every ultimate problem is
wrapped in the profoundest mystery, do hdnest men
proclaim in pulpits that •unhesitating certainty is the
duty of the most foolish and ignorant? Is it not
a spectacle to makq the angels laugh? We are a


40 * AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY

company of ignorant beings, feeling oiir way through
mists and darkness, learning only by incessantly-
repeated blunders, obtaining a glimme^ng of truth
by falling into every conceivable error, dimly dis-
cerning light enough for our daily needs, but hope-
lessly differing whenever we attempt to describe the
ultimate origin or end of our paths ; and yet, when
one of us ventures to declare that we don’t know the
map of the universe as well as the map of our
infinitesimal parish, he is hooted, reviled, and perhaps
told that he will be damned to all eternity for his*
faithlessness. Amidst all the endless and hopeless
controversies which have left nothing but bare husks
of meaningless words, we have been able to discover
certain reliable truths. They don’t take us very far,
and the condition of discovering them has been
distrust of d jniori guesses, and the systematic
interrogation of experience. Let us, say some of
us, follow at least this clue. Here we shall find
sufficient guidance for the needs of life, though we
renounce for ever the attempt to get behind the veil
which no one has succeeded in raising; if, indeed,
there be anything behind. You miserable Agnostics !

c

is tho retort ; throw aside such rubbish, and cling to
the old hubks. Stick to the words which profess to
explain everything ; call your doul{ts mysteries, and
they won’t disturb you any longer; and believe in
those jiecessary truths of which no two philosophers
have ever succeeded in giving the same version.


AN AGNOSTIC’S APOLOGY


41


Gentlemen* we can only reply, wait till you have
some show of agreement amongst yourselvos. Wait
till you can give some answer, not palpably a verbal
answer, to some one of the doubts which oppress us
as they oppress you. Wait till you can point to some
single truth, however trifling, which has been dis-
covered by your method, and will stand the test of
discussion and verification. Wait till you can appeal
to reason without in the same breath vilifying reason.
Wait till your Divine revelations have something more
ta reveal than the hope that the hideous doubts which
they suggest may possibly be without foundation.
Till then wo shall be content to admit openly, what
you whisper under your breath or hide in technical
jargon, that the ancient secret is a secret still ; that
man knows nothing of the Infinite and Absolute ; and
that, knowing nothing, he had better not be dogmatic
about his ignorance. And, meanwhile, we will
endeavour to be as charitable as possible, and whilst
you trumpet forth officially your contempt for our
scepticism, we will at least try to believe that you arc
imposed upon by your own bluster.


42


TTIE SCEPTICISM OF BELIKVEItS

Good people sometimes ask why materialist and in-
fidel docirines spread in spite of the incessant and
crushing refutations to which they arc so frequently
exposed. It is scarcely necessary to insist upon one
very obvious answer. Many diseases are fatal to
men ; one should be fatal to religions — the disease of
being found out. Hume died over a century ago, and
grave theological professors are still trying hard to
believe in the miracle of the swine. Is it strange that
the authority of professors has become shadowy?
The old belief in truth has become weak, partly be-
cause it is so often a sham belief, and partly because
it is chiefly a negative belief. No man makes con-
verts who does not believe what he says, nor will he
make them easily when his creed consists chiefly in
denying the strongest and most fruitful convictions of
his neiglibours. A. creed which is always on the
defensive must be decrepit. I wijl not dwell upon the
first of these explanations. It is not pleasant to in-
sist upon the hypocrisy, generally unconscious, of the
respectable world. But I propose to consider the


48


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS

t

other explanation, which is, perhaps, a little more in
need of defence.

It sounds paradoxical to declare that the orthodox
belief is essentially sceptical. The unbeliever is still
identified with the Mephistophcles whose essence it is
to deny. He denies, it is said, a hereafter and a
Divine element in the present. The denial implies
the abandonment of the most cheering hopes and the
highest aspirations of mankind. Therefore, to charge
with scepticism those who are fighting against Mate-
rialism and Atheism is at best to indulge in a frivolous
tu quoque. A similar retort, however, is common
enough in the months of the orthodox. Nor is the
taunt without foundation. Quasi-sciontific persons
are given to dabbling in gross superstition. Of the
two, the Catholic confessor has obvious advantages
over a medium, and one would, perhaps, prefer the
service of the ancient Church to sitting at the feet of
a Harris or a Blavatsky. The remark has a real
significance. To speak brutally, faith often means
belief in my nonsense ; and credulity, the belief in the
nonsense of somebody else. It is, unfortunately, true
that the rejection of one kind of nonsense d(j» s not
imply the rejection of all nonsense, and it follows that
scepticism and credulity may mean the very same
thing — the acceptance, namely, of a doctrine which is
sceptical in so far as it cotntradicts my opinion, and
credulous in so far as it agrees with yours. It* is
worthwhile to consider the point a little more closely.


44


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS


Scepticism^in the fullest sense of the word, &
rejection of belief as belief — is, if not a strictly un-
thinkable, at least a practically imporsible, state of
mind. Metaphysicians may play with such a doc-
trine, or may impute it to their antagonists. If they
succeed in fastening that imputation upon any system,
they have virtually established a redvetio ad ahswr-
dvm. To make doubting, as doubting, a principle is
impossible. In regard to the great bulk of ordinary
beliefs, the so-called sceptics are just as much be-
lievers as their opponents. Mill, for example, was &s
certain as Newton that two pounds were worth four
half-sovereigns, though he endeavoured to deduce his
arithmetic from experience. The thinkers generally
charged with scejjticism are equally charged with an
excessive belief in the constancy and certainty of so-
called ‘ laws of nature.’ They assign a natural cause
to certain phenomena as confidently as their opponents
assign a supernatural cause. No man of any school
denies the possibility of attaining certainty in regard
to such laws as are verifiable by experience. The
real problem is not. Ought we to believe — but, Why
ought yre to believe — that two and two make four, that
there is a place called Borne, or that the planets obey
the laws of gravitQ,tion ? The believer in necessary
truths assumes by the form of hie argument that his
opponents do in fact believe, and cannot help believ-
ing the truths which he asserts to be necessary,
though they may deny the propriety of the epithet.


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS * 45

The most thoroughgoing empiricist may suggest
that truths, such as those of geometry, would cease
to be valid un|}er some other conditions, but he does
not deny their validity within the whole sphere of
actual experience. By attacking the supposed dis-
tinction between the two classes of truth, he elevates
the claims of empirical as much as ho depresses those
of (i priori knowledge. We can no more alter the
intensity of belief in general than we can change our
centre of gravity without some external point of sup-
pert. One set of thinkers holds that we must pierce
to the absolute or transcendental in order to provide
foundations for the whole edifice of belief. Another
set holds that such a foundation is not discoverable,
but adds that it is unnecessary.

The point is obscured by the habit of speaking of
‘ belief ’ in general, without reference to its contents,
and of proceeding to imply that it is in some way a
creditable, whereas unbelief is a discreditable, state of
mind. The obvious reply is, that belief and unbelief
are the very same thing. It is a mere question of con-
venience whether I shall express myself in negative or
positive terms ; whether I shall say ‘ man is mortal,’
or * man is not immortal.’ The believer at I?ome is
the infidel at Mecca, and conversely. The bdliever in
the geocentric systeip has not more or less boltcf than
the believer in the heliocentric system — he has simply
a different belief. To say, therefore, that belief qua
belief is better or worse than unbelief is a contradiction


46 ‘ THE scefticism; oe believers

in terms. Assertion is denial ; and it* is a transparent
though a common fallacy to give an absolute character
to a proposition which by its very ryiture can only
be true in a particular relation. Belief and unbelief
being identical in a sense, either is good just so far as
it is reasonable or logical ; so far, that is, as it embodies
the rules which secure a conformity between the world
of thought and the world of fact. A great deal of slip-
shod rhetoric about faith and reason is dissipated by
this simple consideration. We are told of the blessed-
ness of a childlike and trusting frame of mind. These
question-begging epithets are out of place in logic.
A childish and credulous state of mind is a bad thing ;
and we can only decide whether the complimentary or
uncomplimentary adjectives are appropriate by know-
ing whether the state of mind is reasonable in the
given case. Has our confidence reasonable grounds
or not ? No other test than the purely logical test can
even be put into articulate shape. If we insist upon
using ‘ scepticism ’ to designate a mental vice, we must
interpret it to mean, not doubt in general, but unreason-
able doubt ; and in this sense the most sceptical man
is he who prefers the least weight of evidence to the
greatest — or, in other words, be is identical with the
most citdulous.

Faith, indeed, may in one sepse bo called a virtue,
even in regard to questions of pure reason. It is our
dqty to believe what appears to us to be proved. The
proposition seems to be superfluous, because from a


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVEKS * 47

purely logical point of view the two things seem to be
identical. * To know,’ it may be said, includes ‘ to
believe.’ Yet^as a matter of fact, it is as common to
know without believing as to believe without knowing.
The reason has to reckon with instincts as powerful as
irrational. I may know that I am absolutely safe
when I am at the brink of a precipice, but my body
declines to be convinced, and shudders and turns giddy
in spite of conclusive evidence. A demonstration may
be as clear to mo as a proposition of Euclid ; but fear
of authority, or dread of consequences, or mere -blind
sympathy with others, may prevent its real assimilation.
To believe what we know to be certain at times even
requires a kind of intellectual heroism. And, therefore,
when Locke laid down the principle that we should in
all cases proportion our beliefs to the evidence, he was
indeed uttering what seems to bo a truism, but what
was, nevertheless, a highly important truth. The
supremacy of reason within its own sphere is rightful,
but is seldom actual, and a downright defiance of logic
is not an impossibility, though it is an absurdity. In
a relevant sense again, faith is indeed the name
of one of the highest of virtues ; of the enthusiasm
which keeps the world from corruption, and now and
then lifts it out of its ancient ruts. The phraBe in this
acceptation includes^ not merely the intellectual con-
viction, but the moral purpose. Psychologists have to
distinguish between the intellect and the emotiops;
but we can hardly say that they exist as two separate


48 * THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVEES

entities. They are, rather, seen to bc'separate aspects
of an indissolnble unity. Thought without feeling is
an empty form, and feeling without t],iought a mere
fragment of chaos. Faith is often used to designate
that state in which a man’s affections or passions are
definitely organised and brought to bear upon some
definite purpose, and which therefore implies a frame-
work of distinct convictions directing and combining
the impulses of his moral nature. We honour the old
heroes who ‘ tlurougb faith put to flight the armies of
the aliens,’ and gave up life for a worthy end. We
honour the man who has faith in his friends, in his
country, in his cause, or in Immim nature ; for such
faith implies, not merely an intellectual state, but the
capacity for love and self-sacrifice and generous
devotion. Such devotion calls for no sacrifice of the
most absolute truthfulness. The enthusiast has, it is
true, a special temptation to certain illusions. The
mother who loves her children sometimes exaggerates
their merits, and the philanthropist thinks men a good
deal fitter for the millennium than the cool observer
would admit. Poetic genius, we are told, lies peril-
ously near to madness, and the hero is own brother to
*

the fanatic. We regard such errors leniently, for danger
to man^d does not lie in tho direction of their ex-
cessive* frequency. Yet, so far ai^ there is error there
is weakness. Nelson’s patriotism led him to entertain
tlm erroneous belief that one Englishman was equal
to three Frenchmen. Fortunately, he had too much


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS


49


genius to act upon it unreservedly. Ho took very good
care in his battles that two Englishmen should be
opposed to ojys Frenchman. We can therefore smile
at a theory which represents merely the exuberance of
an enthusiasm which knew how in practice to obey
the rules of common-sense. But the belief,- taken
seriously by a stupid leader, would have meant a
certainty of disaster. The hero is not the man who
miscalculates or overlooks the risk, but the man who
measures it fairly, and dares it when it must be dared.
Blindness to danger is only a sham version of true
heroism. The more accurate our estimate of facts
the greater our capacity, though at times, also, the
greater the strain upon our powers. If enthusiasm
often generates delusion, that explains why so much
nonest enthusiasm runs to waste ; why a fond parent
spoils the child to whose faults he is blind ; why the
patriot ruins his country by impracticable enterprise,
and the philanthropist stimulates and encourages the
evils which he intends to cure.

Once more, faith in this sense has its negative
aspect. It is as emphatic in its rejection of one ideal
as it is in its acceptance of another. Th->, early
Christians were Atheists from the Fagan point of
view. Sonie of the sternest and most vigorous faiths
that the world haa known have shown thSmselves
chiefly in the iconoclastic direction. English Puritans
and Hebrew Prophets denounced their opponents, as
idolaters, and expressjed the most unequivocal dis-


E


60


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVEES


belief in the virtues of sacerdotal magic. The keenest
fanatics in recent years have, perhaps, been the
Kussian ‘ Nihilists,’ who show their faith by believing
in nothing. The simple-minded assumption, there-
fore, that faith is to be measured by quantity of
belief: that a believer and an unbeliever differ in
this, that one has thirty-nine articles of belief, and
his opponent only thirty-eight, or, perhaps, simply a
negation of all, clearly gives an inaccurate measure
of the facts. The man has most faith, in the .sense
in which faith represents a real force, whose convic-
tions are such as are most favourable to energetic
action, and is freest from the doubts which paralyse
the will in the great moments of life. He must have
a clear vision of an end to be achieved, devotion to
which may be the ruling passion of his life and the
focus to which all his energies may converge. If we
are to follow the Holy Grail, a belief in its existence
and in its surpassing value must be inwoven in the
very tissue of those intimate beliefs which form each
man's universe. But it is not to be assumed that
because we place it in the heaven of simple believers,
or in the philosopher’s transcendental world of pure
ideas, that it supplies a stronger or a loftier faith.
We know too well, by long exi)erience. Row shifting
* and phantasmagoric are the visions which haunt the
region of transcendentalism. If, indeed, beliefs drawn
■ from some supernal region can enable us to solve the
dark riddles of existence, if t];iey can suggest loftier


51


THE SCEi’TICISM OF BELIEVERS

motives and clearer rules, they may be essential to a
worthy conduct of daily life. If, on the other hand,
the attempt <o soar above our atmosphere be destined
to inevitable failure, if the Holy G-rail is a mere
chimera, a shadowy reflection of realities cast upon
the surrounding darkness, our devotion may only
land us in hopeless perplexity. Explain it as we
may, or regard it as inexplicable, we have thoughts
and sensations, pains and pleasures, a solid earth to
live upon, and fellow-men to love and hate, to rule,
to obey, or to help. How to regulate our lives and
what end to pursue is a problem for which we all have
to find some tolerable solution. What creed will give
us the clearest rules, and reduce the inevitable un-
certainty to a minimum *? To answer that question is
to say which creed leaves least room for the scepticism
which clouds our vision and favours the faith which
is the other side of energetic conduct. In considering
it *wo must take into account, not only the positive
but the negative implications of any given creed. We
must ask for more than positive and arbitrary direc-
tions ; no creed is at a loss for directions of that
kind. Eat and drink, for to-morrow we die ; mortify
the flesh, for death comes to-morrow, are equally pre-
cise rules, and may commend themselves to (Jiffereut
minds. We haver further to ask. Whether the
philosophy upon which the creed reposes is not
merely such as to give definite rules, but such as* to
base them upon the most satisfactory and verifiable


52


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS


grounds. A rule which we feel to be arbitrary is as
good as no rule at all.

I propose, therefore, to dwell for a little upon the
negations of the orthodox creed ; to show how it
implicitly denies some of the most important truths
upon which our rule of conduct must repose, and,
though it issues the most absolute commands, really
leaves room for doubts by offering a sham solution.
The convinced Christian, or Buddhist, orMahomedan
has, of course, a faith, and a set of positive pre-
scriptions. Such faiths have, in their time, worked
miracles, and no doubt still possess a vast vitality.
But if to the most thoughtful minds these solutions
have become untenable, it is because they deny
positive principles which have been slowly growing
and strengthening for centuries, and because they,
so far, have a stronger affinity to scepticism than to
genuine faith.

Let us look, first, at the historical creed, which
for centuries could only be assailed at the risk of the
unbeliever’s life. A man believes in the supernatural
birth of the founder of his religion. He denies, then,
that a certain event took place in accordance with the
laws exeiuplified in all ordinary cases. Unless he can
give soqiie adequate reason for taking the case out of
the ordinary category, he impugift the validity of the
inductive process upon which he counts at every step
in * daily life. He is so far a sceptic as he is
throwing doubt upon the validity of one of the


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS * 68

primary ratiociuative processes. The same is true
whenever an event admitted to have happened is
ascribed by«one party to supernatural interference.
Somebody expressed surprise the other day that men
of science should take into account the existence of
flint implements, and refuse to take into account the
existence of the Bible and Christianity. I never
happened to hear of the man of science who denied
the existence of either. Does the man really decline
to take a fact into account when he declares it to be
altogether exceptional and supernatural, or when he
explains it as resulting from the normal operation
of known forces ? Is it more sceptical to say that
somebody compiled the book of Genesis from old
legends by the same faculties which enabled another
man to compile the ‘ Iliad,’ or to say that nobody could
have told the story of Adam and Eve without the
direct assistance of God Almighty '? In the ordinary
case, the fact, as well as the explanation, is doubted.
We refuse to believe in the story of the Magi because
it involves impossibilities and rests upon no evidence.
Somebody — w'e know not who — wrote — we know not
when- -on some authority — we know not what — a
story which implies a belief in exploded doctrines,
and showed, by ignoring all difficulties, * his utter
innocence of anything Uke historical criticism. To
disbelieve his evidence implies the assumption that
such evidence is fallible, and that unfounded stories
may obtain currency jin a sect when they honour the


64


TKE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS


founder of the sect. No human being denies these
assumptions. Everyone who asserts the truth of this
particular legend is ready to assert them* in the case
of every sect but his own. The phenomenon which
we all admit is the existence of a certain narrative.
One person classes it with authentic history, another
with a weU-known variety of popular legend. Neither
denies the existence of much authentic history and
of much popular legend. How are we to decide
which is right ? Surely by Hume’s very simple
principle. There is nothing inconsistent with the
admitted rules derived from experience in admitting
the story to be a legend ; but there is an admitted
contradiction to such rules in supposing the truth of
astrology and of stars standing over the birthplace
of prophets.

On what principle, then, does it show more faith
to admit than to reject such legends, unless faith
be defined, with the schoolgirl, as a belief in what we
know to be false ? Excellent people still think them-
selves entitled to take an air of moral superiority
because they accept marvellous stories without a
fragment of evidence. To argue against such a
position would be too degi'ading. When I read that
one eminent person believes in devils possessing pigs,
and another in the existence of Noah’s ark, I am simply
surprised. I fully believe that they are sincere ; but I
wonder how I should convey a belief, even in their
sincerity, to anyone born out< of the magic circle.


'rflE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS ’ 56

Such people, at any rate, are safe from any arguments
of mine. I can only suggest that they should study
the works Voltaire. He wate a ‘ scoffer,’ it is true,
though a scoffer with a more masculine faith in reason
than can be found among the ninety-and-nine just
persons who never saw a joke in their lives. The
beliefs he combated are, in point of fact, ridiculous ;
they have passed beyond the sphere of reason. If
you would in any sense answer him, it must not be
by holding on to Jonah’s whale, but by boldly throw-
ing the whale overboard, and trying whether you
have not a faith that will lloat without him. How
degrading this desperate clinging to every rag of old
superstition must appeal’ to those who have the use
of their intellects may be sufificienily evident from a
too famous utterance of Newman. Admitting that
the Old Testament was in contradiction with modern
astronomy, he held that both might still be true.
Science says that the earth goes round the sun;
theology, that the sun goes round the earth. That
sounds, no doubt, like a contradiction; but then,
theology, or the Bible, spoke in a metaphysical
sense, and metaphysicians (some at least) tell us
that space is subjective, or don’t know what to
make of it. The argument would bo 'admirably
suited to the famous case of Mahomet : £he moun-
tain came to him just as truly as he went to the
mountain ; but if any Mahomedan made the statement,
and defended it in ,puch a way, we should probably


56 THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVIES

accuse him of gross equivocation. At least, one
might have expected Jehovah, if he was the author of
the statement, to haVe hit upon some t phrase which
would have conveyed the truth without apparently
sanctioning a delusion. But by accepting it in some
sense we are entitled to believe as an historic fact
that the God of heaven and earth stopped a revolution
of this planet in order that one barbarous tribe might
massacre a few more thousands of another. If Jehovah
was capable of such a stroke to get the better of
Chemosh, I can only say that he was not the kind of
character whom I should choose for a Deity. According
to M. Eenau, the whole blunder probably arose from
the prosaic construction of a poetic figui*e. If Milton
came to be regarded as an inspired poet, we should
make a similar history from his words in the ‘ Christ-
mas Hymn ’ :

The stars in deep amaze

Stood fixed with steadfast gaze.

Strange that tlie hypevlwle of an ancient writer of
war-songs should have led a man of genius two or
three thousand years later to grovel in such humiliat-
ing sophistries, and thnik that he was so doing worthy
homage to the Almighty !

I call only marvel that any man should seriously
suppose that all that is most precious and elevating
in bis beliefs should be held on the tenure of the
acceptance as historical facts qf legends only to be


THE SCEPTICISM OP BELIEVEE8


57


paralleled by the stories of folk-lore. I can no more
understand that any serious injury can come to my
moral nature^rom disbelief in Samson than from dis-
belief in Jack the Giant-killer. I care as little for
Goliah as for the giant Blunderbore. I am glad that
children should amuse themselves with nursery stories,
hut it is shocking that they should be ordered to
believe in them as solid facts, and then be told that
such superstition is essential to morality. It is the
more shocking because the idolatry of the Bible de-
prives it of its strongest interest. It is just bj’^ read-
ing what is, strangely, called destructive criticism, that
I have at all discovered the unique interest of the
Bible. Accept the Jewish legends as historical truth,
and you have to believe in a state of things grotesque
in itself and absolutely divorced from all living
realities. Warburton argued — how far he argued
sincerely is a curious puzsile— that God Almighty was
really once Jehovah, and governed the Chosen People
by a system totally different from that upon which He
governed the rest of the human race. The whole his-
tory was an exception to all other history. That is only
to bring out hi its most brutal form the assumption
which underlies the orthodox doctrme. Will anyone
now dare to say that the God of the universe was once
the God of a small tribe; that he reflected all its
national characteristics, was savage, vindictive, and
arbitrary; that he then used temporal instead* of
eternal punishments, and with very partial success


*

68 THE SCEITICLSM OF BELIEVERS

I

tried to help his favourites in their struggle for exist-
ence ? Yet, so far as we are to take the Jewish legends
as history of outward fact, instead of histonical documents
illustrating the Jewish stage of mental development, we
fall into Warburton’s amazing misconstruction. The
whole story is torn from all historical context, and
becomes a barren collection of marvels. Once apply
the true historical method— assume that the Jew be-
longs to human nature, that he has the same passions,
senses, and thoughts as other men, and the story
suddenly becomes alive, and gains all the interest of a
genuine human narrative. The critic may blunder in
his interpretation of fragmentary documents of im-
certain origin and composition ; he may be fanciful, and
apt to see too far into millstones ; but the astonishing
difference is that he now deals at least with the pos-
sible and the credible. To read such a book, for
example, as Henan’s ‘History of the Jews’ is to
receive a new, though a human, revelation. We have
a conceivable account of an imaginable history ; we
lose stories of wonder as foolish and fanciful as those
which surround the cradles of other races, but in re-
turn we see the people themselves ; we watch the slow
struggle out of primitive superstitions, the develop-
ment under unicpie conditions of institutions of singu-
lar interest ; we come to understand that the Prophets
were not propounders of queer conundrums, to be
answered in a later number, but the vigorous advo-
cates of great principles, half-nuderstood, and mingled


THE SCEPl'ICISM OP BELIEVERS


59


with many gi'osa superstitions and narrow prejudices,
yet able to elevate the race and • to leave the deepest
and most permanent of impressions ui)on the history
of mankind. The study becomes correlated with all
that we have learnt from analogous studies elsewhere,
and the whole story pregnant with a new interest. It
is unique, hut no longer exceptional. It does not
imply that the general laws of Nature are broken, but
only that they are exemplified under special conditions.
We have before us men and women, not the strange
imagery of a world of gods and devils; we give up
floods to the top of Ararat, and stars stopped to
win a border skirmish, and we see for the first time
a vivid and living picture of a great race struggling
under the conditions which govern all human en-
deavour. All generous and far-seeing theologians
are beginning to acknowledge this. The historical
method has been admitted into the Churches. Even
apologists acknowledge the working of a Divine Power,
not only within the precincts of Palestine, hut througlj-
out the vast regions and ancient civilisations where
the very name has never been heard. They have
given up the theory that other people’s gods were
simply devils, and recognise them as partial manifes-
tations of the power which created our own. They
hesitate, indeed, about the New Testament. Jehovah
has become a rather questionable personage ; but they
still maintain that God once became man — with
■characteristics very unlike those of Jehovah. Yet the


60 THE SCEPTICISM OF BEIJEVERS

New Testament history is as much in need of a re-
construction as the Old. To take one extreme case,,
there are few things more curious thanuthe fate of the
Apocalypse. We now know, beyond all reasonable
doubt, the date of its composition. Wo can read its
‘ prophecies ’ with the clearest understanding of their
meaning. To do so, we have only to assume that by
Jerusalem the writer meant Jerusalem, and to accept
what he tells us himself of the meaning of the horns
of the beast. W^e can interpret the wonderful 666
without any risk of driving ourselves mad by the pro-
cess. What is the gain and the loss ? We have to
admit that the prophecy, like most others, went wrong
when it began to deal with the future. We have to
admit that the Almighty did not propose a strange
series of puzzles, of which nobody ever has or ever will
be able to make head or tail. The necessity of that
assumption only arises when we assume, in contra-
diction to all experieiice, that a prediction must have
been fulfilled allegorically because it was certainly not
fulfilled according to its plain meaning. We gain a
most striking illustration of the state of mind of the
race among which Christianity was being founded :
of the fierce fanaticism which animated the Jews in
the horrors of the siege of Jerusalem; and of the
nature*of the belief in the advent of a Messiah, which
formed so important an •element in the new religion.
So read, the book ceases to be a preposterous enigma,
and becomes a startling revf^lation of thoughts and


THE SCEPTICISM OF BEIJEVEKS 61

« •

aspiratione, most strange in themselves, and yet most
important to an understanding of the greatest of
r eligious revolutions.

Or we may observe how a simple adoption of the
historical attitude of mind brings out the figure of the
Apostle of the Gentiles. It has been the interest of
orthodox interpreters of all sects to slur over the great
struggle which made Christianity a world religion.
Peter and Paul, as the author of the -Acts already
tried to make out, were completely at one, as how
should they be otherwise if b')th were channels of the
same Holy Ghost ? Eeading Paul’s epistles without
first carefully blinding our eyes, wo can see how
desperate Avas the struggle l)etween the Jewish and
the Gentile Christians; what efforts it cost to dis-
engage the Christian theology of later days from the
swaddling-clothes which first hampered it in Palestine ;
and how singular a mixture of theories struggles in
the argumentation of the Apostle, illogical, perplexed,
and occasionally shocking, but yet showing the firmest
of world-shaping beliefs. Accept every utterance as
that of a Divine authority, and we are forced to shut
our eyes to all that gives them a true human interest,
and to see the enunciation of pure, absolute truth in
the most confused and desperate struggle of confiict-
ing theories that ever agitated a great but still an
eminently human mind. Or consider what a blindness
is necessary to read the Gospel of St. John after "the
old fashion, as a genuine story of an 03'ewitness, instead


62


THE SCEPTICISM OK HELIEVEES


of a series of mystical declamations representing the
influx of a theosophical theory. To the orthodox,
Christianity is something dropped out ef the infinite,
•with no affinity to existing thoughts or real explana-
tion from the conditions of the time. To the reader
who will place himself at the historical point of view,
it is the product of all the social and moral and
intellectual forces of the time; its origin must be
studied in the vast political and social changes
implied in the foundation of the Eoman Empire and
in the developments of Greek philosophy, mixed with
Jewish tradition, as well as in the unique develop-
ment of the Jewish nation itself. Briefly, the orthodox
hypothesis, so far as it is accepted, effectually cuts off
every real human interest from the contemplation of
the greatest drama ever played upon the stage of the
world.

The sum or kernel of all these difficulties appears
in our view of the cc'utral character of the history.
You still cling to the conception of a Godman. It is
needless to do more than allude to all the hopeless
struggles of the human intellect trying to reconcile
itself to such a conception. Take Christ for a man,
exemplifying all the laws of human nature, which are
as much verified by the most exceptional as by the
most ordinary example, and what do you lose? Is
the moral beauty of the Sermon on the Mount
diminished or affected in the smallest degree by
the fact that it came from human Ups? Truth is


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS 6&

truth, and beauty, beauty, whatever its source. But
at every stage of the life, the attempt to identify a
human being with the Author of all Nature only leads
to hopeless incoherence. The logical result is surely
that of the early heretics, condemned, like other hereti-
cal results, because it was so obviously logical — that the
human Christ was a phantasm. Think only of the
last words on the Cross, as reported in the Gospel
according to St. Matthew : ‘ My God, My God, why
hast Thou forsaken Me ? ’ Nothing can be more
teitibly pathetic if we read it as the despairing
utterance of a martyr yielding at the last moment
to a hideous doubts But if it be taken as the
utterance of a Divine being, what can we make of it ?
I will not give the obvious answer.

1 can only hint at a truth which is gradually
coming to be appreciated. The Bible has been made
an idol, and therefore made grotesque. The faith
which accepts its absurdities as divine is destructive
of the human interest. A strong faith of that stamp
really means a dull imagination. The livelier
the imaginative faculty, the firmer the grasp of the
vital laws of the world. Monsters in art, centaurs
and angels, are proofs that their creators did not
really see the human being, but only his 'outside.
The grotesque in aist and religion is merely li proof
that the infantile imagination has no grasp of realities.
Floods drowning the world, rivers turned to blood,
and the sun standing still to light a massacre, are toys


€4 * THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVEES

of an arbitrary fancy, which can join incongruities
without a sense of absurdity. The imagination of
the trained and powerful intellect whish makes the
past present regrets the absurdity, because it perceives
the true forces which worked three thousand years
ago as they work now ; and in that perception is the
true source of all genuine interest in the past. To
make history historical is the problem of the time,
and we need not fear that history will be the loser.
But this is only one illustration of confusions which
still perplex popular thought. Historically speaking,
Jehovah was developed into the God of the Jewish
Prophets, and has since been developed into the God
of Spinoza. The continuity of the process has
concealed the monstrous absurdity of identifying
the two. On such strange assumptions the world
becomes chaos, and therefore scepticism the only
rational frame of mind. Hume long ago pointed out
that the heathens saw their god in the interruptions to
order, while philosophers see God in the preservation
of order. The ordinary mind placidly combines tht.
two views, and smooths over obvious difficulties by
logical sleight of hand too familiar to be worth
examination. It has been argued by orthodox writers
that the heathen were really Atheists because their
gods \^ere merely particular individuals, not the
Supreme Being. Is not the argument equally
applicable against anyone who, believing in the God
of philosophy, persists in identifying him with the


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS 65

old Hebrew detliy ? Is it theism or atheism to hold
that the ruler of the universe is the strange being
who met Moses and his wife at an inn, and tried to
kill their son ? Metaphysicians have asked us to ac>
oept Jehovah’s vagaries on the ground that the motives
of the Absolute mid Infinite Being are necessarily
inconceivable. Jehovah, unluckily, is only too easily
conceivable. Whether his existence be credible is
another question. But so long as such tricks of
logical fence are put forward as serious, one thing, at
least, is evident. History is a chaos. A belief in
God is the one source of true happiness and morality.
But, on the older hypothesis, this belief is only
accessible through inspiration. It is dropped into
the world at a particular place : to ask why that
place and time should be selected is simply ir*
rational, for it depends upon the arbitrary pleasure
(arbitrary, so far as we can know) of the in-
comprehensible Being. Through countless ages that
light was confined to a single tribe, while an in-
calculable majority of the human race was left in
utter darkness, and, according to some logical persons,
damned for not seeing. Even since the light has
come, it has not yet reached a third part of the
human race. It is so far from being clear, tliat it has
formed one main obstacle to the spread of sh ientific
truth ; and so far from regenerating mankind, that they
have seen it only to relapse into infidelity, materialism,
and atheism. To give, any sort of theory of this force


F


66 THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS

is to transgress the limits of the haiuan intellect ; and
yet it is the one force upon which our temporary and
eternal welfare depends. The human ,mind, indeed,
has revolted against such doctrines. They are denied,
1 am glad to say, by modern divines as emphatically as
I could deny them myself. The Deity whom good
men revere to-day is not the savage, jealous tyrant of
ancient times, not the cruel persecutor of error and
protector of favourites who is now accepted by the
most ignorant and belated minds. The gods of the
heathen were not devils, but faint reflections of the
true Deity. The world outside the sacred circle of
Judaism or Christianity was still under a provi-
dential guidance ; the heathens and heretics whom
Dante still kept out of heaven may now obtain
admission, though not, perhaps, as of legal right.
All this and much more may be said for intelligent
theologians who cannot bear to abandon, but do their
best to elevate, the old phrases. I only suggest
that they might show a little more gratitude to the
deists and sceptics who have forced them to learn the
lesson. The higher point of view--no one worth
notice will deny it to be the higher— is gained pre-
cisely by approximation to the Agnostic. So long as
the mirSteulons is admitted, wo admit the arbitrary.
Belief in the supernatural is the .belief in a dualistic
theory, in an established, order liable to spasmodic
and inexplicable interferences from without. Since,
then, supernatural is divine, it is just the force which


THE SCEPTICISM OP BEUEVEES 67

r

jyorka for the good which is intrinsically incom-
prehensible. The wind bloweth where it listeth.
The huge, blmd, God-forsaken world blunders on in
its own way, but here and there a flash from a world
beyond enlightens a man or a race, and forms a
divine province in an empire of chaos. To get rid
of this doctrine is to get rid of the supernatural ; to
admit that the religions of the world are all more or
less faulty and more or less successful attempts of the
race to form a theory of the world suitable for their
guidance; and that all progi’ess, moral, social, or
religious, is due to the working of natural instincts,
the epithet being not superfluous only because it is
necessary to exclude the supernatural. Allowing this,
all history becomes continuous and intelligible. Here
is' no mysterious intrusion of internal forces im-
pinging upon the world from no one knows where ;
no truth revealed in one longitude and latitude,
and hidden from others in proportion to their
distance ; and no order which is not the work of the
men who are at once the product and pi’oducers of
society. After admitting this, you may, as you please,
call the whole ‘ divine ’ or ‘ natural.’ But the etsential
point is the unification of principle which excludes
all supernatural intrusions, and which, by affording
solid ground for scientific reasoning, gives the only
basis unassailable by a mischievous scepticism.

If history is a chaos, so long as one main factor fti
history is taken to be the arbitrary or supernatural,


68 THE SCEPTICISM OP BELIEVERS

vrhat are we to saj' of the science of which history is
the embodiment ? What kind of a psychology must
be constructed upon the lines thus laid*'down ? You
believe that Christ was God incarnate ; I hold that He
was a human being. Your most respectable argument
is from the moral qualities manifested in His works
and words. You regard them as so exceptional that
the diiference between Christ and other men is only
explicable by the intrusion of the supernatural power
— nay, of an infinite power. He is not merely excep-
tional as a Shakespeare or a Newton may be ex-
ceptional, but so exceptional that the existence of
such a man is inconceivable. His character implies,
not an extreme case of the laws of human nature, but
something for which those laws would be utterly un-
able to account. The diiference between the highest
and the lowest of human beings — nay, the difference
between man and beast, must surely be an inadequate
measure of the difference between the divine and the
human. I, on the contrary, hold that Christ was a
man, and so far have surely a higher opinion of human
nature than you. I regard the character of Christ as
within the range of human possibilities. The power
of love and self-sacrifice, the simplicity and charm
of the ebaraoter are such, I hold, as may be, and have
been exemplified in other men> in varying degrees.
Why should I he forced to postulate an incarnation of
deity to account for goodness, even in a superlative
degree ? Your answer has bqen often given by theo-


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVEES


69


logians. It is, simply, that human nature is corrupt
and virtue supernatural. Christ is the type of the
perfect manV indeed, and a type, one vrould think,
should embody qualities possible at least to the race.
But the answer is. that man can only approximate to
this type by supernatural aid. Human nature is the
residuum left when all good impulses are supposed to
come from without. The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked. From ourselves come
nothing but lust, hatred, and the love of darkness.
Certainly, therefore, humanity cannot produce a Christ
— nor even a decent member of society. Where we
find purity, love, or heroism, we may be sure that they
cannot have sprung upon mortal soil. They must
have been transplanted from a supernatural paradise ;
sporadic plants, which have strayed beyond theguarded
walls of Eden, and can only struggle against the foul
indigenous products by the constant care of the Divine
gardener. Our need for supernatural aid is measured
by our sense of human impotence. The doctrine of
the corruption of human nature is, therefore, a central
fact in the most vigorous theology. The belief in
God is, so far, simply the opposite pole of disbelief in
man. They are reciprocal dogmas, allied as the light
and the shadow. The various doctrines of redemption
and atonement are realised in proportion as this belief
is held, and die away as it grows faint. And, so far,
the belief in a supernatural religion is the other side
of a disbelief in all human virtue, which does not


70


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS


repose on a supernatural basis, and is not enlightened
by supernatural revelation and stimulated by hopes
and fears to be realised in a supernatural world.

Undoubtedly this interpretation melts into other
theological doctrines which sometimes express the
very reverse. For the higher conceptions of the Divine
Being suppose His co-operation to be constant in such
a sense that we can hardly distinguish the statement
that virtue is supernatural from the statement that
it is natural. It may then seem to become little more
than a question of words. If man is not good by
nature, and yet God, who is Nature, is always ready
to make him good, it is rather hard to distinguish the
provinces of grace and Nature. The mention of this,
indeed, is enough to indicate how much scepticism
really lurks in the theological point of view. The end-
less and radically insoluble controversies as to the
relations between nature and grace arc a sufficient
proof that upon this cardinal point of the system
anything like rational agreement is impossible. The
knot cannot be untied, though it may be cut. It has
perplexed all the greatest theologians since it brought
St. Paul into hopeless confusion in the Epistle to the
Homans, and has not been solved, though it has passed
pretty much out of the sphere of living interest. It
is one more proof of the hopeless perplexity caused
by the introduction of an arbitrary term into contro-
versy, and the utter impossibility of drawing any
clear distinction between the Divine and the natural.


* THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVEES 71

From the anthropomorphic point of view or the
pantheistic you may come to some definite conclusion,
but when th8 point of view shifts from one to the
other, and God is sometimes synonymous with Nature
and sometimes with an intrusive agent, the result
must be intellectual chaos, and chaos is the correlative
of scepticism.

Is the coherence of our moral convictions bound
up, as theologians assert, with the preseiwation of
theological dogma, or is it true, here as elsewhere,
that the attempt to get to the transcendental must
land us in a vacuum, where there is no foundation
for any settled belief? Let me briefly recapitulate
the Agnostic’s position. He wishes, if he deserves to
be taken at his word, to place morality on a scientific
basis. He must, therefore, begin by rejecting one main
contention of the theologian. He must get rid of the
whole scheme of thought which asserts the necessity
of a belief outside the scope of scientific inquiry.
Morality, like the political sciences, must be placed
upon an inductive basis, or be on the same plane with
those truths which, if fully ascertainable, would form
the science of ‘ sociology.’ We may determine, within
limits, what are the laws of growth of the social
organism and the conditions imposed by its environ-
ment. We can sfee what are the instincts which
contribute to its development and stability, and what,
consequently, are the laws which, if recognised and
accepted, will contribute to its health. To lay them


72 THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS

<

down is to cpnstruct the moral code. This, indeed^
is practicable, because the race has in fact been en-
gaged from its origin in feeling out the -rules essential
to its welfare. They have neither been imported from
without nor deduced from abstract speculation. Men
have discovered that murder is injurious to society, as
they have discovered that intoxication is prejudicial
to health — by trying the experiment on a largo scale.
The so-called intuitions have no supernatural character,
but are assumptions verifiable by experience, as they
are the embodiment of past experience. In their
main outlines they are as much beyond the roach of
confutation as any of our primary beliefs. They are
as certain, when regarded as statements of the con-
ditions of social welfare, as arc the assertions about
the conditions of individual welfare ; as the opinions
that men are mortal, that fire burns, that water
drowns, that certain foods are poisonous, and that
jumping over a cliff is likely to shorten life. Wc can see
how the development of society is conditioned by, and
tends in turn to stimulate the growth of, the higher
instincts, which are inexplicable within the limits of
individual experiehce. Wc can see how their growth
is interwoven with the growth of the intellectual and
emotional nature, and determine the conditions
fovourable to their strength. We* are thus enabled to
consider by what means the rules deduced from social
welfare may be incorporated with the rules for indi-
vidual welfare. The Agnostic l>as, of course, to admit


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS


7ft


that anti'Spcial instincts exist, and will exist for some
time to come. He does not believe in the dogma of
‘ corruption,’ in the incapacity of the race to improve
itself — for all history, upon his view, testifies to its
power of gradual self-elevation. But he must, like
everyone else, recognise the slowness and the difficulty
of the operation. Evil can only be kept down by
strenuous activity, though an activity more sure of
success as it becomes more enlightened and farseeing.
The guarantee for success is just the fact that a
vigorous morality is by its nature one aspect of a
strong vitality. Since the social instincts are in the
strictest sense natural, since they strengthen and
adapt themselves to the growing needs of society, and
survive the decay of the multitudinous creeds in
which they have been partially incorporated, he may
reasonably hope that the upward progress of man-
kind will continue, and may even be accelerated. As
the race becomes more intelligent and more distinctly
conscious of its aims, the victory will become more
certain, and be won at a smaller cost.

The moral progress in which we believe has of
course shown itself in the religious convictions of
mankind. The gods have been reformed as well as
their worshippers. It is true that they normally lag
Aither behind the age in virtue of their conservative
tendencies. They represent the morality of yesterday
rather than the morality of to-morrow. But only a
bigot will deny the utility of conservatism, and the


74


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS


attempts to widen and improve a moral law- may some-
times appear as revolutionary attacks upon the law
itself. There is a value, therefore, in*" the retarding
force, though it is apt to condemn its natural op-
ponents as the agents of diabolical degeneration.
We should not retort the injustice, nor refuse to
acknowledge that the religions of to-day preach a
morality generally sound in substance, however they
may misconceive its origin. In this, as in other
questions, tho opponents of progress have been really
saturated by the ideas of which they failed to recognise
the truth, and can put the substance of the evolu-
tionist doctrine into theological terminology. The
essential difference depends upon the admission or the
exclusion of the supernatural ; that is, upon the
question whether the Divine element is to be identified
with the natural order, or represents an intrusive and
arbitrary interference ; whether we are or are not to
accept a dualism in which the world is the scene of
conflict of two radically opposed powers, one of them
nominally or ‘ potentially ’ Almighty, but in point of
fact encountered and often checkmated by its base
opponent. So long as we are in the old position, the
very basis of ethical theory is insecure. It is laid in
the clouds, not on the solid earth. Morality is suppos^
to be binding because based on th*e will of God ; but of
what God ? The gods of the heathen were unpleasantly
like devils. They sanctioned ‘ hate, revenge, and lust.'
The Devil, indeed, is simply a deposed deity, or the


TIIE SCKPTICISM OF HELIEVJERS


76


product of. a process of differentiation dating back
from a period at -which there was no perceptible
distinction. If we listen to the mutual recrimina-
tions of theologians, we must admit that this rather
important contrast has not even yet been made
so clear as might be wished. We are told, for
example, by one set of very enthusiastic believers,
that the God of Calvinism, in his most pronounced
attributes, has a strong rcsemblence to the Evil One,
although we are also told that he represents merely
the explicit and logical recognition of a doctrine really
held by the loftiest theologians. In any case, it is
clear that the sound theory of morality can only be
deduced from the sound theology. The moral law,
then, must be based on the will of the true God. But
the phrase at once suggests the infinite jumble of
chaotic controversy which has no issue because it
belongs essentially to the region of the arbitrary.
There is no ethical doctrine which may not assert
itself in theological language. Arc actions right
because God wills them, or does God will them
because they are right ? If because God wills them, how
are we to know His will ? If for antecedent i aasons,
then must not reason, instead of the Divine will, be
the true ground of morals? There are theological
utilitarians and theoiogical intuitionists. One theo-
logian holds that a direct I’evelation was necessaiy
for the discovery of the moral law; another, that
morality is a science of observation, and that God


76 THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEV'EES

merely assigns as its end the greatest happiness of
the greatest number. A third holds that morality is
dedncible from pure reason, and thathrcvelation and
experience are alike superfluous. On one system, the
essence of morality is the proclamation of future
rewards and punishments. On another, the unselfish
love of God is the only foundation of true virtue,
which is a sham so far as it is adulterated by any
admixture of personal interests. To one theologian
the virtues of the heathen are but splendid vices,
another sees in them proofs of the universality of
Divine influence. One argues that all natural im-
pulses are good because Nature is the work of God,
and his opponent replies that all Nature is under a
curse, and man’s heart corrupt to the core. The
foundation of one system is that God desires the
happiness of man in this world ; and another declares
all human happiness to be an illusion. One holds asce-
ticism to be simple folly; another thinks it the shortest
road to heaven. The antiuoraian thinks that as God
has once for all elected or rejected him, his actions are
of no importance ; and the sacerdotalist holds that
by accumulating active observances he can establish
an indefeasible claim upon his Creator. One thinks
it blasp'hemous against God’s omnipotence to claim
any share in the work of salvation ; another considers
it an insult to God to suppose that salvation will not
ba conceded to good works. One sees in the goodness
of God an assurance that all -men will be ultimately


THE SCEPTICISM OF EELIEVERS 77

happy, and another infers from His justice that the
vast majority will be doomed to endless torture.

It is true •that such contradictions matter less
tfban would appear at first sight. Somehow or other,
metaphysicians have a wonderful facility for deducing
the same conclusions from the most opposite pre-
misses. .That is, perhaps, because metaphysics is
not really what it professes to be, the exposition of
first principles, from which the inferior truths are
deducible, but an attempt to give explicitly the logic
of the processes already employed by the common-
sense of mankind. Professing to make no assump-
tion, it really assumes all previous knowledge. At
any rate, we have the comfort of believing that ethical
rules have little dependence upon theories of moral
philosophy. I only mean to urge that the assump-
tions of theology in general, even if they be granted,
land us in inextricable labyrinths of dialectics. No
doctrine seems to me to be less tenable than that
which asserts that morality requires a theological
foundation. To connect ethics with theology of the
lower type is, in fact, to define it as obedience to the
will of an arbitrary being, who may be the reflection
of some barbarous ideal, or who may be a meta-
physical entity indistinguishable from the 'abstract
Nature. It is a long way from crude anthropdmorph-
ism to that bloodless spectre of a theological mo-
rality which appears, for example, in the ‘categorical
imperative ’ of Kant. Rant’s moral law is a command


78


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEXTERS


which survives mysteriously when the giver of the
command has evaporated. In their anxiety to get
rid of the ‘ expedient ’ and ‘ empirical/^ philosophers
remove the law to a region where it has no relation to
facts. It becomes mere ‘law’ in the abstract, of
which it is the only condition that it shall not be self-
contradictory, and which is, therefore, equally appli-
cable to any set of rules whatever. The essence of
morality becomes merely a logical formula, and is fit
only for a state of things in which fact can be woven
out of syllogism, and the loom at which the universe
is wrought can be worked in a professor’s lecture-
room. Such philosophy, though it still calls itself
theistie, is the very antithesis of the old doctrine
which goes by the same name. In the primitive stage,
morality is the law given by a particular being known
under definite historical conditions. To get rid of the
arbitrary and empirical element we substitute a being
who inhabits the region of the inconceivable, and of
whom we cannot think directly without falling into
hopeless antinomies. Instead of the arbitrary and
particular, we have the hopelessly vague and un-
intelligible. The true method of escape is surely
different. Morality must be represented as dependent,
not upon the authority of a particular person, in-
visible 'or otherwise;, nor relegated to the region
where we are hopekissly suspended in the inane, but
based upon a knowledge of the concrete constitution
of human nature and society. .


THE scepticism; of believers


79 -


To make a nforal law otherwise than from a study
of human life will be possible when it is possible on
the same term%to construct a physiology and a system
of therapeutics ; and meanwhile it remains in ethics
what the attempt to square the circle is in the history
of mathematics. The charge against the Agnostic^
that he weakens his belief in morality because he
brings it within the sphere of experience, is just as
true as would be the same charge against the man of
science, who appeals to facts instead of evolving the
facts from the depths of his consciousness.

The theologian occasionally shows a leaning to
such transcendental theories, though he ought to
know that their inevitable catastrophe is in a reduc-
tion of theology to pantheism. But the theology
which can appeal to the imagination remains at some
intermediate stage between the purely anthropo-
morphic and the purely metaphysical. The doctrine
of another world of which, as of all matters of fact,
the absolute system of morality must be independent,
is still for him the pivot of morals. It is in rejecting
this part of the doctrine that the ‘ scepticism ’ or
positive unbelief of the Agnostic is most keenly de-
nounced. Once more, which is the sceptic? The
early Christians, like the modem Socialists, efreamed
of a speedy advent of. the millennium ; a faith flushed
with excessive confidence, and^capable of transforming,
if not of regenerating, society, naturally generates suqji
visions. Modern Socialists generally assign the next


80


THE SCEPTICISM OE BELIEVERS


century as the period at which we shall all have
achieved Utopia. The Christian held that his genera-^
tion would not pass away before th^ Messiah was
revealed in supernatural glory. The belief was in
harmony with his whole theory of the world. His
hopes naturally pointed to dreamland — to a world of
catastrophes and surprises. Everything was to be
changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at
the sound of a supernatural trumpet. The true
believers were to be caught up into heaven, and set
upon the thrones provided for them, and the un-
believers to be cast into the sea of fire and brimstone.
The world had been, and might be again, the scene of
tremendous and spasmodic convulsions, to be antici-
pated only in virtue of suijernatural revelation. God
had sent His Son upon earth to reveal the one true
Ught, and suddenly to establish a Divine kingdom.
A.ges have passed, and faith has grown dim, and the
prophecies and revelations have had to be twisted
and spiritualised, and have slowly sunk into enigmas
to exercise the fertile ingenuity of learned folly. The
belief in the Second Advent has faded into inanity,
although, like certain men of Galilee, some may
still stand gazing into heaven, forgetting the solid
earth at their feet. If by the faith which is to save the
world "you still mean faith in the supernatural, you
still hold that faith coipes by revelation, or by an
inexplicable means upon incalculable occasions. And
if the only light which can lijghten the world shines


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS


81


at the arbitrary T)idding of an inscrutable Being, its
occultations are equally mysterious. They are work-
ings of the D«vil, whose very existence in a God-
governed world is a mystery. Friday asked Robinson
Crusoe, why does not God kill the Devil 7 and neither
Robinson Crusoe nor anybody else has hitherto been
able to answer the question. The spread of infidel
opinions is, more or less, supposed to be the work of
the Devil. But why the Devil should suddenly get
into the pulpit, and why Jiis preaching should be so
successful, arc still inscrutable mysteries. ’ The
showing forth of the light and its obscuration equally
belong to the region where the human intellect has
no footing. To the Agnostic, even the spread of an
error is jiart of the wide-world jwocess by which we
stumble into mere aijproximations to truth. It is
explicable from the necessities of the case that partial
illusions should arise at each successive stage of our
onward movement. But if the old Faith be absolutely
true, and also dependent on the catastrophe of a
revelation, the whole process of the evolution of truth
becomes hopelessly unintelligible. The new ideas
which stir the intellectual movement of the world
are regarded with suspicion, for God may be again
leaving the field to the Devil as it was left of old.* The
corruption of our nature may be once more shdwing
itself and getting the upper h%nd. Increase of know-
ledge shakes the old creeds, and increase of wealth
shakes the old structure. The sacred authority


82 THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS

decays, and the orthodox believer has to choose between
equivocating and straining and twisting the old
phrases to a new meaning, or in clG.?er conformity
with the logic of his belief, announcing that the
old world is once more going to the devil, and that
the evil principle, disguised as an angel of intellectual
light, is seducing us to close our eyes to all that is
elevating and purifying.

This, as I take it, is the scepticism which really
underlies the theological belief. The belief in pro-
gress has been transferred to his opponent, for the
belief in progress is the popular version of the doc-
trine of evolution. The doctrine of evolution is the
uncompromising application to all phenomena of
history and thought of a genuine belief in causation,
or of an e.\pulsion of the arbitrary. The theologian,
unless he elects to become a pantheist, must struggle
against a mode of thought which runs counter to his
fundamental assumptions. Tlie scientific reasoner
holds by the continuity and uniformity of Nature ; theo-
logy accepts a dualism which implies catastrophe and
the interference of a radically unknowable factor.
Therefore, the belief in progress which substitutes
a development of natural forces for a Second Advent,
and foresight based upon knowledge of facts for a
miraculous prediction of the mysterious, is essentially
incongruous to theology. The theologian abandons
jthe only clue which can lead us to some foresight here
in the attempt to find a certainty in the clouds. Faith


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS 88

in the beyond re^ly implies scepticism as to the pre-
sent, and those who most fervently assert their belief in
an omnipotent find perfect Governor of the world are,
therefore, those who can speak most bitterly and with
the least hopefulness of the world which He governs.
They can wrap themselves in dreams of heaven, and
see the blind masses plunging, possessed of devils
into the depths of destruction.

The belief in progress has its own delusions. The
Socialist may be doomed to a disappointment like that
which awaited the early Christian. The Son of Man
did not appear in the clouds, and I fear that it will be
some time before the world will be freed from all
cruelty and injustice. Yet the Socialist dream has
the advantage that it points to an end not by its
nature unobtainable, and is therefore capable of being
pursued with some hopes of slow approximation. We
must, perhaps, admit that even progress cannot be
infinite. After some millions of years the enrth, like
its satellite, must become a wandering graveyard, and
men and their dreams will in that case vanish to-
gether. Our hopes, like most things, must be finite.
We must be content if they are enough to stin.ulato
to action. We most believe in a future harvest
enough to encourage us to sow, and hold thaf honest
and unselfish work wall leave the world rather 'better
off than we found it. Perjiaps this is not a very
sublime prospect. Life, says the most candid oi
theologians— and he certainly tried to prove it— is,


84


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS


*

perhaps, but a poor thing. Yet it is tolerable so long
as one can believe that our fellow-men have enough
of healthy and noble instinct to secured a steady, if a
chequered, social growth ; that their instincts do not
depend upon knowledge of the unknowable, and will
survive our petty systems founded uiion irrational
guesswork. It is something to feel a confidence,
based upon experience, that we have nothing to fear
from unlimited inquiry and thoroughgoing destruction
of fictions, and that we may hope, not merely for an
increased power of man over Nature, but for a higher,
more rational, social order, and more widely extended
sympathies. Extension of knowlcdgeimpliesalsoamore
accurate appreciation of the conditions of human wel-
fare and a more intelligent cultivation of the emotions
and sympathies on which it depends. We can build
without fearing that any infidel Samson will suddenly
crush the pillars of our temple. We cannot flatter our-
selves that our personal stake in the universe is more
unlimited in regard to the future than in regard to the
past and the distant; but that reflection may be rather
consoling than otherwise to some who fancy that they
and the universe will have had about enough of each
other in threescore years and ten. That may be a
matter of taste ; but in any case, when we see daily with
more clearness that all intellectual progress involves a
systematic interpretation of experience and a resolute
exclusion of all imaginary a priori data, it is desirable
that we should look in the direction in which alone


THE SCEPTICISM OF BELIEVERS 85

experience can enlighten os, and accept realities in
exchange for dreams. Scepticism about the Rhifting
phantasmagoria of theology is less paralysing than
the scepticism which, when it sj^eaks frankly, rejects
realities, and when it does not, attempts to mystify us
by a jargon which hopelessly confounds the two.


86


DREAMS AND REALITIES

Strakqe 8pectaclc8 meet us everywhere in a period of
speculative fermentation, when men’s thoughts are
heaving and working they know not why, and their
minds, like those of half-aroused sleepers, are unable
to distinguish between dreams and perceived realities.
Our conceptions of the unknown world are naturally
most sensitive to every change of belief. They gi’ow
fantastic and unsubstantial, like shadows at the close of
day. From every pulpit we hear passionate assertions
of the transcendent importance and enduring vitality
of some form of belief in a future life. What the
belief ought to be, and upon what logical foundation
it should be based, becomes ever more uncertain. In
all ages there has, of course, been a vast gap between
the ostensible creed upon such matters, and that
which^ has really consistency and vividness enough to
affect men’s conduct. Preachers and their adversaries
agree as to the matter of*fact, that the hopes and fears
of future retribution fail to exert an influence upon
the ordinary human being bearing any proportion to

t


DREAMS AND REALITIES


87


the greatness of their object. Whether men’s intellects
are too sceptical, or their imaginations too sluggish,
they are strangely indifferent to the most tremendous
threats and the most inspiring promises.

Such a phenomenon has never been otherwise than
normal. The only remarkable fact about modem
sentiment is the degree in which the language used by
believers betrays the absence of reasoned grounds of
conviction and the vacillating and indefinite nature
of the conception obtained. In a curious discussion
recently published in the ‘ Nineteenth Century,’ one of
the ablest advocates of the orthodox position said that
he believed ‘ because he was told.' As he was arguing
against persons who told him not to believe, this was
merely another way of saying that he believed because
he chose. The saying, however, was but an epigram-
matic avowal of the inconclusivencss of the ordinary
argument for a future life. That argument proceeds
smoothly so long as it is simply an assault upon
materialism. But the idealist position may be victori-
ously established without leading us a step further.
Hume was the natural development of Berkeley.
Idealism of a newer fashion than Berkeley’s may
have other issues ; but if it avoids the sceptical
conclusion in regard to all theology, it will probably
land us in some forhS of pantheism entirely irreconcil-
able with a belief in that indestructible spiritual atom
called a soul. The logical gap, which inevitably
occurs, has to bo filled by some scholastic show of
I


88


DBEAMS AND BEAUTIES


argument, or by a recourse to the supernatural
authority, or, more frequently, by setting the emotions
in the place of reason.

The real appeal — that which persuades although
it can scarcely bo said to convince --is the appeal to
the emotions. It is the vehement assertion that with-
out this belief life would be intolerable; that the
world would become hideous, morality paralytic , and
religion an empty name. No creed, it is urged, could
have any real hold upon mankind of which the Chris-
tian dogma of personal immortality did not form an
organic part. It should follow that such a doctrine
has formed part of all widely-spread and enduring
creeds. This statement, indeed, brings us into rudo
conflict with the most notorious facts. The briefest
outline of the religious history of mankind shows that
creeds which can count more adherents than Chris-
tianity, and have flourished through a longer period,
have yet omitted all that makes the Christian doc-
trine of a future state valuable in the eyes of its
supporters. But, oven if we could get rid of so stupen-
dous a fact as, for example, the existence of the multi-
tudinous creeds of the East, by expedients scarcely
admissible in the days when religion is being studied
in a scientific spirit, wc should find some strange
puzzles within the limits of the Christian Churches.

Thus, for example, the most fervent preachers of
Christianity are committed to the assertion of the
essential continuity of their* oi\n with the Jewish

I


89


PREAMS AND REALITIES

t

creed. Everyone, infidel or orthodox, will agree that,
of all creeds known to mankind, the Jewish has
stamped itself most deeply into the very fibre and
intimate constitution of the believing race. And yet
it is a palpable fact that the creed of the early Jews
virtually ignores all distinct reference to a future state.
If some indirect and constructive allusions can be tor-
tured out of special texts by the ingenuity of commen-
tators, the general silence is the more remarkable.
The doctrine which forms a corner-stone of • Chris-
tianity appears as an extraneous addition appended
by way of afterthought to the main structure of
Judaism. The Christian priest calmly reads to his
hearers the melancholy scepticism of the .Jewish
Preacher, and assures them that every word is
divinely inspired. ‘ The Imng know that they shall
die : but the dead know not anything, neither have
they any more a reward, for the memory of them is
forgotten. Also their love, and their hatred, and
their envy, is now perished ; neither have they any
more a portion in anything that is done under the
sun. . . . Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it
with thy might ; for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou
goest.’

If some of the Preacher’s phrases may be forced
to look another way, his doctrine is one which reads
strangely in a Christian mouth; so strangely, one
may say, that if his book were now discovered for the


90


DREAMS AND REALITIES


first time, it would have as little chance of being added
to the canon as the magnificent stanzas of Omar
Khayyam of being incorporated with the gentle
pietism of the ‘ Christian Year.’ Or, again, what is
the true moral of the Book of Job, accounted to be
the most impressive poetical treatment in all literature
of the great problem of the unequal distribution of
good and evil ? Is it to be found in the odd state-
ment — certainly not very edifying from any point of
view — ^that Job was rewarded with six thousand camels
and fourteen thousand sheep, besides oxen, asses,
sons, and daughters ; or is it not virtually a splendid
declamation in favour of Agnosticism ? The problem
of the universe is insoluble. The wisest of us cannot
presume to comprehend even a fractional part of the
vast scheme of the universe. The ways of the God
who made Behemoth and Leviathan are past finding
out, and we must not presume even to try to under-
stand. When Dante incarnated in poetry the deepest
thought of an age really penetrated to the core with
a belief in future retribution, we know how he
answered the problem. He replied by the most
elaborate and minute description of that future world
in which the demands of a rigid justice will be satis-
fied to^ the uttermost scruple. It is plain that the
faintest hint of such a solution' was scarcely present
to the mind of his Jewish predecessor when awed,
overpowered, and driven to the most sceptical utter-
ances by the pressure of this tremendous problem.


DREAMS AND REALITIES


91


It is sorely strange that the most impressive books
in the Hebrew canon are such as could be accepted
almost without reservation by the sceptic who is re-
proached for denying their Divine authority.

We have all had the contrast strangely, brought
before us in ’svhat is called our ‘ sublime ’ Funeral
Service. Who has not listened to the grand Psalm
declaring that man passes away like a sleep or like the
grass, which is green in the morning and withered in
the evening, and finding comfort only in the thought
that our little lives are in the hands of the Supreme
Master ; and afterwards to the strange chapter from
St. Paul’s Fjpistle to the Corinthians, where the one
noble outburst of rhetoric has to be rushed through
strange tortuous special pleadings, arguments from
superstitious practices, false analogies about ‘ wheat
or some other grain,’ and the queer irrelevance about
‘ evil communications ’ corrupting ‘ good manners ’ ?
Wliich is the most congenial sentiment at a mo-
ment when our hearts are most open to impres-
sions ? Standing by an open grave, and moved by
all the most solemn sentiments of our nature, we all,
I tliink — I can only speak for myself with certainty
— must feel that the Psalmist takes his sor^;ow like a
man, and as we, with whatever difference of, dialect,
should wish to tate our own sorrows; while the
Apostle is desperately tryiilg to shirk the inevitable,
and at best resembles the weak comforters who *try

to cover up the terrible reality under a veil of well-

*


92


DREAMS AND REALITIES


meant fiction. I would rather face the inevitable with
open eyes.

But, in any case, a Christian preacfier should be
the last man to deny that a religion which pointedly
omits all reference to the doctrine of immortality may
yet, under some conditions, lay the most vigorous
grasp upon human nature, and supply the life-blood of
a Puritanical code of morality. The Christian creed
itself includes contrasts which are from some points
of view even more remarkable. The discussion as to
the logical basis of belief has suggested another as to
the superstructure. Canon Farrar has lately* pub-
lished a set of sermons upon ‘Our Eternal Hope,’
which have been criticised by the representatives of
various shades of Christian opinion in the ‘ Contem-
porary Eoview.’ It is barely possible, with the best in-
tentions, to take such a discussion seriously. Boswell
tells us how a lady interrogated Johnson as to the
nature of the spiritual body. She seemed desirous,
he adds, ‘ of knowing more ; but he left the subject in
obscurity.’ We smile at Boswell’s evident impression
that Johnson could, if he had chosen, have dispelled
the darkness. When we find a number of educated
gentlemen seriously inquiring as to the conditions of
existence in the next world, we feel that they are
sharing Boswell’s naivete without his excuse. What
can any human being outside a pulpit say upon such
a subject which docs not amount to a confession of


187S.


DREAMS AND REALITIES


9a


ignorance, coupled, it may be, with more or less sug-
gestion of shadowy hopes and fears? Have the
secrets of the V^so^^'^ouse really been revealed to any
man, that he should dare lay down its geography as
Mr . Stanley can describe the course of the Congo?
Dante did so once ; and the very vigour of his 'realism
suggests hallucination, if not consciousness of a delibe-
rate invention. But Dante was at least creating out-
ward symbols for a vivid sentiment. The darkness
has gathered since his days ; it is hardly to be dis-
pelled by special pleading as to the meaning of texts
and the opinions of respectable divines. It is due to
the ‘ utter dearth of metaphj'^sical knowledge,’ says
Canon Farrar, that we cannot now understand that
eternal is a word having no relation to time. Alas !
if we had all the knowledge of that kind which
has accumulated in all ages we should, as Voltaire
forcibly observed, know fort pen de chosen. The
question as to what the Jews meant, or St. Paul
meant, or what the Articles mean, is doubtless
very interesting in certain relations, but one would
like to see a rather clearer, recognition of the fact that
such meanings have but an infinitesimal bearing upon
the ultimate problem itself. St. Paul was doubtless
among the greatest of the sons of men, but'is there
the smallest reason 'for supposing that he kndw any-
thing more about that problem than Plato, or Con-
fucius, oi‘ Comte, or the humblest of their disciplQs ?
The veil which covers .that mystery is one which dc-


94


DEEAMS AND BEAUTIES


pends upon the constitution of the human mind, and
is not drawn back as its faculties grow. The keenest
eye is no more able than the feeblest to get beyond
the regions of light.

When men search into the unknowable, they
naturally arrive at very different results. There are,
according to Canon Farrar, four different forms of
creed within the Christian Church. Most Protestants
are of opinion that we shall be divided into two
classes hereafter, the good being eternally happy, and
the wicked eternally tortured. Catholics hold that
there is a large intermediate class of morally imperfect
people, who are only tortured for a long time until
they become good. A third class thinks it more
reasonable to suppose that the bad will be simidy
extinguished instead of tortured. A fourth holds the
pleasant creed that after a certain time everybody
will be infinitely and eternally happy. As, moreover,
there are radical differences of opinion upon the
significance of every word employed, it is obvious
that we might again subdivide the classes into many
others. Now it, is to be observed that the nominal
believers in an everlasting hell-fire have included, by
general admission, the great numerical majority of
Christiahs. The greatest divines, philosophers, poets,
and rbformevs — such men as iugustinc, Aquinas,
Dante, and Luther — have accepted and enforced this
bejicf. It is plainly the belief of the average multitude
in those sects which represent the most vigorous forme


DREAMS AND REALITIES


95


of Christianity.* Protestants, Papists, and Greeks
vie with each other in setting forth the doctrine in the
most forcible •manner. No one who has listened to
a revivalist sermon or looked at the pictorial repre-
sentations common in Catholic countries, can deny
that the belief is profoundly interwoven with the
religious instincts of the masses. Destroy hell, and
you destroy that part of the Christian creed which
most impresses the popular imagination, and in some
sects may almost be called the keystone of the arch.

Further, the third form of doctrine appears
on Canon Farrar’s showmg to be nearly peculiar
to the Eev. E. White, whilst the fourth is avowedly
held only by the small and decaying sect of Universalists
in America. Indeed, Canon Farrar does not himself
deny the existence of hell ; he only thinks that fewer
people will go there, and perhaps find it much less
disagi'eeable than is generally supposed. He also holds
that the fate of every man will not bo irrevocably and
definitely fixed at death, and so loaves room for a
purgatory differing in certiun respects from the purga-
tory of the Koman Church. He quotes a good many
writers who, from the time of Origen, have more or
less sympathised with these views ; nor would anyone
deny or wish to deny that a large number of the most
philosophical Christians, especially in receift tunes,
have greatly softened the doctrine, and cherished
hopes amounting more or less nearly to a final restitu-
tion of all men. A leaning to scepticism, or a more


96


DREAMS AND REALITIES


sensitive imagination, or some loftier philosophy than
that of the average believer, has enabled most men to
extenuate or to siiiritualise a doctrine ‘inconceivably
repulsive in its more intense forms.

It remains true that the milder form of belief is
the exception. The fact that it is so is admitted, and,
indeed, Canon Farrar writes just because he admits it.
His own opinion, he says, ‘ is not, and never has been,
the opinion of the numerical majority ’ ; and it has
been explicitly condemned by a whole crowd of
eminent writers. ‘ Thousands of theologians,’ as he
says, ‘ have taught for thousands of years ’ that ‘ the
vast majority are in the ne.xt world lost for ever.’
The whole of Canon Farrar’s contention is, therefore,
not that the doctrine which he assails is heretical,
but that his own doctrine may also be admissible.
The early Church, it appears, was ‘ wisely silent,’ and
‘ allowed various mutually irreconcilable oi)inions to be
held by her sons without rebuke.’ The Church wisely
admits that it has nothing to say as to the most
important of all conceivable questions ; it allows us to
believe in a maddenin g or an intoxicating doctrine . Wo
may hold that the great majority of the human race
are destined to endless torture, and — if Canon Farrar
establishes his point- -we may also hold that nobody
will be fortuied eternally, and that the great majority
will be eternally happy. The pleasant belief may per-
haps be admitted by the side of the painful one, but,
even in that case, Canon Farrar cannot retort upon his


DREAMS AND REALITIES


97


opponents the imputation of heresy. His opinion
may be, theirs nmsl be, admissible.

What, thent is the doctrine which, by the general
agreement, is an allowable, if not the only allowable,
interpretation of the Christian creed ? It is a doctrine
of which Canon Farrar cannot speak without in-
dignation. If anything can justify a man in such
a sentiment it is the vision of unutterable liorror
upon which some theologians declare themselves able
to gaze with complacency. But can tin’s language be
used without drawing up an indi(‘tmcnt against
Christianity itself? In one of these sermons Canon
Farrar discusses the question which has been lately
raised, whether life is worth living. He reaches, of
course, the orthodox conclusion that life would not be
worth living without the eternal hope of Christians.
The Atheist ought to admit that life is a failure. The
Christian can reply, ‘Life is infinitely worth living,
and death is oven infinitely more worth dying ’ ; and
the reason is, that ‘ to die is to bo with God for ever-
more.’ WHio is the ‘ Christian ’ who gives this reply?
If he is a believer in the creed of the majority of
‘ thousands of theologians ’ during ‘ thousands of
years,’ he believes that for most men to die is to be
shut out from God and doomed to hell-fire for over-
more. He believes that, for the majority of the race,
it would have been infinitely Jbettcr not to have been
born. The infidel maj' look forward to annihilation
as a release from tliQ troubles of existence. The


98


DBEAMS AND BBALITIES


Christian looks forward to a state of things in which
most human beings will long for annihilation and
know that it is impossible. They are 'doomed to the
state described by the great poet, in which it is
the worst aggravation that they have ‘ no hope of
death.’

Canon Farrar tells us himself what is the
(;ffect of such a creed upon a generous mind. He
‘ declai'es and calls God to witness ’ that if the
popular doctrine of hell were true he would resign
all hope of immortality, if he could thereby save, ‘ not
mUUonH, but one human soul from what fear and
superstition and ignorance and inveterate hate and
slavish letter-worship have dreamed and taught of
hell.’ If al<ovios means what some people take it to
mean, he would ask God that he might die as the
beasts that perish, ‘ rather than that his worst enemy
should endure the hell described by Tertullian, or
Minucius Felix, or .Jonathan Edwards, or Dr. Pusey,
or Mr. Furniss, or Mr. Moody, or Mr. Spurgeon, for
one single year.’ In other and less excited words,
however discouraging infidelity may be, the creed
held upon this point by the majority of Christians,
by most theologians, and by the most effective
preachers, is incomparably worse. It is only in
accordance with this view that Canon Farrar
observes that the doctrine is one main cause of infi-
delity, and that it is a ‘ wild and monstrous delusion ’
to suppose that it deters from vice. Christians who


DBEAMS AND REALITIES


99


are in the habit of asserting that the doctrine of
personal immortality is the great bul-wark of morality,
and the great advantage of their own creed over in-
fidelity, may do well to reflect upon this avowal of so
eloquent and enthusiastic an advocate. If your creed
is so pleasant and delightful, why does it produce this
passionate revolt from an earnest adherent ?

For reasons to be presently given, I think that
Canon Farrar has exaggerated the horrors of the
belief. If, however, we are to assume that Christians
believe in hell as they believ .t in Paris, as a sober,
serious matter of fact, my only complaint against
Canon Farrar’s language would be that all rhetoric
becomes simply impertinent in presence of such an
alwmination. To hold the belief groundlessly is a
misfortune deserving of the sinccrest sympathy; to
propagate it without certainty, an offence deserving
of the gravest reprobation. Scorn, indeed, rather
than anger is the emotion provoked by the resusci-
tation of these shadowy relics of the torture-chamber.
The preacher who affects to produce them knows that
they are rotten, and will crumble if he dares to expose
them to any real strain. The question, however,
still remains which I have just asked. If ^Canou
Farrar's view' be correct, the doetj-ine of popular
Christianity is, in onb word, damnable. How does
he propose to defend the Church distinguished above
all others for the force with which it has propagated
this devilish sentiment '? .


100


DREAMS AND EEALniES


The ordinary mode of evasion is familiar enough.
Wc know it well in the allied question of toleration.
For many generations the chief (Christian sects
persecuted right and left ; they burnt, hanged,
flogged, dragonaded, enforced penal codes, drove the
best part of the population into banishment, and, in
short, oppressed the unfortunate minority— whichever
it might be — by every conceivable instrument of
tyramiy. Wlien some heretics began to denounce
the practice under which they suffered, the doctrine
of toleration was hooted down as savouring of
Socinianism, deism, and atheism. Thanks to the
rationalist spirit within and without the Churches,
thanks above all to the influence of such men as
Voltaire, men of all creeds have slowly come to admit
that religious persecution is a detestable crime, and
one of ihe most fruitful of all the causes of misery
that depend upon the human will. And then the
advocates of the Churches tuni round and declare,
with astonishing self-possession, that they arc not
responsible; i^ersecution is quite irreconcilable with
the true spirit of Christianity. If Philip II., or
Louis XIV., or Henry VIII. chose to persecute, so
much the worse for them and their instruments.

I

Yes; but why did you not find that out a little
sooner ? If I were a landlord, and had calmly sat by
whilst my agent extorted rents from my tenants, by
dint of applying thumbscrews and rubbing pepper on
their eyelids, am I, when my tenants have grown


DKEAMS AND REALITIES


101


strong enough to turn the tables, to say quietly, ‘ Oh,
it ■was quite against the letter of my instructions ’ ?
Why, then, did not I return the rents, punish the
agent, and make my instructions a little plainer?
And now for me, a fallible human being, substitute
what you take to be the immaculate Church of God,
the medium through which eternal truth is revealed
to erring man ; suppose that this Church profits and
thrives for a time by help of the most atrocious crimes
that have ever disgraced maitkind ; that, far from
reviling the criminal, it ha.; always denounced the
victim, and now, when it is down and the victim on
his legs, that it complacently observes that it was all
a mistake ; what am I to think of such a revelation
and its God ? You can damn mei\ readily enough for
not bolding the right shade of belief about mysteries
which you loudly proclaim to be inconceivable ; did
you ever — when you were strong enough — bring your
tremendous arsenal of threats to bear upon men who
were making a hell upon earth, and committing every
abomination under the sun in your name and for
your profit? You did not explicitly approve; or,
rather, the persons who approved in your name did
it without proper authority. But what is the good of
a body which can allow its whole influence to be
used in favour of unspeakable atrocities, till its* power
of inflicting them has vanished? Persecution is
either an imperative duty, or it is one of the wovst
of crimes. The Church, on Dr. Farrar’s principle,


102


DREAMS AND REALITIES


‘ Tvisely ’ allows us to hold either view. We can only
say, if it be right, uphold the doctrine and encounter
the disapproval of the conscience of maVikind ; we can,
at least, honour your courage. But if it be wrong,
you cannot sneak out of yoiu* responsibility by help
of your legal quibblings without admitting that your
true Church which is to guide us unto all truth has
only a potential existence, whilst the concrete Church
which we can all see and recognise may be an ac-
complice in the Avorst and most demoralising of all
the cruelties that have left their stain upon history.

And now, may we not say just the same of this
doctrine of everlasting damnation ? Whilst the
Christian creed flourished — and 1 use the word
Christian to mean the actual creed which was im-
plicitly accepted by concrete human beings —
dominated their consciences, and was vividly realised
by their imaginations, not a doubt could be uttered
of the truth of tins dogma. Protestants and Papists
agreed in enforcing it. Catholics are now apt to claim
that they are not m(>>'e intolerent than Protestants.
Formerly it was their popular and most troublesome
argument against such men as Chillingworth, that a
Protestant could not be saved on the Papist theory,
whilst a Papist might possibly be saved on the Protes-
tant theory. Threats of hell-flre crossed each other
as thickly as bullets in. a battle. Turks, Jews, and
heretics, and even unbaptized children, the vast
majority of the whole racci were consigned to its


DREAMS AND REALITIES


108


flames as freely as brutes to annihilation, by
* thousands of theologians ’ and millions of ordinary
believers. Onty a few milder thinkers could breathe a
half-suppressed whisper of doubt under imminent
peril of heresy. Fanatics, preachers, and orators
exhausted their ingenuity in giving form and’ reality
to the conception. Men, women, and little children
were driven into paroxysms of hysterical excitement,
numbers into madness, by vehement and nnreproved
declamation. Every cruelty of the persecutors was
justified by the necessity of saving souls from hell.
And now, at last, your creed is decaying. People have
discovered that you luiow nothing about it ; that
heaven and hell belong to dreamland ; that the im-
pertinent young curate who tells me that I shall be
burnt everlastingly for not sharing his superstition is
just as ignorant as I am myself, and that I loiow as
much as my dog. And then you calmly say again,
' It is all a mistake ; this, and that, and the other
excellent man cherished a benevolent doubt ; perhaps
aUopios necessarily means a limited time, or has
necessarily no relation to time at all, or has both
meanings at once ; only believe in a something — and
we will make it as easy for you as possible. Hell
shall have no more than a fine equable teni^crature,
really good for the constitution ; there shall btf nobody
in it except Judas Iscariot fmd one or two more ; and
even the poor Devil shall have a chance if he .will
resolve to mend his ways.’


104


DREAMS ARD REALITIES


This, again, is all very well, and no doubt the
terror can easily be exterminated after wo know it to
be baseless. But then, what are we 4o think of the
religion in which so fearful a belief grew and flourished;
a belief which, according to you, is calculated to drive
men mad, to make them pray for annihilation as
infinitely preferable to the state which it reveals, and
which, so far from exerting a moral influence, pollutes
the imagination and lowers the tone of character of
all who accept it ? Your contention is really that the
historical Christianity, the actual belief of millions of
men and women, deserves upon this head all that its
fiercest adversaries have ever said ag.ainst it. You
add, indeed, that a religious creed may be put together
in conformity with the official documents which omit
this ghastly superstition. Possibly, but a creed must
be judged by its fruits, by the effect which it actually
produces upon living men and women ; and if in its
actual working it formulates or protects such de-
testable doctrines as this, it is useless to complain of
the facts. If Christianity meant really what it meant
for Mr. Maurice, or Mr, Erskine of Linlathen, or
Canon Farrar, it would be a very much milder form
of belief than it has actually been. Only, as a matter
of fact,' it has had quite a different meaning for
Tertullian, Augustine, Aquinas, Dante, Luther,
‘ thousands of theologians,’ and millions upon
millions of professed believers. The fact affords a
conclusive presumption that the belief is what Dr.


DBEAMH AND REALITIES


105


Newman would call a development, not aji ‘ incrusta-
tion.’ It must have an organic connection of some
kind with the vital principles of the creed, or it would
not have grown so vigorously and flourished so per-
sistently wherever Christianity has been strongest.
Accidental dogmas may be engrafted upon a creed
here and there under special circumstances ; they die
and drop off when tlie conditions alter ; but a phe-
nomenon so universal and endining could hardly be
produced unless there were an underlying logical
necessity which binds it indissolubly svith the primary
articles of the faith. It is, one must assume, a
consequence of the mode of conceiving the universe
implied in the very structure of Christianity, not an
addition from without. In any case, we are virtually
asked to adopt a new creed because the old lias
fostered a detestable superstition. It is no strained
inference that some more radical remedy is re-
quired than a simple omission of a particular clause
of the revealed code. The whole must require to be
remodelled. We cannot retain the amiable parts of a
doctrine whilst leaving out the sterner elements, or be
sure that we can clip and mangle without emasculat-
ing.

Is, then, the Christian doctrine of a future Wdd to
be regarded as simplya curse to mankind ? Thafseeins
to be the reasonable inference from Canon Farrar’s
assertions, though it is as far as possible frojn
being the inference which the Canon draws. If I took


106


DREAMS AND RRALITIES


his representation of Christianity to be true, I should
regard it as necessarily including a very large element
of devil-worship. No dogma can be of more impor-
tance than one which serves as the basis of the whole
moral system, and governs the whole application of
religious principle to conduct. If the accepted
version of this doctrine be utterly repulsive, we should
be forced to hold that Christianity poisons i-ho springs
whicli it represents as the sole support of the spiritual
life. No other doctrine is so important in regai’d to
practice, and none so horrible. And yet I believe, as
I suppose all moderately intelligent persons believe,
that Christianity not only represents the teaching of
many of the greatest and most moral of mankind, but
was for centuries ono of the chief reforming agencies
in the world. I leave it to Canon Farrar and those
who agree with him to solve this paradox upon their
own principles. Upon mine the explanation is simple
enough. It is that the so-called belief in a future life
— whether in hell or in heaven — has always been
in reality a dream, and not strictly speaking a belief
at all. Occasionally this dream, like others, passes
into hallucination ; as a rule it is as flimsy in its tex-
ture as other dreams, and really supplies new symbols
for the emotions instead of suggesting genuine^motives
for action. The ignorant and "the childish are hope-
lessly unable to draw the line between dreamland and
reality ; but the imagery which takes its rise in the
imagination, as distinguished from the perceptions, bears


DREAMS AND REALITIES 107

indelible traces of its origin in comparative unsub-
stantiality and vagueness of outline. If Christianity
eounsellcd men in sober earnestness to interpret the
universe as significant of aorueland arbitrary despotism,
it would deserve unmixed reprobation. The true state-
ment is that it generates fantastic and sometimes hor-
rible dreams, which arc insufficiently distinguished
from realities. The confusion has sometimes disas-
trous results ; but they are not such as might be antici-
pated from the matter-of-fact statement which con-
founds poetry with prose and shadow with substance.

There is, of course, a logical groundwork for this
as for other widespread beliefs. The sources of the
illusion, indeed, are so numerous and plausible that
the only difficulty of explaining is in the selection.
When, for example, another being has become inwoven
with our habitual experience; when we have learnt
to interpret various phenomena as signs of a living
presence, the process becomes so spontaneous and in-
stinctive that we cannot speedily unlearn it. We
actually feel (who has not felt ?) the pressure of the
hand that is still for over, and hear the footstep that
is no longer caused by the living form. It is as hard
to reduce the touch or sound lo the bare testimony of
the senses as for an educated man to see in a hook the
bare black-and-white symbols without imbibing the
meaning beyond. There is,.indeed, a contradiction to
thought once organised by experience in supposing
that the dead can still ppeak or move. But the infan-


108


DREAMS AND REALITIES

•

tile intellect is tolerant of contradictions; it is not
surprised on discovering that a body which was covered
with earth and burnt with fire is again appearing in its
former state ; and the fact that death ends life is but
slowly forced upon it by experience. If my dog saw
something which recalled me after my death, he would
accept the vision without the least shock of surprise ;
the childish mind certainly, and, we may presume, the
savage mind, is in the same stage. As it begins to
become sensible of the empirical truth that the dead
do not rise, whilst still believing that they are some-
times seen and felt, it tacitly solves the contradiction by
imagining another life, a race of dim shadows which
haunt the graves of the dead and visit the dreams of
survivors. Eecent philosophers have shown us how
the experience of dr<!aras and other phenomena may
suggest or corroborate a similar theory, until a sjjirit-
world is created more populous than the world of the
living, and inhabited by beings, some of whom gradually
decay, whilst others are gradually promoted to the
honours of godhood.

But if the framework of the belief is suggested
by misinterpreted experience, aU that fills it up, that’
gives it definite form and substance and colour, is
necessarily the work of the creative imagination. This
land of vague shadows is the natural heritage of the
poet. Its population is in part supplied by ordinary
dreams, and the waking dreams naturally find in it a
congenial dwelling-place, where they can acquire a


109


UBEAMS AND REALITIES

t

kind of shadowy reality. Even the most orthodox of
intelligent persons intimate that the particular sym-
bols — the fire of hell and the harps of the blessed —
have no more than a poetic or symbolical truth. The
whole question is as to the extent of the share contri-
buted by the imagination. A very slight comparison
of the fully-formed belief with the ostensible logical
groundwork will suggest how little is due even to a
mistaken system of reasoning. I do not know
whether it is the orthodox view that the immortality
of the soul is capable of piouf, or that the doctrine
can only be known through revelation. In any case,
the supposed ‘proof* leaves innumerable questions un-
decided. The pre-existence of the soul is as plausible a
dogma as its post-existence ; we may as easily believe
that it emerges from and returns to the vast ocean of
Divine existence as that it persists permanently and
separately ; and the whole theory of * future rewards
and punishments ’ — of the doctrine that our condi-
tion through all eternity is to be determined by our
conduct here — is palpably gratuitous from any philo-
sophical point of view. That which distinguishes the
Christian system from systems which can reckon a
much greater number of disciples is ])recisely that for
which no shadow of proof can bo advance’d; and,
moreover, it is that upon which the whole value* of the
dogma depends in the eyes qf believers.

The simple explanation is that the whole process
is poetical in substancq, It is the construction of an


110 DREAMS AMD REALITIES

ideal world, which may he in some sense congenial to
the imagination. The conscience as trained by great
Christian teachers creates spontaneously a system of
retribution inconsistent with a pre-existent state, or
an ultimate absorption of the soul in the infinite.
The dream-world is framed to suit the moral theory,
instead of the morality being adapted to facts. The
illegitimate nature of the process betrays itself in the
arbitrary and even repulsive conclusions ultimately
reached ; but it is the normal process of the imagina-
tive faculty.

The world of dreams, in fact, if not created, is
moulded by our desii'es. It is the embodiment of our
hopes and fears. The historical conditions which
render certain impulses prominent at particular epochs,
determine also the direction which will bo taken by
our wandering fancies. The plastic world of the
imagination yields to every passionate longing that
stirs our natures. Pure emotion knows of no limits.
The more vividly we feel, the less we attend to the
conditions of feeling. Absorbed in love or hate, we
cannot for the moment even conceive the iiossibility of
satiety, and imagine raptures indefinitely protracted.
Past feelings survive, and the future is anticipated,
and we imagine a state independent of time, and in
which iestruction has no place. ‘We are irritated by
the unsubstaritiality of the images created, and we try
to compensate their faintness by magnifying them to
gigantic and more than gigantic proportions. The


DBEAMS AND REALITIES 111

/

phantasms die away rapidly as we wake, and we
stimulate our jaded and flagging imaginations by
drawing indefinitely upon the boundless resources of
dreamland.

A world thus framed may at times represent the
strength of love. We cannot and we will not beh'eve
in the loss of those whose lives seemed to be part of
our essence. A belief caused by (I cannot say based
upon) this passionate yearning is so pathetic and
even sacred that the unbeliever may well shrink from
breathing his doubts in its presence. It is, no doubt,
mainly this sentiment which makes criticism unwel-
come. Yet for that reason it makes an anvswer im-
perative. You ask me for consolation under a blow
which has wrecked your happiness. The only consola-
tion which would really satisfy you would be the assertion
that the blow has not really fallen. We try to make
such an assertion. Do we ever console anyone ? Does
the dream of the assumed blessedness of the change
really alleviate the sorrow of the loss ? Considering,
indeed, that the future state may represent eternal
misery as well as eternal happiness, wc may ask
whether the ‘ consolation ’ is quite reasonable. Why
is everyone entitled to assume that his own friends
have gone straight to heaven ? But, not to’ dwell
upon this, what is the«real source of such consolation
as can bo obtained ? A heart-breaking sorrow is as
much a fact as a bodily pain. A man in the tortures
of some cruel disease is in torture, and there is no use


112 DREAMS AND REALITIES

V

in denying the fact. Tt is not a question of stating a
fact, but of prescribing a discipline. The loss of our
dearest may inflict pain, from which weVould willingly
purchase relief by the tortures of the worst disease.
It may, like the loss of a bodily organ, shatter the
])illars of existence ; we may know that our lives will
bo henceforth maimed and unreal ; that we shall move
about like ghosts, watching, but not sharing in, the
panorama of existence. What can wc say by way of
‘ consolation ’ that shall not be a mockery ? I believe
that we can only say one thing, the one thing which
has been said in various forms by Wordsworth. It is
simply the truth that deep emotion, even the most
painful, may l)e ‘transmuted’ into nobler feeling;
that sorrow may make the heart softer and widen the
sympathies ; that the v.yc which has ‘ kept watch o’er
man’s mortality’ may henceforth see the world in
soberer colouring, but may see more truly and more
tenderly. There is no fact to be announced which
will alter the truth. In that sense there is no conso-
lation. But it is some encouragement to a brave
man to feel in the midst of sorrow that it may bring
him nearer to his kind, and fit liim to play a worthier
and manlier part through the space that is left to him.

To \ihe demands made by such emotions as this
one must reply respectfully. But it must be added
that a belief in a future .life sometimes means the in-

t

tense dislike of a selfish nature to part from all chance
of enjoyment. It is mere grcjcdiness for life, and


DBEAMS AND BEAUTIES 113

means so strong a regard for one’s own wretched little
individuality tl^t the universe seems worthless un-
less it is preserved. Or it may be the expression of
the intense longing for rest of the weary and heavy-
laden, to whom life is an incessant struggle against
overpowering forces, who have come to regard all
desires as torments, and whoso ideal is an everlasting
repose scarcely distinguishable from annihilation.
The more active intellect frames a different ideal : it
feels that the physical needs, and the sensual desires
which correspond to them, are the conditions that
clog its energies, and longs for a region where the
pure intellect and the finer essence of love may have
room for action in perfect independence of those de-
grading incumbrances. The moralist longs for a
state in which good and evil shall be finally and un-
alterably divided, and the harrowing sense of unequal
distribution of happiness and misery cease its tor-
menting discords. The philosopher longs for a final
revelation of truth, and the bigot for a world in which
heretics will be tormented. The Nihilist and the
ascetic and the sensualist, the lofty and the common-
sense moralist, the selfish and the benevolent man,
the mystic and the hard logician, will each create a
heaven or a hell of his own ; and the future wqrld,
created by a creed whi<Jh represents a wide and care-
fully;-elaborated system of speculation, will blend
more or less consistently many different conceptions. *
Only it is as well to remark that when people begin


114


DIffiAMS AND REALITIES


to quarrel about their dreams, the whole fabric is apt
to show its baselessness ; and further, that opponents
should remember that one of the conditions of dream-
land is that it should admit the phantoms of terror as
well as of ecstasy. Wake, and the phantoms will disap-
pear ; but if you choose to dream, you must have your
nightmares as well as your visions of undying bliss.
Dreams must be at least distorted and grotesque
shadows of realities. Since life is at best a. hard
struggle, you can only create a heaven at the price of
supposing a counterbalancing hell. That is a law of
the imagination which will fulfil itself in spite of the
best-meant efforts. Heaven and hell are correlatives,
and rise and fall together. Hell, so far as it is real, is
the hell within us. Shame, remorse, unavailing
regret for the past, are the very materials out of
which it is constructed. It is precisely the shadow of
the mental anguish cast upon the misty world of
dreams. To produce ‘ conviction of sin ’ is the aim of
all Christian preaching ; the more intense the convic-
tion, the more vivid the phantoms g^merated in the
mind. The triumph of good may be logically inter-
preted to mean the extinction of evil. But in the
logic of the imagination, since our satisfaction in the
good is bound up with, if it does not rather spring
out of, our misery under evil,- the triumphant good is
inconceivable without .the prostrate evil. The back-
• ground of darkness is necessary to make the glory
visible. Our hopes are bqt the obverse of our fears.


115


DREAMS AND REALITIES

t

Whatever the meaning of atmvios, the fearful emotion
which is symbolised is eternal or independent of time
by the same right as the ecstatic emotion. It is as
impossible to separate light from darkness, height
from depth, object from subject, as to conceive of good
without conceiving evil. And, indeed, the logic of the
creed really falls in with its symbolism. Time can
have nothing to do with arguments about the absolute
and the infinite ; and if a sense of the real existence
of evil is at the root of our religious beliefs, its exist-
ence at all implies its existence in eternity. You may
escape verbally by denying that evil has any real exist-
ence, but that is to adopt an optimism, impossible as a
genuine creed, and radically alien to the Christian
sentiment. You may escape from Manichseism, terribly
plausible as it is, by representing evil as limited and
prostrate, but you cannot destroy evil without destroy-
ing its antithesis. To cultivate a strong sense of the
corruption of humanity, a dogma which is of the essence
of Christianity, without stimulating the belief in hell,
is thtj hopeless task of proving at once that sin is
destructive, and that it has no real existence.

Canon Farrar may denomice to his heart’s content
the hell created by savage intolerance, or by the
coarse terrorism which outrages the conscience with
its elaborate images of physical horror. We may be
heartily glad that such denunciations at the present
day can be uttered even by an orthodox divine, but
the phantasms cannot be finally exorcised so long as


116 DREAMS AND REALITIES

V

the popular imagination is invited and encouraged
to dwell upon the future world, and to invert the true
order by basing realities upon dreams. Hell, with
the loftier theologians, meant a stern and righteous
hatred of sin — a vigorous grasp of the fact that the
past is irrevocable, and the future its necessary
development ; that ill deeds have consequences reach-
ing forwards through all conceivable time, never to
be wiped out by any bitterness of repentance; and
that, in a world which is one incessant struggle, the
triumphant nature must be idealised, not as seated
on a throne of everlasting indolence, but with feet
planted on the neck of evil, prostrate, but always
ready to burst into renewed activity upon the least
intermission of watchfulness. Given speh sentiments
and convictions, and the same method of imaginative
projection, they must always be interpreted in the
same symbolism. Hell must be an integral part of
the ideal world so long as the radical convictions of
Christianity retain their genuine vitality. Simply to
suppress it is to substitute a vapid optimism which
will never satisfy men nourished upon the Christian
version of the unmistakable facts of the universe.
Eternal damnation is as much a necessity of the
imagination as a logical deduction from the funda-
mental principles of the creed. ■

So far, again, as hell was merely a translation
into poetical symbols of their genuine beliefs, we
must make allowances for the apparently atrocious


DREAMS AND REALITIES


117


language of men like Augustine, or even Jonathan
Edwards. We j^ardon a child or a peasant for using
language which to us is horrible, partly because the
immature mind can only use such phrases as infinite
and eternal by way of vague superlatives, and partly
because it does not so much believe in errors, as fail
to distinguisli between belief and fancy. Its dis-
crimination is not logical, but imaginative. The
images which it creates are distinguished from the
realities which it perceives, not by being less believed
in, but by being of a more shadowy texture. The
same leniency of construction must be extended to
great men who were themselves in a more infantile
stage of mind, or who had inheiited infantile modes
of conception. The underlying emotion deserves our
respect, although the images which it generated be-
come grotesque and horrible when we have learnt to
put more bluntly the decisive dilemma of fact or
fiction.

The true evil is not that the dreams sometimes
take liideous shapes, but that. all mixture of dreams
and realities involves distortion of facts. Dreamland
is, of course, the natural empire of magic, sacerdotal
or other. The phantoms of the imagination, do, in
&et, obey laws different from those of reality* In
that region fancy deWmines, instead of being de-
termined, by fact. A charm cannot turn aside a
real bullet, but it may well govern the flight of ali
imaginary missile. Expiatory rites which dull the


118 DREAMS AND REALITIES

pangs of conscience really release us from the hell
■which conscience creates. Here, /^herefore, is the
source of all the quack remedies for remorse which
assume that the past can he wiped out by changing
the play of the imagination. Luther was content
■with abolishing that part of the imaginary world
from which priests derived their chief claim to
authority. So long as purgatory was admitted, he
saw that it would generate the superstitions from
which Canon Farrar supposes it to be separable.
Admit that the future state is modifiable, and men
will try to modify by the only method available for
the imaginary world — some form, namely, of super-
natural charm. But Luther’s reform still left r»^om
for other modes of spiritual quackery. The Protestant
could get rid of the hell within him by the simple
method of persuading himself that he personally was
saved. Conviction of salvation is salvation in dream-
land. If priests had no longer the keys of the next
world, the believer could alter his own fate by the
paroxysm of excitement which he called a conversion.
Such methods do in- fact affect a man’s dreams, and
are inevitably adopted when dreamland is asserted
to be jihe sole reality. The preachers might appeal
to good feelings, as the discipline of the Church
might be exerted for moral purposes. But the
method necessarily generated under certain con-
ditions the corrupt Protestantism which attributed
a supernatural value to a mere imaginative change,.


DRIJLVMS AND liEAUTIES 119

and the corrupt Catholicism which attributed the
same efficacy jjp external rites. Wlien we abandon
ourselves to the guidance of our imagination, we
shall inevitably believe m remedies which have only
an imaginary validity.

A belief in a future world is necessary, so we arc
told, to morality. We reply that the future world
owes its confomation in great part to the play of
the moral instincts. We agree that it once provided
the only mode through which those instincts could
find expression. We maintain that, in this sense,
hell, with all its fantastic horrors, has yet been
associated with the most \ital of all regenerative
forces. But then in that very fact lies the danger of
prolonging tlie association when the belief has be-
come a mere effete shadow. You would still frighten
men into virtue by bugbears. To make your threats
effective at all, you must exaggerate the dream
indefinitely to compensate for its unreality. Then it
shocks and revolts instead of governing the conscience,
and you imagine expedients for softening the shock
which you have produced. They are seen to be
immoral because arbitrary and unreal, and you then
try to deprive the nightmare of its horrors. You
will find that a mere rose-coloured dream fails to
satisfy the deepest idstincts which lie at the root of
yofix religion. And meanwhile the whole vision has
become so shadowy and uncertain that its hopes and
its terrors cease alike to have any tangible infiuence.


120 DREAMS AND REALITIES

* V

If the other world is to supply the sole adequate
motives of morality, then morality is ^^o be based on
a foundation more vague and shifting than the spectre
projected upon a mountain cloud.

The theory of the Almighty Chief Justice is,
perhaps, too antiquated for serious discussion. If any
reference must be made to it, it is because, although
the argument is not explicitly stated, its validity
is often tacitly assumed. Though abandoned in
actual controversy, the presumption of its utility is
still taken for granted. It may, therefore, be just
worth while to note that the whole doctrine really
belongs to a bygone stage of mythology ; to a belief,
not in God, but in an anthropomorphic deity, and
to a deity of a low type. He was the product of a
society in which justice was still confounded with
revenge. It would be unfair to judge his conduct by
modern canons of morality were he not still occa-
sionally resuscitated. We have agreed now that
human laws should be reformatory instead of vin-
dictive. The measuTe of their goodness is, that they
should inflict a minimum of suffering, and that they
should be subservient to the great purpose of
reforming, if not the criminal himself, at least the
society. Though they must still be aimed at deter-
ring ^om crime, they should not inflict, even upon
the criminal, sufferings more than are required for
that purpose. The so-called divine law, of which the
sanction was hell-fire, produced, on the contrary, a


DREAMS AND REALITIES


121


niq.Yinrmm of Buffering for a minimum of effect. Its
principle woul^ therefore, be simply revenge of the
most savage kind ; and reformation, though one might
have supposed an Omnipotent Being to be capable of
doing something in that dhection, a subsidiary con-
sideration, if a consideration at all. The reforming
effect of a law depends, not upon its severity simply,
but upon the general recognition of its justice. But
when tliis deity is promoted to be the absolute creator
of the universe, when he has himself made the
beings whom he tortures for ever, and placed them
in a world full of temptations, it is obvious, to put it
mildly, that his ‘justice’ must be understood in a
non-natural sense. To reconcile the theory of a
‘ Moral Governor of the Universe ’ with the theory
of an Omnipotent Creator who dooms his failures to
endless torment, is a problem which I gladly leave
to theologians.

The substance of morality is distorted as well as
its supposed sanction. In dreamland we get rid
easily enough of all the pressing material wants of
life. If to be moral is to fit ourselves for dreamland,
we should therefore become ascetics or mystics, and
abandon as insoluble and unimportant the problems
which are most urgently pressing upon mankind.
The saintly ideal ma^ doubtless be beautiful, but there
is^an ineradicable taint of the morbid and sickly in
its very beauty. It has the same relation to actual
life as the wizards and,knightB of chivalrous romance


122 DREAMP AND REALITIES

to real soldiers or philosophers. To present a lofty
ideal for our imitation is among the ,most important
functions of all great religious or poetical teaching.
But the imagination which soars too far above the
earth into the regions of the purely arbitrary ends
by creating the grotesque and unreal. We want to
know what n man should be under the actual con-
ditions of hungering, thirsting social beings, and we
are presented with an emaciated invalid with a pair
of impossible wings tacked mechanically to his
shoulders. Such religion orders men not to reform
the world, but to retire from it in despair, and to
aim at*an ideal which is radically unattainable. So,
again, we may trace the opposite develoinnent, in
which we separate the worlds of dreaming and
reality effectually enough. We are sensual or cruel
or avaricious in this life, and reconcile ourselves to
evil by dreaming in the most edifying fashion. We
are niggardly tradesmen on week-days and plunged
in saintly devotion on Sabbaths, or indulge in every
luxurious enjoyment, secure of an absolution by
proper compliance with the ceremonies that satisfy
our imagination.

Such evils are common enough in all ages, and
will probably be common in one form or another in
all time to come. They are stimhlated and nourished
by any form of belief which helps us to regard
morality as ultimately dependent upon anything but
a compliance with the actual' conditions of the real,


DJIEAMS AND REALITIES lUB

tangible, and visible world in which we live. The
more extrem® aberrations of asceticism and anti-
nomianism, of excessive faith in priestly magic and
in supernatural conversions, are, of course, rare in a
civilised society which knows pretty well that its
dreams are woven of unsubstantial materials. The
hell of the present day is objectionable for a rather
different reason. It can hardly be said, I think, with
fairness, that it is ever a product of commonplace
selfishness. The selfish man is too comfortable to
want a hell. So long as we do not look beyond that
part of the universe which is buttoned within our
own waistcoats, we can generally make ourselves
tolerably happy. The other world is generally created
by a deep sense of evils so inextricably intertwined
with our present state that we frame an imaginary
world where all groat problems are solved, and dwell
upon it till we half-believe in its reality. It is not
that which makes ‘ life worth living,’ for it is the
embodiment of a profound discontent with the world
as it is ; but it is that which might make life better
worth living if its force w'ere expended, not ui)on
dreams, but realities.

Amiable and philosophical minds cling to this
belief, because they believe in all sincerity that to
abandon it is to al)andon the world to sensuality,
materialism, and anarchy. To these we can only say
that it is surely undesirable to associate the features of
morality and our highest social interests with a belief


124


DREAMS AND REAUTIJIS


which, daily proves more shadowy in outline, more
palpably demoralising as it is more distinctly realised,
and more obviously divorced from any reasonable
speculation, until even its advocates can say little
more than that they wish it were true. If the associa-
tion be really enforced by logic, there is no more to be
said ; only in that case it is desirable that an exhibi-
tion of the logical ground should be less frequently
superseded by a simple appeal to emotion. It is surely
a misfortune that morality should be ostensibly based
upon a conception which is avowedly little more than
a vague ‘ perhaps.’

The tendency to cling desperately to dreamland
is more frequently an utterance of that refined Epi-
cm'eanism which is one of the worst and commonest
tendencies of the day. It is the tendency which in
one direction generates the cant of ‘ art for art’s sake ’
— the doctrine, that is, which would encourage men to
steep themselves in luxurious dreaming, and explicitly
renounce the belief that art is valuable, as it provides
a worthy embodiment for the most strenuous thought
and highest endeavour of the age. In politics it corre-
sponds to the doctrine that men should be diverted
from dangerous aspirations towards social reform by
bribes administered to their lower passions, and that
acquiescence in enervating desx)6tism should be pre-
served by lavish expenditure ujm frivolous or corrupt-
ing indulgence. The religion which falls in with such
conceptions is a fashionable accomplishment, governed


DKEAMS AND BEALITIES


125


by the canons of good taste instead of argument, and is
equivalent to a^systematic cultivation of some agree-
able emotion. The so-called believer of this type is a
cynic in a thin disguise. He is partly aware that his
belief is a sham, but is not the less resolved to stick
to so pleasant a sham. He answers his opponents
by a shriek or a sneer. The sentiment which he most
thoroughly hates and misunderstands is the love of
truth for its own sake. He cannot conceive why any
man should attack a lie simply because it is a lie, and
supposes that the enemy is prompted to disperse his
dreams by coarse brutality and malignant hatred of
the beautiful. His most effective weapon is the petu-
lant sarcasm which was once used by sceptics because
they were not allowed to argue seriously, and is now
used by believers because they cannot. His indigna-
tion is the growl of the sluggard who will not be
roused from his dreams. Why cannot men be satisfied
to amuse themselves with the reverend phantoms of
the past, instead of prying into all manner of awkward
questions, upsetting established convictions, and
pressing every comfortable old creed to give a rigid
account of its validity and utility ? An honest believer
is not necessarily or probably an obstructive or a
bigot ; but obstructive and repressive tendencies pre-
dispose a man to accept the intellectual attitude which
justifies him in complacently asserting that the actual
world is going straight to the devil, whilst he maskspa
selfish indifference under cover of loftier aspirations


126


DREAMS AND REALITIES


towards the world of the imagination. Dreamland
once provided a safe issue for much di^ontent, for it
sanctified a policy of submission to tyranny and
abnegation of social duties. Though it has grown
more shadowy, it still provides a pleasant refuge for
the far less vigorous sentiment of men who see that
the world has escaped from their guidance, and who
welcome a good excuse for folding their arms, sneering
at busy agitators, and declaring that the sole worthy
aim of human effort is to be found in dreamland,
instead of amidst the harsh shock .of struggling
realities.


127


WHAT IS MATERIALISMS '

Metaphysical alignments are apt to take the form of
disputes about words. A system of classification is
already implied in a nomenclature ; and new theories
are smuggled into belief under the disguise of improved
definitions. Philosophers are constantly at cross-
purposes over the misunderstandings which are thus
introduced. The technical terms of metaphysics
become a coinage of ambiguous value. This coinage
is again modified in the heated furnace of theological
controversy. When it has passed into still wider
circulation, and even become part of the stock-in-trade
of the popular novelist, the old sharpness of im-
pression is utterly worn away. The currency becomes
hopelessly debased. Phrases once used to convey
refined logical distinctions are now only lit to take
place among the clumsy missiles with which popular
orators bombard the objects of their hatred. •

This seems to .apply to the word ‘Materialist.
That word has a philosophical, a theological, and an

' From a discourse delivered at South Place, Finsbmyl on
March -21, 1886.


128


WHAT IS MATEKIALLSM?


ethical bearing. Various meanings have become
attached to it in the course of manj;. controversies.
When they are lumped together, and this or that
thinker is denounced as a Materialist, he often finds
himself saddled with opinions which he would l)e the
first to disavow. If he tries to make distinctions, he
is supposed to be (juibbling, to be refusing to follow
his own reasoning to its logical conclusion, or to be
trying to dissociate himself fi'oin those who are really
his allies. ‘ You are not a Christian : then you hold
that the only aim in life is the gratification of the
senses.’ That is a pleasant bit of popular logic, to
which freethinkers are pretty well accustomed. I
have been told, as a matter of course, that I am a
Materialist. I do not think that I am one in any
fair sense of the word, but I willingly leave it to
others to label me with such tickets as they please
in the museum of monstrosities. Still, as the phrase
seems to me to imply a common misconception, I
think it only right to try to say, as frankly as I can,
what is, in fact, my opinion upon such matters. I
premise, however, that in dealing with such a question
briefly and with the least possible use of technical
terms, I canhot hope to observe all the proper meta-

c

physical niceties. In all probability I shall fall into
inaccuracies both of thought and language. I shall
merely try to express myself as well as I can in phrases
intelligible to the ‘ general reader,’ but I should not
think my opinion worth the trouble of expression


WHAT IS MATEBIALISM?


129


were it not that I take myself to be aiming at con-
clusions to wlijch far more competent thinkers are
gravitating. I do not profess to offer any solution of
so vast a problem ; only to indicate the direction in
which, as I hold, a solution is probably attainable.

Materialism should, apparently, denote the doctrine
that matter is the ultimate reality. Nothing really
exists except matter, in various combinations from
stones to brains. Spiritualism must be the doctrine
that mind is the ultimate reality. Nothing really
exists except thought in its various modiiications.
The statement is simple and clear enough if we
assume that matter and spirit are words which
represent distinctly known entities. But this is
exactly one of the eases in which we have already
begged the question when we have given the names.
If asked whether I accepted either of these doctrines,
1 could not say Yes or No till I had asked some
question as to the meaning of the words. I might,
for example, urge that spiritual and material do not
represent two different categories, either of which can
be contemplated alone, but that they correspond to
two methods of combining experience, each legitimate
within its own sphere ; and that when we tr^ to get
beyond the necessary limits of knowledge, each con-
ception win land us iflto insuperable difficulties.

^ Materialism, we may say, represents the point of
view of the physical inquirer. A man is a matcriaUst
for the time being so long as he has only to do with

K


130


WHAT LS MATERIALISM?


that which may be touched, handled, seen, or otherwise
perceived through the senses. We know all that can
he known about it when we have combined all that
our senses can tell us. Through the senses wc define
its configuration, or, in other words, its relations in
space. The senses, indeed, reveal other than space-
properties : they tell us of the colours, sounds, smells,
and so forth which are in some sense inherent in
certain bodies ; and these, of course, are an essential
part of our conceptions of the various objects. But
we treat these so-called secondary qualities as in some
way dependent upon the geometrical properties. They
point out rather than constitute the object. We
reach the ultimate goal of physical sciences by
establishing certain formula) expressible solely in terms
of space and time. We measure everything that can
be measured in miles and feet, hours and seconds ;
and the general iwoblom is to determine the rules
according to which one set of positions will at any
given time transform itself into another. The
physicist, of course, speaks of ‘ forces ’ and of ‘ energy.’
But he has nothing to do with the meaning of such
words, apart from what he calls their ‘ measures.’
They are merely shorthand s3Tnbols for certain
changes measurable in space and time. The force of
gravity, for example, is measured by the velocity
generated in a given time — that is, by the rate at
which a body is moving after it has been falling in
vacuum for a second. To say that it varies inversely


WHAT IS MATERL\LISM ?


181


as the square of the distance is to say that, of two
such bodies, the one which is at twice the distance from
the assumed centre will begin to move with a quarter
of the velocity. Of the force, considered apart from its
measure, we can say nothing w’hatever ; and it was
precisely by confining their attention to the measure
that scientific reasonors were able to get rid of meta-
physical puzzles which had made progress impossible.
From the simplest to the most complex scientific pro-
blem we have still the same procedure. Astronomical
problems are solved when, from the position of certain
bodies at one time, we can infer their position in
another, the forces being ‘ known ’ in the sense that
their ‘ measure ’ is known. In more refined inquiries
we have to pass beyond all possible limits of obser-
vation, and to postulate atoms which, by their nature,
are imperceptible. But they still have to move
according to the analogy of perceivable bodies, and the
use of them is only justifiable because they bring us
back to conclusions which are again within the limits
of perception. The recognised aim of all scientific
inquiry is to give quantitative relations — that is, to
lay down formulae expressed in terms of •.ime and
space, and nothing else. Scientific method, again, is
nothing but a more refined and systematic applicatiou
of methods more or less roughly implied in every
moment of our lives. All human action upon the
extdtnal world, including our own bodies, consists,
simply in changing the positions of pieces of matter.


182


WHAT IS IIATEKULISM?


To move a thing is to impose upon it certain relations
expressible in terms of space and time ^ and, so far as
action implies thought, it implies innumerable more
or less conscious judgments of the same kind. To
make those judgments articulate and explicit is to make
them scientific. The whole structure of scientific know-
ledge is built up from such elements, and is, therefore,
nothing but a system of formulae in terms of space and
time. So long as we are dealing with the so-called
physical sciences, nobody objects to this procedure.
We are only systematising and giving precision to our
thought. But a difficulty occurs when the man of
science begins to deal with organised and living matter ;
when he tries to unify knowledge by reasoning from
the principles of physical science in the departments
claimed by the philosopher and the psychologist.
The brain is a piece of matter ; thought is somehow
dependent upon the action of the brain; a stone
impinges on a nerve ; a message is sent to the brain,
and returns in the shape of a muscular impulse. Is
the whole of this process to be explained by a set of
movements of vibrating atoms V Are we to give up
the belief that our thoughts and emotions have some-
thing to do with our actions, and to conceive of the
mind as a phantom looking on (if a phantom can
xook bn) at the mysterious dance of a whirlwind of
infinitesimal particles of dust ? It is undeniable that
these questions lead to enormous difficulties. How
axe we to state the relation between brain and mind ?


WHAT IS MATEKIALISM ?


183


That they are related is. undeniable ; but the boldest
theorist wouldi hesitate to state definitely what is the
nature of the relation. It seems that we are so far
from being able to answer the question correctly that
we cannot as yet even put the question accurately.
When this is the state of the case for even the most
competent inquirers, I think that one who does not
profess to bo competent should be modest enough to
confess himself a provisional Agnostic. Ho must
admit that, so far from having a solution, he does not
quite perceive where the difficulty lies, though he is
painfully aware that it e.xists ; nor feel certain whether
it is or is not one of the questions to which an answer
may be reasonably anticipated. There are probably
some facts which we sliall always have to accept as
ultimate— to be admitted but not to be explained.
Yet, within such narrow limits as are imposed by the
nature of the case and my own incompetence, it may
be possible to suggest the point of view from which it
will appear that the danger is, after all, a bugbear,
and that there is no fear that any conceivable pro-
gress of physical science will even tend to destroy our
belief in our own consciousness.

Materialism has an undoubted plausibility. To
common-sense, nothing can be more real than the stone
which Johnson kickeS to confute Berkeley. Strip it of
the secondary qualities which are obviously dependent
upon the observing eye, and the residuum is a blcfck
of solidified space : matter resisting and embodying


134


WHAT IS 3IATERULLSMT


geometrical relations, and nothing else. Out of such
blocks, finite or infinitesimal, the whoU material uni-
verse is constructed for the mathematician ; and in
the age of Newton metaphysicians naturally took the
mathematical point of view, and applied mathematical
methods to all truth. They felt themselves in pre-
sence of a mathematical world, which threatened to
be not only real but the sole reality. Innumerable
devices were tried to get rid of .this oppressive reality,
or to make conceivable its relations to an immaterial
soul. How could a soul know anything of matter
except by a continuous miracle ? But if it could not
know it, must we not resign all pretensions to a
knowledge of reality ? If matter, instead of the con-
sciousness, is to be the mere phantom 'loes not the
whole world become a dream, an unreal web spun by
the dreamer — a ‘ subjective ’ construction which has
no longer any safe anchorage hi fact ? What are these
mysterious entities, time and space, which define the
nature of the material world ? Bo we know of them
as somethhig existing altogether independently of our-
selves, or are they made by our minds ? and can we, if
60, soar into transcendental regions altogether outside
of them-? So long as the philosopher attempts to per-
form such feats, the ordinary miiid, to which common-
sense supplies the pole-star, will prefer to hold by the
reality of sticks and stones, even tliough such a belief
may end in Materialism ; or, more probably, it may
contentedly retain contradictoty elements of thougjht


WHAT TS MATERIALISM?


185


without seeking to solve the antinomies which bother
the metaphysic^n. A stone is ‘ real/ and a thought
is ’real’; but how the realities are related is a
question beyond the ordinary interest. This bare
reference, however, to the controversies which have
raged through centuries is enough to recall the in-
numerable pitfalls which beset the unwary wanderer
on every side. That Serbonian bog is not yet mapped,
and no plain pathway has been constructed through
its labjTinth.

What are time and space ? Eternal and self-existoit
realities, or transformed sensations, or mental forms
somehow imposed upon chaotic sense materials? A
lifetime may be devoted to studies which will convince
ua that no answer can be given. We may, however,
say in some sense, without fear of contradiction, that
in any case we cannot get outside our own conscious-
ni-ss. We know nothing directly except the modifi-
cations of our consciousness, thoughts, sensations,
emotions, volitions and so forth ; and all statements
of knowledge carry with them a reference, explicit or
implicit, to the knower. An object without a subject
is a meaningless phrase. The basis of the knowledge
of every individual is his own current of consciousness,
which is transformed into knowledge by reflection.
What, then, are wd* doing when we raise tins vast
structure of physical science, composed essentially
of time and space formula) ? We are filling up the
gaps in our immediate perceptions. Each man’s


136


WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


experience is fragmentary, discontinuous, and narrow^
He sees infinitesimal arcs, and connects them by
drawing the whole circle. We extend the range and
supply the intervals of our knowledge. We are doing
so somehow every instant of our lives, and when we
reach the furthest limits of the physical sciences we
are still doing the same. I shut my eyes for an
instant, and believe that my pen and paper are still
there. 1 believe that I should see them if my eyes
were open, and that other persons may see them still.
If I look back to the past, or forward to the future, or
away to the furthest abysses of space, I am carrying
on the same construction. I am ‘ producing ’ the
curve of which a minute element is before my eyes, I
form, then, a kind of hyiwthetical consciousness, of
which my own is an essential pai’t, but which extends
indefinitely beyond it. By this artifice (if it may be
called so) I state a general truth without explicit
reference to my own i)erceptions. I do so when upon
seeing a man first at one window and then at another
I supply the intermediate positions and infer his
relations to other objects by correcting my own
perspective. Kepler constructed the solar system in
the same way. He observed a planet in certain
position^ ; he supplied the intermediate positions by
discov^ing the curve which passed through all the
observed positions; and to do so he had to place

Q

hipsself in imagination at a different point of view
from which the relations asserted to exist might be


WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


1S7


matters of direct observation. All scientific progress
is a development and a more distinct articulation of
the same procedure.

I do not inquire what is the ultimate meaning of
space, or ‘outness,’ what precisely we mean when we
say that a thing is ‘outside’ ourselves or outside
another thing. I only say that we are not in this
process getting rid of an observer, but only hypo-
thetically extending his powers. We are ‘ producing ’
our curves : seeing in imagination what wo should
see through a telescope or a microscope, or should
sec if we moved to Sirius, or could touch a raj’ of
light ; what we should see if we could live a thousand
years hence or had lived a thousand years ago : or if
wc could see the back of our heads as well as what
lies m front of us. W’'o are still only doing what we
arc doing when we shut our eyes or imagine the chair
behind u.s. Wc thus obtain formulae which are
independent, in a sense, of our particulai* position.
Yet they are so constructed that when the necessary
data are filled in they give the experience corre-
sponding to that position.

‘ This is a table ’ is a phrase which in the first
place asserts that I have a certain set of organised
sense-impressions. But it also means that you have
an analogous set of impressions, and that if we
changed places we should also change sensations. It
is a compact formula, which not only indicates the sen-
sations of an observer a particular time and place.


188


WHAT IS MATEHIALISM ?


but also gives the sensations of every other observer as
those which would be perceived by the same observer
at other times and places. It is a general formula
with an indefinite term, such that when that term is
filled in or defined it indicates the sensations corre-
sponding to any particular case. We arc, as it were,
postulating an omnipresent consciousness, which may
be for the moment focussed at any particular point,
and the one phrase defines what will be its perceptions
at that point. This habitual reference to the common
instead of the particubu’ generates the impression
that I am somehow laying down truths, ‘ objective ’ in
the sense of having no reference at all to my indi-
vidual experience. Such formulae have been con-
structed from the experience of the race at large, and
therefore arc independent in one sense of my personal
experience. Yet, in fact, each man is necessarily his
own base, from which all things are measured for him ;
and he only discovers wider formulas in which his own
experience is included, not formulse from which it is
excluded. We do not get a step nearer towards the
abolition of the subject. When wo speak of what
happened when the solar system was still an incan-
descent mist, we are only extending our experience, as
we do when we say that the fire is still burning in the
room we have left. To say wha^ would or did happen,
outside of all experience, actual or potential — that is,
supposing all experience to be annihilated — is to use


WIIAT IS MATEKUIJSM?


139


■words without meaning, as much as to say what I feel
when I don’t feA.

If I have not said, I have aimed, I think, at say-
ing something which will, perhaps, be admitted in
regard to the physical science — to the body of truth
made up of time and space fonuulie. But the further
question remains, What other kinds of knowledge can
we attain, and how are they related to this ? So far
we are at the materialist point of view. We are
enabled to see wViat we should see with increased
faculties, and to trace the changes of the vision back-
wards and forwards. But nothing is so far revealed
to us which is not an object of sight, or of one
of the senses. What arc the h«.nses concerned in
weaving this marvellous web of the outward universe
may be disputed; but they do not in any case in-
clude all the affections of our consciousness. A stone,
according to common-sense, is a reality; but so
undoubtedly is a toothache. Although the pain is
associated in some sense with certain objects exist-
ing in space, in this case with a tooth in a certain
visible condition, it is merely associated. The pain is a
perfectly distinguishable sensation by itself, and the
emotions — fear and love and anger, for example— are
just as ‘ real ’ as the stone, or as the sensations jvhich
reveal the. stone, to us. Why, then, if our various
feedings, using the word in the most general sense,
are all on the same plane ; if one has as good a claim
to jreal existence as the other ; if I recognise each


140


WHAT IS MATERIALISM ?


simply because it is an element in my reflective con-
sciousness, am I induced to assign Aiperior ‘ reality ’
to one class ? A man slaps my face ; have I not as
good a right to say that the pain is real, or the resent-
ment real, as that the hand or the face is real ? One
answer would seem to be simple. All knowledge of
the outside world is derived through the sensations of
sight and touch, and so forth, which constitute, or
are, in any case, implied in our perceptions of material
objects. 1 know of this room and this tabki because I
can see, touch, and grasp them. I know that there
is another person in it because I can see, touch, and
grasp his body. If my senses of touch, sight, and so
forth, could bo annihilated, I could have no k)iow-
ledge whatever of anything but my own immediate
feelings. Laura Bridgeman could acquire knowledge
through the sense of touch alone, without seeing or
hearing. But what could she have known had she
been also deprived of the sense of touch ? She might
have had a series of painful and pleasurable sensa-
tions; but for her tlie universe would have been
annihilated, or she would have been her own uni-
verse. I know of more than I can directly perceive,
but I know it by an inference. I see a man’s hand
tremble as I see a candle flicker. I infer a draught
of air from the flickering, that is, something the exist-
ence of which is again perceptible to the senses. I iyfer
that the man is afraid, but I can never directly per-
ceive his fear. The inference is no doubt justifiable,


WHAT IS MATEEIAUfiM ?


141


because the belief in a consciousness like my own,
associated in soi|pe way with certain sensible manifesta-
tions, enables me to foresee a number of phenomena,
the existence of which can be again verified through
the senses. A man whose hand trembles is frightened ;
as I know because my own hand trembles under simi-
lar emotions, and because a man with a trembling
hand generally runs away. My knowledge, however,
that there is a man at all, and my further knowledge
that he has the emotion of fear, is derived -through
the same senses which reveal to me the existence of
the chair and the table.

In both cases the judgment of ‘ reality ’ implies
a certain inference. When I say there is a real
candle, I assert implicitly that the candle is there for
you as for me ; 1 make an inference which, if I am
dreaming, may be a wrong inference, and, indeed, is
often wrong. A fact, says somebody, is a bundle of
inferences. I assume, to justify the inference, that we
live in the same world, or that certain general formulae
are true both for you and me, and will give either
your sensations or mine when the proper data are
inserted. But I am not directly conscious of your
sensations ; I can no more see your sensation of light
than 1 can see your emotion of fear. Matirialists
are, indeed — and it is'characteristic of the difficulty—
sometimes betrayed into erroneous language upon
tins point. They find themselves logically bound to
speak of a blue sensation instead of a sensation of


142


WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


blue. To me, and I fancy to common-sense, such a
combination of words is without a meaning.

The difference of the two processes indicates the
source of the illusion which wc are considering. We
construct a universe extending indefinitely in space
and time beyond our own immediate perceptions.
We thus obtain general statements of fact which bear
no explicit reference to our own personal experience.
We fancy that we thus get an ‘ objective ’ universe in
the sense in which ‘ objective ’ means outside all con-
sciousness, instead of meaning a formula common to
all consciousness. The formula which is true for you
and me, and for all other conscious beings, is taken to
be true without any reference to consciousness at all.
We forget that not only the sensations of light and
heat, for example, have no meaning apart from a
sentient being, but even that light and heat as used
for the supposed physical causes of the sensations,
vibrating atoms and so forth, have no meaning apart
from the percipient being. Then, further, as we know
of emotions other than our own only through the
sensations which inform us of material objects, as we
know the man’s fear only through his trembling, we
attribute a superior reality to the sensations which
determihe the knowledge. My own consciousness
tells nfe that fear is as * real ’ as sight or touch is.
But as I know of your fear only through the visible
aiyd tangible manifestations, I take it to be somehow
dependent upon them. Because my knowledge is


WHAT IS MATERULLSM?


14a


dependent, I take the fact to be dependent. The
order of inferen<jp is mistaken for the order of exist-
ence. The emotion is taken to be an appendage to the
external sign of emotion. Thus, we first forget that
all knowledge of the facts implies an inference from
our sensations ; then we attribute a reality to sensa-
tions apart from the sensitive being ; and we suppose
the other modifications of consciousness revealed to us
through the sensations to be leas real, or to be depend-
ent upon the sensations for what reality they possess.

The argument which I have thus tried to express
has, I should say, two applications. In the first
place, it condemns Materialism so far as Materialism
professes to state that ‘ matter ’ is an ultimate reality,
and that thoughts and emotions are mere nothings or
phantasms. Wo are sometimes told that the solar
system was once a ‘ cosmic mist,’ a whirl of incoherent
atoms, which has gradually shaken down into such
order as we see around us. In the early stage no
human consciousness was possible, and therefore we,
organised and Uving beings, are merely the product
of a blind fate. Assuming the fact, which at least
cannot be disproved, we have only to reply that all that
science can reveal to us is not a state of things which
existed outside consciousness, but that which waft per-
ceived if there was a perceiver. We are still ftnly
extending backwards the series of our own sensations.
I abstract from my own consciousness, but not from,
consciousness itself. I cannot get into a world outside of


144


WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


all experience. We try to do so, verbally at least, when
we invent the imaginary substratum ^ which sensible
qualities somehow stick, instead oi using the word
as a mere name for the coherence of certain groups
of sensation. We cannot peep behind the curtain.

Immerst iu darkness, round the drama rolled.

Which for the pastime of eternity

Thou didst thyself enact, conceive, behold.

The curtain is the reality. The effort to look
behind it is an effort to get out of ourselves. It
only plunges us into the transcendental region of
antinomies and cobwebs of the brain. The un-
knowable, which lies beyond, is not made into a
reality by its capital letter. It is a mere blank,
with which we have nothing to do. And as for the
* blind fate ’ in which materialists are charged with
believing, it is a mere word ; except, indeed, that it
indicates that we cannot get into a region beyond
knowledge which will explain to us why there should
be a world at all, or why it should be such a world as
we know. We must be content to trace the facts
and their laws ; to infer to-day from yesterday, and
to-morrow from to-day. But we can discover no
‘ fate *■ or * compulsion,’ blind or otherwise, beyond
the 'facts. If we infer to-day from yesterday, we
may equally infer yesterday from to-day. We may
run, backwards or forwards, by the same right along
the chain of causes. If I am a ‘ necessary ’ conae-


WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


146


quenoe, given the atoms, the atoms were a ' necessary '
antecedent, gi^^n me. I may go from causes to
effects, or effects to causes ; take what is called, when
we wish to be philosophical, the ‘ teleological,' or the
evolutionist view. They give merely the facts given
in different orders. So far as we admit causation—
and the admission is generally said to be legitimate
— we are merely denying the intrusion of an intrin-
sically unaccountable clement into the universe. We
are, in fact, simply taking a continuous series and
arbitrarily dividing it into two parts. We join them
again by a gratuitous hypothesis of an imaginary
‘fate,’ or ‘necessity.’ We have, in reality, simply
the facts themselves. If living beings arose from
inanimate matter, that does not prove that Ufe is a
figment, but only that matter had other properties
than those which we please to attribute to it. The
difficulty is one of our own making, and we make it
by the assumption that we know something, or pos-
sibly might know something, about matter ‘ in itself,'
that is, apart from thought or feeling.

The same remarks apply to the supposed danger
of resolving thought into mechanical processes. We
are forced to suppose that somehow or other every
mental process corresponds in some way to a cerebral
process. To define the ‘ some way ’ is the problem
whi§h is at present hopelessly, or all but hopelessly,
obscure. We are at the very threshold of the science,*
even if there be a conceivable science. Rather, it

L


146


WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


seems that in some sense the coincidence must always
remain as an ultimate datum of ok'servation. We
must apparently believe that when Shakespeare wrote
‘Hamlet,’ or Newton the ‘Principia,’ some corre-
sponding process took place in the little lumps of
matter which we call their brains. If, to make a
bold assumption, we could say how the two processes
correspond, to what would our achievement amount
We should, 1 think, have learnt what Berkeley called
a natural language. Each process would be a ‘ sign ’
of the other. When Shakespeare was writing ‘ To be
or not to be,’ we should know that certain modifica-
tions of his nervous system took place simultaneously
with the occurrence of certain thoughts and emotions
in his consciousness. The students of ‘ psychophysics ’
are industriously labouring at the fringe of such
inquiries. They are trying to make out certain
natural hieroglyphics which correspond in some in-
definite way to a language which is unknown, and of
which even the grammatical construction is a mystery.
If ever they obtain trustworthy results, we shall still
know nothing but the bare fact of a coincidence.
When I, looking into your brain, have certain sensa-
tions,,! shall know that you have certain thoughts.
But,such a knowledge would not tend in any degree
to weaken the conviction, which rests upon evidence
as clear as any scientific proof, that a n^n’s
‘passions affect his conduct: that love, and hate,' and
lust, and fear, do determine our actions ; although we


WHAT IS UATEBIALISM?


147


might, on this hypothesis, show that they were
invariably acco&panied by certain physical manifesta-
tions. At the worst, we should come to some such
conclusion as was adumbrated by Locke in the pro-
position, which seemed so scandalous to his contem-
poraries, that God might superadd a faculty of thinking
to matter. That would be to become materialists, with
the explanation that matter was itself a kind of spirit
When we know what matter and spirit are, we may
settle whether the conclusion is really scandalous or
not. There is, 1 have said, another application of
our doctrine. It has already been indicated in the
foregoing. We escape from the materialist conclusion
by always keeping in mind the limitations of know-
ledge, or, in other words, by refusing to admit mere
empty phrases as solutions. If we keep to the
so-called common-sense point of view, we are left
with two entirely disparate entities, matter and spirit,
which cannot be brought together without a confusion
of thought. If, as philosophers, we become sensible
of this incoherence, and try to meet scepticism by
pronouncing time and space to be independent
realities, we get a solid mathematical universe of
indestructible matter, with the soul looking on from
a pineal gland or elsewhere, unable really to influence
it, and only brought into connection with it by a
sia»nding miracle. If we pronounce time and space
to be merely subjective, we take leave of all relation
to^ fact, and verbally construct the universe out of


148


WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


bare logic, or we create a mystical theory from emo-
tions cast into some show of logical f£rm. Bat such
constructions, however ingenious, can lead to no
conclusion, for they have renounced the only basis
upon which genuine knowledge can be systematised,
and end in presenting a shifting phantasmagoria of
vision, coloured, as dreams are coloured, by the pre-
dilections of each dreamer. We have to hold fast to
the realities. We must recognise the truth which is
distorted by the materialist conclusion, and is yet
always bringing it forward m spite of the absurdities
to which it leads. Emotions and feelings, I have
said, are as ‘real ’ as stocks and stones. They play
as real a part in the great drama, and from them it
derives its whole interest for us. But, as I have also
said, we can only know of the feelings of others
through our sensations. Each of us is an absolute
unit, cut off by an impassable abyss from a direct
knowledge of other consciousness. But we weave the
whole universe out of the senses, which somehow
indicate the varying relations of bodies, and, through
them, of other conscious beings to ourselves. Time
and space are the warp and woof upon which is
embroidered all the shifting scenery of conscious-
ness. ^ By means of it signals are thrown out to
us from other centres : our 'isolation ceases, and
our very thoughts are built up by the action apd
reaction of other minds. From the living body
which I see or touch I infer unhesitatingly the


WHAT IS MATERIALISM? 149

existence of a mind analogous to mj own, for only
so can I expl&in its actions. The belief in the
existence of others is part of my most fundamental
convictions; and my whole system of thought is
developed through the constant necessity of har-
monising my thoughts with yours. The meaning of
objective truth is, simply, that which is true both for
you and me. When I come to such a neutral ‘ form ’
as space or time, which is taken to be identical for
us all, 1 can no longer call it either objective- or sub-
jective, or I may call it indifferently either. From
the fact that it belongs to all percipient beings as
percipient, we may infer that it is an essential
property of thought, or is an ultimate condition of
thought. It does not matter which.

At this point we come to that question with which
Materialism is most frequently identified in popular
discussions. I hold, like everybody else, that there
are other centres of consciousness besides my own.
Does this, then, imply a belief in a ‘ soul,’ and, if so,
in an immortal soul? Can that belief be resigned
without giving up a belief in volitions, emotions,
and reason ? The materialist is popularly aefined as
a person who disbelieves in a soul, and is, therefore,
among other things, logically bound to be a brute.
One remark, however, is obvious in this connection.
In^ the earlier stages of belief the soul is itself re-
garded as material. It is stiU in want of fire, food,
and clothes ,* it requires support as a kind of outdoor


150


WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


pauper, and gradually dissipates like a vapour if it
does not prolong existence in some wappy hunting-
ground. Moreover, materialist conceptions of the
soul long survive the savage state. ‘Franciscus
Bibera,’ says Burton in the ‘ Anatomy of Melan-
choly,’ * will have hell a material and local fire in the
middle of the earth, two hundred miles in diameter.
But Lessius will have the local fire far less, one Dutch
mile in diameter, because, as he demonstrates, that
space cubically multiplied will make a space able to
hold 800,000 millions of damned bodies (allowing
each body six-feet square), which will abundantly
suffice, because it is certain that there will not be
100,000 millions of the damned.’ General Booth’s
followers might dispute the figures, but hardly the
principle. The pictures and sermons by which the faith
of the ignorant is stimulated, the proofs of a ‘ spirit ’
world offered by beings who untie knots and write
upon slates — and must therefore be immortal— are
sufficient illustrations of the popular mode of thought.
Indeed, there still seems to be a vague impression
that a body which is burnt instead of buried will be
in difficulties at the Eesurrection.

This is no accident of belief. Of course, every
reasonable person explains these sensuous images as
mere symbolism intended to cbnvey a higher truth.
But the question is. What remains when the
imagery ‘ is banished ? What conception remains
when yon seriously try to think of the soul apart


WHAT IP StATERIALISJa^*


151


from all embodiment? Leibnitz maintained, and
plausibly, thabi every created soul must have a body
of some kind. The reason seems to be given by
vrhat T have already stated. We know of another
consciousness only by means of the sensations which
reveal the body. Our inference is justified because
the assumption explains the actions of the body.
1 knock down a man and an image, and both fall
because both are material. But when the man
gets up and knocks mo down, the result is not
explicable by any merely mechanical action, and
is fully explicable (that is, fully reducible to intelli-
gible ‘ laws ’) by the assumption that he has certain
passions and volitions. But annihilate the medium
through which we know of thc«e passions and volitions,
and we find it difficult even to think of the conscious-
ness behind : for there is nothing in front. Strip off
all the web of sense-given fact which runs through
and supports our whole conceptions of the world, and
the residuum is painfully Uke nothing. Can we form
any picture of thoughts and emotions going about
bodiless and bare, \vith no link between them and
ourselves ? Aro they not superfluous, if not rigorously
unthinkable ? Can we assert that there is anything
knowable or conceivable which has not a*tnaterial
aspect ? We can make a distinct picture of fiell, as
Bibera and Lcssius seem to have done, because we
aro allowed to leave material bodies to be damned.
But it is very difficult to form any conceptions of


152


■WHAT IS MATEBIALISM?


heaven, \7here the souls are etherealised so as to have
no bodies at all. They are not aUowed material
pleasures or bodily appetites. It is impossible even
to understand emotions in an eternal state where
nothing happens and no action is rigidly possible.
Even the ecstasies become unintelligible. Nothing
seems to be left but purely intellectual perception, an
eternal consciousness that two and two make four,
which i» not, after all, a very appetising prospect.
What, indeed, can the most sublime philosophers or
poets tell us about the soul, if they are in earnest
when trying to present it without even the most
rarefied fragment of matter ? Its very organisation
seems to be dissolved. We know, indeed, the so-
called arguments for the existence and immortality of
the soul. I am not sure whether it is orthodox to
believe in them, or to consider that the belief requires
a revelation. The argument for immortality has,
indeed, a parallel which may be impressive. The
physicist gives us his version of the old doctrine, ex
nihilo nihil, and tells us that the absolute creation or
annihilation of a particle of matter is unthinkable.
Even the orthodox, who assert creation from nothing,
admit that such a process requires Almighty power ;
the incohceivable operation of an Inconceivable being.
It seeifls to be our spontaneous impression that matter
is really the permanent clement. Our thoughts and
faQcies change and dicker, rise and vanish, while our
bodies remain permanent objects of consciousness.


■WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


158


l!he animvla, ragula blamlida, is a flitting phantom
Vrhich cannot h%ld its own in this solid world. But
if we resolve to give up ‘ matter ’ in the transcendental
sense, as a substance independent of thought, this
contrast would vanish. There is nothing but con-
sciousness : the perceived or the perceivable, and
therefore always some perceiver. An eternity of
potential percepts would seem to carry with it some
statement of an eternity of perception. If all that
we can know or perceive means only transformation,
evolution, change, but newj- actual interpolation of a
new or elimination of an old element, then the
‘objective’ formula should be in some way trans-
latable into a ‘ subjective.’ But this doctrine, what-
ever may be said for it, does not conduct us to what
is called ‘personal immortality.’ We know that
arguments iipon that subject lead to results which are
arbitrarily excluded. We cannot give ourselves souls
without giving them to our dogs, and if to our dogs,
perhaps to plants. It is still clearer that a belief in
posthumous existence naturally implies a belief in
pre-existence. ‘ To begin implies to end ’ ; and to end
implies to begin. If every cause has an eftect, every
effect has a cause. If the extinction of a soul is un-
thinkable, BO is its creation. If you can reallylbelieve
in the creation of a ^oul, that is because, for*some
reason, the imagination which resents the intrusion
of a now stone or a new force into the universe does
not resent the intrusion .of so flimsy a thing as a soul.


154


WHAT IS MATEKIALISM?


For the same reason, it cannot logically resent the
extinction. Had our religious opinions been deve-
loped from a different stock, we should have found it
quite as easy to demonstrate the transmigration of
souls as their future existence. The doctrine of pre-
existence, indeed, was suppressed (as I suppose), not
from philosophical objections, but on account of
obvious ethical considerations. We are told that a
beginning of life is inconceivable. Living organisms
cannot have been developed, as it is not shown that
they have been developed, from inanimate matter.
Every living thing, then, is a continuation of some
previously living thing ; and the soul should therefore
be continuous with a previous soul. I was ai’toally
part of my father, and he, if we go back far enough,
with Adam and Adam’s prehuman ancestors. The
different souls are offshoots from some previous soul,
and the unity of race implies an actual unity of sub-
stance. The argument seems to be more consistent
than the argument for a separate creation of souls.
"Why should we not accept the theories which suppose
a continuous emanation &om, and absorption into, the
world soul ? We can, of course, put together a set
of words about the absolute unity and simplicity of
the soul. But mere word-barriers will never restrain
a thought guided by obvious ahalogies. All that has
to be done is to put our theory into the premisses, and
bring it out triumphantly as the conclusion. I shall
not attempt such arguments.. My own soul, as far as.


•WHAT IS MATEIOALISM?


165


I can judge, is a highly complex thing, and quite
capable of beihg dissolved or absorbed. But such
questions must be left to the philosophers, who have
found every variety of opinion thinkable and im-
thinkable. I am content to say that, so far as I can
judge, nobody knows anything about it ; and that we
part company with reason once and for all when we
try to reason about a thing without resting upon the
experience which alone testifies to its existence or
reveals the laws of its action. Perhaps it would even
be thought wrong to be dogmatic upon such a ques-
tion ; were it not that it has been made a duty to be
absolutely confident in answering questions where no
two thinkers agree, or w'here the only agreement is
that knowledge is impossible. I am fully content on
such matters to accept authority ; that is to say, the
authority of competent rcasoners, which has shown,
as I think unmistakably, that there is a majority
against any particular view, and that no view can be
admitted except as a matter of arbitrary choice.

Without going further, we can turn to the ethical
aspects of Materialism, upon which, in fact, the greatest
stress is laid in popular controversy. To call a man a
materialist is to say more politely that he is — or, upon
his own showing, is bound to be — a hog ; and that
his hopes and fears ‘turn exclusively, as Carlyle put
it,, upon the abundance or scarcity of pigs’ wash.
Materialism, according to Comte, was the explanation
of the higher by the lower (in his classification of the


166


WHAT IS MATEIUAUSM?


sciences)— of the laws of life, for example, by the laws
of mechanics. A thoroughgoing materialist is still,
as I have argued, at that point of view from which he
has only to deal with the direct objects of the senses.
He applies the method which is legitimate, so long as
the phenomena concerned do not require the recognition
of other consciousness than his own, to those pheno-
mena which are only explicable through such a recogni-
tion. He should regard men, therefore, merely as
machines, acting not from volitions determined by emo-
tions, but from purely mechanical causes. He could
draw no line of distinction between a human arm and
the lever which it works. If we regard everybody
except ourselves as mere tools, we are, of course, at the
maximum of selfishness. There is no such thing as
morality, for there is no such thing as sympathy.
That such a position would be immoral needs no
demonstration. Virtue must be a sham, and love or
hate empty phrases. The question, however, occurs
whether such a state of mind is possible. To be
thoroughgoing materialists we must not only dis-
believe in other men's feelings, but in our own ; and
outside of a lunatic asylum we can hardly main-
tain that men, including ourselves, are only teapots or
eight-day clocks. The materialist, on this showing,
is logically inconsistent if he allows that he possesses
even the physical appetites. Even a drunkard, is
something more than a sponge. He imbibes liquid
when be is thirsty, but he has sensations, emotions, and


WHAT IS aiATERlALISM?


167


a will, if his volition only takes him to the public-house.
He still acts in*’a manner not to be explained by the
purely physical data. A man, indeed, who should
pay no regard whatever to the feelings of others, whose
only aim was the gratification of his own lust, and who
did not believe even in the lusts of others, would still
be a materialist after a fashion. He would say,
virtually, I have certain passions, but you are all
dolls, or, at least, I shall treat you as such. The
doctrine is illogical, unless upon a practically im-
possible theory of absolute egoism. I have argued
that, even in constructing a world for ourselves, we
proceed by assuming the existence of other conscious-
ness than our own ; and the progress of moralisation
consists in a parallel regulation of the emotions. Our
intellectual order is formed by recognising other
minds; and the social order by harmonising our
feelings with those of our fellow-beings. The con-
nection is so intimate that it is difficult to imagine a
materialism carried to the pitch of an actual disbelief
in any feelings at all, or even of any feelings but our
own. Yet it may be admitted that, if a man can
hardly keep himself at the stage of a piece ot wood, he
can sometimes contrive to remain pretty nearly at the
level of pigs’ wash.

One conclusion, hoArever, follows. We must always
distinguish a man’s philosophy — even supposing it to
be perfectly sincere — and his practical application of
it. My objection to Materialism, is, simply that it


158


WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


involves a contradiction ; and therefore I have a
difficulty what is its ‘ logical ’ result. If

two and t\^H|w five, what is the sum of three and
three ? Tha^!^ question with which I do not see
how to deal. And, in regard to Materialism, I have
a similar difficulty about the primary assumption. It
is the first step that costs. If any feeling can be
‘ explained ’ as a motion, perhaps our whole nature
may be explained in the same way. If you can
explain mere hanger and thirst, perhaps you can also
explain love in the most ‘ spiritual ’ sense of the'^
words, as absolute selfishness. The difference between
the philosophical materialist and his antagonist is not
that one asserts and the other denies the existence of
certain facts which we call volitions, emotions, and so
forth, but that they have different theories as to the
way of explaining them. Supposing the materialist
to be able to make that first leap across the chasm, I
do not see why he should not tMOgnise the reality of
the emotions for which he professes to account, and
assign to them the same laws of action as his
opponent. The materialism which is really immoral
is the practical, not the theoretical, materialism ; nor
do I believe that it springs from the theoretical. On
the contrary, the theory is so opposed to ordinary
common-sense, it is so impossible to argue a man out
of a belief in liis own emotions, that I do not see how
it could ever exert much influence. The ordinary
man cares for such theories as little as he cares for


WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


159


the most obscure dogmas that were ever nursed in
the brain of a fhystical. theosophist. Materialism in
the practical sense arises from whatever conditions
tend to isolate us from our fellows : from the grinding
poverty which limits a poor man’s thoughts to the
simple gratification of his physical appetites; or from
the isolation of a rich man, who discharges no useful
function in society and indulges in luxurious dreaming
as far as possible from the actual struggles of his kind.

But I am not merely enforcing the commonplace
— sound enough in its way — that a man is often
better than his philosophy— a fact but for which we
should, indeed, be in a poor way — but attributing a
more positive merit to materialists. In fact, it seems
to me that some of the men who were attacked by
that name did more than any of their contemporaries
for the improvement of mankind. They may have
thought themselves mere machines (as many of them
certainly did not), but they acted as if they really
desired the happiness of their feUow-creatures. When
the Churches were on the whole chiefly inclined to
preach that everybody should be content with the
position in which Providence had placed him, they
systematically studied the plans by which the pro-
vidential arrangements might be improved. Nor is
the explanation simply that they were inconsistent.
Their aim — and I hold it to have been a right aim —
was, briefly speaking, to apply scientific methods *to
social problems. They wished to systematise the obser-


160


WHAT LS MATERIALISM?


vationof the phenomena which must be studied in order
to found what we now call ‘ sociology.’ They were led
to crude assumptions and premature conviction that
a science— political economy for example — had been
definitely constituted, when, in fact, they had only
begun to see their way to a method. As the physical
sciences supply the type of systematic reasoning, they
sometimes assumed too hastily that sociology was nO'
more than a particular case of physical inquiry.
Nobody now doubts that they reached some very
crude results. But the introduction of a spirit of
scientific inquiry, of methodised and accurate obser-
vation of facts, was an achievement of the highest
possible significance. Moreover, it was true, although
the truth was no doubt seen in a distorted shape, that
social or moral science must be constituted, so far as
it can ever be constituted, upon a base of physical
science. It is because physical science has been so
far established that we can conceive the possibility, and,
in a modest w'ay, hope for the establishment, of some-
thing which may more or less deserve the name of a
science of human nature. The road, no doubt, will be
long, and short outs are doomed to failure ; but it is
something to have set our faces in the right direction.

This brings us to the radical contrast. The groat
religions of the world have cettainly been protests
against Materialism, taking the word in its practical
sense ; that is, they set forth ideals of life in which
the intellect and the emotions are represented, as


WHAT IS MATEBIALISU?


161


well as the mere physical appetites, and in which,
as a consequence, pure brutal selfishness ceases to he
the sole motive. But the doctrine was necessarily
presented in terms of that dualism which is accepted
by the common-sense of mankind, and which descends
from the old ‘animistic’ superstition. Man, it is
assumed, is made up of soul and body. To the soul
are assigned the higher faculties, and to the body the
mere animal instincts. If, then, I accept this dualism,
and deny the existence of the superior partner ; or,
even if 1 make the existence of the assumed soul
dependent on the existence of the body, 1 may be
supposed to deny the realit}' of all but the animal
instincts. This might be the position of a thorough-
going materialist. He might accept the antithesis
and deny the existence of one of the correlative
entities. What I should deny, however, is precisely
the validity of the antithesis. 1 believe in a man,
not m two men, one contained in the other like a
kernel in a fruit, and capable of sometimes walking
about separately. Nor do 1 assume that a^ the higher
faculties belong to one of these agents, and the lower
to the other. I do not believe that any metaphysician
can separate soul and body by logical analysis, any
more than 1 believe that a surgeon will som^ day
discover a soul by skilful dissection of the brain. It
is IJiis crude hypothesis which makes the well-meant
protest against Materialism subservient to doctrines
equally mischievous. The spiritualist is tempted to

M


162


WHAT IS MATERIALISM?


deny the existence of the body, and therefore to
deprive himself of all basis for veAfiable theories;
or he identifies matter v?ith evil, and condemns the
natural instinct as intrinsically bad. He becomes a
thoroughgoing ascetic in order to escape from ma-
terialism. The physical appetites arc not to be regu-
lated, but to be eradicated. Marriage is a teDi]^)orary
concession to human frailty ; and the highest life is
to leave the world, and flog yourself, and say prayers
at the top of a pillar. An eminent theologian ‘ com-
pares the history of religion to the fairy-story of the
mortal to whom it was granted to become whatever
he wished, and who rose through successive stages
to bo king, kaiser, and pope, and then wished to
become God, when he fell back to his original misery.
So, he says, the Eastern Christians tried to raise
themselves above the temporal world, and, finally, to
be as God in knowledge and felicity. And then at
once they fell back into barbarism, ignorance, and
filth. Their religion had become a m(‘re bundle oi
formula and rites, a religion of amulet^, fetishes, and
magic, so grovelling (be adds) that when Islam swept
it away the superstition was yielding to a more
spiritu^ creed. That is the penalty of trying to get
really rid of the facts, to hunt chimeras, and find
comfort in ecstasies and spiritual narcotics. The
enterprise is impossible, because, after all, we m^st
bhrrow our imagery from the sensible world ; and the

' Hamaok's Dogmen, QeschiciiU, ii. 414.


WHAT ]S MATERIALISM?


163


result is not to ‘ spiritiialise ’ by exalting the faculties,
but to materialise even the higher aspirations. If
Materialism would lead to brutalitj- and to logical
absurdity, spiritualism may lead to conclusions which,
practically carried out, would ini olve the decay or even
annihilation of human society, liy denouncing the
strongest ties by which it is hold together. Happily,
the common-sense of mankind was in the West at
last loo strong for its logic. It developed’ a creed
which was, at any rate, not incompatible with pro-
gress or with a practical appreciation of the value of
tht body and its instincts. Vet, according to the
official orthodoxy, we still have, ii. name at least, the
asswtion of a doctrine, incompatible not only with
Materialism, hut with science. The centre of gravity,
so to speak, of the universe is still to be placed in a
transcendental, not in a material, that is, not in the
real, w’orld. The ultimate end of man is not to do
his duty as member of a visible society, but to ‘ save
his soul,’ and get a place in the heavenly world.
Industriously as this doctrine is preached, and
Tehemently as the importance and reality of the
belief is asserted, the hopes and fears associated with
it have become vague and shadowy. It is di^cult
even to understand how men can have fancied them-
selves seriously to believe in the fantastic imagery of
the offi heaven and hell. It is impossible to take the
slightest interest in the old controversies which stirred *
all men’s hearts, when they fancied that they could


164


WHVT IS MATEBIALIRM?


determine by logical disputation, the nature and rela-
tions of the Supreme Being, unless we can translate their
dialect into terms of realities, and discover that what
was really at issue was something quite different from
what was ostensibly discussed. Any theory which
will really affect men’s conceptions of duty and happi-
ness must have its fulcrum on the solid earth, not in
dreamland. The Churches have found out the open
secret, though they are slow to confess it. A religious
body goes on offering prizes in heaven and threaten-
ing sinners with the pangs of hell. But a priest-
hood, if it rules, must rule by obeying. VVhat it has
leally to depend upon is the offer of something that
people really want. It has now to show that it 'can
help peasants to buy their farms or working-men
to do without capitalists. It must promise to abolish
pauperism, not declare that poverty is a blessing.
It must not preach the charity which implies depend-
ence, but the spirit of independence which makes
charity needless. It must give up the attempt to put
down socialism as wicked, and manage to persuade
socialists that they will find in it a powerful ally — or
slave.

The denunciations of Materialism are intelligible,
an(\ arc, beyond all doubt, aimed at real evils. It is
possible that, 2,000 years ago, the really immoral
materialism could only be assailed in terms of the
‘doctrine about ‘immortal souls.’ It is danger 0 |&
however, to use that weapon now. You are


WHAT IS MATERIALL'SM ?


165


your hearer that his better instincts depend upon his
acceptance of a* shadowy and fading belief. He will
not give up the body, which he can see and feel ; but
he may very easily disbelieve in his soul, and there-
fore, as you assert, in the instincts to which it cor-
responds. The true line, according to the Agnostic, is
to abandon this unmanageable and unverifiable theory
altogether, and to get rid of the recriminations as to
the reality of one world or the other. The higher
instincts are realities : realities as much as the bodily
appetites and the pains and pleasures of which nobody
can really doubt the existence. That is the critical
point, and one which is as verifiable as any other by
our direct consciousness and by systematic experience.
Who other problem — whether they are inherent in
metaphysical entities, of which it is only clear that
neither is conceivable alone— may be left to puzzle the
heads of those who have a turn for dialectics in vacuo.
The true question is. What are we ? not How long
will any one of us last ? If we are only thirsting and
hungering beings, let us cat and drink, whether we
die to-morrow or live to eternity ; we can do nothing
else. If we arc reasoning and loving and imaginative
beings, then we must love and reason and imagine
whether our little lives are ‘ rounded with a sleep,’ or
stretch on for uncountable seons. We Uve, in ‘^^ords-
worth’s famous phrase, by admiration, hope and love.
That is true ; but it is also true that we live by bread,
and can neither hope, nor love, nor admire, unless we


1G6


WHAT IS MATERULLSM ?


fill our stomachs. The material conditions of life are
essential ; although other conditions are eij[ually
essential to higher forms of development. And,
moreover, since all knovrledge of the outer world
comes to us through the senses, wo Jimst base every
social and other theory upon the knowledge so
attained. On such terms, indeed, it is impossible to
attain to any knowledge of that supposed transcen-
dental world, in which men have wandered, or fancied
themsehes wandering, so long and so fruitleosly; or
about those imaginary entities, among which we
divide our faculties, and wliich turn out after all to be
mere sensible experience disguised. We can look
backwards to past ages, or dimly divine some coining
events. We cannot get behind the curtain, which is
reality. If this be called Materialism, materialists we
must be. But it is a materialibiii which denies
neither the reality nor the value of the loftiest
instincts which ever animated saint or hero. It
takes those instincts for facts, and only disputes the
theories framed to account for them under the in-
fluence of philosojihical illusions. It does not,
indeed, seek to raise the value of moral qualities
by hyperboles about the Absolute and the Infinite.
Their value is simply that they are essential to the
welfare of the race. It asscrls their reality most
emphatically, for it connects them at every step wjth
the most undeniable realities. The whole social
framework is built up by instincts which gi'ow as the


WHAT IS MATERIALISM? 167

intelligence is developed, and the sympathy which
binds men togettier becomes wider and stronger as the
intellect takes us further out of ourselves. We do not
really exalt men by taking leave of the facts and
spinning those cobwebs of the brain which pass for
ontological ‘ systems,’ and are reaUy a futile attempt
to get rid of the fallacies involved in them all. Nor
is the ideal of human nature really raised by trying
to soar above the atmosphere. It means making the
best of the materials at our disposal, and- conformity
to the k}iown conditions of the world aroimd us,
instead of the construction of a fanciful palace under
the guidance of arbitrary fancy.


168


NEWMAN'S THEORY OF BELIEF

Sous persons, it is said, still cherish the pleasant
illusion that to write a history of thought is not,
on the face of it, a chimerical undertaking. Their
opinion implies the assumption that all contemporary
thought has certain common characteristics, and
that the various prophets, inspired by the spirit of
this or any other age, utter complementary rather
than contradictory doctrines. Gould we attain the
vantage-ground which will be occupied by our
posterity, we might, of course, detect an underlying
unity of purpose in the perplexing labyrinth of
divergent intellectual parts. And yet, making all
allowance for the distortions due to mental per-
spective when the objects of vision are too close to
our eyes, it is difficult to see how two of the most
conspicuous teachers of modern Englishmen are to
be forced into neighbouring compartments of the
same* logical framework. Ne^mian and J. S. Mill
were nearly contemporaries ; they were probably the
tyro greatest masters of philosophical English 'in
recent times, and the mind of the same generation


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


169


mil bear the impress of their speculation. And yet
they move in ^heres of thought so different that a
critic, judging purely from internal evidence, might
be inclined to assign them to entirely different periods.
The distance from Oxford to Westminster would seem
to be measurable rather in centuries than in miles.
Oxford, as Newman says,' was, in his time, a ‘ me-
diaeval university.’ The roar of modern contro-
versies was heard dimly, as in a dream. Only the
vague rumours of portentous phantoms- of German
or English origin — Pantheism and neologies and
rationalism — might occasionally reach the quiet
cloisters where Aristotelian logic still reigned supreme.
To turn from Newman’s ‘ Apologia ’ to Mill’s
‘ Autobiography ’ is, in the slang of modern science,
to plunge the organism in a totally different environ-
ment. With Newman we are knee-deep in the
dust of the ancient fathers, poring over the histories
of Eutychians, Monophysites, or Arians, comparing
the teaching of Luther and Melanchthon with that of
Augustine ; and from such dry bones extracting — not
the materials of antiquarian discussions or philo-
sophical histories— but living and effective light for our
own guidance. The terminal limit of our inquiries
is fixed by Butler’s ‘ Analogy.’ Newman ends
where Mill began. *It was precisely the stu*dy of
Butler’s book which was the turning-point in the
mental development of the elder Mill, and the cause
' Aiwlogidt 1st edition, p. 149.


170 NEW^LVN’fs THEORY OF BELIEF

of his sou’s education in entire ignorance of all that
is generally called religioii.’ The fouhdation-stone of
MUl’s creed is to Newman the great rock of offence ;
the atmosphere habitually breathed by the free-
thinker was to the theologian as a mephitic vapour
in which all that is pure and holy mentally droops
and dies. But, for the most part, Newman would
rather ignore than directly encounter this insidious
evil. He will not reason with such, but pass them
by with an averted glance. ‘ Why,’ he asks, ‘ should
we vex ourselves to find out whether our own
deductions are philosophical or no, provided they
are religious ? ’ ^

That free play of the pure intellect, which with
Mill is the necessary and sufficient guarantee of all
improvement of the race, forms, according to New-
man, the inlet for an ‘ all-corroding and all-dissolving ’
scepticism,® the very poison of the soul; for the
intellect, when not subordinated to the conscience and
enlightened by authority, is doomed to a perpetuity
of fruitless wandering. The shibboleths of Mill’s
creed are mentioned by Newman — if mentioned
at all — with unmixed aversion. Liberalism, fore-
shadowed by the apostate Julian, ' is now Satan’s
chief instrument in deluding the nations ’ ; * and
even “ toleration — though one fancies that here


' Mill’s Autohiographyt p. 38.

* Theory of HeUgimia Beliefs 1843, p. 351.

^ .4po%ia, p. 402. * Artatis, 1833, p. 117.


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


171


NeMrmau is glad to find an expedient for reconciling
his feelings to* the logic which had once prompted
him to less tolerant utterances — is a principle ‘ con-
ceived in the spirit of unbelief,’ though ‘ providentially
overruled ’ for the advantage of Catholicism.*

For the most part, as I have said, the two writers
are too far apart to have even the relation of direct
antagonism. But as both are profoundly interested
in the bearing of their teaching upon conduct, they
necessarily come into collision upon some vital ques-
tions. The contrast is instructive. Mill tells us
that the study of Dumont’s redaction of Bentham
made him a different being. It was the dropping of
the keystone into the arch of previously fragmentary
belief. It gave him ‘ a creed, a doctrine, a philosophy ;
in one among the best senses of the word, a religion ;
the inculcation and diffusion of which would be made
the principal outward purpose of a life.’ ® The pro-
gress of the race would be henceforward his aim ; and
the belief that such progress was a law of Nature
could supply him with hope and animation. Here
we have the characteristic divergence between the
modes of thought native to science and tlicology.
Utilitarianism, when Newman happens to mention
it, is, of course, mentioned as equivalent to Mate-
rialism — the preference of temporal comfort to
spiritual welfare. It prescribes as the ultimate end

• • Idea of a University^ 1875, p. 385.

Autobiography, p, 67.


172


NEWMAN'S THEOBY OF BELIEF


of all legislation the pursuit of ' \ 7 hatever tends to
produce wealth.’’ From Newman’s point of view,
it is less ‘a religion’ than the antithesis of a
religion, for the end which it proposes to men is,
briefly, the sum-total of all the seductions by which
the world attracts men from their allegiance to the
Church. To emphasise and enforce this distinction,
to show that the Christian morality tramples under
foot and rejects as worthless all that the secular
philosopher values as most precious, is the purpose
of his subtlest logic and keenest rhetoric. The con-
trast between the prosperous self-satisfied denizen of
this world and the genuine Christianity set forth in
the types of the * humble monk, and the holy nun,’
is ever before him. In their ‘ calm faces, and sweet
plaintive voices, and spare frames, and gentle
manners, and hearts weaned from the world,’ * he
sees the embodiment of the one true ideal.

What common ground can there be between such
Christianity and the religion of progress ? ‘ Our

race’s progress and perfectibility,’ he says, ‘is a
dream, because revelation contradicts it.’ * And even
if there were no explicit contradiction, how could the
tw’o ideas coalesce? The ‘foundation of all true
doctrine a‘ to the way of salvation’ is the ‘great
trutli ’ of the corruption of man. His present nature

, ' o/t/te 1844,p i>8. p. 328.

’ Idea of a Utmemly, p. 76,


NEWMAN’S THEOfiy OF BELIEF 173

is evil, not good, and produces evil things, not good
things.' His ‘improvement, then, if he improves,
must be supernatural and miraculous, not the spon-
taneous working of his natural tendencies. The
very basis of rational hope of progress is therefore
struck away. The enthusiasm which that hope
generates in such a mind as Mill's is therefore mere
folly — it is an empty exultation over a process which,
when it really exists, involves the more effectual
weaning of the world from God. In his sermons,
Newman aims his sharpest taunts at the super-
ficial optimism of the disciples of progress. The
popular religion of the day forgets the ‘darker,
deeper views ’ (darker as deeper) ‘ of man’s condition
and prospects.’ Conscience, the fundamental re-
ligious faculty, is a ‘stem, gloomy principle,* and
therefore systematically ignored by worldly and
shallow souls.* A phrase, quoted in the * Apologia ’ *
with some implied apology for its vehemence, is but
a vivid expression of this sentiment. It is his ‘ firm
conviction that it would be a gain to this country
were it vastly more superstitious, more bigoted, more
gloomy, more fierce in its religion, than at present it
shows itself to be.’< Tho groat instrument of his
opponents is as objectionable as their end is futile
and their temper shallow. The lovers of progress

• ‘ Parochial Sermons, v. 164. * Ibid. i. 359.

• * Apologia, p. 117. * Parochial Sermons, i. 368.


174


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF RELIEF


found their hopes on the influence of illumination in
dispelling superstition. ‘ Supcrstitiori,’ replies New-
man, ‘is better than your so-called illumination.’
Superstition, in fact, differs from religion, not in the
temper and disposition of mind which it indicates,
but in the authority which it accepts ; it is the blind
man groping after the guiding hand vouchsafed to
him in revelation.* The world, when trying to turn
to its Maker, has ‘ ever professed a gloomy religion in
spite of itself.’ Its sacrifices, its bodily tortures, its
fierce delight in self-tormenting, testify to its sense
of guilt and corruption. These ‘ dark and desperate
struggles’ are superstition when set beside Chris-
ianity ; but such superstition ‘ is man’s purest and
best religion before the Gospel shines on him.’ To
bo gloomy, to see ourselves with horror, ‘to wait
naked and shivering ajuong the trees of the garden ’
... ‘ in a word, to be superstitious is Nature’s best
offering, her most acceptable service, her most
matured and enlarged wisdom, in presence of a holy
and offended God.’ ®

The contrast is drawn out most systematically in
wo of the most powerful of the lectures on ‘ Anglican
Difficulties’ (Nos. VIII. and IX.). They contain
some of the passages which moat vexed the soul of
poor Kingsley, to whom the theory was but partly
intelligible, and altogether abhorrent. They are

■ See Lectwes on Jwtificatmi, 1838, pp. 364, Ac.

* Theory of ReUgiotis Belief, pp. 106-6.


NEWMAN’S THEOBY OF BELIEF 175

answers to the ordinary objections that Catholicism
is hostile to progress and favourable to superstition.
Newman meets the objections — ^not by traversing
the statements, but by denying their relevancy.
Catholic countries are, let us grant, less civilised than
Protestant ; ' what then ? The office of the Church
is to save souls, not to promote civilisation. As he
had said whilst still a Protestant (for this is no theory
framed under pressure of arguments, but a primitive
and settled conviction), the Church does not seek to
make men good subjects, good citizens, good members
of society, not, in short, to secure any of the advan-
tages which the Utilitarian would place in the first
rank, but to make them members of the New Jeru-
salem.* The two objects are so far from identical
that they may be incompatible ; nay, it is doubtful
whether ‘Christianity has at any time been of any
great spiritual advantage to the world at large.’ * It
has saved individuals, not reformed society. Intellec-
tual enlightenment is beyond its scope, and often
hurtful to its influence. So says the Protestant, and
fancies that he has aimed a blow at its authority.
Newman again accepts hLs statement without
hesitation. In truth, Catholicism often generates
mere superstition, and allies itself with falselbood,
vice, and profanity. What if it does ? It addresses
the conscience first, and the reason through the con-

t

’• Anglican Difficulties, 1850, p, 201. * Parochial Sermons, iv. 188
J Ufdversity Sennons, p. 40.


176


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


science. Superstition proves that the conscience is
still alive. If divine faith is found in alliance, not
merely with gross conceptions, but with fraud and
cruelty, that proves not, as the Protestant would urge,
that good Catholicism may sanction vice, but that
even vice cannot destroy Catholicism. Faith lays so
powerful a grasp upon the soul, that it survives even
in the midst of moral and mental degradation, where
the less rigorous creed of the Protestant would be
asphyxiated. If the power of saving souls be the true
test of the utility of a religion, that is not the genuine
creed which makes men most decorous, but that
which stimulates the keenest sensibility to the in-
fluences of the unseen world. The hope of ultimate
pardon may make murder more frequent, but it gives
a better chance of saving the murderer’s soul at the
very foot of the gallows.

Applying so different a standard, Newman
comes to results shocking to those who would deny
the possibility of thus separating natural virtue from
religion. Such, for example, is the contrast between
the pattern statesman, honourable, generous, and
conscious by nature, and the lazy, slatternly, lying
beggarwoman who has got a better chance of heaven,
because in her may dwell a seed of supernatural
faith*; * or the admiring picture of the poor nun
who ‘points to God’s wounds as imprinted on her
hands and feet and side, though she herself has been
' Anglican Dijgicidties, p. 207.


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF 177

instrumental in their formation.’ ' She is a liar
or a hysterical patient, says blunt English common-
sense, echoed by Kingsley; but Newman condones
her offence in consideration of the lively faith from
which it sprang. On his version, the contrast is one
between the world and the Church, between care for
the external and transitory, and care for the enclosed
and eternal. ‘We,’ he says, ‘come to poor human
nature as the angels of God; you as policemen.’
Nature ‘ lies, like Lazarus, at your gate, full of sores.
You see it gasping and panting with privations and
penalties ; and you sing to it, you dance to it, you show
it your picture-books, you let off your fireworks, you
open your menageries. Shallow philosophers ! Is this
mode of going on so winning and persuasive that we
should imitate it ? ' * Wc, in short, are the physicians
of the soul ; you, at best, the nurses of the body.

Newman, so far, is the antithesis of Mill. He
accepts that version of Christianity which is most
diametrically opposed to the tendency of what is
called modern thought. The Zeitgeist is a deluding
spirit ; he is an incarnation of the world, the flesh,
and the devil. That two eminent thinkers should
differ radically in their estimate of the world and its
value, that the Church of one man’s worship should.be
the prison of another man’s reason, is not surprising.
Temperament and circumstance, not logic, make the
difference between a pessimist and an optimist, and

* Anghcan Difficulties, p. 238. a Ibid, p. 210.


178


NEWMAN’S THEORY OR RELIEF


social conditions have a more powerful influence than
speculation in giving colour to the creeds of the day.
Yet we may fairly ask for an explanation of the fact
that one loader of men should express his conceptions
by symbols which have lost all meaning for his contem-
porary. The doctrine which, to Mill, seemed hopelessly
obsolete, had still enough vitality in the mind of
Newman to throw out fresh shoots of extraordinary
vigour of growth. To account for such phenomena
by calling one system reactionary is to make the facts
•explain themselves. The stream is now flowing east
because it was before flowing west : — Such a reason
can only satisfy those who regard all speculation as
consisting in a helpless and endless oscillation between
antagonist creeds. To attempt any adequate explana-
tion, however, would be nothing less than to write the
mental history of the last half-century. A more
limited problem may be briefly discussed. What, we
may ask, is the logic by which, in the last resort,
Newman would justifj his conclusions ? The reason-
ing upon which he relies may bo cause or effect ; it
may have prompted or been prompted by the osten-
sible conclusions ; but, in any case, it may show us
upop what points he comes into contact with other
teachers. No one can quite cut himself lodfee from

* m *'

the conditions of the time ; and it must be possible to
find some point of intersection between the two. lines
* of thought, however widely they may diverge.

The task is the easier because Mill is not separated


NEWMAN'S THEORY OP BELIEF


179


from Newman, as he was separated from Coleridge
or Maurice, by radical differences of intellectual tem-
perament. Newman is, like Mill, a lover of the broad
daylight ; of clear, definite, tangible statements.
There is no danger with him of losing ourselves in
that mystical haze which the ordinary common-sense
of mankind irritates and bewilders. From the age of
fifteen, he tells us, dogma has been the fundamental
principle of his religion.' Upon this point he has
nothing to retract or to repent. ‘ Liberalism ’ was his
enemy, because by liberalism ho meant the anti-dog-
matic prineiide the principle wliich would convert
religion into a sentiment, and therefore, for him, into
a drcuim and a mockery. Xu Oi;e, of course, could be
more sensitive to the mysterious element of theology ;
but, in his view, that dogma is not the less definite for
being mysterious. If, on one side, it leads us to the
abysses where the highest reason faints, yet, on the
other, it may serve as a basis for truths as clear-cut,
and peremptory as those of the physical sciences.

Tho resemblance might be extended to another
point. Newman has a scepticism of his own, which
sometimes coincides with and sometimes exceeds
the scepticism of Mill. He exceeds it, for he^some-
times sanctions that dangerous mode of a^jology
which would destroy the validity of the reasoning
prgeess itself m order to evade reasonable conclusions.
Si)ch, for example, is the remarkable passage in wliich
‘ A'pologia, p. 120.


180


NEWMAN’S THEOBY OE BELIEF


he meets the objection from the incompatible asser-
tions of Scripture and science as to the motion of the
sun, by saying that till we know what motion is we may
suppose both the apparently contradictory assertions
to be true.' So again, in the ‘ Grammar of Assent,’
our belief in the uniformity of Nature is regarded as an
illogical conclusion of the imagination,^ a doctrine which
he shared with the purely empirical school, but pushes
to a practical application which they would regard as
unauthorised. Here, as in so many cases, the typical
dogmatist is more sceptical than the typical sceptic.

It is more noteworthy that Newman frequently
insists upon the doctrine that physical science is con-
sistent with atheism. ‘It is a great question,’ he
says, ‘ whether atheism is not as philosoi»hically con-
sistent with the phenomena of the physical world as
the doctrine of a creative and governing power.’ And,
therefore, he admits Hume’s argument against
miracles to be valid from a purely scientific aspect of
things.® Elsewhere he admits the argument from
design (though not the argument from order) to be
inconclusive.'' The statement, however qualified, falls
in with the common assertion that a logical mind

* Thiktry of Religious Beliefs p. 350. This sentence, says the
author^ of the Nemesis of Faith, finally destroyed his faith in Dr.
Newman {Nemesis of Faith, p. 158, second edition).

* Qra/mmar of Assctit (second edition, 1878), pp. 78, 355.

* University Sermons, p. 194 ; also in Theory of Religious Belief,
pl). 186-7.

* Unw&rsity Semiorn, p. 70. It is right to add Dr. Newjnali’s

qualification of this statement: phenomena taken by them-


NEWMAN’S THEOEY OF BELIEF


181


must embrace either atheism or Catholicism.' The
powerful passagS which opens the ‘ General Answer to
Mr. Kingsley ’ in the ‘ Apologia,’ admits not only that
it is hard to state the argument for theism with pre-
cise logical shape, but that a contemplation of the
world would lead to ‘atheism, pantheism, or poly-
theism,’ were it not for the Divine voice which is
uttered through the conscience.* Either there is no
God, or He is separated from his creatures. The
world is ‘ out of joint with the purposes of it& Creator.’
Hume would infer that we cannot argue to a God
from the world ; Newman, that as we know of a God,
we must postulate a mysterious separation.

Although Newman is as certain of God’s exist-
ence as his own, it is plain that much of this falls
in with the argument, for example, of Mill’s essay on
Theism. His conviction is founded on a voice to
which atheists are deaf ; but in the interpretation of
the testimony open to both parties, the divergence
is only one of degree. There is, however, a character-
istic difference in the mode of approaching the pro-
blem. Though Newman’s writings abound in acute
logical discussions, they deal very little with the purely

selves, that is, apart from psychological i>henoineDa, apart from
moral considerations, apart from the moral principles by rrhich they
must be interpreted, and apact from the idea of God, which wi&es up
in the mind under the stimulus of intellectual training. The ques-
tion is, whether physical phenomena logically teach us, or, on the
•othfr hand, logically remind us of the being of a God.’ — Note Ijp
University Sermons, p. 194.

' Apologia, p. 323. ■ Ibid. pp. 377, 379.


182 NEWMAN’S THEOBVr OV BKIAEF

\-'V

philosophical question. There is no direct argument)^
for example, as to the various metaphysical reasonings
upon which theism has been defended 'or impugned.
Such arguments have, of course, presented themselves
to his mind ; but they have not sunk into it, and modi-
fied the structure of his thought. He denounces pan-
theism, atheism, and other forms of unbelief, but is not
interested in then' origin or logical meaning. He takes
for granted that Iiis hearers think of them with horror,
and possibly he feels himself that there would be irre-
verence in the open discus.sion of such sacred topics.

His scepticism is of the historical variety. It
implies the profound conviction that, although a
reality as well as a show of demonstration is pro-
ducible to duly-prepared minds for the central doctrine
of the faith, yet, as a matter of plain, undeniable fact,
no system of independent demonstrative theology,
such as philosophers have dreamed, has ever, esta-
blished itself in the world- Theologj' cannot assume a '
place amongst the sciences, which rest on their 'own
basis, and require no adventitious aids to commend
themselves to the unassisted intellect. Perhaps mci^ '
ought to be, but they are not in fact, convinced by the
whole^array of theological argument.

Some such scepticism is implied in that historical
method which, in one shape or other, is the great inno-
vating instrument of modem thinkers. Mill’s weak
^de is, perhaps, his inadequate appreciation of ^its
efficacy and applicability. The school, on the otW


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


183


hand, of which Newman is the chief leader owes
what philosophical interest it possesses chiefly to its
sense of the continuity of history, and consequently
of the importance of an historical mode of approaching
religious and other problems. Doctrines of evolution,
development, and so on, from which the historical
method is a corollary, imply that further light is to
be sought by a more systematic interrogation of a
wider experience, and, consequently, fall in with the
belief that the attempts to settle the plan of the uni-
verse by direct inspection of ideas existing ready-made
in our own minds are doomed to inevitable failure.
It is needless to speak of the potency of the new
method, which has for the first time rendered possible
an approach to a scientific treatment of religious,
ethical, and political problems. Perhaps it is more to
the imrpose to note briefly that it is a natural but
mischievous illusion to infer that such methods can
dispense with philosophy. The logic of facts does not
lie on the surface, to be picked up by the first observer
who comes by, but requires a collateral process of
preparing and testing and corresponding logical ap-
paratus. Newman’s writings seem to afford many
curious illustrations of the consequences of this
erroneous application of a sound method, and the
fallacies into which the subtlest thinker may fall when
his mind is not carefully guarded against the pre-
possessions which make historical arguments illusory.

Certain significant tendencies reveal themselves in


184


NEWMAN’S THEOEY OF BELIEF

ft

hifl eailier writings. Virtually ignoring infidelity, he
recognises his chief adversary in*^ popular Pro-
testantism. *This great and deadly foe,’ he says,
speaking of his former allies after his own (ion-
version, ‘ their scorn and their laughing-stock, was
that imbecile, inconsistent thing called Protestant-
ism. ‘ Th(j special ground of this scorn may be
gathered from the ‘ Lectures on Justification.’ They
arc, indeed, by no means easy reading, for every page
indicates the nature of the author’s intellectual
food. Extinct controversies are resuscitated ; we plod
through weary scholastic distinctions and refinements
derived from our outworn metaphysical systems ; and
wheix reason, perplexed by these subtleties, fails to
discriminate the blended elements of grace and nature,
we are ordered to prostrate ourselves before long
chains of texts, where criticism would be profanity.
We are expressly warned, indeed,* against ‘ philoso-
phising,’ or trying to reach ‘ general views,’ instead
of entering the ‘ strait and lowly gate of the Holy
Jerusalem ’ with bowed heads and eyes bent to the
earth. Had Newman never emerged from this region
of theological special pleading, the clo(j[aence which
occasionally animates the logic would not have saved
his w()rks from the moths.

llie essence, however, of his criticism is clear and
to the purpose. He argues that the Protestant doc-
trine of faith is an unfounded theory, and that hence
' AngHean Difficulties, p. 120. ' Justifkatvm (1S38), p. 32S.


NEWMAN’S THKOBY OF BELIEF


185


the whole theology reared upon it is ‘ shadowy and
unreal ' ; * whilst the creed is a dry heap of technical
jargon, the practical tendency is to reduce religion to
a mere sentiment. As the Lutheran leaven spread,
he says elsewhere,^ faith became severed from truth
aud knowledge, and religion degenerated into a senti-
mental pietism. Luther tried (that is the summary
of his historical view in the lectures on Justification)*
to save men from the bondage to works and obser-
vances by his doctrine of faitli ; but he left them in
bondage to their feelings. He introduced a more subtle
shape of self-reliance, ))y dispensing with Iheordinances
of the Church in favour of certain personal emotions.

Wliatever the force of this criticism as against
Luther or modern Protestants, it simply ignores the
philosophical difficulty. Luther’s attack upon ‘ works
and observances ’ had logical consequences which he
did not contemplate. The assertion that man can
have no meiit as towards his Creator fits into a
philosophy which is radically destructi\e, not only of
the abuses of an ecclesiastical system, but of the very
groundwork of all such systems. It is blasphemous,
says the Protestant, to suppose that the performance
of an outward rite can alter the position of a man in
the eyes of God, and that dipping a child hi water can
affect its spiritual condition. Man must be judged

by his intrinsic nature, not by the accidents of his

0

4 Jitstification, p. 300. * Idea of a XJniuersity (fourth edit,), p, 28.

'' Justificatimy p. 889.


186


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


position. But, if so, his works can be valuable only
as the fruit of his nature ; and since he did not make
his own nature, he cannot be responsible for it.
Eeciprocal claims between the pots and the potter are
radically absurd. Thus, attacking the supernatural
claim of the Church, you are inevitably gliding into
pantheism; for you are, in fact, substituting the
philosophical conception of a first cause for the
anthropomorphic conception implied in the whole
ecclesiastical system.

The tendency of their own logic was concealed
from Protestants by their use of the old jihraseology.
Such doctrines as that of imputed merit really meant
the denial of aU real merit, along with the affectation of
preserving it as a mere legal fiction. The Protestants
of later timos preserved, the mask whilst they lost
the living force beneath. Their serious arguments
fell to the rationalists, whilst they clung to the set of
phrases under which the meaning had been covered.
And thus Newman, ignoring throughout the philo-
sophical objection, has a cheap victory over the
feeble deposit of barren technicality which had been
left behind. He can tear to pieces, with leonine
vigour, the mere suits of clothes, when the man haa
stepped out of them. Protestantism, in fact, was an
unstable compound of elements which refused to
enter into permanent combination. The rationalism
and the inherited superstition had decomposed, giving
tiro in the process ;to all manner of heterogeneoua


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF 187

products, each containing in itself a principle of
antagonism anS decay.

Here, then, we have the implicit application of a
course of criticism which became, as we shall see,
the leading principle of Newman’s method. Any
student of his controversial writings, such as the
‘ Prophetical Office of the Church ’ and the ‘ Essay
on Development,’ which mark successive stages of his
opinions, must be struck by one remark. -The man,
he will say,*i3 an Anglican, or has become a Catholic.
Why docs he not defend himself by proving his creed
to be true ? Let liim apply an <1 priori or an o posteriori
test, as he pleases ; exhibit its philosophical founda-
tion, or accept any straightforward mode of con-
fronting it with facts. But, instead of this apparently
most natural method, we are involved in a laborious
indirect process. Instead of examining, with an earlier
school of apologists, the evidence external or internal
of the position, our attention is invited at length to
apparently superficial analogies, such as the relation
between Anglicans and semi-Arians, or to the question
of the internal consistency of the creed, instead of
its correspondence to facts. A false theory, it is
obvious to remark, may witliin its own limits be as
consistent as a true one: the Ptolemaic as the
Copernican astronomy ; and we test their merits by
seeking for facts compatible with one alone of the
riyal doctrines. Why not apply the same method tt>
theological controversy ?


188


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


The answer has been already virtually suggested.
Some such method is necessary when approaching
the problem from the historical side. The historical
scepticism assumes that direct methods of proof are
practically inconclusive in such matters. History
seems to show, on a first inspection, that all philo-
sophies have been defended with equal plausibility,
and generate endless and internecine controversy.
But it suggests at the same time another kind of
test. For questions as to the logical talidity, we
may substitute questions as to the practical vitality
of creeds. If we assume that creeds live in pro-
portion to the amount of truth which they contain,
the plainest facts written on the very surface of his-
tory will tell us which are the truest. Newman’s
theory of development has a real analogy to the
scientific theories which use the same name. The
development of a system of belief may be compared
to the development of a species under natural selec-
tion. Amongst the varieties of belief which are
constantly generated, some have and some have not
the vital force necessary to secure their permanence.
Some creeds, again, survive for a period, though their
principle of life is rather artificial than natm-al.
They are analogous to the breeds of animals which
are maintained by cultivation, "that is, by being kept
by external force under a special set of conditions.-
They live in our gardens, but would perish or revert
to the original type if transplanted to the woods. As


iJEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


189


the gardener manages to preserve a hybrid plant in
his hot-honses, ^he statesman preserves the artificial
equilibrium of a body which, left to itself, would
split into its natural elements. There could not he
a better commentary upon this theory than in the
opening lectures upon Anglican Difficulties. There
ai'e, ho says, various kinds of life. ‘ The life of a
plant is not the same as the life of an animated being :
and the life of the body is not the same as the life
of the intellect; nor is the life of the intellect the
same in kind as the life of grace ; nor is the h'fe of
the Church the same as the life of the State.’ And
ho proceeds to argue, with admirable vigour, that the
life of the Church of England is something quite
different from the life of the Catholic Church. The
difference is, briefly, that the Church of England is
analogous to an artificial rather than a natural pro-
duct. rt is Erastian in principle ; it is held together
by Acts of rnrliament, and is an engine created of
statesmen in aid of the policeman. It is not the
incarnation of a system of thought, possessing an
ijidopendent vitality, and moulding the society which
it animates.

So soon as Newman had fairly grasped his
method, such a conclusion was so obvious tha! one
rather wonders that he should not have reached it
sooner. The ‘ Lectures on the Prophetical Office of
the^ Church ’ represent the most coherent phase of'
his Anglican teaching. He still in'clines to the view


190


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


that Borne is Antichrist, but assigns as a main
reason of this theory that very fact of the extreme
plausibihty, soon to become the conclusive logical
force, of its pretensions. The book, thrice rewritten,
and the product of three years’ labour,* shows by its
tentative and hesitating tone, and evoii by the eager-
ness with which some Bomanist dogmas are assailed,
the uncertainty of its author’s position. The ground
under his feet has a hollow sound. The method is
significant of the principles already indicated. Pro-
testantism, he says in the introduction, has shown
by its history that it tends to infidelity.- And the
reason is clear. Controversies with I’rfitostants are
‘ easy to handle, but interminable, la'ing disputes
about opinions: but those with Bomanists arduous,
but instructive, as relating rather to matters of fact.’ ®
In other words, philosophising tends to hopeless
scepticism ; and the remedy is the appeal to history.
Private judgment, as he argues at length,* is liable to
so many illusions that it cannot lead to agreement.
We must, therefore, turn to the old Catholic test of
Vincentius, and try to discover what is that doctrine
which has been held ‘ always, everywhere, and by all.’
To apply this tost is to show historically that the
Church of England may be legitimately affiliated to
that primitive Church whose unity was a visible and
palpable phenomenon, not a matter of careful, in-

i.

' Apologia, p. 140. * Proyhetical Office (1837), p. 26.

“ Ibid, p. 60. ^ Ibid, Lect. V.


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BEIJEF


191


ferenco and accpmmodation. The difficulties of such
a task are cancfidly admitted in the introduction, and
are obvious in the very structure of the book. For,
in the first place, we are led to so complex a theory
as to the mode of combining the authority of Scrip-
ture, antiquity, and Catholicity, and confining within
due limits the exercise of private judgment, that we
arc evidently in presence of an artificial, and there-
fore easily destructible, theory.* And, in. the next
place, whatever may be said for the via media which
results from this eclectic method, and however clearly
it may be traced to the great English divines of the
seventeenth century, it is open to the conclusive
objection that it has ‘ never existed except on paper.’ ®
Newman candidly puts this difticulty in its full
force, and admits that its advocates may seem to be
‘ mere antiquarians and pedants, amusing themselves
with illusions or learned subtleties, and unable to
gi’apple with things as they are. Wo tender no
proofs to show that our view is not self-contradictory,
and, if set in motion, would not fall to pieces, or
start off in different directions at once.’ Admitting
that there is force in these objections, he still thinks
the experiment of forming such a creed worth trying,
and urges some historical considerations to show that
Anglicanism has re*ally enjoyed some independent
vitality. It is not, however, by a doctrine thus
hesitatingly announced, criticised so freely by Its
• Prophetical Office, p. 160. * Ibid. p. 20.


192


NEWMAN’S THEOEY OE BELIEF


teacher, and openly admitted to bo in some sense an
experiment, that serious thinkers are to be attracted,
or the creeds of the mass moulded and dominated.
The vital inconsistency which underlies the whole
could not be expressed more vigorously than by its
author at a later period. Turning unsparingly upon
those who had stopped at the point from which he
advance<l, he asks them some unanswerable questions
Their religion, he says, is eclectic and original, and
yet they claim the authority of Catholic prescription.
‘ Say you go by any authority whatever, and I shall
know where to find you. . . . But do not come to
me with the latest phase of opinion which the world
has seen, and protest to me that it is the oldest.’
The Anglo-Catholic admits that he has begun by
doubting the authority of some creed in which he was
bred. Then he read the Fathers, and determined
which of their works were genuine ; ‘ which of them
apply to all times, and which are occasional ; what
opinions arc private, What authoritative ; what they
only seem to hold, what they ought to hold ; what
are fundamental, what ornamental. Having thus
measured, and cut, and put together my creed by my
own proper intellect, by my own lucubrations, and
differing from the whole world in my results, I dis-
tinctly bid you, I solemnly warn* you, not to do as I
have done, but to take what I have found, to revere
it,' to use it, to believe it, for it is the teaching of
the old Fathers, and of your mother, the Church of


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


198


England.’ ' The end of such a creed holds, it is
clear, no proportion with the beginning. Yon claim
for a mere arbitrary patchwork the authority due to
an organic system of ideas which can prove its
vitality by the ‘ active unity and integrating virtue ’ *
of the Church of which it has been the animating
principle.

Newman, then, had been on a false scent. He
had been really in search of a creed which might
claim to have been the soul of a flourishing and
vigorous organism. He had found only a creed
which, if it had ever been a working force, might
have justified the claim of the Church which held it
to be the most legitimate offshoot of such an organism.
To recognise the fact that he had been put off with
vacant chaff in place of grain, and taken a mechanism
for a vital growth, was with him to become a Catholic ;
and the essay on Dtvelopment shows the form in
which th( final solution presented itself to his
mmd.

The years following the composition of the ‘ Pro-
phetical Office ' were devoted to various works, his-
torical and speculative, which had more or less
bearing upon the na media theory. That theory
suddenly and totally collapsed, and the blow'came
from a remarkable ipiarter. The first doubt’ was
suggested by the history of the Monophysito con-
troversy. The final catastrophe was brought about*

* Anglican Difficulties, p. 134. ’ Ibid. p. 258.

• 0


194


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


by the affair of the Jerusalem bishopric.' Newman
himself has a quiet smile at the apparent oddity
of a conversion occasioned by the study of that delirat
senex ‘old Eutycles,' and by so futile a project as
the Jerusalem scheme. One may remark in passing,
that whilst Newman was thus occtipied with eccle-
siastical history, Mill was working into shape his
theory of induction. The same years saw the incuba-
tion of the system of Logic and the theory of Develop-
ment. The importance attached by Newman to
apparently trifling points is a natural consequence of
his point of view'. The great discoveries of science
may depend upon the careful examination of some
insigirificant phenomenon. And if we contemplate
Catholicism, m a similar way, as one of the greatest
facts in the world’s history, we may find the most
unequivocal manifestation of its laws of growth in
some apparently trifling series of events. Eenouncing
the attempt to judge of its doctrine by direct tests, we
have to consider how the organism behaves itself
under given conditions, it is not the magnitude of
the event, but its fitness to test the assumed principle,
which is important in this relation. The history of
the Monophysite controversy served as the record of
an experiment judiciously devised to lay bare certain
principles whose bearing might afterwards be verified
on a larger scale.

‘ The purpose of the theory of Development is to
' Apologiat pp. 209, 245.


NEWMAN'S THEORY OF BEIJEF


196


exhibit by histo|ical facts what he elsewhere calls the
‘ active unity and integrating virtue of the see of
Peter,’ It records the process by which Newman
convinced himself that the Catholic faith differs from
the doctrine of Anglicanism as a living organism from
a dead mechanism. The method, once more, implies
the old scepticism. Newman does not say that
there are no ‘ eternal truths .... which all acknow-
ledge in private,’ but that there are none sufficiently
commanding to be the basis of public union and
action. The only general persuasive in matters of
conduct is authority ; that is, when truth is in ques-
tion, a judgment which we consider superior to our
own.' We must not, therefore, prove the doctrine,
but discover the authority, for authority is, in a sense,
self-evidencing. Its historical manifestation, its
demonstrable unity, efficacy, and persistency will
establish its claims upon our allegiance. Newman’s
method is, therefore, to trace these attributes in the
history of the Church. In his language, this is to
prove that Catholic theology is a legitimate develop-
ment, instead of a corruption, of the primitive faith.
The tests which he apidies, though they do not affect
to be discriminated with logical accuracy, indicatg the
result sufficiently. ,

The first test of a true development is the obvious
onepf the preservation of the type. A corruption
desljFoys, as a development preserves, the essential
1 Development (1845), p. 128.


196


NEWMAN’S 'raiORY OF HEUEF


idea of a system. The second, is t]ie continuity of
principles. Doctrines expand according to the pecu*
liarities of the receiving mind and society; but, so
long as they are true to their law, they have a certain
character or genius, which can be felt when it cannot
be explained. In fact, a breach of continuity would
be marked by a discord corresponding to some hidden
inconsistency in the theory. Thirdly, as in the
physical world life implies growth, so doctrines, like
organisms, must have a power of assimilation ; and
the more vigorous the growth the greater the power.
Fourthly, a true development implies anticipations,
for we shall often detect the rudimentary germs of
the principles which are afterwards fully incorporated.
Fifthly, true development implies logical sequence.
Ideas grow in the mind of a man or of society by a
spontaneous and silent process, not by du-ect conscious
reasoning. But when they have thus grown, they
are, if legitimate, capable of being analysed and
methodised by the logical faculty. The process is not
carried on systematically, but the logical character of
the result reached by sponianeoiis co-operation of
many minds is a test that it has been ‘ a true develop-
ment, not a perversion or corruption, from its evident
naturalness.’ ' Their growth has been moulded, one
may say, by an implicit logic, which comes to light
when the whole is complete. Sixthly, a true develop-
*■ ment implies that the added doctrines are preservative
' Development, p, 82 .


NEWMAN’S THEOEY OF BELIEF


197


of the original jrced. They corroborate and illustrate,
instead of contradicting or arresting. And, seventhly,
we have the test of chronic continuance. A heresy
includes a principle of inconsistency, and therefore
dies out in a comparatively short period. It. has not
the true vital principle, but is an unstable amalgam
of truth with error.

Supposing that Newman is accurate in the appli-
cation of his tests, the cogency of the argument
is undeniable. The only complaint, indeed, i^ that it
is not pushed far enough. He has called attention to
a most important method; and though he is naturally
anxious to disclaim originality, it may be presumed
that the principle had at least never been stated with
any approach to the same fulness and vigour. The
historical test, thus understood, supplies us with a
stringent method for philosophical investigations.
The facts that a creed will ‘ work,’ that a certain
intellectual harmony exists amongst its adherents
which enables them unconsciously to arrive at logically
coherent results, that it can assimilate beneficial and
eject hurtful materials, that it can be rega’^ded as a
whole in such a sense that we can trace the rise of
component doctrines from their earliest germs tj their
fullest expression, that it has a vitality denied Jo its
occasional offshoots, prove undoubtedly that it is a real
cr§ed, and not a mere sham and mechanical con-
trivance. Everyone who feels the utter impossibility
of attaining to a true philosophy by his own unaided


198


NEWMAN’S TirEORY OF BELIEF


exertions, who realises the extent t^ which the in-
dividual must depend upon the race for his doctrines
as well as his material wants, must feel that the only
alternative to complete scepticism is, as Newman
urges, the affiliation of his own beliefs to some such
system of belief. Truth can only be definitively
established when it has been exposed to, aiul fully
answered, the application of such tests in the widest
possible sense. Verification by an individual is not
comparable to verification by ages or generations.
The voice of mankind must override the opinion of
the aeutest solitary thinker. And, further, the argu-
ment as against Anglicanism iiaid r\a moUn con-
trivances might well appear conclusive. If truth, and
the whole truth, is to be found in either system, it
must certainly be in the living system, and not in the
accidental aggregate of dogmas put together by states-
men and eclectic reasoners.

Newman naturally contemplated nothing wider
than this contrast. Protestantism he rejected because
he held — and surely with justice — that history proved
it to be the luilf-way house to infidelity. The choice
thus lay between Anglicanism and Catholicism. But
suppose that we do not shrink from the rationalist
solution, the argument loses its cogency. For, in the
first place, it is obvious to remark that the harmony
and vitality of Catholicism implies a relative, not ,an
absolute, value. It shows that the creed was con-
sistent, not that it was true ; that it was fitted for a


NEWMAN’S THEOEY OF BELIEF


199


certain stage of ilevelopment, not that it represents
the final stage. In fact, it is clear that a similar
harmony may bo obtained from Fetichist, or Poly-
theist, or Pantheist points of view. It shows that
certain fundamental conceptions underlie every appli-
cation of the theory, and produce harmonious results,
not that those conceptions are incapable of modifica-
tion or destruction. The creed flourishes so long as
they arc alive. But arc they immortal ? The logical
superiority challenged for Catholicism over Pro-
testantism exists in tliis sense, that Catholicism is a
consistent development of ideas natural and universal
at certain stages of thought, whereas Protestantism
combines ideas characteristic of different stages.
Hence, the Protestant -is constantly re-opening <|ues-
tions which the Catholic begs once for all. His creed
is less coherent, but it does not even tend to follow
that the part of it which he dt'rives fi*om the Catholic
is the solid part. If atheism and Catholicism are
both logically coherent, and if, we may add, the same
may he said for every form of religion which has
satisfied Newman’s test of vitality, we are evidently
only at the tlu’eshold of our inquiry. We have
lessened the number of candidates ; we have reduced
possible religions to a certain number of types ; but
we have still to choose between them.

^ And, secondly, it is obvious that, in seeking to
defend Catholicism, Newman has really explained
it. He has incidentally observed (in a passage just


200 NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF

quoted), that a development ib legitimate heeause
natural. That is precieely the point of the whole.
The imposing unity of the Catholic Church is the
ground upon which its advocates have always relied ;
and their ordinary arguments tend to imply that such
consistency implies supernatural guidance. That is,
of course, Newman’s own view. But what he has
really proved, by exhibiting and analysing so skilfully
the sense in which such consistency can be predicated
of the Church, is precisely this: that it is the work
of natural laws. The consistency is the result of the
spontaneous co-operation of many minds, guided by
that implicit and unconscious logic which re^.ultfc from
a unity of fundamental conceptions. The logic has
been felt before it has been proved. This comes out
curiously in various passages. Thus, for exam])le, he
illustrates the development of .Jewish policy by asking,
‘ Can any history wear a more human appearance tlian
that of the rise and growth of the Chosen People ?’ '
That which had been predetermnnd in the Divine
counsels is ‘afterwards reiiresentcd as the growth of
an idea under successive emergences.* Unbelievers
hold, as he says, that the Messianic idea was gradu-
ally developed in the minds of the Jews,** and grew to
full proportions by ‘ a mere human process ’ ; and his
theory partly conUrms this doctrine. It is significant,
again, that he faii'ly admits that analogy tells ‘ in one
point of view ’ against all revelation, and therefore

' Ibid, p. 1015,


' Develqpnientt p. 108.


NEWMAN’S TIIEOKY OF BEUEF


201


against the continued . existence of an external
authority.* And his answer appears to lie simply
that, if we admit any revelation, we may admit a per-
manent and infallible guide. But for that guidance
we should fall into permanent scepticism. Erom the
infidel point of view it is, indeed, clear that an his-
torical argument cannot be fairly applied to the
support of an authority which, by its very nature,
contradicts all the necessary c-mses of historical
inquiry. The exist (>nce of a Church such as he
postulates becomes part of the explanation of the
phenomenon. The advantages of a vast and highly-
organised religion'- society are so obvious as to explain
why it arose, and hou it helped to give consistency
and pei'inanence to the creed which it embodied.
Every proof of its utility is an explanation of its
origin ; and history, fairly treated, would prove that
the Church, like its creed, owes its power to the coni-
pletencbf. with which it satisfied the needs of a certain
stage of social doielopmont. The more he demon-
strates its utility, the greater the presumption that it
was strictly a natural giwvth.

And here comes in the final difficulty. The creed
and the Church are to be tested by their working
power. This is the meaning of that phrase which so
profoundly affected him — securvit judical wbis ter-
raruw.^ The ultimate test of a belief is its vitality —
it proves its right by exercising its power. That ik
* Develolwient, p. J22. - Aixflogicbi p. 211.


202


NEWTffAN'fS THEOKY OF BELIEF


true which will work. By all melons. But then,
how do you come to translate orhis termnm by that
small part of the world which has for a certain period
accepted the Catholic creed ? Why exclude the count-
less religions which have dominated different ages and
races '? Newman tells us elsewhere,’ briefly, that the
superior continuity and perfection t»f the civilisation
of the races of Western Europe entitle them to be called
by this imposing name, orhin Ivrrarum, Then apply
your test fairly. The Catholic religion is the true one
because it approved itself to those civilised races. If
it approved itself more as they became more civilised
the argument would be a powerful one. But the
obvious and, indeed, loudly-proclaimed fact, is that a
large part, and that the more civilised part of this
very arhis terrarnm, has rejected Catholicism avowedly
or virtually. It has ceased to dominate men in pro-
portion as they had become more civilised. If, then,
their acceptance of the creed is the proof of its truth,
their rejection must surely be a proof of its error.
Doubtless it contained troth, or it could not have
flourished. It must have contained error, or it would
not have pined.

This is, indeed, the conclusive and culminating
proof with many and most serious minds. They
have judged Catholicism by its fruits, and reject it,
not on particular arguments, but because the whole
bourse of history jiroves it to be incompatible with in-
' Idea of a University^ p. 250.


lOSWMAN’S THEOEY OF BELIEF


203


tcllectual and social progi'ess beyond a certain stage.
It no longer satisfies Newman’s tests; it has lost
its power of assimilation and of growth, and is fast
becoming a dead system of extinct formulse. That is
the contention. IIow docs Newman meet it? By
rejecting, as we have seen, the testimony of civili-
sation ; by asserting that modern philosophy implies
a deadening of the conscience ; by declaring that even
superstition is better than modern illumination, and
setting the testimony of the savage against the testi-
mony of the philosopher. If his reasoning be sound,
it is yet, in any case, an abandonment of his test. In
fact, he is retreating from the historical method pre-
cisely because, as a theologian, he can only half
accept a doctrine of development whilst retaining a
belief in the arbitrary mtervention of supernatural
forces. His method is a corollary from the doctrine
of evolution ; hut, logically followed out, that method
would destroy his conclusions. lie escapes, therefore,
by denying the truth of the doctrine which gives to
his own teaching all its plausibility,

Newman, however, is too good a logician not
to feel the need of some further logical bases. To
confront the world and modern thought he must have
a less ambiguous standing-ground. He must ^show
cause for rejecting the testimony which apparently
makes against him. And we shall see that he has in
fact worked out an elaborate theory calculated to*
justify his method. In its less coherent shape, it


204


NEWMAN’S THEOEY OF BELIEF


occurs in many of his earlier ■writings^ but is first fully
elaborated in the * Grammar of Assent,’ and I shall
therefore proceed to discuss it on the basis of that
most remarkable book.

The historical method, as understood by New-
man, would test the value of a creed by its fruitful-
ness, coherence, persistence, and power of assimi-
lating congenial and rejecting alien matter, or, in a
word, by its vitality. Such a method has two re-
markable consequences. In the first place, it tends
to set aside the direct and obvious tests of the old-
fashioned apologists. Wo need not ask, with the
philosophers, whether the creed gives a worthy or
intelligible conception of the universe; for such
inquiries only lead into the endless labyrinth of
metaphysical argumentations. We need not inquire,
with the critics, into the evidence for particular his-
torical statements ; for the facts are intelligible only as
part of a vast and complex evolution, which must be
appreciated as a whole before it can be understood
in detail. And, in the second place, the method lays
particular stress upon the process by which ideas
‘percolate’ (as Newman somewhere says) by other
than directly logical means. The dogmas of the
creed are not revealed in full scholastic precision
and nicety of definition. They are not reasoned out,
like mathematical propositions, by direct demons(jra-
‘tion. The gerins are planted by revelation; they
grow spontaneously in the minds of believers, obeying


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


206


a law which ia not consciously apprehended, but
which may be afterwards elicited, and which becomes
more manifest as the process is developed. Once
seized, it may be stated as a logical formula; but
during the earlier period it is in the state of implicit
logic — an informing and animating principle, not a
recognised and avowed law of belief.

Some kind of logical organon is required, as I
have already tried to point out, in order to extract
from this theory an available logical teat. The
truth of a theory must be the ultimate reason for
believing it ; and the question is, briefly. How from
the vitality of a Creed are we to infer its truth ? An
answer is attempted in the • Grammar of Assent ’ ;
and the theory expounded in that book harmonises
throughout with that which is implied in the doctrine
of development. The method of classification adopted
is the same in both cases. Creeds, according to the
historical theory, are measurable according to their
degrees of vitality ; and so the ‘ Grammar of Assent ’
opens with an elaborate scale of assents or beliefs,
varying from the faintest to the most vivid, and from
the most abstract to the most concrete. Beliefs, that
is, are classified by their fitness to form part of a
vigorous creed. The faculty whose existence is pos-
tulated in the doctrine of development, that by which

the mind draws remote inferences without a conscious

*

syllogistic process, is now carefully analysed, and re-
ceives the name of the Illative Sense. And, finally.


206


NEWMAN’S THEORY OE BELIEF


we are again struck by the absence; of the direct
logical method. A Grammar of Assent, one would
say, ought to correspond to a treatise on logic. We
ought to assent to true propositions, and therefore
should begin by inquiring what is the test of truth.
But the very name of the treatise seems designedly
calculated to set aside such inquiries, and contem-
plates at least the possibility of a divorce between the
faculty of believing and the faculty of perceiving the
truth. The method, as we shall see, is calculated
— whether designedly or not— to evade the purely
logical question. Indeed, Newman lays it down as
a principle that ‘in no class of concrete reason-
ings .... is there any ultimate test of truth and
error in our reasonings besides the trustworthiness of
the illative sense that gives them its sanction.’ * Our
duty is to cultivate that faculty, and then trust im-
plicitly to its decisions.

The meaning of this will appear as we proceed ;
but it is important to notice at once the precise
nature of Newman’s problem . He is investigating, one
may say, the physiology of belief in the individual,
as he before considered the physiology of religious
faith in a society. He looks upon belief from outside
as a phenomenon which is to be examined, and whose
laws are to be discovered by observation. The
problem is, in truth, this — What are the general condi-
tions of belief? How do men, as a fact, reach the
‘ Orammar of Assmt, p. 352.


NEWMANS THEORY OF BELIEF


207


state of mind called ‘ certitude ’ ? If an exhaustive
answer could be given, we should know the laws of
belief. But it must be distinctly observed that ‘ law’
is here used in its scientific, not in its narrower and
more proper sense. The code investigated is not that
imposed by logic, but that which is necessarily and
always obeyed by the working of the human mind. We
are seeking the laws of all belief, not the laws of right
belief; and our theory would explain the growth of error
just as much as the growth of sound knowledge.. Every
opinion, true or false, must necessarily obey the laws
of thought, when the phrase is used in this sense ;
and it is a further and different (piestio}! which of
the opinions generated arc true, or, in other words,
correspond io the facts. Logic may be regarded from
this point of view as a particular province of the
wider science of belief in general, and it is with
that wider science that Newman is primarily con-
cerned. It will require a distinct step to reach the
purely logical problem. Before that step is made, his
conclusions may be useful in discriminating between
real and sham beliefs, but do not touch the distinc-
tion between true and false beliefs. He may help us
to tell in what cases a man actually does believe, or,
in his language, gives a full assent to a dogma ; but
he has, so far, nothing to do with the logical value of
the assent.

the two questions, it is true, are closely connected,
and may be even said ultimately to coincide. If, in


208


NEWMAN’S THEOBY OF BELIEF


fact, we should discover that certain beliefs are neces-
sary — that is, that every rational be&ig is forced to
accept them under all circumatancos — the theory of
belief would give a basis for the narrower theory of
logic. A strictly necessary belief would, indeed, be
implied in erroneous as well as in sound reasoning,
and could not supply a test for discriminating truth
from error. But a belief may be of such a character
that we admit it when once presented to us, though
we have previously not thought about it ; or, whilst
admitting it, wo may not have evolved its remoter
coubequences. The general theory of belief may be
useful as revealing and defining such necobsary beliefs.
Their existence would bo proved by one theory, and
taken as a touchstone of all reasoning in the other.
Such, of course, whether we call them necessary or
not, are the beliefs expressed in Euclid’s axioms or
the doctrine of the uniformity of Nature. The logi-
cian must accept the lK‘Uef as an ultimate fact, whilst
he leaves the problem of its origin to the psychologist.

For the present it is enough to note the obviouu
difference between the two provinces of incpiiry, and
the danger of confounding them. If every condition
which in fact determines belief were taken to bo there-
fore a condition of logical belief, wo should sanction
every possible error. If, on the other hand, logical
conditions were regarded as the sole causes which in
' fact determine belief, we should certainly have, as
Newman coiKslusively shows, a most inadequate view


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


209


of the way in which belief, and even sound belief, is
in fact originated and propagated. Meanwhile, as
Newman is primarily concerned with the wider
theory of belief in general, ho produces a Grammar
of Assent instead of a logic ; a theory of the methods
by which men are convinced, not of the methods by
which doctrines arc proved; and an account of the
assumptions upon which creeds in fact rest, rather
than an account of the marks by which we may
recognise the verified assumptions entitled to be re-
garded as cstaldished truths.

So long as Newman remains within the limits
thus prescribed his theory appears to be as unassail-
able as it is admirabl}' expounded. The propriety of
the phi-ascology may be disputed; but the name
‘illative sense’ undoubtedly corresponds to a real
faculty or combination of faculties, and his use of it
enables him to give an accurate analysis of a most
important set of mental phenomena. It is true, as he
says, that ‘ formal logical sequence is not, in fact, the
method by which we are enabled to become certain of
what is concrete.’ The real method is ‘ the cumula-
tion of probabilities, independent of each othei, arising
out of the nature and circumstances of the particular
case which is under review; probabilities too fine, to
avail separately, too subtle and circuitous to bo con-
vertible into syllogisms, too numerous and various for
such ’conversion, even were they convertible. As a
man’s portrait differs from a sketch of him in having


V


210


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


not merely a continuoua outline, but all its details
filled in, and shades and colours laid on and har>
monised together ; such is the multiform and intri-
cate process of ratiocination necessary for our reach-
ing him as a concrete fact, compared with the rude
operation of syllogistic treatment.’ ‘ Nothing could
be better said, or more substantially true. Formal
logic is rather a negative and a verifying than a positive
and discovering process, and represents only a very
small part of the actual operation by which we are
guided, and necessarily guided, in all practical judg-
ments. When I form an estimate of a man’s
character, of the wisdom of a policy, of the truth of a
creed, my mind is, in fact, determined by countless
considerations, of which only a small part can be dis-
tinctly tabulated and drawn out into articulate logical
order. But, undeniable as this may be, the logical
formulse may yet have a paramount importance.
They do not constitute the whole line of defence, but
they may give the key of the position.

The point may require elucidation. Newman
illustrates his position by a criticism of the authen-
ticity of a passage in Shakespeare,^ and shows with
great felicity how short a cut we make to the decision
of^a question which involves almost countless con-
siderations, when drawn out into full logical shape.
I will venture to extend the illustration a little


‘ Onmmar of Assent, p. 281.


* Ibid. p. 264.”


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


211


farther. One o^the relevant arguments in disGussing
the authenticity of a Shakespearian passage is the
character of the versification. A critic with a fine
ear pronounces unhesitatingly that Wolsey’s speech
in ‘ Henry VIII. ’ resembles Fletcher more than Shake-
speare. A member of the New Shakespeare Society
confirms this judgment by the application of a
metrical test. Ho counts, for example, the propor-
tion of stopped and unstopped lines, and decides that
it corresponds to the proportion always found in
Fletcher’s known writings, and never in Shake-
speare’s. The counter of stops and syllables is able
to put his argument into syllogistic shape ; the critic
can only say that he has judged by his ear.

Now, it is plain that both observers have been
determined in part by the same consideration. The
critic may have been guided by innumerable like-
nesses, which are too delicate to be put into words,
and of which he is not even distinctly conscious.
Bnt he has also been guided, though unconsciously,
by the characteristic which his humble colleague has
measured. He has felt the peculiarity, though he
has not discovered its cause. A critic is a good one
in proportion as he is sensitive to the most re^ed
and delicate differences ; he is scientific in propo];tion
as he can give an accurate and verifiable analysis of
the^ nature of those differences; and, of course, the
two powers are distinct, and differently developed.
One man may be quickest at recognising the fact of


212


NEWMAN’S TIIEOEY OF BELIEF


a likeness, and another ablest to assign the causes
of such likeness as he recognises.

"VVlien we compare the higher critic and his-
humble rival, it is clear that the intensity of con-
viction may be the same to the observer himself. A
man with an exquisite intellectual taste can recognise
the flavour of Shakespeare as distinctly as the epicure
recognises a special vintage, and may be as ansolutely
peremptory in his conclusions. Moreover, he can
form a judgment upon matters where the humbler
word-counter is hopelessly at a loss. His sphere of
reasoning envelops and transcends that of his rival.
But his inference cannot be regarded as conclusively
proved for anyone else. We all know that critics arc
often peremptory in proportion to their ignorance.
The counter of syllables, on the other hand, has
proved beyond all doubt the fact which he asserts.
There is undeniably such a likeness as he maintains,
and in such a definite degi’ee. The statement can
be tested by every human being who possesses the
faculty of counting, and there is, therefore, no risk
of a ‘ iiersonal error.’ It is convincing, as far as it
goes, not only to himself, but to the whole world of
rational beings, and may take its place as a definite *
objtictive truth.

The relation of the two is admirably illustrated
by Sancho Panza. Two of his uncles sat in judgment *

on a cask of wine. One said that it had a smack of

*

leather, and the other that it smacked of iron. The


NEWMAN’S TUEORY OF BELIEF


218


bystanders laugjjied ; but the uncles had the laugh
on their side when the cask was drunk out, and an
old key with a leather thong revealed at the bottom.
The uncles were the fine critics who could recognise
a truth as proved for them. It was not proved for
the world till the unmistakable test came to light.
They might, in fact, have lieon deceived by some
personal error. But, as everybody can judge of iron
and leather when they see and touch it, error became
impossible. Then the private conviction passed into
a univt'vsal objective trutb. But unhesitating con-
viction previously would have been mireasonable,
except so far as there wt;re independent reasons for
admitting the infallibility of Sancho’s uncles.

In all cases, from the simplest and most definite
to the most complex and vague inferences, the ultimate
ground of all inductive argument is the same, namely,
the perception of likeness or unlikencss. The dif-
ference is, that in some cases the characteristic is
capable of strict measurement, in which all minds
agree, whilst in others it is recognisable only by the
acuter observers, and therefore with varying distinct-
ness. In some cases we can only reach qualitative,
whilst in others we can attain to (juantitath e analysis.
Accordingly, the whole mass of human belief may be
regarded as a chaotic nebula surrounding a solid
nucleus of definitively-established truth. The core
of jjermanent knowledge consists partly in those
beliefs which can be expressed with mathematical


214


NEWMAN'S THEOBY OF BELIEF


precision and exposed to definite tesip, and partly in
those vaguer and less tangible beliefs which may,
nevertheless, be confirmed by such an overwhelming
body of evidence from the concurrent testimony of
innumerable observers that doubt is practically im-
possible. Outside this core we have multitudinous
beliefs of all degrees of authority, down to the vaguest
conjecture. But there is no definite separation
between the inner and the outer sphere. A process
of integration is continually taking place. New
beliefs are constantly crystallising round the solid
core and becoming definitely established, whilst
others are dissipated or transformed by the progress
.of inquiry.

Meanwhile it is an obvious fact that conviction
follows a different law from proof. In man^’ cases it
outruns proof. A man may be as firmly convinced
of the truth of an uncertain or a false proposition as
of a demonstrable, mathematical formula. He may
be right, if he has evidence open to no one else,
whether by virtue of finer perceptions or of fuller
knowledge. Or, on the other hand, conviction may
fall short of proof. A man may disbelieve an esta-
Misljed proposition, either because he is ignorant of
its evidence, or incapable of estimating the evidence,
or too indolent or prejudiced to estimate it fairly.
The question, therefore, as to whether a doctrine is
proved is distinct from the question as to whether
it produces conviction on a given mind. One


NEWMAN’S THEOEY OF BELIEF


215


problem is a logical one, and the other belongs to the
theory of belief in general.

If, indeed, we apply with Newman the purely
empirical test, we may say that the ultimate criterion
is the same. That is a true proposition in matters
of fact (for we are not speaking of the so-called
necessary, or d prioii truths) which men actually
believe when it is presented to their minds. We
cannot get beyond the test of experience. Our beliefs
in the general doctrine of the uniformity of Nature,
which underlies all empirical reasoning, still more in
all specific truths as to the world of realities, are
ultimately based upon or expi'ess the fact that all
men do in fact accept them when distinctly set before
them. Therefore, it may be urged, whenever men
differ as to such truths, Ave must either hold ourselves
in suspense or be convinced without sufficient evidence.
This, it may be added, is the case in regard to all
religious opinions; and therefore we must choose
between permanent scepticism or a dogmatic belief
which dispenses with tangible proof by the help of
the ‘ illative sense.’ Scepticism — an absolute suspense
of judgment — is in such matters impossille, and we
must therefore allow our beliefs to outrun our logic.
This is specially true in such cases as are illustrated
by the Shakespearian criticism, where the grounds
of^ conviction are too complex and delicate to be
expressible in syllogistic form. In this whole sphere*
of opinion, including as one class all our religious


216


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


beliefs, wo can only judge by the testimony of the
illative sense. I perceive, by a process analogous to
the use of the external senses, that this or that belief -
is on the whole congruous to ray other established
beliefs. Therefore it is true. 1 can go no further ;
for all inference really comes to this in the last resort ;
and the perception summed up in these words is too
complex for analysis or verification. It may happen
that whilst you perceive the belief to be congruous,

1 perceive it to be incongruous. Therefore, it seems,
what is true for you is false for me ; or there is no
objective certainty, though there is subjective con-
viction. Newman partly accepts this conclusion. ‘ A
proof,’ he says, ‘except in abstract (leraonstration,
has always in it, more or less, an element of the
personal,’ ' because the degree of conviction depends
to some degree upon that kind of knowledge which
entitles a man to be culled an expert, and which varies
from one man to another.

Once more, if this be miderstood as part of the
theory of belief, it is, I think, undoubtedly true.
Conviction as to all matters of fact, nay, even as to
mathematical propositions, does, I doubt not, vary
most materially from man to man. Evidence of all
kinds strikes people with very different force, accord-
ing to their prepossessions, their power of reasoning,
and so on ; and the evidence accessible to differ^it
people, even in support of the commonest facts, m^y

* (Jrammm' of Assent, p. 310.


NEWMiVN’S THEORY OF BELIEF 217

vary almost indefinitely. It is a truism, indeed, to
say that, as things are, divergence of belief is
inevitable ; that an ordiimry man cannot help being
a Catholic at Rome and a Mussulman at Mecca;
or that Ne^vman as naturally became a Roman
Catholic as Comte became a Positivist. And from
this fact it is usual and proper to infer the duty of
toleration and the absurdity, not of conviction, but
of dogmatism. I cannot help believing, but 1 have
no right to make ray belief, simply as my belief, a
ground for demanding your belief. But, asserting
all this as emphatically as possible, it is entirely
irrelevant to the logical problem. Error is inevitable,
but it is not therefore truth. When a man’s mind
is constituted in a certain way, and certain evidence
is brought before him, it will inevitably produce a
certain opinion. That is as true as that any action
whatever is a function of the organism and the
medium. But it has simply no bearing upon the
other question, whether the man’s mind is rational,
or whether he deals with the evidence in accordance
with logical rules. Those rules simply express the
conditions which secure a conformity between opinion
and fact. They are not, as I have said, ‘lOjjvs of
thought ’ in the scientific sense of law, for they are
constantly broken. They simply state the conditions,
a neglect of which leads a man into error. And the^
fufiest agreement that, as men are constituted, error
is unavoidable does not prevent us from inquiring


218


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


which opinions have been reached by a logical and’
which by an illogical process. iJ, indeed, the-
difference between men’s minds were such that no
two people could hold the same opinion, the pursuit
of a truth independent of personal variation would
be chimerical. But as the same conclusion may be
reached by many different processes, we may hope to
approximate by degrees to a general agreement, or, in
other words, to a coincidence between proof and con-
viction. Nor, again, does the difficulty of summing
up and (so to speak) packing into a single formula the
whole pith and essence of so complex an assent as
that to the truth of a religion diminish in the slightest
degree the importance of applying logical tests other
than that of the direct testimony of the ‘illative
sense.’ That difficulty undoubtedly makes the pur-
suit of truth a slow and complex operation. It proves
that the co-operation of many minds and of many
generations must be necessary foi the elimination of
personal error — indeed, of more minds and more
generations than have existed or perhaps ever will
exist in the world. But though we cannot devise any
direct crucial experiment upon which to stake our
conclusions, we can lay down rules, the observance of
which will secure an approximation to truth. A
religious system, for example, may involve historical
statements which can be compared with established
‘facts ; unless we are prepared to deny that there are
any established facts in history. It contains, again,.


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF 219

innumerable philosophic or scientific statements and
implications capable of being tested by the ordinary
methods which obtain certainty elsewhere. As the
core of fixed knowledge grows by slow accretion, we
obtain a larger basis for our inquiries and a more dis-
tinct perception of its tendency to combine with or
destroy the religious dogmas.

Such tests are, necessarily, of gradual application.
The indmdual can only endeavour to conform his
own reasoning methods to the general rules of sound
inquiry. Though he cannot bring all the various
threads of his explicit and imidicit reasoning to a
single point, he can do something to detect the
presence of inconsistent elements, of unfounded
assumptions, or of extra-logical aiguments. He can,
in particular, form some opinion as to his own im-
partiality. If he is impressed by some special
characteristic, he can say whether this impression is
due to some accidental bias ; and if he is a lover of
truth, he can in that case resist it. In other words,
he can endeavour to base his conclusions upon reason
instead of arbitrary prejudice.

This seems to be the plain meaning of a canon
laid down by Locke. ‘ There is oare unerring mark,’
says that most candid of thinkers, ‘ by which a man
may know whether ho is a lover of truth in earnest ’ ;
viz. ‘ the not entertaining any jrropositiou ivith greater
assurance than the proofs it is built on n'ill warrant.''^
' Qnoteil in Grammar of Assent, p. 1.5.5.


220


NEWMAN'S THEORY OF RELIEF


Newman attacks this canon at considerable length ;
and 1 therefore presume that he regards it as in
some way incompatible with his own doctrine. To
me I confess that it sounds almost like a truism —
only necessary to be assorted because so scandalously
neglected. It amounts simply to saying that wo
should form our opinions in accordance with logic ;
that is, in accordance with the rules which secure
truth. It is not easy to sec how this can be denied
by anyone who admits (as, of course, NowTOan
most fully admits) that the sole end of reasoning is
the attainment of truth.

The main argument which Newman opposes
to Locke is the simple statement of fa(;t. ‘ We do.’
he says, ‘ believe certain propositions which rest upon
probability alone as peremptorily as if they rested
upon demonstrative evidence.’ Such, for example, are
the beliefs of the mortality of man and the insularity
of Great Britain. In such cases Newman holds
that there exists what Locke calls a ‘ surplusage ’ of
belief over proof.* Various answers might be made.
If it were in truth not proved or provable that men
would die, or that Great Britain was an island, I, for
one, would decline to believe it. If, whilst denying
the proof, I were yet forced to retain the belief, I
should have to believe in intuitions of a character
never yet admitted by philosophers, namely, intuitions
as to particular matters of fact. But I should prefer

t

^ Grammar of Assent y y. 293.


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


221


to reply that the propositions in question are in fact
proved. And I am not sure that Newman would
differ from me in substance. He would only say that
they are proved by the ‘ illative sense ’ instead of the
syllogistic process. The truth is that all such pro-
positions imply a belief in the validity of inductive
metliods, and, therefore, in the invariable, and at least
general, uniformity of Nature. Without such an
assumption, however founded, we could simply not
reason at all. With it, the proof of a matter of fact
may approximate indefinitely to demonstration. It
never actually reaches it, as the asymptote never
actually reaches the curve. But the approximation
is so close that human faculties will not enable us to
distinguish the difference. The proof, that is, that
two and two make four differs from the proof that
men are mortal by so infinitesimal an amount as to
be indistinguishable to the mosit sensitive mental
vision. A slight correction may be necessary to
Locke’s statement to justify our neglect of these
infinitesimal quantities ; but its validity is not sensibly
affected. The proof of human mortality rests on the
immense variety of conditions mider which the experi-
ment of living has been tried, none of which sensibly
affect the result. We are justified in the inference
that no conditions, the occurrence of which can be
anticipated, will affect any particular life. And, as
we understand more clearly the nature of the process
called life, we are able to affiliate this truth to other


222


NEWMAN’S THEOEY OF BELIEF


still more general laws of Nature. So, again, the
proof that England is an island rests, for most of ns,
upon the impossibility of the belief of its insularity
being so widely spread, and assumed at every step by
so many people in a position to verify the statement,
if it were, in fact, erroneous. So far Newman’s
difference from Locke seems to be almost verbal.
Newman fully admits and admirably illustrates the
force of an argument existing upon innumerable
converging probabilities; but he does not call it
‘ proof,’ because it is not expressible in syllogisms, nor
is a denial of its force reducible to a contradiction in
terms. Locke, on the other hand, equally admits the
force of the argument, but regards it as strictly logical.
Mill and the purely empirical school would have called
it the only logical method. In any case, the man who
admits its force cannot allow that in accepting such
arguments he is allowing belief to be ‘ more than the
proofs will warrant.’

The tendency, however, of Newman’s argument
comes out in another direction. Undoubtedly many
people believe the truths in question upon in-
sufficient evidence. Children believe in mortality
because they have been told that they are mortal,
and, on precisely the same grounds, they may believe
in witches or in the flatness of the world. A foreigner
may believe that England is an island because a
notorious liar, who had a strong interest in the state-
ment, has told him that it is an island. The pro-


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


228


verbial old woman refused to believe in flying-fish, and
did believe in "mountains of sugar and lakes of rum.
K she had been more credulous, she would have
accepted the truth and the error with equal confidence.
The fact that a man may hold a true opinion on in-
sufficient evidence is no proof, though it is, strangely,
urged as a proof, that he is right in receiving insuffi-
cient evidence. The often-quoted Eastern prince who
believed in ice on authority was accidentally right :
but, if he had accepted all that was told him on the
same authority, he would have fallen into errors as
great as that of the old lady of the flying-fish.

Yet facts of this kind are often alleged as if they
proved that we ov{)JU to believe — as they certainly
prove that we do believe — upon insufficient proof.
The point is put in a nutshell by Newman himself.
He says, most truly, that ‘ life is not long enough for
a religion of inferences; we shall never have done
beginning if we determine to begin with proof. Life
is for action. If we insist on proof for everything, we
shall never come to action ; to act you must assume,
and that assumption is faith.’ * That sums up his
theory. Assumption is faith. Now, undovbtedly, the
proposition states a truth, and a most important trutli,
in the theory of belief. Assumptions are necessary,
and for the reason given by Newman. The whole

’ Qraimnar of Assent, p. 92 . The passage is quoted liy
Newman from an earlier letter of his own. Ho apparently endorses
the assertion ; but in any case the illustration is equally good*


224


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


luBtory of human belief is a history of the gi’owth and
decay of such assumptions. The creed of the savage
is of necessity a series of postulates, some of which
are verified, whilst otliers disappear. Not only so, but
wo are all forced at every moment to make innumerable
assumptions. We could not live or act without them.
And, further, such assumptions tend to become beliefs.
Wo act on the liypotlu'sis that a creed is true. We
come to iK'lieve that it is certainly true. And, further,
the process may be perfectly legitimate. To assume
the doctrine may be the best or only way of testing its
truth. And, in fact, that is the way in which doctrines
have been established or destroyed.

Buji whilst this is perfectly true of belief, it is not
true of right belief. On the contrary, the need of
making unverified assumptions, and the tendency to
cling to them after their falsity has been exposed, is
precisely the reason why error is so common and so
persistent. The logician is a man, and must therefore
act, and act upon countless unverified assumptions.
But he ought to be u lover of truth, and must tlu're-
fore carefully guai d his mind against a process which
is, as Newman says, perfectly natural, but most un-
doubtedly illogical. The first lesson he has to learn
is just this —that assumption, though not proof, has
a pernicious tendency to pass for proof. In insist-
ing upon this process, Newman fully explains the
genealogy of faith, but the explanation is often tile
very contrary of a justification. It states the cause


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF 226

but not the reason of faith, and, unluckily, the cause is
often most unreasonable. To assign the conditions
of a belief is often to prove its error. If we show that
belief in a criminal’s fault is associated with dislike
of his person, the verdict of a jury loses its force. If
we find that a superstition exists, not only 'where it
Slight be, but also where it could not possibly be, veri-
fied, we show that it must be founded, not on obser-
vation, but on fancy. And thus an examination of
the laws of belief will show us that many most real
beliefs are entirely illogical, and consequently that it
is a grievous error to take a test of the reality of a
belief as a test of its truth.

The application of this to religious beliefs is
obvious. Newman gives a pathetic passage from
* North and South,’ in which the poor factory-girl ends
by saying, ‘ If this life is the end, and there is no God
to wipe away aU tears from all eyes, I could go mad.'
‘ Here,’ says Newma,n, ‘ is an argument for the
immortality of the soul. As to its force, be it great
or small, will it make a figure in a logical discussion
cai'ried on secundum urtau ? Can any scientific
common measure compel the intellects of a Dives and
Lazarus to take the same measure of it ? Is there
any test of its validity better than the ipse dixit of
private judgment— that is, the judgment of those who
have a right to judge, and next, agreement of
many private judgments in one and the same view o{

Q


226


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


it ? ’ ‘ If we are asking what will be the actual effect
of the argument upon people’s minds, Newman’s
implied statements are undeniable. Dives and
Lazarus, the wise and the simple, the cynic and the
sentimentalist, will each be affected after his kind.
And if there were no difference between rhetoric and
logic, between the actual persuasive force and the
true logical force of an argument, we should have to
admit that we could get no further than a purely
sceptical result. One man will think one thing,
another will think another, and if a good many think
the same, so much the better.

But all this is purely irrelevant in logic. It still
remains undeniably clear that there is a difference
between the weight which the argument actually
bears, and that which it ought to bear. The logical
and the rhetorical influence are separable, at any rate
in theory. The divergence between people’s opinions
is due in part to the fact that the argument may
strike their ‘ illative sense ’ differently ; and partly
also to the fact that argument fails to strike some
people in any way. .Few men think, yet all will have
opinions, as Berkeley says; and therefore some
opinions have no authority. The agreement of
private judgments is valuable only so far as those
judgments are in some sense the product of reasoning.
If any man’s belief is caused by blind contagion, by
submission to arbitrary authority, or by the mere
' Orammar of Assent, p. 305.


NEWMANS THEOKY OF BELIEF 227

pleasantness the belief, his judgment is logically
worthless.

Newman would, of course, agree to a statement
which in fact merely comes to saying that logic re-
presents a real science. There is some inference
which ought to be drawn from any given statement,
if only we could discover it. Newman, indeed, shows
admirably why it is that obedience to logical
rules cannot secure right conclusions. Logic may
make our reason correct in form, but it cannot supply
the matter. No art of syllogisms will adequately
represent the whole reasoning process. Logic, there-
fore, can in such matters be no self-acting machine,
like Professor Jevons’s, into which we can insert our
premisses and grind out correct conclusions. But
it may still be an organising principle; a practical
rule which helps us to unravel confusion and repel
inconsistent elements in our mental operations, to
exhibit their nature, and perceive their tendency.
Even in the most complex cases, where the ‘ illative
sense ’ is hopelessly unable to give a distinct analysis
of its operation, the attempt to be logical gives a
value to the conclusions of the reasoner. Dives and
Lazarus cannot find a measure which will of itself
gauge the worth of their inferences, but if Dives
attends to logical rules, and Lazarus neglects them,
the.opinion of Dives will be so far the most valuable.
An^ though in such cases superior logic may give a
very trifling advantage, yet the converging opinion of


228


KEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


a number of logicians may have an enormous advan-
tage. Lazarus is as likely to be wrong as to be right ;
Dives has one more chance out of a hundred in his
favour. The difference, according to a familiar prin-
ciple, may be decisive in the long run ; and, there-
fore, little as logic can do, it is our duty to be as
logical as we can.

The argument in question supplies an excellent
illustration of the truth. An opponent would ask
Newman, What is the major of your factory-girl’s
enthymeme ? She asserts that a belief is in-
tensely painful. She infers that it is false. Does
she, then, hold implicitly that all intensely painful
beliefs are false? If so, why? If not, is she

reasoning at all, or only refusing to reason ? To be
logical is to ask such questions, and thereby to clear
the issues, though not to produce instantaneous agree-
ment. It is only to introduce a principle which will
secure a slow gravitation towards agreement; and
the advantage is clear. Though Dives cannot see
things just as Lazarus secs them, and therefore
cannot appreciate his inducement to believe, he can
judge as well, or, if an abler logician, he can judge
better, of Iho truth of the general proposition, ‘ Pain-
ful beliefs are false.’ Logic does not give the answer
ready-made, but it reveals the true nature of the
, process. To reject it because inadequate to produce
instant agreement, is to throw away a compass
because it is not a divining-rod.


NEWMAN’S THEOKY OF BEUEE


229


In this case I venture to think that it would prove
the so-called argument to be no argument at all. It
is simply a forcible illustration of the importance of
Locke’s canon. It is a flagrant instance of allowing
a conclusion to be formed by motives with which
logic has no concern, and therefore believing more
than the evidence will warrant. But whether this be
so or not, another result is striking and obvious. It
is undeniable that the pleasantness of a belief is an
adequate explanation of the survival of the. belief, in-
dependently of argument. What Newman offers
as ^ logical process is really an ’analysis of the con-
ditions of conviction, which j)roves that one condition
is illogical, and he therefore, so far, destroys the
authority of the conviction. He has clearly shown
why people entertain a belief in the absence of any
reason for maintaining it.

The result of Newman’s method is up to tliis
point purely sceptical. The laws of belief are re-
sponsible for every false opinion that ever was formed ,*
and therefore, if the bare fact of belief is a testimony
to its validity, we have equal testimony to all opinions.
Each man must follow his own ‘ illative sense ’ ; but
no common measure of the value of different influences
is attainable. Because logic cannot supply us with a
decisive test, applicable at once, its use as an organ-
ising and unifying principle is virtually denied. From
tfiis difficulty there is one mode of escape. We are
invited to measure beliefs by their intensity and


280


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


fertility. If, then, it is possible to assign a class of
beliefs, the validity of which may be* recognised by
an internal mark, we can arrive at certainty. In
such a case we should not only know, but know that
we know ; and the problem becomes an inquiry into
the conditions of such beliefs, or, as Newman
would call them, ‘certitudes.’ If there are such
beliefs, they ought to have two marks. They must be
permanent when reached, because truth is indepen-
dent of time, and universal, because it is the same for
all men. We cannot know that we know unless we
know that our opinion will not change ; and if we are
certain of a truth, we are certain that it must be
true for everybody. Newman inquires, therefore,
whether certitude, the highest degree of belief attain-
able, is ‘indefectible.’ He comes to the conclusion
that certitude is generally indefectible, though he
candidly admits that there are exceptions to the prin-
ciple, and can only extenuate their number and im-
portance by hypothetical interpretations. People
seldom change thoir minds — as is pretty obvious —
after reaching a high degree of conviction ; but they
do at times change. And, moreover, the test is prac-
tically useless, for we cannot know beforehand which
are thfe indelible beliefs. The other test is still more
palpably hopeless. There is a conflict of certitudes.
Mahomedans, and Catholics, and Positivists are all
bqually peremptory in asserting the most opposite
beliefs. Where, then, arc we to turn for certainty ?


NEWMAN S THEOEY OF BELIEF


231


This is, of course, a new shape of a very old
difficulty. Newman has discussed it elsewhere, and
given a solution substantially identical with that more
elaborately set forth in the ‘Grammar of Assent.’
Since the first inference from history is obviously
sceptical, inasmuch as every opinion has been held
as an historical fact, we can only produce an appear-
ance of consent by disqualifying certain classes.
Newman accordingly sets aside a large number of
thinkers whose opinions are described in a rhetorical
and, therefore, unintentionalfy unfair passage.' They
are the ‘ opinions,’ he says, which ‘ characterise a
civilised age.’ Me cannot ai’gue with men who will
not admit his first principles, and it is needless to
argue with them, because the system of opinions in
question ‘ contradicts the primary teachings of Nature
in the human race wherever a religion is found and
its workings can be ascertained.’ The ‘ system of
opinion ’ which thus disqualifies a reasoner is that
which is variously called utilitarian, materialistic,
atheistical, and so forth ; and the primary teaching
of human nature which contradicts it is the teach-
ing of the conscience. Newman, as we must re-
member, distinguishes the conscience from the moral
sense, the conscience being the sense of sin as an
affront to the Almighty — the ‘ trembling of ajguilty
thing surprised ’ in presence of its Maker. It is in
conscience thus defined that he, like his master,'


* Grammar of Assent^ p. 411.


282


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


Butler, finds the voice of God, and upon its intimations
rests substantially the whole fabric 0/ his theology.

This exclusion of the witnesses on one side is
generally justified by the analogy of the blind
and the seeing. It would be useless, it is said, to
argue witli a blind man about colours, or with
a dull conscience about sin. The analogj' breaks
down in one important point. No seeing man ever
had a difficulty in convincing a blind man of his
blindness. The blind man cannot know what sight
is, but he cannot help knowing that others possess
some faculty of which he is deprived. No such pro-
cess is applicable to the infidel. He is bold enough
to maintain that he, too, has a conscience -that is,
that he is as sensitive as the believer to the emotions
described by that name. He only denies the inter-
pretation put uiron it by the theologian. He cannot
be confuted, like the blind man, by any summary
appeal to facts ; for the facts to which the theologian
appeals are beyond all verification by e.\perioncc.
Thus we see at once that from the outset all hopes of
an objective test of religious truth must be abandoned.
You can prove to a blind man that you see things at
a distance. You cannot prove to the infidel that you
see a* transcendental world.

fn the next place, conscience is, according to
Newman, the root of all superstition. Every real
'religious belief is an interpretation of its voice.
Therefore an argument from conscience would "be


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


28 »


equally applicable in defence of all religions, both of
the true and of the false superstitions; for super-
stition only differs from religion by the falsity of
the alleged facts. Hence Newman has to defend
religion as against superstition by an appeal to
specific evidence. There must, he admits, be a con-
clusive argument to justify our belief ; but the argu-
ment can only be valid or intelligible to those who, in
the first place, have a conscience - who, in the second
place, accept his interpretation of its teaching — and
who, in the third place, a) Impi’essed by the special
facts which lu is able to adduce in favour of the one
true Church. Thus hi the last resort, he relies upon
private judgment- up*' his own private belief, that
is, that he can convince people in a certain state of
mind on being presented with a certain set of
evidence. He cannot say that, as a matter of fact, all
tpuilified people are couvuiced, in which case there
would be a show of some objective test ; for many un-
belie\ors assert that they iwssess a conscience, and
o\en found theii unbelief partly upon the testimony
of their conscience. Many, too, who accept his theory
of the conscience remain unconvinced by the facts in
favour of his special conclusions. The only ground
for denying their qualification would be the fact of
their unbelief ; and Newman is too good a logician
to indulge in the circular argument that a religion is
true because the qualified are convinced, and that
they are qualified because convinced.


284 NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF

We have, therefore, an apology for Christianity
which runs in the main upon the old lines. One part
of it is enough for my purpose. So reverent a dis-
ciple of Butler naturally lays a stress upon the analogy
between natural and revealed religion. ‘ The belief in
revealed truths depends on belief in natural.’ * Amongst
the most remarkable of natural beliefs is the belief in
the efficacy of sacrifice. Men are not only sensible of
sin, so long as their conscience is allowed to speak, but
believe that guilt may be pm’ged by offerings and by
vicarious suffering. • This belief, universal in all su-
perstitions, is taken up, purified, and then sanctioned
by the supernatural authority of revelation. Civili-
sation unfortunately destroys the belief, because it
tends to encourage Materialism and to deaden the
conscience. And thus we come back to the diffi-
culty already noticed in the theory of development.

‘ Civilisation ’ pronounces against Newman : why is
civilisation wrong? The answer involves some re-
markable assumptions.

Civilisation is wrong because it contradicts the
primary teaching of Nature. The proof is, that
savages recognise the efficacy of sacrifice, whilst civi-
lised men lose it. We all agree that savages believe
that they have offended an unseen power, and that
they can pacify him by presents. Civilised men do
not. The inference is that savages have, and civilised
'men have not, ‘a conscience,’ that is, a sense^of

^ Orammar of Aasentf p. 408,


NEWMAN'S THEORY OF BELIEF


286


remorse for evil-doing. But the opposite inference
is more natural, namely, that a belief in the effi-
cacy of sacrifice does not imply a conscience. A
sacrifice doubtless implies a belief that an unseen
being can be paoifieil, but it does not in the least tend
to imply that his anger is caused by sin. The argu-
ment proves too much. We find sacrifice amongst
races ^vho appear to be not only deficient in a con-
science', but totally devoid of a moral sense. The
Kuig of Dahomey makes a blood-)>ath — not, sprely, as
an e\])iation for drinking iniicli rum, but to bribe
an unseen power to help liim to kill enemies and get
more blood. Wlien a god becomes moral, and there-
fore hates -lin, the old mode of i>acifying an immoral
deity is applied to pacify the guardian of morality.
But the more people reason, the less they believe in
sacrifice. The most enlightened amongst the Jews
denounced the belief as superstitious in words familiar
to ns all, not because their consciences were less sen-
sitne, but because the remedy appeared unworthy.
The Christiaji religion spiritualised the doctrine — that
is, rend('red it less coarse and material. Protestants
and rationalists have abandoned it more uecishcly,
and (if they are to be believed) for precisely the oppo-
site reason to that assigned by Newman. The higher
the conception of a deity, the less possible the belief
that ho could be pacified by the blood of bulls and
goals, or even by the blood of an innocent and divine *
suileror. What are we to think of a theory which


286


NEWMAN’S THEOKY OF BELIEF


makes Spinoza a typo of the man without, and the
King of Dahomey a type of the man with, a con-
science ? Only this, 1 imagine, that we arrive at a
mere caricatm*e of true historical method so long as
we persist in looking at history through the old
arbitrary prejudices.

And now it may be observed that, if 'rc confine
ourselves to a statement of facts, Newman is en-
tirely at one with the ordinary infidel. Both say
that sacrifice is a survival of superstitions found in
their grossest foim amongst barbarous races: both
say that the power of the Church is chiefly founded
upon its mode of pacifying the sense of remorse by an
elaborate system of absolution : both say that, as
the intellect is enlightened, as men become more re-
fined, more gentle, more rational, more free from the
old brutal instincts, the belief tends to disappear.
Newman infers that these phenomena imply the
deadening of comcience; the infidel, that they
imply the gradual development of a loftier concep-
tion of the universe. And if Newman is asked
why he accepts his own solution, he can only reply
that, as a matter of fact, it convinces his ‘illative
sense,’ and that he believes that it would convince the
illative sense of other people, provided that they have
a conscience, that they interpret it in the \vay that he
does, and that the arguments are fairly set before
them. To which one can only say that, undoubtedly,
if any man is precisely in Newman’s state of mind.


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


287


And has precisely the same arguments put before
him, he will come to precisely the same conclu*
sion. But any attempt at a common measure of
truth as an ‘ objective test ’ is explicitly pronounced
impossible; and thus we are once more landed in
complete scepticism. A. or B. may be convinced, but
nothing can be proved. In short, here for the last
time Newman has substituted an explanation of the
vitality of a creed for a justification of its claims.
His writings show most admirably what are, in fact,
the methods by which Caihulicism has thriven and
survives ; but, so far from showing those methods to
be reasonable, he really shows conclusively that they
involve the operation of distinctly illogical induce-
ments to belief. Such is the natural result of con-
founding a theory of belief with an organon of proof.
If the ultimate test of truth is the power of creed to
convince men’s minds by whatever process, we are
inevitably led to the conclusion that all existing be-
liefs are equally justified. Some are more vigorous
than others ; but in a logical sense, if objective tests
are set aside, they are all on a footing of equality.

And now we may briefly define the general out-
come of Newman’s teaching. It is, in two words,
a genuine theory of development in the scientific
sense, omitting the doctrine of the survival of the
fittest. The evolutionist holds that, in the struggle^
for existence, the truest opinion tends to survive ; and*
thus, that whilst no generation is in possession of the


238


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


whole truth, the history of belief is^ that of a slow
gravitation towards truth. Some doctrines which
have survived all changes, and strengthened under all
conditions, may be regarded as definitely established,
or at least as indefinitely close approximations to
truth. Others are disappearing, or requiring trans-
formation. By studying the history of opinion from
this point of view we may obtain, not a self-subsist-
ing and independent system of philosophy, but an
indispensable guide towards further approximations.
We can use history without being under the tyranny
of the past. We can value the postulates upon which
men have acted without investing them with super-
natural authority. Newman, ignoring this test, and
retaining enough of the old arbitrary assumptions
to reject all progress as a baseless dream, sees no-
thing but a huge welter of struggling creeds, differing
only in degrees of vitality or permanence. Having
no trust in independent reason, he has virtually to
take that creed which happens to be most congenial
to his feelings, and justifies himself by the incongru-
ous intervention of a supernatural authority. He can
thus comfortably appeal to history so long as it testi-
fies to the life of a creed, and contemptuously reject
its testimony when it exhibits the creed as ossifying
or decaying. As soon as his tests give unpleasant
results, he can discard them as irrelevant. Though
the adoption of such a method does not justify
Kingsley’s absurd imputation that Newman preached


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


289


that truth was not a virtue, it certainly sanotionB a
method of pla^ng fast and loose with facts which
makes the apparent appeal to history a mere illusion.
The whole pith of the ‘Grammar of Assent,’ so far
as it is original, is in the assertion that belief is a
personal product in such a sense that no common
mcasui'e between different minds is attainable.
Therefore agreement can only be produced by super-
natural intervention; or, in other words, rational
agreement is impossible.

If, then, it is asked ho\\ wo are to escape from such
scepticism as Newman’s, whilst appealing, as we
adrnit that we must appeal, to ('xperience as the
ultimate test of truth, the answer is plain. We must
take Newman’s own criterion, not narrowed by
his prejudices, nor perverted by his introduction of
arbitrary assumptions. Seenrus jiidicat orbis terra-
rum : but othit ten-arum must not mean that part of
the earth’s surface wliich is overlooked by the spire of
St. Mary’s, or even that wider region whose inhabi-
tants look with reverence to the dome of St. Peter’s.
The (lej)0'>ttum of faith which we must accept is not
that which is guarded by any single Church, however
august in its history and imposing in its pretensions.
It is that body of scientific truth which is the slow
growth of human experience through countless ages,
and which develops by the labour of truth-loving
men, and under the remorseless pressure of hard facts.
We cannot accept as proved the rash solutions of the


240


NEWMAN’S THEOEY OF BELIEF


eternal riddle which have commended themselves to
savages, or to philosophers, or to any arbitrary selec-
tion of men who happen to agree with ns, or to any
organisation which has enabled men to find a common
mouthpiece for the utterance of their emotions.
Dreams, however gorgeous, however richly they em-
body the thoughts of old poets and sages, and genera-
tions of the noblest men on earth, cannot pass muster.
We can take nothing as proved but that which has
stood the hard test of verification by multitudinous
experience. The authority, we must admit, of any
individual is infinitesimal ; his chances of error innu-
merable. No man can say, This is true because I
think it ; no man can hold that he has grasped the
full and ultimate truth upon any subject. But, if the
race is to progress, men must not be content to bow
to the first authority at hand, even if it shows signs
of strong and prolonged vitality. We must venture
something to win anything. Our principle must be to
place ourselves in that direction winch is shown to
have the greatest promise by the general set of
opinions of (pialified thinkers. Those opinions have
the most authority which are most rational ; and the
safest test of rationality is that they have commended
themsehes to independent in(|uircrs, who themselves
acknowledged no law but reason, and have not been
propagated by ignorance, blind submission to arbitrary
rules, and reluctance to believe unpleasant truths.
There is no infallible guide and no complete and


NEWMAN’S THEORY OF BELIEF


241


defiiutive system of universal truth; but by such
means we can attain enough truth to secure the wel-
fare and progress of the race and a continual approxi-
mation towards a fuller and more definite body of
definitive truth. If we deny that there is any such
progress, we may pick up a creed at random. If wo
admit it, we can, by careful observation and the use
of all available logical canons and accumulated know-
ledge, throw some light upon the great problem, Wliat
is the conception of the universe to which the previous
history of [inquiry sho\»s that men’s minds are gradu-
ally conforming themselves as they become more
raHnna.l 9


R


242


POISONOUS OPINIONS

Mr. Fboude, in his ‘ Life of Carlyle,’ incidentally sets
forth a theory of toleration. Cromwell, he tells us,
held Bomanism to be ‘ morally poisonous ’ ; therefore
Cromwell did not tolerate. We have decided that it
is no longer poisonous; therefore we do tolerate.
Cromwell’s intolerance implied an intense ' hatred of
evil in its concrete form ’ ; our tolerance need not
imply any deficiency in that respect, but merely a
difference of opinion as to facts. Upon this showing,
then, we are justified in extirpating, by fire and sword,
any doctrine, if only we are sincerely convinced that
it is ‘ morally poisonous.’ T do not take this as a full
account either of Carlyle’s theory or of Mr. Fronde’s.
I quote it merely as a pointed statement of a doctrine
which in some ways would appear to follow more
directly from the utilitarianism which Carlyle de<
tested. The a-gument is simple. A ‘poisonous
opinion ’ is one which causes a balance of evil. The
existence of such opinions is admitted. Nor, again,
is it denied that under certain conditions an opinion
may be suppressed by persecution. The persecution,


POISONOUS OPINIONS


248


then, of a poisonous opinion must do some good, and
must produce a balance of good if the evil effects of
the opinion suppressed exceed the various evils due
to the persecution. But that which causes a balance
of good is right according to utilitarians ; and there-
fore persecution may sometimes be right'. If you
have to suppress a trifling error at the cost of much
suffering, you are acting wrongly, as it would be '
wrong to euro a scratch by cutting off a fihger. But
it may be right to suppress a poisonous opinion when
the evil of the opinion is measured by the corruption
of a whole social order, and the evil of the persecu-
tion by the death, say, of twelve apostles. In such
a case it is expedient, and therefore right, that one
man or a dozen should perish for the good of the
people.

Mill attacked the applicability, though not the
first principle, of this reasoning in the most forcible
part of his ' Liberty.’ He argues in substance that
the collateral evils due to persecution are always, or
almost always, excessive. He could not, as a utili-
tarian, deduce toleration from some absolute A prion
principle. But by pointing out evil consequences
generally overlooked, he could strengthen the geperal
presumption against its utility in any particular case.
His utilitarian opponents may still dispute the suffi-
ciency of his reasoning. They urge, in substance, .
th^t the presumption is not strong enough to justify
an absolute rule. Granting that there is a presump-


244


POISONOUS OPINIONS


tion against persecution generally, and that all the
evils pointed out by Mill should be taken into account,
yet, they say, it is still a question of expediency. We
must be guided in each particular case by a careful
balance of the good and evil, and must admit this
general presumption only for what it is worth ; that is,
as a guiding rule in doubtful cases, or where we do not
know enough to balance consequences satisfactorily,
but not as possessing sufficient authority to override
a deal* conclusion in the opposite sense. Practically,
we may assume, the difference comes to very little.
Mill’s opponents might often be as tolerant as himself.
He says, indeed, that toleration is the universal rule ;
yet even he might admit that, as in other moral
problems, a casuist might devise circumstances under
which it would cease to be an absolute rule. On the
other hand, his opponents, though holding in theory
that each case has to be judged on its merits, would,
in fact, agree that no case ever occurs at the present
time in which the balance is not in favour of tolera-
tion. The discussion, therefore, has less practical
application than one might at first sight suppose.
One man says, ‘Toleration is always right, but at
times this, like other moral rules, may be suspended.’
The other, * It is not a question of right or wrong,
but of expediency ; but, on the other hand, in almost
every conceivable case, toleration is clearly expedient.’
It is only, therefore, as illustrating an interesting
ethical problem — interesting, that is, to people capable


POISONOUS OPINIONS 245

of feeling an interest in such gratuitous logic-chopping
— that I would consider the problem.

I remark, therefore, in the first place, that one
argument of considerable importance scarcely receives
sufficient emphasis from MiU. The objection taken
by the ordinary common-sense of mankind to per-
secution is, very often, that the doctrines enforced are
false. Toleration, beyond aU doubt, has been ad-
vanced by scepticism. It is cleai'ly both inexpedient
and wrong to burn people for not holding erroneous
beliefs. MUl extends the argument to cases where
power and truth are on the same side ; but he scarcely
brings out what may be called the specifically moral
objection. 1 may hold that Homanism is false and
even ‘ poisonous.’ I may still admit that a sincere
Eomanist is not only justified in believing — for, so far
as his belief appears to him to be reasonable, he cannot
help believing — but also that ho is morally bound to
avow his belief. He is in the position of a man who
is sincerely convinced that a food which I hold to be
poisonous is wholesome, or, rather, an indispensable
medicine. If he thinks so, it is clearly his duty to let
his opinion be known. A man holds that prussic acid
will cure, when it really kills. He is mistaken, but
surely he is bound to impart so important a truth to
his fellows. So long, indeed, as men held that it was
not only foolish, but wicked, to hold other religious
opinions than their own, this argument did not apply.
But 1 need not argue that sincere errors are in them-


246


POISONOUS OPINIONS


selves innocent. The most virtaons of men will be
a Calvinist in Scotland, a Catholic ili Spain, and a
Mohammedan in Turkey. And so far as this pos*
sibility is admitted, and as the contrai 7 conviction
spreads — namely, that the leaders of heresies are
generally virtuous, because it requires virtue to
uphold an unpopular opinion — the dilemma becomes
pressing. The persecutor, as a rule, is punishing
the virtuous for virtuous conduct, and, moreover, for
conduct which he admits to be virtuous. For this is
not one of those cases with which casuists sometimes
puzzle themselves. The fact that a man thinks him>
self acting rightly, or is wicked on principle, is not a
sufficient defence against legal punishment. If a
man is a Thug, the Government is not the less bound
to hang him because he thinks murder right. A thief
must be punished, though he objects to property in
general ; and a man who deserts his wife, though he
disapproves of marriage. A man is in such cases
punished for an action which the ruler holds to be
immoral. But the persecutor has to punish a man
precisely for discharging a duty admitted even by the
persecutor to be a duty, and a duty of the highest
obligation. If the duty of truthfulness be admitted,
I am* bound not to express belief in a creed which 1
hold to be false. If benevolence be a duty, I am
bound to tell my neighbom* how he can avoid hell-
'• fire. The dilemma thus brought about — the necessity
of crushing conscience by law — ^will be admitted ‘to


POISONOUS OPINIONS


247


be an evil, though it may be an inevitable evil. The
social tie carries mth it the necessity of sometimes
forcing particular people to do that which both they
and we admit to be wrong. But the scandal so caused
is one main cause of the abhorrence felt for the
persecutor, and the sympathy for his victipis. The
ordinary statement of the impolicy of making men
martyrs testifies to the general force of the im-
pression. And it must, in fact, be taken into account
upon any method of calculation, in so far, at least,
as the revulsion of feeling excited by persecution tells
against the efficacy of the method adopted. The
persecutor, that is, must clearly remember that by
burning a man for his honesty he is inevitably
exciting the disgust of all who care for honesty, even
though they do not prize it more than orthodoxy. It
must be in all cases a great, even if a necessary, evil,
that the law should outrage the conscience of its
subjects. And whatever conclusion may be reached,
it is desirable to consider how far and on what prin-
ciples the acceptance of this dilemma can be regarded
as unavoidable.

The utilitarian can, of course, give a consistent
reply. The ultimate criterion, he says, of virtue is
utility. Sincerity is a virtue because it is obviously
useful to mankind. That men should be able to trust
each other is a first condition of the mutual assistance
up*on which happiness depends. But here is a caser
iif which we — that is, the rulers — are convinced that


248


POISONOUS OPINIONS


sincerity does harm. We shall be illogical if we
allow the general rule derived hrom particular cases
to govern us in the case where it plainly does not
apply. We admit all the evils alleged : the suffering
of a sincere man because of his sincerity, the en-
couragement to hypocrisy, tlie demoralisation of those
whose lips are closed ; but, after admitting all this,
we still see so clearly the mischief which will follow
from the spread of the opinions in question, that we
pronounce it to exceed all the other admitted mischief,
and are therefore still bound to persecute. Turn it
and twist it as you will, the question still comes to
this: Which way does the balance of happiness
incline '? Is it better that virtuous Eomanists should
go to the stake and Bomanism be so stamped out, or
that so poisonous an opinion be allowed to spread ?
We fully admit all the evils which you have noted,
and willingly put them in the balance ; but we must
weigh them against the evils which will follow from
the toleration, and our action must be determined by
a final comparison.

Undoubtedly the argument has great apparent
strength. It fixes the issues which are generally
taken; and when helped by the assumption that
belief 4n a creed may determine a man's happiness
for all eternity, and that men or some body of men
may possess infallibility, it makes a very imposing
show. Nor do I wisli to dispute the fundamental
principle ; that is, the principle that utility is in som*6


POISONOUS OPINIONS


249


sense to be the final criterion of morality. I think,
liowever, that here, as in other cases, a thoroughgoing
application of that criterion will lead us to a different
conclusion from that which results from a first in-
spection. And, in order to show this, 1 must try to
point out certain tacit assumptions made in the
application of this principle to the facts. Granting
that we must test persecution by its effects upon
human happiness, I must add that we cannot fairly
measure these effects without looking a little more
closely into the conditions under which they are
necessarily applied. The argument starts from the
generalisation of something like a truism. The
alleged fact is simply this : that pain, threatened or
indicted, will stop a man's month. It ctui hardly
convert him, but it will prevent him from converting
others. I do not • dispute the statement ; 1 will not
undertake to say that there is any creed which I
would not avow or renounce rather than be burnt
alive. 1 think that I might possibly prefer distant
damnation to immediate martyrdom. Many men,
happily for the race, have been more heroic; but
burning stopped even their mouths, and so for sup-
pressed their influence. We have, however, to
modify this statement before we can apply it to any
serious purpose. We have to show, that is, that we
not only suppress the individual, but eradicate the
opmion from society ; and this raises two questions.
Tfiore is a difficulty in catching the opinion which is


»60


POISONOUS OPINIONS


to be suppressed, and there is a difficulty about ar-
ranging the machinery through which the necessary
force is to be supplied. When we examine the con-
ditions of success in the enterprise, it may, turn out
that it is impossible in many cases, and possible in
any case only at the cost of e^dls which would more
than counterbalance any possible benefit. Only by
such an imestigation can we really measure the total
effect of i)er8ocution, and it will, I think, appear to be
still more far-reaching and disastrous than is implied
even by Mill’s cogent reasoning.

Mill, in fact, conducts the argument as though he
made an assumption (for I will not say that ho
actually made it) which appears to me, at least, to be
curiously unreal. His reasoning would be sometimes
more to the purpose if we could suppose an opinion
to be a sort of definite object, a tangible thing like
the cholera bacillus, existing in a particular mind,
as the germ in a particular body, and therefore
capable of being laid bold of and suppressed by
burning the person to a horn it belongs, as the gorm
is suppressed by being dipped in boiling water. This
corresponds to what one may call the ‘ happy thought ’
doctrine of scientific discovery. Popular writers used
sometimes to tell the story of Newtons great dis-
covery as though Newton one day saw an apple fall,
and exclaimed, ' Ah ! an apple is a kind of moon ! ’
This remark had occurred to no one else, and might
never have struck anybody again. If, therefore, you


POISONOUS OPINIONS


2C1


had eaught Newton on the spot and stamped him out,
the discovery of gravitation might have l)een per-
manently suppressed. Mill would, of course, have
perceived the absurdity of such a statement as clearly
as anyone ; yet he seems to make a very similar
assumption in his * Liberty.’ It is, he is {(irgning, a
* piece of idle sentimentality ’ that truth has any
intrinsic power of prevailing against persecution,
‘ The real advantage which truth has consists in this —
that when an opinion is true it may be extinguished
once, twice, or many times, but in the course of ages
there will generally be found persons to rediscover it ’ ;
and when, he adds, it is rediscovered in a i>ropitious
age, it may *makc such head’ as to resist later
attempts at suppression. Surely this is a most in-
adequate account of the strength of truth. The
advantage dependent upon a chance of rediscovery is
equally possessed by error ; old superstitions are just
as much given to reappearance as old truths. Every-
one who has examined stupid lads knows very well
that the blunders which they make are just as uniform
as the truths which they perceive. Given minds at a
certain stage, and exposed to certain external con-
ditions, we can predict the illusions which will be
generated. So, to take the familiar instances, the
mass of mankind still beUeves that the sun goes
round the earth, and is convinced that a mOAring body
witl stop of itself, independently of external resistance.*
The advantage of truth is surely dependent upon the


252


POISONOUS OHNIONS


other fact that it can, as Mill says, ‘ make head.’ It
gathers strength by existing; it gathers strength,
that is, because it can be verified and tested, and
every fresh test confirms the belief; and it gathers
strength, again, in so far as it becomes part of a
general system of truths, each of which confirms,
elucidates, and corroborates the others, and which
together form the organised mass of accepted know-
ledge which we call science. So far as we are
possessed of anything that can be calh'd scientific
knowledge, we have not to deal with a list of separate
assertions, each of which has to bo judged upon its
own merits, and each of which may stand or fall
independently of all the others ; but with a system of
interdependent truths, some of which are supported
by irresistible weight of evidence, whilst the remainder
an* 80 inextricably intertwined with the central core
of truth that they cannot be separately rejected. To
talk, therefore, of suppressing an opinion as if it
were not part of a single growth, but a separable
item in a chsmtic aggre gate of distinguishable theories,
is to overlook the most essential condition of bringing
any influence to boar upon opmion generally.

Consider, first, the case of any scientific theory.
Newton’s great achievement was supposed to lead to
questionable theological inferences ; as, indeed, what-
ever may be the logical mferenccs, there can be no
doubt that it was fatal to the mythological imagery
in which the earth appeared as the centre of the


POISONOUS OPINIONS


253


umverse. Saj^se, then, that it had been decided
that the opinion was poisonous, and that anybody
who maintained that the earth went round the sun
should bo burnt. Had such a system been carried
out, what must have happened ? If we suppose it to
be compatible with the continued progress of astro-
nomical and physical inquiries, this particular oon-
cluoion might still be ostensibly conceded. Kepler’s
discoveries, and all the astronomical observations
assumed by Newton, might have been allowed to be
promulgated, as affording convenient means of cal-
culation, and Ne\^ ton’s physical theories might have
been let pass as interesting surmises in speculation,
or admitted as applicable to other cases, it might
still bo asserted that, so far as the solar system was
concerned, the doctrines possessed no ‘objective
truth.’ Something of the kind was, I believe, actually
attempted. It needs, however, no argument to show
that such a persecution would be childish, and would
be virtually giving over the key of the position to the
antagonist, with some feeble, ostensible stipulation that
he should not openly occupy one dependent outwork.
The truth would not have been suppressed, but the
open avowal of the truth. The only other alternative
would have been to suppress physical theories and
astronomical observation altogether, in order to avoid
the deduction of the offensive corollary. In such a
case, then, the only choice, by the very nature of the*
case, is not between permitting or suppressing ‘ an


254


POISONOUS OPINIONS


opinion,’ but between permitting or suppreesing
scientific inquiry in general. There are, no doubt,
bigots and stupid people enough to be ready to suppress
speculation at large, but they would find it hard to in*
ducc people to suppress things of obvious utility ; they
cannot suppress the study of astronomy for purposes
of navigation, and yet, when the truth has been
acquired for this end, its application to others follows
by a spontaneous and irresistible process. The victory
is won, and the only question is, whether the conqueror
shall march in openly or in a mask.

This familiar example may illustrate the extreme
difficulty of catching, isolating, and suppressing so
subtle an essence as an opinion. Stop all thought,
and of course you can annihilate the particular' doc-
trine which it generates. But the price to pay is a
heavy one, and clearly not to be measured by the par-
ticular sets of consequences which result from the
specified dogma. The same principle is everywhere
operative. The gi-eatest shock lately received by the
conservative theologians has been due to the spread
of Darwinian thu>ries. How, granting that rulers
and priests had at their disposal any amount of
■.nMsecuting power, would they have proposed to sup-
)ss those theories ? They object to the belief that
■i n have grown out of monkeys. Would they, then,
.allow men to hold that the horse and ass have a
common ancestor ; or to question the permanency of
genera and species of plants ? Would they prohibit


POISONOUS OPINIONS


266


Darwin’s investigations into the various breeds of
pigeons, or ottject to his exposition of the way in
which a multiplication of cats might be unfavourable
to the fertilisation of clover ? The principle shows
itself in the most trifling cases; once established
there, it spreads by inevitable contagion to others ;
the conclusion is obvious to all men, whether tacitly
insinuated or openly drawn. To suppress it you
must get rid of the primitive germ. Wh6n once it
has begun to spread, no political nets or traps can
catch so subtle an element. It would be as idle to
attempt to guard against it as to say that small-pox
may rage as it pleases everywhere else, but you will
keep it out of Pall Mall by a cordon of policemen to
stop people with an actual eruption. The philosophy
of a people is the central core of thought, which is
affected by every change taking place on the remotest
confines of the organism. It is sensitive to every
change in every department of inquiry. Every new
principle discovered anywhere has to find its place in
the central truths ; and unless you are prepared to
superintend, and therefore to stifle, thought in general,
you may as well let it alone altogether. Superintend-
ence means stifling. That is not the less true, even
if the doctrine suppressed be erroneous. Assfiming
that Darwinianism is wrong, or as far as you please
from being absolutely true, yet its spread proves

*

conclusively that it represents a necessary stage of
progress. We may have to pass beyond it ; but in


256


POISONOUS OPINIONS


oay case we have to pass through it. It represents
that attitude of mind and method of combining obser-
vations which is required under existing conditions.
It may enable us to rise to a point from which we
shall see its inadequacy. But even its antagonists
admit the necessity of working provisionally, at least,
from this assumption, and seeing what can be made
of it; and would admit, therefore, that a forcible
suppression, if so wild an hypothesis can be enter-
tained, would be equivalent to the supprossiou, not of
this or that theory, but of thought.

The conclusion is, briefly, that, so far as sciontiiic
opinion is concerned, you have to choose liotween
tolerating error and suppressing all intellectual
activity. If this be admitted in the case of what we
call ‘ Bcicntilic ’ knowledge, the dilemma presents
itself everywhere. Wo are becoming daily more fully
aware of the imity of knowledge ; of the impossibility
of preserving, isolating, and impounding particular
bits of truth, or protecting orthodoxy by the most
elaborate quarantine. It is idle to speak of a separa-
tion between the spheres of science and theology, as
though the contents of the two were entirely separate.
There is, doubtless, much misconception as to the
naturb of the relation ; false inferences are frequently
made by hasty thinkers ; but the difference, whatever
it may be, is not such as divides two independent
'■series of observations, but such that every important
change in one region has a necessary and immediate


POISONOUS OPINIONS


267


reaction on the other. If we accept the principle of
evolution —whether we take the Darwinian version or
any other as our guide — as applied to the history of
human belief, we more and more realise tho undeni-
able facts that the history must be considered as a
whole ; that tho evolution, however it takes place,
has to follow certain linos defined by the successive
stages of intelloctiial development ; that it consists of
a scries of gradual appr(*xiniatiou8, each involving
positive errors, or at least provisional assumptions
accepted for the moment as definitive truths; and
that every widely-spread belief, whether accurate or
erroneous, has its place in the process, as representing
at least the illusions which necessarily present them-
selves to minds at a given point of the ascending
scale. The whole process may be, and, of course,
fr<>quontly has been, arrested. But, if it is to take
place at all, it is impossible to iiroscribe particular
conclusions beforehand. Tho conclusions forbidden
may, of course, be such as would never have been
rtached, even if not forbidden. In thai case the
persecution would be useless. But if they are such
as would commend themselves to masses of men but
for the prohibition, it follows that they are necessary
‘ moments ’ in the evolution of thought, and fiiere-
fore can only be suppressed by suppressing that
evolution.

’ The vagueness of the argument stated in these*
general terms is no bar to its value in considering

B


258


POISONOUS OPINIONS


more special cases. It suggests, in the first place^
an extension of one of Mill’s arguments, which has
been most frequently criticised. He tries to prove
this advantage of persecution by a rather exaggerated
estimate of the value of contradiction. ‘ Even ad-
mitted truths,’ he says, ‘ are apt to lose their interest
for us unless stimulated by collision with the con-
tradictory error.’ It is, of com’so, obvious to reply
that we believe in Euclid or in the ordinary principles
of conduct, though nobody ever denies that two sides
of a triangle are greater than the third, or doubts
that water quenches thirst. An opinion, I should
say, gains vividness rather from constant application
to conduct than from habitual opposition. But, so
far as Mill’s argument has to do with toleration, it
seems to.be cogent, and to derive its strength from
the principle I am defending. Many opinions, if left
alone, would doubtless die out by inherent weakness.
It would be idle to punish men for maintaining that
two and two make five, because the opinion would
never survive a practical application. The prohibi-
tion of a palpably absurd theory would be a waste of
force, and might possibly suggest to a few eccentric
people that there must, after all, be something to say
for tbe absurdity, and therefore, if for no other
reason, it is undesirable. But it was, of course, not
of such opinions that Mill was thinking. 'The only
opinions which anyone would seriously desire “to
suppress are plausible opinions — opinions, that iS,


POISONOUS OPINIONS


259


which would flourish but for persecution ; and every
persecutor justifies himself by showing, to his own
satisfaction, that his intervention is needed. He
rejects the argument by which Gramaliel defended
the first plea for toleration. He holds thai opinions,
though coming from God, require human defence.
He thinks that even the devil’s creed would flourish
but for a stake, and this assumption is the sole jus-
tification of the stake. That is to say, persecution is
always defended, and can only be defended, on the
ground that the persecuted opinion is highly plausible,
and the same plausibility of an opinion is a strong
presumption that it is an essential part of the whole
evolution. Even if it be wrong, it must represent
the way in which a largo number of people will think,
if they think at all. It corresponds to one aspect,
though an incomplete or illusory aspect, of the facts.
If there be no reason, there must bo some general
cause of the error ; a cause which, in the supposed
case, must be the prevalence of some erroneous or
imperfect belief in the minds of many people. The
predisposing cause will presumably remain, even if
this expression of opinion be silenced. And, in all
such cases, the effect of suppression will be pre-
judicial to the vigour even of the true belief. *The
causes, whatever they be, which obstruct its accept-
ance will operate in a cbvert form. Real examination
becomes impossible when the side which is not con-
victed is not allowed to have its reasons for doubt


260


POISONOUS OPINIONS


tested ; and we reach the dilemma just stated. That
is to say, if thought is not suppressed, the error will
find its way to the surface through some subterranean
channels ; whilst, if thought is suppressed, the truth
^ and all speculative truth will of course be enfeebled
with the general enfeeblement of the intellect. To
remedy a morbid growth you have applied a ligature
which can only succeed by arresting circulation and
bringing on the mortification of the limb. To treat
intellectual error in this fashion must always be to
fall into the practice of quackery, and suppress a
symptom instead of attacking the source of the evil.

The assertion is, apparently, at least, opposed to
another doctrine in which Mill agrees with some of
his antagonists. He says, as we have seen, that a
belief in the natural prevalence of truth is a piece of
idle sentimentality; it is a ‘pleasant falsehood’ to
say that truth always triumphs ; ‘ history teems with
instances of successful persecution ’ ; and he confirms
this by such cases as the failure of the Beformers in
Spain, Italy, and Flanders, and of the various attempts
which preceded Luther’s successful revolt. Arguments
beginning ‘ all history shows ’ are always sophistical.
The most superficial knowledge is sufficient to show
that, in thi.s case at least, the conclusion is not demon-
strated. To prove that persecution ‘succeeded’ in
suppressing truth, you must prove that without per-
secution truth would have prevailed. The argument
from the Beformation must surely in Mill be an


POISONOUS OPINIONS


261


argumentum hominm . He did not hold that Luther,
or Knox, or the Lollards preached the whole truth ;
hardly, even, that they were nearer the truth than
Ignatius Loyola or St. Bernard. And the point is
important. For when it is said that the Reformation
was suppressed in Italy and Spain by persecution,
we ask at once whether there is the slightest reason
to suppose that, if those countries had been as free
as England at the present day, they .would have
become rrotestant? Protestantism had its day of
vitality, and in some places it is still vigorous ; but
with all the liberty of conscience of modern Italy, the
most enthusiastic Protestant scarcely expects its con-
version before the millennium. If, when there is a
fair field and no favour, Protestantism stands still,
why should we suppose that it would once have
advanced? Many writers have insisted upon the
singular arrest of the Protestant impulse. The
boundaries between Protestantism and Catholicism
are still drawn upon the lines fixed by the first great
convulsion. It is at least as plausible to attribute this
to the internal decay of Protestantism as to the external
barriers raised by persecution. In the seventeenth
century philosophical intellects had already passed
beyond the temporary compromise which satisfied
Luther and his contemporaries. Protestantism, so far
as it meant a speculative movement, was not the name
of a single principle or a coherent system of opinion,
W of a mass of inconsistent theories approximating


262


POISONOUS OPINIONS


more or less consciously to pure deism of ‘ naturalism.’
Victories over Romanism were not really won by the
creed of Calvin and Knox, but by the doctrines of
Hobbes and Spinoza. Otherwise we may well believe
the Protestant creed would have spread more rapidly,
instead of ceasing to spread at all precisely when
persecution became less vigorous. When we look
more closely at the facts, the assumption really made
shows its true nature. Persecution might strike
down any nascent Protestantism in Spain; but it can
hardly be said that it created the very zeal which it
manifested. If no persecution had b('en possiblt', the
enthusiasm of Loyola and his successors might (even
if I may not say would) have burnt all the more
brightly. And if the orthodox had been forbidden
to strike a foul blow, they might have been ccpially
successful when confined to legitimate methods.
The reasoning, in fact, is simple. Protestantism died
out when persecution flourished. But persecution
flourished when zeal was intense. It is impossible,
then, to argue that the extinction of heresy was duo
to the special fact of the persecution in order to
account for the fact that it did not spread in the
regions where faith was strongest. In any case, if
wo assume, as we must assume, that the old faith
was congenial to a vast number of minds, we might
be sure that it would triumph whore it had the most
numerous and zealous followers. Under the condi*
tions of the times, that triumph of course implied


POISONOUS OHNIONS


268


persecution ; but it is an invasion of all logic to put
this collateral effect as the cause of the very state of
mind which alone could make it possible. So, again,
Protestantism died out in France (which Mill does
not mention) and survived in England ; and in Eng-
land, says Mill, tho death of Elizabeth or the life of
Mary would ‘ most likely ’ have caused its extirpation.
Possibly, for it is difficult to argue ‘ might have beens.’
But it is ecjually possible that the English indifference
which made the country pliable in the hands of its
rulers would have prevented any effective persecution,
and tho ineffectual persecution have led only to a more
thoroughgoing revolution when the Puritan party had
accumulated a greater stock of grievances. If, again,
Protestantism had been really congenial to the French
people, is it not at least probable that it would have
gathered sufficient strength in the seventeenth century
— whatever the disadvantages under which it actually
laboured — to make a. subseipient revival of vigorous
persecution impossible? One ultimate condition of
success lay, partly, at any rate, in the complex
conditions, other than the direct action of rulers,
which predisposed one society to the Catholic and
others to the Protestant doctrine ; and if we arc not
entitled to assume that this was the sole ultimate
and determining condition of the final division, we
are certainly not entitled to seek for it in the perse-
cution which is in any land a product of a spiritual*
force capable of acting in countless other ways.


264


POISONOUS OPINIONS


Once more we come across that ‘ happy thought '

I

doctrine which was natural to the old method of
writing history. Catholics were once content to trace
the English Beformation to the wickedness of Henry
VIII. or Elizabeth; Protestants, to the sudden in-
spiration of this or that Reformer. Without attempt-
ing to argue the general question of the importance
of great religious leaders, this at least is evident :
that the appropriate medium is as necessary as the im-
mediate stimulus. There were bad men before Henry
VIII.,anddaring thmkorsandBoformer,sl)cfore Luther.
The Church could resist plunder or reform whilst it
possessed sufficient vital force ; and the uUiuiate
condition of that force was that its creeds and its wor-
ship satislied the strongest religious aspirations of
mankind. Luther himself at an earlier period would
have been a St. Bernard. Its weakness and the
success of assailants, good or 1>ad, was due, as no one
will now deny, to the morbid condition into which it
had fallen, from causes which could only be fully set
forth by tlr- profoundest and most ])ainstaking in-
vestigation. If this be granted, it follows that
Protestantism, whether a wholesome or a pernicious
movement, meant the operation of certain widely-
spread and deeply-seated causes rendering some
catastrophe inevitable. To apply an effective remedy
it would have been necessary to remove the causes,
to restore the old institutions in working order, and
to renew the vitality of the faiths upon which its


POISONOUS OPINIONS


265


vigour essentially depended. So far as the opponents
of reform relied upon persecution, they were driving
the disease bwards instead of applying an effectual
remedy. Such observations — too commonplace to be
worth more than a brief indication— must be indi-
cated in order to justify the obvious limitations to
Mill’s estimate of the efficacy of persecution. In the
first place, it is not proved that it was properly
‘ efficacious ’ at all ; that is, that the hmits of the
creeds would not have beta approximately the same
had no persecution been allowed Secondly, if effi-
cacioixs, it was ('flicacious at a cost at wbich the
immediate suffering of the martyrs is an absurdly
inadequate measure. Jn Spam, Protestantism was
stamped out, when it might have died a natural
death, at the price of general intellectual atrophy.
Had the persecutors known that the system from
which persecution resulted was also a system under
which their country would decline from the highest
to the most insignificant position, their zeal might
have been cooled. In France, again, if Protestantism
was suppressed by the State, Catholics ot to-day may
reckon the cost. Thought, behig (upon that hypo-
thesis) forced into a different mode of expressing
dissent, has not only brought about the triumph of
mibelief, but the production of a type of infidelity not
only speculatively hostile to Catholicism, but ani-,
mated by a bitter hatred which even the most anti-
datholic of reasoners may regret. I am unable to


266


POISONOUS OPINIONS


decide the problem whether it is worth while to save
a few souls at the moment with the result of ultimately
driving a whole nation to perdition ; but it is one
which even those who rely upon the hell-fire argu-
ment may consider worth notice. A.iid if in England
we have escaped some of these mischiefs, we may ask
how much good we have done by an ineffectual
persecution of Catholics in Ireland — a point upon
which it is needless to insist, because everyone
admits the folly of ineffectual persecution.

The facts, so considered, seem to fit best with the
doctrine which I am advocating. Persecution may
be effective at the cost of strangling all intellectual
advance ; it may be successful for a time in enforcing
hypocrisy, or, in other words, taking the surest means
of producing a dry-rot of the system defended ; or,
finally, it may be ineffectual in securing its avowed
object, but singularly efficacious in producing bitter
antipathy and accumulating undying ill-will between
hostile sections of society. When, therefore, the
argument is .stated as though all the evils to be put
in the balance against persecution were the pain of
the immediate sufferers and the terror of sympathisers,
1 should say that the merest outside of the case has
really been touched. One other consideration is
enough for this part of the question. Persecution
.may discourage unbelief, but it cannot be maintained
that it has the least direct tendency to increase belief.
Positively it must fail, whatever it may do negatively.


POISONOUS OPINIONS


267


The decay of ^ religion means a decline of * vital
faith ’ — of a vivid realisation of the formulae verbally
accepted. That is the true danger in the eyes of
believers ; and, if it be widely spread, no burning of
heretics can tend to diminish it. People do not
believe more vigorously because believers in a dif-
ferent creed are burnt. They only become more
cowardly in all their opinions ; and some other
remedy of a totally different nature can alone be
efficacious. You can prevent people from worshipping
another God, but you cannot make them more
zealous about their own. And perhaps a lukewarm
believer is more likely to be damned, certainly he
is not loss likely to be mischievous, than a vigorous
heretic.

To complete the argument, however, or rather the
outline of the argument, it would be necessary to
follow out another set of considerations. Granting
that you can suppress your heresy by persecution
enough, we have to ask how you can get persecution
enough. Persecution which does not suppress is a
folly as well as a crime. To irritate without injuring
is mischievous upon all hypotheses. In that case, if
not in others, even cynics allow that the blood of the
martyrs is the seed of the Church. The danger of
advertising your opponent is pretty well understood
by ^ this time, and popular riots suppressed by the
police are the very thing desirable for the Salvation
Army. It is agreed, then, that the weapon is one


268


POISONOUS OPINIONS


to be used solely on condition that it ^is applied with
sufficient stringency. Now, if we ask further how
this is to he obtained, and especially if we ask that
question in the light of the preceding inquiry, we
shall arrive at a conclusion difficult to state in
adequate terms. It may be possible to stamp out
what we may call a particular opinion. The ex-
periment, at least, has often been tried, though 1 do
not know that it has often succeeded. When it was
criminal to speak of a king’s vices, the opinion
entertained about particular kings was hardly mure
flattering — though flatterers alone could speak openly
— than it is now. But to suppress so vague and
penetrating a thing as a new religious opinion is a
very different and a very serious matter. The change
may not be the less efficacious because it is not overt.
Nothing, for example, could be easier than to ad-
vocate the most infldel opinions in the language of
perfect orthodoxy. The belief in God is generally
taken to be a cardinal article of faith. But the
words may be made to cover any state of mind.
Spinoza and Hobbes both professed to believe in a
God who, to their opponents, is no God at aU. The
quaint identification of ‘ deist ’ with ‘ atheist,’ by
orthodox writers, is an illustration of the possible
divergence of meaning under unity of phrase. One
^ set of theologians hold to the conception of a Being
who will help a pious leader to win a battle if a
proper request be made. Another set, equally sincere


POISONOUS OPINIONS


269


and devout, regard any such doctrine as presumptuous
and profane. Briefly, what is common to all who
use the word, is a substance known only by attributes
which are susceptible of indefinite variation. And
what is true of this is true of all articles of faith. 1
will be a believer in any theological dogma to-morrow,
if you will agree that I shall define the words pre-
cisely as I please ; nor do I think that I should often
have to strain them beyond very respectable precedents
in order to cover downright positivism. How is this
difficulty to be met? How is a nominal belief in
Christianity to be guarded from melting away without
any change of phraseology into some vague pantheism
or agnosticism, or, in the other direction, to a de-
grading anthropomorphism ? A mere chain of words
is too easily borne to be cared for by anybody. You
may crush a downright Tom Paine ; but how are you
to restrain your wily latitudinarian, who will swallow
any formula as if he liked it ? Obviously, the only
reply can bo that you must give discretionary powers
to your Inquisition. It must be empowered to judge
of tendencies as well as of definite opinions ; to cross-
examine the freethinker, and bring his heresy to open
light ; to fashion new tests when the old ones break
down, and to resist the very first approaches *of the
insidious enemy who would rationalise and extenuate.
And, further, as I have said, the same authority must
lay his grasp, not only on theologians and philo-
sophers, but upon every department of thought by


270


POLSONOUS OPINIONS


'which they are influenced; that is to say, upon
speculation in general. Without this, the substance
may all slip away, and leave you with nothing but an
empty shell of merely formal assertion. The task is,
of course, practicable in proportion to the rarity of
intellectual activity. In ages when speculation was
only possible for a rare philosopher here and there,
it might be easy to make the place too hot to hold
him, even if lu; escaped open collision with authority.
But in any social state approaching at all to the
present, the magnitude of the task is obvious beyond
all need of explanation.

This suggests a final conclusion. No serious
politician assumes offhand that a law will execute
itself. It may be true that drunkenness and heresy
would expire together if every drunkard and heretic
could be hanged. But before proposing a law founded
upon that opinion, the legislator has to ask, not only
whether it would be effective if applied, but whether
it could be applied. What are the conditions of
efficiency of law itself? Opponents of toleration
seem to pass over this as irrelevant. If heretics ^vere
burnable, heresy would die out. Suppose that
granted, how does it apply ? The question as to the
possibility of carrying out a law is as important as
any other question about it. The Legislate is
omnipotent in the sense that whatever it declares to

I 4

be a law is a law, for that is the meaning of a law ;
but it is as far as possible from omnipotence in the


POISONOUS OPINIONS


271


sense of being able, to impose any rule in practice.
For anything to be effective persecution you require
your Inquisition — a body endowed with such authority
as to be able not merely to proscribe a given dogma,
but all the various disguises which it may. assume ;
and to suppress the very germs of the doctrines by
which the whole of a creed may be sapped without
ostensible assaults upon its specific statements ; to
silence, not only the conscious heretic, but the more
dangerous reasoner who is unintentionally farthering
heretical opinions; to extend its dominion over the
whole field of intellectual activity, and so stamp out,
iJot this or that objectionable statement, but to arrest
those changes in the very constituent principles of
reasoning, which, if they occur, bring with them the
necessity of correlative changes in particular opbuons,
and which can only be hindered from occurring by
arresting the development of thought itself. When
faith in the supernatural is decaying, it is idle to
enforce internal homage to this or that idol. The
special symptom is the result of a constitutional
change which such measures have no tendency to
remedy. How, then, is an administrative machinery
equal to such purposes to be contrived, or the
necessary force supplied for its effective working?
Obviously it implies such an all-embracing and
penetrating despotism as can hardly be paralleled in
hislibry; a blind spirit of loyalty which will accept
anfi carry out the decisions of the political rulers.


272


POISONOUS OPINIONS


and that in the face of the various influences which,
by the hypothesis, are bringing about an intellectual
change, and presumably affecting the rulers as well
as their subjects. And even so much can only be
reached by limiting or asphyxiating the intellectual
progress, with all which it implies. The argument,
it must be added, applies to the case of erroneous, as
well as of sound, opinions. That is to say, it is in
all cases idle to attack the error unless you can
remove the predisposing cause. I may hold, as in
fact I do hold, that what is called the religious
reaction of recent times involves the growth of many
fallacies, and that it is far more superficial than iS
generally asserted. But, whatever its origin, it has
its causes. So far as they are not to be found in
the purely intellectual sphere, they must be sought
in social conditions, or in the existence of certain
emotional needs not yet provided for by the newer
philosophy. To try to suppress sucli movements
forcibly — if any such enterprise could be seriously
proposed -would be idiotic. However strong our
conviction of intellectual error, we must be content
to have error as long as we have fools. For folly,
education in the widest sense is the sole, though
singdlarly imperfect, remedy ; and education in that
sense means the stimulation of all kinds of intellectual
energy. The other causes can only be removed by
thorough social reforms, and the fuller elaboration of
a satisfactory philosophy. Persecution, were such a


POISONOUS OPINIONS


278


thing really conceivable, could at most drive the
mischief to take other forms, and would remove one
of the most potent stimulants to the more satisfactory
variety of regenerating activity.

My reply, then, to the question, Why do you not
extirpate poisonous opinions by force ? is, briefly, the
old one — Because I object to quack remedies: to
remedies, in this case, which can at most secure a
negative result at the cost of arresting the patient’s
growth. When 1 come to the strictly ethical problem.
Is persecution wicked ? and, if so, why ? I must answer
rather more fully. All that I have said is a simple
expansion of familiar and obvious arguments. Not
only must Mill, whom I have cj’iticised in particular
points, have recognised all the alleged evils in a general
way, but I am certain that others less favom'able to
toleration would admit them in any given case. If,
that is, a systematic attack upon any opinion, or upon
general freedom of thought, were proposed, everyone
would admit the futility of a partial persecution, and
the impossibility of an effectual one. It is only the
form into which the general argument is cast that
perplexes the general theory. It is so plain that a
special utterance may be stoi)ped by a suflicient
penalty ; and, again, it seems so easy to assume lhat
a dogma is a kind of entity with a particular and
definable set of consequences adhering to it, that
reasbners overlook the unreality which intrudes in the
course of their generalisations. They neglect what.


X


274


POISONOUS OPINIONS


according to me, is an essential part of the case — all
the secondary im})lications, that is, of an effectual
persecution ; the necessity of arresting a mental phase
as well as a particular error, and of altering the whole
political and social organisation in order to provide
an effectual censorship. If these necessities are more
or less recognised, they are thrust out of the argu-
ment by a simple device. The impossibility of
organising an effectual persecution now is admitted ;
but then it is said that this is a proof of modern
effeminacy — sentimentalism, or anarchy, or some
other objectionable peculiarity. This is virtually to
say that, though toleration must be admitted as a
transitional phase, it implies a weakness, not strength,
and, in brief, that the advocate of persecution would
prefer a totally different social state — namely, such a
one as combines all the requisites for an adequate
regulation of opinion. Persecution is wrong, hero
and now, for you and me, because our teeth are drawn,
and we can only mumble without biting ; but we will
hope that our teeth may grow again. The admission,
in whatever terms it may be made, is perhaps enough
for us. Virtually it is an admission that persecution
cannot be justiiicd unless certain conditions are
realised which arc not now realisable; and this
admission is not less important because made ia
terms calculated to extenuate the importance and the
permanence of these conditions. From my point of
view, on the other hand, the circumstances ^hus


POISONOUS OPINIONS


•276


treated as removable and trifling accidents are really
of the very essence of the case, and it is only by taking
them into account that we can give a satisfactory
theory of toleration. Toleration presupposes a certain
stage of development, moral and intellectual. In the
ruder social order, toleration is out of the question for
familiar reasons. The rudimentary Church and State
are so identified that the kingly power has the spiritual
sanctity, and the priest can wield the secular arm.
Heresy is a kind of rebellion, and the gods cannot be
renounced without an attack upon political authority.
Intellectual activity is eonlined to a small class, and
opinions change by an imperceptible and unconscious
process. Wlierever such a condition is actually in
existence, controversy can only be carried on by the
sword. A change of faith is not caused by argument,
but is part of the process by which a more powerful
race conquers or extirpates its neighbours. The
higher belief has a better chance, perhaps, so far as
it is characteristic of a superior race, but owes little
to its logical or philosophical merits. And, in such a
state of things, toleration is hardly to be called a
virtue, becauso it is an impossibility. If the equili-
brium between sects, as between races, deponds^upon
the sword, the propagator or the defender of the faith
must use the sword as the essential condition of his
success. If individuals perceive that toleration is^
desirable, they perceive also that it can only bo
achieved through an elevation of the whole race to a


276


POISONOUS OPINIONS


higher social condition. It remains ^s an nnattaiu-
able ideal, dimly foreshadowed in some higher minds.

In the more advanced stage, with which we have
to do, the state of things is altered. Church and
State are no longer identified ; a society has a political
apparatus discharging one set of functions, and an
ecclesiastical apparatus (or more than one) which
discharges another set. Borne such distinction exists
as a plain matter of fact. There remains, indeed, the
perplexed controversy as to its ultimate nature, and
the degree in which it can be maintained. The priest
is a different person from the ruler, and each indivi-
dual is governed in part of his conduct by a reference
to the political order, and in other parts by a reference
to the spiritual order. On the other hand, it is urged,
and, indeed, it is undeniable, that the distinction is
not a complete separation. Every spiritual rule has
its secular aspect, and every secular rule its spiritual.
Each power has an influence over the whole sphere of
conduct, and it is idle to draw a line between theory
and practice, inasmuch as all theory affects practice,
and all practice is based upon theory. How are the
conflicting claims of two powers to be reconciled, when
eacl^ affects the whole sphere of thought and conduct,
without making one absolutely dependent upon the
other ?

This opens a wide field of controversy, upon which
I must touch only so far as the doctrine of toleration
is concerned. How are we to reconcile any such


POISONOUS OPINIONS


277


doctrine \rith the admission that the State must
enforce certain kinds of conduct, that it must decide
(unless it is to be absolutely dependent upon the
Ohm’ch, or, in other words, unless the Church is itself
a State) what kinds of conduct it will enforce ; and,
therefore, that it may have to forbid practices com-
mended by the Church, or to punish men, indirectly
at least, for religious opinions — that is, to persecute ?
We may argue about the expediency in particular
cases ; but how can we lay down a general principle ?

Before answering, I must begin by one or two
preliminary considerations. The existence of any
society whatever clearly presuiiposes an agreement
to obey certain elementary rules, and therefore the
cxistonoo of a certain desire for order and respect for
constituted authority. Every society also contains
anti-social elements, and must impose penalties upon
anti-social conduct. It can, of course, deal with a
small part only of such conduct. It can punish
murder, but not ill-will. And, further, though it
cannot punish all immorality, it may punish no con-
duct which is not immoral. The crimmal law covers
only a jiart of the field of the moral law, and may
nowhere extend beyond it. The efficacy, again, of all
State action depends upon the existence of the organic
instincts which have been evolved in its growth.
Churches, like all other forips of association, depend
upon the existence of similar instincts or sentiments, *
some of which are identical with those upon which


‘278


POISONOUS OPINIONS


the State is also founded, whilst others^ are not directly
related to any particular form of political organisation.
Many different Churches may arise, corresponding to
differences of belief upon questions of the highest
importance, of which the members may yet be capable
of uniting for political purposes, and of membership
of the same State. Agnostics, Protestants, and
Catholics may agree to hang murderers and enforce
contracts, though they go to different Churches, and
some of them to no Church at all ; or hold the most
contradictory opinions about the universe at large.
The possibility, within some undefined limits, is
proved by experience ; but can we define the limits or
deny the contrary possibility ? May not a Church b(5
so constituted that membership is inconsistent with
membership of the State ? If a creed says ‘ Steal,’
must not believers go to prison? If so, and if the
State be the sole judge on such points, do we not
come back to persecution ?

1 reply, first, that the difBculty is in one way
exaggerated, and in a way which gi’eatly affects the
argument. Respect, for example, for human life or
for properly represents different manifestations of
that essential instinct which is essential to all social
development. Unless murderers and thieves were
condemned and punished, there could be no society,
but only a barbarous chaos. These are fundamental
points which are and must be settled before the pro-
blem of toleration can even be raised. The ethical


POISONOUS OPINIONS


279


sentiment which condemns such crimes must exist in
order that priests and policemen may exist. It is not
a product, but a precedent condition, of their activity.
The remark is needed because it is opposed to a
common set of theories and phrases. Theologians of
one class arc given to assert that morality is the
creation of a certain set of dogmas which have some-
how dropped out of the skies. The prejudice against
theft, for example, is due to the belief, itself due to
revelation — that is, to a communication from without
— that thieves will have their portion in the lake of
fire. So long as this theory, oi one derived from it,
holds its ground, we are liable to the assumption that
all morality is dependent upon specific beliefs about
facts of which wc may or may not be ignorant, and
has, therefore, something essentially arbitrary about it.
It is a natural consequence that religion may change
in such a way as to involve a reversal of the moral
law, and therefore a total incompatibihty between the
demands of the religion and the most essential con-
ditions of social life. I hold, as I have argued else-
where, that this represents a complete inversion of
cause and effect ; that morality springs simply from
the felt need of human beings living in society ; that
religious beliefs spring from and reflect the prevalent
moral sentiment instead of producing it as an inde-
pendent cause ; that a belief that murderers will bo ^
damned is the effect, and not the cause, of our objection *
to* murder. There is, doubtless, an intimate connection


280


POISONOUS OPINIONS


between the two beliefs. In the intellectual stage at
which hell seems a reasonable hypothesis, wo cannot
express our objection to murder without speaking in
terms of hell-hre. But the hell is created by that
objection when present to minds at a certain stage ;
and not a doctrine communicated from without and
generating the objection. From this it follows that
the religious belief which springs from the moral
sentiments (amongst other conditions) cannot, as a
rule, be in conflict with them, or with the corollaries
deduced from thorn by the legislator. In other words,
agreement between the State and the Church as to a
very wide sphere of conduct must be the rule, because
the sentiment upon which their vitality depends
springs from a common root, and depends upon
general conditions, independent of special beliefs and
forms of government. In spite of these considerations,
the difficulty may undoubtedly occur. A religion may
command criminal practices, and even practices in-
consistent with the very existence of the society.
Nihilists and Communists may order men to steal or
slay. Are they to be permitted to attack the State
because they attack it in the name of religion ? The
answer, of course, is plain. Criminals must be
punished, whatever their principle. The fact that a
god commands an action does not make it moral.
There are very immoral gods going about, whose

*•

followers must be punished for obeying their orders.
Belief in his gods is no excuse for the criminal. It


POISONOUS OPINIONS


281


only shows thi^t his moral ideas are confused. If the
god has no better principles than a receiver of stolen
goods, his authority gives no better justification for
the act. The punishment does not violate the
principle that none but immoral acts should be
punished, unless we regard morality as a mere name
for actions commanded by invisible beings. Nor,
leaving this for the moment, is this properly a case
of persecution. Toleration implies that a man is
to be allowed to profess and maintain any principles
that ho pleases; not that ho. should be allowed ‘in all
cases to act upon his principjes, especially to act upon
them to the injury of others. No limitation whatever
need be put upon this principle in the case suiiposed.
I, for one, am fully prepared to listen to any argu-
ments for the propriety of theft or murder, or, if it be
possible, of immorality in the abstract. No doctrine,
however well established, should be jjrotected from
discussion. The reasons have been already assigned.
If, as a matter of fact, any ai^preciable number of
persons is inclined to advocate murder on principle, I
should wish them to state their opinions openly and
fearlessly, because I should think that the shortest
way of exploding the principle and of ascertaining
the true causes of such a perversion of moral senti-
ment. Such a state of things implies the existence
of evils which cannot be really cured till their cause
is known, and the shortest way to discover the cause
is to give a hearing to the alleged reasons. Of course,


282


POISONOUS OPINIONS


this may lead to very difficult points of casuistry.
We cannot always draw the line between theory and
practice. An attack upon the evils of landed property
delivered in a certain place and time may mean —
shoot this particular landlord. In all such cases, it
can only be said that the issue is one of fact. It is
most desirable that the principles upon which property
in land can be defended should be thoroughly dis-
cussed. It is most undesirable that any landlord
should be assassinated. Whether a particular speech
is really a part of the general discussion, or an act in
furtherance of a murderous conspiracy, is a question
to be decided by the evidence in the case. Sometimes
it may be almost impossible to draw the line ; 1 only
urge that it should be drawn in conformity with the
general rule. The propriety of every law should bo
arguable; but whilst it is the law, it must be en-
forced.

This brings us to a further difficulty. Who, it is
asked, is to decide these cases ? The State is to
punish acts which arc inconsistent with its existence
or immoral. But if the State is to decide, its decision
is ultimate ; and it may decide, for example, as
Cromwell decided, that the Mass was an immoral
ceremony, and therefore as much to be suppressed as
an act of theft. Simply to traverse the statement of
fact would be insufficient. If we merely deny the
immorality of the Mass, wo say that Cromwell was
mistaken in his facts, not that his conduct was


POISONOUS OPINIONS


28a


immoritl in itself. He \vas mistaken, as he \?oald
have been mistaken' had he supposed that the con>
gregation was collected to begin a political rising,
when it simply came together for a religious cere-
monial. The objection (if we may fairly judge
Cromwell by a modern standard, which need, not be
hero considered) is obviously different. It assumes
that the suppression of the Mass was an act done in
restraint of opinion. Nobody alleged that the Mass
had any other ill-consequences than its tendency to
encourage the spread of a religion. A simple act of
idolatry is not of itself injurious to my neighbour.
I am not injured because you, being a fool, do an act
of folly which is nothing but an open avowal of your
folly. The intention of the persecutor was to restrain
the spread of an opinion by terror ; and just so far
as that was the intention it w'as an act of intolerance.
It is easy to put different cases. If, for example, a
creed commanded human sacrifices, it might be (I
should say that it would be) right to suppress an
anti-social practice. The murder would not be jus-
tified because of the invisible accomplice, though he
were called a god. The action should therefore be
punished, though we ought not to punish the pro-
mulgation of an argument in favour of the practice,
nor to punish other harmless practices dictated by
the same creed. But in the case of the Mass the
conduct would be admittedly harmless in every other
respect than in' its supposed effect upon opinion. The


284


rOISONOUS OPINIONS


bare act of eating a wafer with certain ceremonies
only became punishable because the actor attached
to it, and encouraged others to attach to it, a par-
ticular religious significance. Eestraint of opinion,
or of its free utterance, by terror is the essence of
persecution, and all conduct intended to achieve that
purpose is immoral. The principle is entirely con-
sistent with the admission that a legislator must
decide for himself whether or not that is the real
tendency of his legislation. There is no appeal from
the Legislature, and therefore it must decide in the
last resort. But it does not follow that a court from
which there is no appeal follows no rules in fact, nor
that all its decisions are morally right. In laying
down such a principle, or any other first principle,
we are not proposing a rule which can be enforced by
any external authority. It belongs to a sphere which
is antecedent to all legislation. Wo say simply that
a legislator will accept it so far as he legislates upon
sound principles. Nor is it asserted that the princi-
ple is always free from ambiguity in its applications.
Granting that persecution is wrong, it may still be a fair
question whether this or that law implies persecution.
There may be irreconcilable differences of opinion.
The legislator may declare that a particular kind of
conduct is immoral, or, in other words, that the
. practice is irreconcilable with the essential conditions
of social welfare. The priest may assert that it is
commanded by his deity, and, moreover, that it is


POISONOUS OPINIONS


285


really moral in the same sense in which the legislator
declares it to he immoral. Who is to decide ? The
principle of toleration does not of itself answer that
question. It only lays down certain conditions for
conducting the argument. It decides that the
immorality must consist in something else than the
evil tendency of any general doctrine. A man must
not be punished for openly avowing any principles
whatever. Any defence of the proposed rule is ir-
relevant unless it contains an allegation that the
punishment is indicted for something else than a
defence of opinion. And, further, if agreement be
still impossible, the principle does not say who is to
give the decision ; it only lays down a condition as to
the mode of obtaining the decision. In the last
resort, we may say, the question must be fought out,
but it must be fought out with fair weapons. The
statesnmn, so long as he is seriously convinced, must
uphold the law, but he must allow its policy and
justice to be freely discussed. No statement can be
made as to the result. The statesman appeals directly
to one class of motives ; the priest to others, not
identical, though not disparate. The ultimate success
of one or the other will depend upon the constitution of
the society, and the strength of all the various forces
by which authority is supported and baltmced.
Toleration only ensures fair play, and implies the ,
existence of conditions necessary for securing a possi-
bility of ultimate agreement. The relevant issues


286


POISONOUS OPINIONS


are defined, though the question of fact remains for
discussion. Even where brute force has the most
unrestricted play, and rule is most decidedly based
upon sheer terror, all power ultimately rests upon the
beliefs and sentiments of the society. The advantage
of- toleration is to exclude that kind of coercion which
tries to restrain opinion by sheer terror, and therefore
bj' considerations plainly irrelevant to the truth of
the opinions.

This leads to what are really the most difficult
problems at the present day. No moral principle, I
should say, and certainly not the principle of tolera-
tion, can lay down a distinct external criterion of
right and wrong applicable at once to all concrete
cases. No test, by the nature of the case, can be
given which will decide at once whether a particular
rule does or does not transgress the principle of
toleration. This is especially true in the controversies
where the question of toleration is mixed up with the
other question as to the proper limits of State mter-
ference. A great deal has been said, and very little
has been decided, as to the latter problem. We may
argue the propriety of the State undertaking the
management of railways, or interfering between
labourers and capitalists, without considering the
principle of toleration in the sense in which I have
taken it. But when we come to such controversies
as that about the Established Church or the national
systems of education, the problem becomes more


POISONOUS OPINIONS


287


intricate. The briefest glance must suffice to show
the bearmg of my principles upon such problems..
An Established Church was clearly open to objection
on the ground of intolerance so long as it was vir-
tually and avowedly an organisation for propagating
a faith. When it was supported on the ground that
its doctrines were true, and dissent was regarded as
criminal because heretical, persecution was accepted
in principle and carried into practice. At the present
day its advocates have abandoned this gi’onnd. All
that can be said is, that the State confers ‘certain
privileges upon, and assigns cei'tain revenues to,
persons who will discharge certain functions and
accept certain tests. Dissenters, therefore, arc ex-
cluded from the privileges on account of their faith.
But it may be urged that the functions discharged
by the Church are useful to the people in general,
even to unbelievers, and that in the opinion of un-
believers themselves. And, again, it is argued that
the formularies of the Church are maintained, not as
true, but simply as expressing the opinions of the
majority. There is no direct persecution, for any-
one may dissent as much as he pleases, and (with
.with hardly an exception) attack any doctrines what-
ever. The existence of such an institution must, of
course, act to some extent as a bribe, if not as a
threat ; but implies so little of direct intolerance that
it is’ frequently defended expressly and sincerely on
t&e ground that it is favourable to freedom of


288


POISONOUS OPINIONS


thought. To argue all the issues here suggested
would require a treatise. I should certainly hold
that, so long as an Establishment exists, the free play
of opinion is trammelled, in spite of some plausible
arguments to the contrary. But 1 certainly hold
also, that it is impossible to condemn an Establish-
ment purely and simply on the ground of toleration
without doing violence to fair argument. All that
can be said is, that questions of toleration are here
involved, along with many other questions possibly of
more importance in this particular case, and I am
not prepared to cut the knot by any unqualified
assertion. And this is equally true of national edu-
cation. It does not necessarily imply any intolerance
whatever. Not only may it be possible or easy in many
cases to solve the problem by giving an education
which all sects approve, and to leave the religious
education to each sect, but there is another con-
sideration. Toleration implies that each man must
have a right to say what he pleases. It does not imply
a right both to impress his own doctrines upon other
people and to exclude the influence of other teachers.
If I take the child of a Protestant and bring him up
as a Catholic, or vice versa, 1 am guilty, undoubtedly,
of a gross act of tyranny. But I am not necessarily '
more intolerant than if I decided that a slave was to
be educated by the State instead of by his master.
The moral question falls under a diflerent head. The
Legislature in such a case is altering the relation


POISONOUS OPINIONS


289


between' parei^ts and children. It is handing over
to others the authority over the children hitherto
possessed by their parents. This is a very grave
and, beyond narrow limits, a most objectionable pro-
ceeding, but it is not so objectionable as intolerant. It
simply implies the exchanging one kind of influence for
another. The parent’s right to his own opinions and
their utterance is not the same as his right to instil
them into other minds ; the tyranny implied is the
tyranny of limiting his power over his children ; and
that limitation, upon other grounds, may be most op-
pressive. But if the child was sent to a school whero
he was allowed to hear all opinions, and his parents
had access to him, amongst others, he would clearly be
freer to form his own creed, and, so far, there would
he more room for the free play of opinion. To give
the rule over him exclusively to his parents is, so
far, to sanction private intolerance, though for other
reasons this may bo fully justifiable. The question
of intolerance is raised at a different point. If, for
example, one creed should be favoured at the expense
of others, if all the schools of a country should be
Protestant whilst some of the people were Catholic,
we should clearly have a case of limiting opinion by
force ; and so, if any uniform creed were prescribed
by the State, all Dissenters might complain of per-
secution. It may, fm’ther, be urged that some such .
result is a natural result of a State system. I do not
argue the question, which I only notice to show how

V


280


POISONOUS OPINIONS


the siinple doctrine of toleration may be mixed
up \?ith other problems— here, for example, with
the enormously important question of the proper
limits of parental authority — which render impossible
any offhand decision. The principle of toleration
may be simple; the importance of so organising
society that it may be carried out without exceptions
is enormous ; but it is not the sole principle of con-
duct, and in a complex condition of society, full of
fragments of institutions which have more or less
deviated from their original functions, wc must some-
times be content with an imperfect application, and
permit it to be overridden by other principles which
spring from the same root of social utility, and
cannot be brought into harmony with it without
changes which, for the moment, are impracticable.

How far, then, docs the principle, thus under-
stood, differ from the simple doctrine of expediency,
and therefore exclude the admission that we have
in every case to decide by the calculation of con-
sequences ? The final reply to this question will
sum up what I have to say, by indicating what I take
to be the weakness or inadequacy of the simple
utilitarian doctrine. I entirely agree with Mill that
conduct is proved to bo immoral by proving it to be
mischievous, or, in other words, productive of a
balance of misery. But I hold that his neglect of
the conditions of social development deprives his
argument of the necessary coherency. For the


POISONOUS OPINIONS


291


reasons already set forth, I say that toleration lie*
comes possible and desirable at a certain stage of
progress. If this condition be overlooked or in-
sufficiently recognised, we fall into errors at the
beginning and the end of our argument. The advo-
cate of toleration tries to prove that persecution
is bad irrespectively of this condition, and therefore
that it was bad at the earliest as well as the latest
stages. Since this is not true, and therefore cannot
be proved, his argument seems to break down ; and
BO we find that the arguments from history aVe in-
discriminately joined, and that the advocates of per-
secution argue as if precedents drawn from primitive
social stages Avere applicable without modification to
the latest. They frciiuently try to defend this ex-
idieitly by assuming that human nature is always
the same, and inferring that, if people once argued
with the list, we must always use that controversial
weapon. That human nature always retains certain
fundammital propertied' may he fully granted ; but if
this iufereneo be sound, civilisation, which consists in
great measure in learning to limit the sphere of brute
force, must be an illusory phenomenon. Prom my
point of view, on the other hand, the recognition
that society does in fact grow is an essential point of
the case. When we have to deal with the later stages,
Mill’s argument fixils of cogency just so far as ho
treats its essential characteristics as though they
werd mere aecidenls. So, as wo have seen, he says,


292


POISONOUS OPINIONS


yirtually, that persecution may be effective in sup-
pressing an opinion; and passes lightly over the
consideration of the real meaning of this ‘ may be/
It ‘ may be ’ efficient, if it is so vigorous as to choke
thought as well as to excise particular results of
thought, and if, therefore, a political organisation
exists which becomes altogether impossible as society
advances beyond a certain stage. But when we
restore the condition thus imperfectly indicated to
its proper place in the argument. Mill’s arguments,
cogently stated -already, acquire fresh cogency. At
that stage toleration becomes an essential condition
of development, and therefore it becomes at the same
time an essential condition of promoting happiness.
Given such a social organisation as exists at present,
the only kind of persecution which is possible is that
which is condemned by everyone as ineffectual. To
persecute without suppressing, to stimulate hypocrisy
without encouraging faith, is clearly to produce suffer-
ing without compensating advantage. Persecution is
an anachronism, and Ixjcomes a blunder, and upon
this showing it is so palpably impolitic, and therefore
immoral, that even a theoretical advocate of persecution
admits that it is wicked under the conditions. The
chief point of difference is that he does not recognise
the necessity of the conditions, or fancies that ho im-
. plicitly gets rid of them by saying that he dislikes them.

This suggests one further explanation. Vou
assume, it is said, that progress is a blessing. ‘We


POISONOUS OPINIONS


293


prefer the mq^iseval, or the pagan, or the savage state
of society, and deny that progress deserves the
admiration lavished upon it by professors of claptrap.
I make no such assumption, whatever my private
opinion ; I simply allege the fact of progress as
showing historically what is the genesis of toleration,
and therefore the conditions under which it has
become essential. But whether progress be a good
or a bad thing, whether men are happier or less
happy than monkeys, the argument is unaffected.
Perhaps a child is happier than a man ; but a inan
does not therefore become happier by adopting childish
modes of life. When society is at a given stage, you
cannot restore the previous stage, nor can you adopt
the old methods. The modes by which society pro-
gresses determme a certain organisation, and when
that exists it becomes an essential part of the problem.
It is still possible to be intolerant ; but it is not
possible to restore the conditions under which in-
tolerance could be carried out as a principle, and
therefore you can only tease and hamper and irritate,
without gaining any proportional advantage, if any
advantage whatever. Even if there be a period at
which it is still possible to arrest progress, you do not
ensure a maintenance of the existing stage, but
rather ensure actual decay. The choice is not
between advancing and standing still, but between.
Rowing and rotting; and the bitterest denouncers
of progress may think it less objectionable than


294


POISONOUS OPINIONwS


actual decline. We have, fortunately, advanced beyond
the early stage, and may therefore say that, given the
existing order, toleration is not merely conducive on
the average, but is unconditionally and necessarily
conducive, to happiness. I do not, of course, deny
that in this, as in all moral principles, there may not
be found, here and there, exceptional cases which
may amuse a casuist ; but they can be only such rare
cases as might cause doubt to one thoroughly con-
vinced of the essential importance of a complete per-
meation of society by tolerant principles. Something,
indeed, remains to be done, perhaps much, before
the principle can be thoroughly carried out. There
is a region of difficulties or anomalies not yet cleared
up. Toleration, in fact, as I have understood it, is a
necessary correlative to a respect for truthfulness.
So far as we can lay it down as an absolute principle
that every man should be thoroughly trustworthy,
and therefore truthful, we are bound to respect every
manifestation of truthfulness. In many cases a man’s
opinions are really detcriuinocl by his character, and
possibly by bad characteristics, ife holds a certain
creed because it flatters him as a cowardly, or sensual,
or selfish animal. In that case it is hard, but it is
right, to distinguish between our disapproval of the
passions, and our disapproval of the open avowal of
•the doctrines which spring from them. The virtpe
of truthfulness was naturally recognised in particular
cases before the virtue of toleration. It was obviously


POISONOUS OPINIONS


295


necessary to social welfare that men should be able
to tmst each other, and, therefore, that in all private
relations a man’s word should be as good as his
bond. The theory was virtually limited by the under-
standing that there were certain opinions which could
not be uttered mthout endangering the social order.
If an avowal of disbelief in the gods necessarily
meant disloyalty, the heretic was punishable upon
that ground, whatever might be thought of his virtue.
The conflict began as soon as a respect for such
sincerity was outraged by a pimis-hment still held to
be n«jcessary. It is solved when society is organised
in such a way that this necessity is removed ; when,
therefore, the outrage is not compensated even appar-
ently, and the suppression of free utterance is seen
to be in itself an inai)propriate mode of meeting the
difficulty. It is clenched by the spread of a general
conviction that the only safe basis for any theory is
the encouragement of its full discussion from every
l>oint of view. By a strange inconsistency, toleration
is still sometimes denounced, even by acute reasoners,
as a product of absolute scepticism. It may spring
from scepticism as to the particular doctrnes en-
forced; but it is certainly inseparable from the
conviction, the reverse of sceptical, that truth is
attainable, and only attainable, by the free play of
intelligence. Toleration, it is said, is opposed to the
‘ principle of authority ’ ; as if there could be a prin-
ciple of authority in the abstract ! To say that we


296


POISONOUS OPINIONS


are to accept authority in the abstract^ is to say that
we are to believe anything that anybody tells us ; that
is, to believe direct contradictions. Toleration is, in
fact, opposed to any authority which does not rest upon
the only possible ground of rational authority — the
gradual agreement of inquirers free from all irrelevant
bias, and therefore from the bias of sheer terror of
the evils inflicted by persons of different opinion.

The principle, I have said, is not yet fully
developed. Intolerance of the crudest kind is dis-
credited, and has come to be regarded as wicked. It
is admittedly wrong to burn any man because he
does not think as I think. But there are the cases
already noticed in wliich, though heretical opinion
is not punishable as such, it carries with it certain
disqualifications, or is marked by a certain stigma in
consequence of the survival of old institutions and
hereditary prejudices. Such anomalies may be gradu-
ally removed, but they canpot be adequately discussed
under the simple heading of tolerance. We are, in
regard to them, in the same position as our ancestors
in regard to the primary (juestions of toleration.
The concrete facts aie still so ravelled that we have
(if I may say so) to make a practical abstraction
before we can apply the abstract theory. And,
besides this, further corollaries may be suggested.
It is a recognised duty not to punish people for ex-
pressing opinion ; but it is not a recognised duty to
let our opinions be known. The utterance of ohr


POISONOUS OPINIONS


297


creed is taken to be a right, not a duty. And yet
there is a great deal to be said for objecting to passive
as well as active reticence. If every man thought it
a duty to profess his creed openly, he would be doing
a service not only by helping to remove the stigma
which clings to unpopular creeds, but very frequently
by making the discovery that his opinions, when
articulately uttered, were absurd, and the grounds
upon which they are formed ludicrously inadequate.
A man often excuses himself for bigotry because he
locks it up in his own breast Instead of openly
avowing it. Brought into daylight, he might see its
folly, and recognise the absurdity of the principle
which makes it a duty to be dogmatic about proposi-
tions which wo are palpably unable to miderstand or
appreciate. If, however, the right of holding one’s
tongue be still considered as sacred, though it seems
to be justified only by the remnant of the bigotry
directed against free speech, there is an application
of the principle in the sphere of politics which re-
quires explicit notice. The doctrine of toleration
requires a positive as well as a negative statement.
It is not only wrong to burn a man on accounc of his
creed, but it is right to encourage the open avowal
and defence of every opinion sincerely maintained*
Every man who says frankly and fully what he thinks
is, so far, doing a public service. We should be
grateful to him for attacking most unsparingly our
m'hst cherished opinions. I do not say that we should


298


POIRONOITR OPINIONS


be grateful to him for attacking them by unfair
means. Proselytism of all varieties is, to my mind,
a detestable phenomenon ; for proselytism means, as
I understand it, the attempt to influence opinion in
an underhand way, by appeals to the passions which
obscure reason, or by mere personal authority. The
only way in which one human being can properly
attempt to influence another is the encouraging hinj
to think for himself, instead of endeavouring to instil
ready-made doctrmes into his mind. Every sane
person, of course, should respect the aiithority of
more competent iitquirers than hinis(‘lf, and not less
in philosophical or religious than in scientific ques-
tions. But he should learn to respect because the
authority is competent, not because it is that of some-
one w’hom he respects for reasons which have nothing
to do with such competence.

I have thus argued that all legal restraint of
opinion is wrong; and wrong because it tends to
enervate the vital principle of intellectual develop-
ment. In doing so, I have partly indicated the
method in which I should attempt to approach a
more general problem : How, in point of fact, are
opinions constructed ? When we try to form a clear
conception of social dynamics, we are naturally led
to ask what is the true theory of the intellectual
factor. We jwsscss philosophies of history and re-
ligion in abundance ; and I think that it is generally
impossible to read them witliout a strange sense' of


POISONOUS OPINIONS


299


unreality. Thfy may show infinite ingenuity and
great plausibility, but they become unsatisfactory
when we try to translate them into facts, and bring
them face to face with history. When we try to give
a theory of history, we arc naturally tempted to
convert history into a theory; and, therefore, to
represent it as a purely logical process. The suc-
cessive stages corresiwnd to deductions from first
principles ; and the whole iirocess becomes an ‘ evolu-
tion ’ in the purely logical, as distinguished from the
emiimcal, sense ; the explication of a dogma, not the
elaboration t>f an institution. The race, we suppose,
lays down a major premiss in one centmry, su]»plie8
the minor in a second, and in a third draws the
inference. This conception is the natural heir to the
theological doctrine of a revelation. The history of
a religion traces back all later developments to certain
first jn'inciples which were introduced into the world
from without. A Divine Being pre8entc<l us with a
set of axioms and definitions, and we, still, perhaps,
under Divine guidance, have drawn from them a series
of propositions and corollaries which constitute the
orthodox system of dogma, as the deductions of
Euclid constitute a system of geometry. On this
showing, the revelation of the axioms, whether they
announce themselves as * innate ideas ’ or are injected
by some miraculous process, is the starting-point of
the religion. We must, of course, recur to empirical
observation in order to describe the actual process


300


POISONOUS OPINIONS


of their acceptance, diffusion, and development. But
we never get further back than the promulgation of
the primary truths. By faith, that is, by assimilating
these truths, men accept the religion, and the religion
shapes all their lives, thoughts, and actions. On this
showing, then, the purely intellectual factor is, if not
the sole, the sole original and independent force. A
history of religion is a history of the development of
the primitive belief, or of the errors by which they
have been obscured ; but those beliefs themselves are
an ultimate cause, and, as such, incapable of further
explanation. We have traced the river to its source,
or to its first emergence in the world of fact. Even
disbelievers in a particular religion often continue
to make -this assumption. The founder of the new
creed is regarded as its ultimate creator. We trace
Mahomedanisra back to Mahomet, and no further.
Had Mahomet died before he had written the Koran,
the whole history of tlie world, in the accepted phrase,
would have been different. To the true believer, he
was the channel through which came a revelation
from the outside ; to outsiders, he is still the ultimate
source of the new doctrine, and of all the effects
attributed to it. Without discussing these assump-
tions in the abstract, I will say something of the facts
which, to me, seem to necessitate a reconstruction of
the theory.

We have lately been led to look back to the
primitive ages for the explanation of all instituti<^n8.


POISONOUS OPINIONS


SOI


A savage has^ a certain system of ‘beliefs’ and
customs. He does not distinguish between his philo-
sophical, his religious, his political, and his ethical
beliefs ; they exist in him, so far as they exist, only
in germ, and they take the form of an acceptance of
certain concrete facts. He believes in the god .of his
tribe as he believes in the chief whom he follows, or
in the enemy whom he fights. He adheres to certain
customs by instinct, and it would be as idle to ask
him why he observes them, as to ask him why he eats
or drinks, or to ask a bird why it builds nestS. An
instinct — even the instinct of an animal — is of
course ‘ reasonable, ’ in the sense that we can
ascertain the rules according to which it acts, and
explain by conditions of its existence. It only be-
comes reason, in the full sense, when reflection makes
the agent himself conscious of the rule already im-
phcitly given, and of the place which it holds in liis
constitution and in his system of life. But until
reflection is possible, and is, to some extent, system-
atised, the instinct is an ultimate fact for the agent ;
no explanation or justification is demanded, or even
conceived as possible. Such development, +hen, as
takes place must take place, not by any conscious
reasoning, but, as I have said, by natural selection.
A superior creed must generally accompany liigher
intelligence and a better organisation of society. The
religion is an indistinguishable part of the instincts
wliich hold a tribe together and determine its


802


POISONOUS OPINIONS


efficiency. The savage does not a^gue with his
enemy, but knocks him on the head. But the tribe
which has the best brains and the most appropriate
instincts will generally exterminate its antagonists.
Even while I write, the Catholics and Protestants of
Uganda are propagating their faiths after this method,
and their arguments receive additional point from
the Maxim gvms of their apostolic allies. Whatever
the precise relation between the primitive creed and
the instincts in which it is embedded, the creed which
conduces to, or which is generated by, supreme
qualities will tend to prevail. The men of the flint
weapons were' not converted by the worshippers of
Odin, but their creed, whatever it may have been,
was effectually suppressed. Again, if one savage
creed contains more truth than another, we may
suppose that it is so far the better. There must to
every period be a certain conformity between the
beliefs of a race ftnd the facts asserted, or the race
would disappear. Science, even in its germ, must
approximately state facts. The lowest savage must
believe that fire burns and water drowns. But this
test of truthfulness is not so easily applied to the
beliefe in which we find the germ of later ethics, or
which animate the collective action of the tribe. The
power of united action, the primitive public spirit of
a tribe, must be of primary importance. But this is
recognised in the savage dialect by help of grotesque
hypotheses. A group of savages believes that it i^


POISONOUS OPINIONS


808


descended from|i> mythical animal, or that the ghost of
its great-grandfather looks after its common interests.
The theory, taken as a statement of fact, is absurd ;
but, in its name, tho tribe may destroy the leas intelli-
gent savages who are not drilled, even by a ghost.
Such a belief indicates qualities of the highest utility ;
but is, one must suppose, a symptom, not a cause, of
the useful qualities. It corrtibix>nd8 to the only way
in which a truth could bo dimly apprehended by the
savage. It is the projection upon the imaginarj*
world of a sentiment, not of a percc])tion of fact.
‘ Union among kinsmen is useful ’ would be the
ultimate formula, which could only present itself by
the fancy ; ‘ you and I mnst not kill each other,
because we are connected by an imaginary Toh'm.*
In other words, social relations of the highest utility
give rise to mythological fancies, which, as reflection
awakens, are put forward as the reasons or ‘ sanctions ’
of the practices. The practice prevailed because it
was useful, not because it was seen to be useful ; that
is, because the race which had that instinct was
successful in the struggle for existence; although
the perception of its utility was not even dimly
present to the savage mind ; and, when a justification
was required, the embodiment in symbols of the
belief was given as the cause of the belief itself.

How far is the case altered when we advance to
comparatively civilised races ? Do we ever reach a
stag% in which reason is substituted for instinct ? In


304


POISONOUS OmiONS


what sense is reason specifically distinct from in-
stinct ? A germ of reason is already present in in-
stinct, and to become rational is never to suppress,
but to rationalise, instinct. We still start from beliefs
which arc also instincts, but they are instincts which
have been verified by observation. The reasoned belief
is still propagated by identical methods. If the doc-
trine of the ‘ survival of the fittest ’ be true nowhere else,
it seems certainly to be true of intellectual develop-,
ment. The world of thought grows by the develop-
ment of countless hypotheses, among which those
which are useless die out, and those which are useful,
because they correspond to fruitful combinations of
thought, become fixed, and serve as the nucleus of
more complex constructions. We call men reasonable
so far as their beliefs are formed by some conscious
logical process ; by a deliberate attempt to frame and
to verify general rules, as to phenomena of all kinds,
and which can, therefore, be propagated by argument
or persuasion as well as by the more roundabout
method which depends upon the survival of the most
intelligent races. When people have sat at the feet of
philosophers and filled libraries with argumentative
treatises, pure reasoning has some influence. And
yet it is still only a part, and a subordinate part, of
the process by which creeds are elaborated. For, in
the first place, the intellect of the millions is altogether
indiflerent to the logic of the dogmatists, and ignorant
of the data tow’hich the logic is applied. ItpJust


POISONOUS OPINIONS


806


take its beliefs for granted, and is so far from asking
how they are proved that it does not see that proof is
required. There are two or three hundred millions of
human beings in our Indian Empire, and perhaps not
as many hundreds who could, in the old phrase, give a
reason for their belief, except the fact that their fathers
believed. There are six hundred and seventy members
of Parliament, of whom we may certainly doubt whether
the odd seventy have ever reasoned, or could really
reason, about the fundamental doctrines of Christi-
anity. If, again, we take the few who have some
sort of reasoned persuasion, we know as a fact that
a man generally accepts Catholicism or Protes-
tantism much as he accepts the shape of his hat,
from the conditions under which he has been brought
up; that even if ho reasons, he generally seeks foi*
reasons to support his creed, instead of finding a
creed to suit his reason ; and that, in any case, he
necessarily starts with an established set of opinions,
which ho may gradually modify, but which, even in
the keenest and most candid minds, are still traceable
as transformed, rather than replaced, in his latest con-
victions. And then, finally, it is clear that in any
case his reason is but one factor in his total system of
beliefs. His opinions are necessarily infiuenced by
his whole character, his emotional and ai-tive, as
well as by hie intellectual, nature, and, moreover, by
his kocial position. As holding a religion, he be-
long to a Church. A Church is a social organisation


806


I'OIRONOUS OPINIONS


■which supposes a certain corporate snirit, no more
to be fully expressed by its dogmas than the patriot-
ism of an Englishman by the beliefs which he holds
about the characteristics of his nation or the pecu-
liarities of its pohtical constitution. Tlie Church is
invested with historical associations ; it has provided
channels for our thoughts, activities, and emotions ; it
supplies the intellect with ready-made beliefs, tacitly
instilled in infancy; it has established forms of
worship which fascinate the imagination and pro-
vide utterance for the emotions ; it presents an ideal
of life ; it has in its system of discipline a powerful
machinery for regulating the passions ; and it is more
or less elaborately organised with a view to discharg-
ing a variety of important social functions. The vast
majority of its members take its beliefs on trust, and,
of those who examine, a large proportion only exa-
mine in order to bo convinced. We may, therefore,
safely assume that, although a leligion supposes cer>'
tain beliefs in its adherents, we have gone but a
little way to explain the whole complex phenomenon
when we have formulated the beliefs and stated the
reasons upon which they are founded. They arc, for
the enormous majority, mere expressions of belief still
in the stage of instinct; and so far as they imply
genuine reasoning, they correspond to a modification
of a previously-existing creed, slowly developed, and
worked into conformity with philosophical doctrines
by a gradual and often imperceptible process.^ A


POISONOUS OPINIONS


807


genuine historian of religion would, therefore, still
have to regard the whole record as an enlarged
process of natural selection. The Church and the
creed thrive by reason of their adaptation to the whole
of human nature and the needs of the society in
which they are planted ; and the purely intellectual
process is merely one factor, which we may, indeed,
consider apart, but which is in reality a subordinate
factor in the concrete history. It must, of course,
be a source of weakness if a religion includes incredible
statements, or its theories represent deficient moral
and social ideals. That is, the intellectual state has
an influence upon tlie vitality of the religion, but it is
through that influence, and not by an explicit reason-
ing process, that it really acts. We still have to deal
•with a survival of the fittest, and the ‘fitness’ includes
much besides logic.

Indeed, it is only necessary to lay stress upon this
because the obvious facts seem to have been so often
ignored by theories not yet quite obsolete. The
Protestant writers upon the ‘ evidences,’ for example,
very properly held that they w’ere bound to pro’^e the
propositions which they asked others to believe. But
their method of reasoning showed that they not only
supposed themselves capable of givmg a proof, but
thought that everybody else had followed the same
m«thod. They held that the Evangelists were not
merely recording the beliefs of their day, but giving
evidence like witnesses in a court of justice. They


808


POISONOUS OPINIONS


imagined that St. Panl had convinced , himself of the
truth of the Resurrection by a method of inquiry
which would have passed muster in an English
criminal trial. They held, therefore, that a state-
ment of a miracle lu'oved the fact, instead of proving
the credulity of the witness, Thej’ could see the
fallacy of such an argument when applied, say, to the
deification of the Virgin Mary ; but when the tradi-
tional view had been put in writing a little earlier, it
became a ‘ proof ' of the divinity of Christ. Therefore
the whole proof of their religion and, as they often
held, the proof of facts upon which even morality was
dependent, came to be the truth of certain statements
which really prove only the mental condition of the
writers. Such a conception of a rational religion is a
curious proof of the unreality of the whole way of
regarding the question. The pyramid is balanced
upon its apex. The truth of Christianity, with all
that it is sui^posed to involve, including all genuine
morality, was made to rest upon the possibility of
proving that certain events took place two thousand
years ago. The position was indefensible, but
scarcely more grotesque than the implied conception
that a religion is, in fact, propagated after this
fashion: that a))08ties go about proving things by
‘ evidence ’ ; that miracles are the cause, and not
the consequence, of a vast moral and social crisis ;
and, in brief, that any religion wliich wants facts to
support it will have the slightest difficulty in making


POISONOUS OPINIONS


809


any evidence i^at is desirable for the purpose. Yet
it is hardly more impossible to suppose that a religion
is a product of ‘ evidence ’ in the technical, juristic
sense than to suppose that it is a product of conscious
philosophy. The grave humourists, indeed, who "call
themselves historians of philosophy seem to be 'at
times under the impression that the development of
tho world has been affected by the last new feat of
some great man in the art of logical hair-splitting.
They imagine that the true impulse to the greatest
changes of thought and character is to be sought in
the metaphysical lectures which supply new puzzles
for half a dozen eccentric recluses. To me, though I
cannot argue the point, it seems clear that what a
philosopher does— and it is quite enough— is not to
govern speculation, but to codify and bring into
clearer light the principles already involved in the
speculations of the more concrete sciences. But, m
any case, tho proHem occurs how the promulgation
of a philosophical doctrine, especially if it is of an
intuitive or self-evident truth, comes to produce the
gigantic influence attributed to a new religion. We
must surely consider, not simply the doctrine, true or
false, but tho moral state of the recipients. Even in
such a case as pure mathematics, where the progress
is a simple question of reasoning, we can only account
for the historical phenomenon, for the development
of mathematical knowledge at certain periods, and
fo!!^ its absolutely stationary condition at others, by


310


POISONOUS OPINIONS


assigning the conditions which lead to a study of
mathematics. But in the case of a philosophical
theory this necessity is more obvious. If the truth of
monotheism be self-evident, and if upon any theory
it is a doctrine dependent on the simplest grounds,
and resting upon arguments familiar to the earliest
speculator, why should its enunciation at a par-
ticular period suddenly transform the world? A
syllogism, or a ‘ self-evident truth,’ is not a thing
walking about on two legs, which suddenly catches
hold of people and converts them. The more evident
the truth, the more difficult to understand its efficacy
at a particular conjuncture. The truth was always
there, and the secret must lie in the variable, not in the
constant, factor. It is a favourite view of many people
that the essence of the Christian revelation consisted in
the promulgation of its ethical teaching. I, of course,
have no doubt that the moral ideal implied in the
Christian teaching played a great, part in the gi'owth
of the new religion. But I do not think, nor woidd
it, I suppose, be eveu the orthodox view, that the
secret lay in the propounding of a new (so far as it
was a new) thesis in ethical philosophy. On this
showing, the sudden revelation of the truth that a
man should love his neighbour as himself brought
about the revolution. Why should people who did not
love their neighbours already be so much attracted? or,
if they loved them already, why should they bo stailtlcd
as by a novelty ? The morality of the Sermon on4he


rOIvSONOUS OPINIONS


811


Mount has been universally admired, but it is so far from
having been generally accepted, that to take it seriously
even now would be to adopt a position of eccentric
originality ; and it may be doubted whether the whole
progress of the raco has not depended upon the limi-
tation of this by other moral principles, and whether
its full acceptance would not have meant a destruction
of social order and welfare. But, in any case, it was
not as a simple proiH>sition in ethics, but as part
of a system of teaching, that it really impressed the
imagination of the new Church. The morality was
one aspect of an ideal of life which, for some reason,
became widely spread at that period, and has had a
wide influence over since.

What, then, was the reason ? The answer which,
I suppose, everyone would now admit in some form or
other, would be, in the first ifiace, that it was not the
proof of miracles, nor the enunciation of new dogmas,
but the development of that spirit which has been called
the ‘ enthusiasm of humanity,’ the widely-spread and
powerful desire for a reconstruction of society and a
regenoration of the individual. To the believer in
supernatural interferences, this presents itself as the
sudden infusion of a new spiritual force ; and so far
as he argues against the inadequacy of the doctrines
imonted by evidence writers and abstract philosophers,
1 should think that he has a strong case. But the^
conditions of such a development must, even by him,
fte sought in the ‘ environment ’ as well as in the new


812


POISONOUS OPINIONS


creed. We can only explain the fipread of the
organism by shoving how and why the soil was
congenial. The Christian doctrine obviously spread,
as every doctrine spreads, just so far as it was
adapted to men at a given stage. If, therefore, it spread
through a certain section of the human race, and
never spread further, the circumstances of that section
must be relevant to the explanation. Nor can there
be any doubt of the direction in which explanation
must be sought, though there is ample room for the
most elaborate researches before we can put any
explanation into a definitive shape. The explanation,
in fact, must include nothing less than an analysis of
the vast religious, social, and political changes which
were fermenting throughout the iloman Empire.
The destruction of the old national systems of
government, and of the creeds with which they were
bound up, the mixture and transfusion of vaiious
races and institutions, the growth of a vast population
which could not find satisfaction within the old social
framework, form, of cooisc, essential data for any
comprehension of the greatest revolution which ever
transformed the world. Amidst the struggle for
existence of various modes of thought, the Christian
doctrine formed in some sense the centre round which
tlie classic elements ultimately crystallised into a
certain unity. No one, I presume, would undertake
to say confidently how much was due in the final result
to the personal character of the founders of the creed,


POISONOUS OPINIONS


813


and ho^ much to the countless multitudes who found
in it what they wanted. We cannot try experiments
on such points, nor say what would have been the
prevalent form of religion, had St. Paul, for example,
been hilled before he was converted. The tendency of
more scientific thinkers, I take it, will he to attribute
less to the single voice which uttered the appropriate
solution, and more to the millions vho were ready for
a solution, and were certain ultimately to find one to
suit them. When the passions are roused, the man
will come who sets them to a tune. Given the
ferment, a crystallisation upon some point is a
l)raciical certainty. We may infer what was required
for success from what ultimately succeeded. The
demand was for a Kingdom of Heaven— that is, for a
new society, apart from all the rotting fabrics which
had served their time; cosmopolitan instead of
national, with hopes fixed upon another world, since
this world appeare'd to be hopeless, with the assertion
of a brotherhood of suffering poor throughout the
nations, and with a prophecy of a good time for the
saints when their tyrants would be cast into the lake
of fire. How that society was formed and grew, and
was in time fused with the order against which it
protested, is the greatest of themes for a philosophical
historian. The scarcity of facts will give him an ample
field for imaginative construction. But we, at least,
are in a position, at the present time, to appreciate the
general nature of the position. Looking on, daily.


814


POISONOUS OPINIONS


hopefully or* doubtfully, at the groyrth of a new
social creed, which is rejecting the outworn and as-
similating the living elements of the old, we can
sorely not be ambzed at the parallel phenomenon of
the development of a new society, though at a time
when possibilities of aspirations were very unlike
those now existing, and the dialect which men had to
use involved a very different terminology. Certainly
we can be at no loss to understand why the new creed is
to include an element representative of ignorance
and superstition. What, then, was the influence of
the purely intellectual factor in this complex revo-
lution ? We see a vast struggle of philosophies and
religions, and a confused hubbub of controversy, dead
long ago, and buried in the stately mausoleums of
official dogma. How did it come to pass, we ask with
wonder, that men grew so heated over the famous
diphthong ? Even Gibbon is moved by the personal
greatness of Athanasius ; but the greater the man,
the greater is the wonder ot the historian that he
should have laboiured so zealously in such a cause.
The orthodox may bo tolerably sure that, whatever
false opinions may arise, there will be no heresies in
future about the relations of the Persons of the
Trinity. No one will grudge them the possession of
dogmas which refer to the mere exuvisc of long-
extinct speculation. Yet no rational historian can
now doubt that there once was really fire under' all
the smoke. Even the early Fathers must have me&nt


POLSONOUS OPINIONS


816


something ; and we must do them the hare justice to
suppose that the subtleties in which they spent their
brains were symbols of a profound and important
underlying principle. Whatever the full explanation
of this principle, one point seems to be sufficiently
clear for our purpose.

The great theological controversies are the conflict
of rival solutions of one great problem : how to re-
concile philosophy to superstition. A vigorous creed
has to appeal to the po^mlace, and yet to be acceptable
to the higher intellects. Stoicism might satisfy a
Marcus Aurelius, but the mass required a concrete
duty ; not a philosophical theory of the universe, but a
historical, if invisible being, capable of being definitely
presented to the average imagination. There must
bo an official monotheism, and yet some substitute
must he found for the old polytheistic fancies.
Christianity had to embody philosophical doctrines of
a first cause, and yet to frame a pantheon with a
hierarchy of angels, saints, and devils, which was,
in fact, a simple survival of the old pagan mode of
thought. It had in its own plurase to provide a God-
man ; to bring together into some sort of unity two
conceptions so heterogeneous as that of the ground
of all existence and that of a particular peasant in
G alilee. One use of language is to conceal, not thought,
hut flat contradictions of thought. Since the con-
(feption of God corresponds to a historical development
from the tribal deity to the inconceivable and infinite


816


POISONOUS OPINIONS


Being whose attributes can only be es^ressed by
negatives, the use of the same phrase could bridge
the apparently infinite distance, and bring together,
verbally at least, the most contradictory opinions. If
the traditional element of the creed raised difficulties,
they could be evaded by the help of ‘ spiritualisation ’
and allegory; and if the philosophical element led
to conti'adictions, they had only to be called mysteries.
If, in fact, the creed covered absolutely heterogeneous
philosophies, that was, for the time, its strength, and
not its weakness. The religious society could thrive
precisely because its formulte represented a modus oiveinU
acceptable both to the people and their teachers.
The religion was to be cosmopolitan, but not universal.
It required one God for Jew and Gentile, but he was
still to be the God of a historical creed. He had to be
identified historically with the national ruler of a tribe,
and on the other hand with tho First Principle of the
universe, klonotheism may mean either belief in one
jiarticular deity, or belief in the essential unity which is
independent of all particular events. The unity may
be accidental or essential. Tliat the two conceptions
are logically irreconcilable matters little. People did
not look so close as to care for contradictions. They
must have both elements, the superstitious and the
philosophical, however superficial the logical connection .
,A rationalism which could really trust to abstract
reasoning alone, and which could really set aside all
tradition, was in danger of being sublimated into a


POISONOUS OPINIONS


817


shifting phanJ;asmagoria of mystical metaphysics.
The unqualified deification of the historical Christ
was therefore necessary in order to suppress the
drift of philosophers into hopeless cosmogonical specu-
lations. The Church must have lor its head a con-
ceivable Deity. The essential practical object was
to set up a concrete theology which would satisfy the
needs of the popular imagination. As much philo-
sophy might be introduced as was consistent with the
traditional creed; but in any case there must. be a
creed which would work, and any dangerous incursions
into 8j)oculation must be rigidly suppressed. It is for
the learned critic to toll us precisely how this was
accomplished. We need not doubt for a moment that
the great men who worked out the problem, starting
from the ethical side, and regarding the practical re-
quirements of the time, were perfectly sincere in
subordinating the philosophical requirements. They
believed that it was not only morally right, but
theoretically reasonable, to start from the traditional
belief, and work in the philosophy as far as it would
go. When people have learnt to distinguish between
an esoteric and exoteric creed, when they hold that
philosophy teaches scepticism, while morality requires
dogmatism, they come face to face with an un-
pleasant problem, and sometimes escape from it by
. something disagreeably like lying. That issue was
prdbably not so distinctly presented to the framers of
th% early creed. But it is not the less true that, in


818


POISONOUS OPINIONS


point of fact, reason was put in chains: forced to
grind in the theological mill, and bring out the orthodox
dogma, and therefore that the claims of truth were
subordinated to the immediate practical necessities.
Difficulties were seen— some difficulties are too pal-
pable not to have been seen by every serious thinker ;
but they were judiciously skimmed over by convenient
formula*. Tlie real deity had to be the anthropomorphic
deity ; and was only identified with the philosophical
deity when it was convenient to confute heretics. God
was the head of the celestial hierarchy ; and the Devil
was his adversary. Practically, the Devil ruled this
lower world, and human beings had fallen under his
power. Such a scheme would suit a polytheistic creed.
But as God was also the God of philosopliers, it was
equally declared that the evil was a mere negation or
nonentity, and that the Devil, unpleasantly active as
he was for the present, would be suppressed in time,
and that his existence was therefore compatible with
universal benevolence. It was hard to bring together
the finite and the infinite, or to combine a tradition
with an abstract theory. But anything can be done
by words. All good impulses, it was said, come
from God ; press the doctrine, and we have pre-
destination and arbitrary grace as the sole basis of
morality. But man must be allowed the mysterious
. attribute of free-will. Since God is reason, and •vjill
help all men impartially, it would seem on this shoe-
ing that one determining factor of the result depends


POISONOUS OPINIONS


819


absolutely upop ourselves. We are in presence of two
really contradictory theories, but they can be forced
into one by the help of judicious verbal distinctions.
The whole history of theological controversies is a
history of such devices, by which awkward questions
could be suppressed or relegated to the time when
reason would insist upon its rights. ‘ For God’s
sake, hold your tongue ! ’ is the plain answer to im-
pertinent mquirers.

Whether from conscious reflection or unconscious
instinct, the true problem was to hit oft that mixture
of philosophy and superstition which was best adapted
to secure the ellicieney and authority of the Church.
Wliilo the ecclesiastical system acqufrod unity and
vipnur, the philosopliical doctrine only covered pro-
found incoherencies by a judicious manipulation of
oflicial dogma. The reasoning faculty was strictly
subordinated to the needs of the evolution of the
organism. The result is especially obvious in that
part of the system which applies to the theory of
toleration. The relations of God to the world at
large, or to the soul of the individual, the theories of
creation and of grace, present difficulties enough when
we have to combine tradition with philosophy, the
anthropomorphic with tho philosophical conception of
the deity. But there is also the problem of tho rela-
tions of God to the Church — the great organisation,
wTiose needs determined the whole process of evolution.
]6ces the Church moan the saints, or docs it mean the


820


POISONOUS OPINIONS


visible hierarchy, which includes a good many people
who are not saints ? The question received different
answers, and underlay some critical controversies. In
the early period the two could be identified ; to be-
come a member of the Kingdom of Heaven was the
same thing as to be saved, and the rite of baptism
A\as the mark of adhesion. But when the Church
became a vast institution, including men of all sorts ,*
when a men joined it as an infant by hereditary
right ; when it came into relations, hostile or friendly,
ivith the political institutions, the question became
more complex. The Church retained the old claim
appropriate to the early conception. To be a Christian
was still to have a certain spiritual status ; all out-
siders, wore still without the privilege which admitted
to heaven, and as membership of the Church implied
acceptance of certain doctrines, there grew up the
theory of salvation by dogma. To be a Christian
gave a certain right, without which none could be
saxed, but which, of course, ro(ioired to be supple-
mented by compliance with other conditions. Tlie
subjects of the new kingdom must be obedient to its
regulations. But though the Church includes both
sinners and fallible men, the divine character still
adhered to the Church m its corporate capacity. It
could be infallible 'n matters of doctrine and the sole
dispenser of the means of grace, that is, of the means
of keeping out of hell. From the philosophical point
of view, the onlj difference between the relations o'


POISONOUS OPINIONS


321


men to a Sutv'^me Being mast depend upon their
intrinsic quality. But if you bolievo in an anthropo-
morphic being, he may have special relations to a
favoured race or a favoured society ; he may confer a
monopoly upon a particular corporation ; and prescribe
compliance with a special set of external regulations
as a condition of his favour. From the preservation,
therefore, of this anthropomorphic nloraent there
follows logically the whole system of priestly magic,
and of the transcendent value of external rites and
observances. The God in whom you believe is far
above the god of savages ; but he has to be conceived
as the legislator of a ])artieular historical system, and
his authority must be represented by its regulations.
It was consistent still to believe that the whole heathen
world — that is, the vast majority of the race — would be
damned for not obeying rules of which they had
never heard ; that their virtues, since they did not
come from the grace of God, which flows only in its
prescribed channels, were ‘ splendid vices ’ ; and that
a baby born when a certain charm has been said will
be saved eternally, and its brother, who has acci-
dentally been overlooked, be eternally damned. No
doubt, as Butler suggested, babies are lost or rescued
in cases of physical illness by the action of their
parents, and the God of Eevelation may be expected
to^act in the same way as the God of Nature. The
vital question is, what we mean by God. The word
coVered two opposite senses, and the difficulties which


y


822


POISONOUS OPINIONS


arise when the same word is applied to^ contradictory
meanings wore latent in the results. The elaborate
theory of sacraments, of their nature, effects, condi-
tions of efficacy, mode of administering, and so forth,
is all perfectly intelligible and coherent if the sacra-
ments arc regarded as the regulations of a human
society, intended to secure order and discipline within
the corporation, and to stimulate an interest by appro-
priate obser vances. It is, on this understanding, simply
a case of legislation worked out by minds imbued with
theories of jurisprudence, as was natural to members of
a vast organisation with an elaborate constitution, lint
when they are regarded as regulations emanating from
a divinity, we must necessarily suppose a thoroughly
anthropomorphic being, capable, like human legis-
lators, of applying only external tests, though he
chooses to communicate supernatural influences by
means of them ; and when their being is identified
with the First Cause, or even witli the ruler of all
men, as well as of the members of his 8])ecial society,
the doctrine is in danger of becoming blasphemous.
The system of legislation was no doubt intended, like
the English or any other system of law, in the inte-
rests of morality. Some such system was inevitable
when men were at a certain stage of development,
and in the hands of well-meaning people it may still
bo worked, especially with the help of judicious ex-
planations and reticences, so as to promote gobd
habits and avoid gross shocks to a healthy conscience.


POISONOUS OPINIONS


823


Still, a God who is represented by a particular human
corporation, however august, will suffer in his
character. Ho will have, like a human legislator, to
look at the outside action instead of the inmost
consciousness, to be responsible for all the slips and
irregularities inevitable in a human system of regnla'
tion, and to extend his favour to a class or a race on
the most arbitrai'y and immoral principles.

To look at the problem historically is, therefore, to
recognise the weakness, though not to diminish the
importance, of the purely reasoning faculty. The
love of abstract truth is the feeblest of all human
passions. There is no' passion, according to Bacon,
which will not overpower the fear of death. Certainly
there is none which will not suppress the love of
logical consistency. A Spinoza — a man in whom the
passion for logical harmony is really dominant — is the
rarest of all human types. Even the most vigorous
of thinkers have found their stimulus in some practical
need, and reasoning has been only the instrument for
securing some end prescribed by the emotions. They
have seen that the achievement of a social reform
involved the refutation of some error : but if the
reasoning process did not lead them to the desired
end, it has generally been the logic, and not the desired
conclusion, which was finally sacrificed. To the great
mass of mankind a sacrifice of consistency or of rigid
prdbf is, of course, no sacrifice at all. There is nothing,
as*every schoolmaster knows, which the average mind.


824


rOISONOUS OPJNJOXS


rcBonts so much as the demand for reasons. It will
gladly accept any rule, provided that it has not to
answer the troublesome question, Why ? Tell me how
to answer : but, for heaven’s sake ! don’t explain the
reasons of the answer. We are sometimes told that
men of science have to encounter the natural desire of
mankind to extend the limits of knowledge. That
seems to mcj to bo an inversion of the truth. What a
man naturally desires is to put a fixed stop to inquiry.
To-day, says the man of science, must be explained
l)y yesterday ; and the same process must be repeated
for every period to which we can push our researches.
The popular instinct stops this indefinite regress
by a summary hypothesis. Tin's planet is the uni-
verse ; never mind the stars. The world was created
6,000 years ago, and there is an end of it. Ask no
more. The ‘ explanation ’ turns out to be tliat an in-
conceivable being perform«‘d an inconceivable process ;
but, if accepted verbally, it supplies an excuse for
dropping a troublesome operation, which fatigues the
imagination, though it is still demanded by the reason.
We want a world limited in every direction ; we desire
to lay down definite bounds to the labour of investiga-
tion ; and we make our limits by an arbitrary hypo-
thesis. The inertness of the average mind, not its
desire for knowledge, is the real obstacle ; and if it
nominally asks for an infinite and the absolute, that
means that it wants to put a final stop to the restless
activity of the genuine inquirer. •


POISONOUS OPINIONS


825


This, of cQjirse, is pre-eminently true of that part of
religious beliefs which corresponds, not to a statement
of fact, but to the promulgation of laws. You must do
so and so ; you must obey this or that rule of the
society to which you belong. To ask why is to bo
not only impertinent but profane. Society depends
upon the observation of certain primary rules; and
the question why they should be obeyed is, in fact, the
question why they are essential to the welfare of the
society, or what is the value of society itself to its
members. Obviously, these are questions inconvenient
in the highest degree to the society which embodies
the working of the laws. The dumb sense of then*
necessity has embodied itself in a set of imaginary
•sanctions ; and the imagination has attributed them
to the supernatural agents whose existence is assumed
as the ultimate groundwork of all authority ; that is,
as belonging to the region about which it is wicked to
ask questions. The authority must be taken for
granted in practice, and therefore in theory. A
government cannot be carried on if the subjects are
entitled to go behind the Constitution. That is a
practical necessity. It is now thought almost as wicked
to ask why a majority should be obeyed, as it would
have been to ask why a king should be obeyed, and to
ask that was once to ask why a god should be obeyed.
If obedience to the moral law is interpreted as obe- .
dtence to the will of a god, his authority must not
bb questioned in practice; for to ‘question’ there


326


POISONOUS OPINIONS


means to dispute ; and it mnst not be,, questioned in
theory, so long as no answer can possibly be given.
It is taken to be part of the primary data, assumed in
all social action, and therefore to be enforced by society.
Nothmg can be more simple, though it involves the
assumption that to inquire is the same thing as to
deny. It is only when we have reached the con-
clusion that free inquiry can be constitutive as well
as destructive that we can give full play to the activity
of reason, even in those sacred regions where assump-
tions arc necessary in the sphere of conduct, and
where, therefore, assumptions are made into ultimate
or unquestionable truths in the sphere of speculation.

The normal attitude of the religious mind is there-
fore conservative. Even the founders of a new
religion profess to be restoring an ancient creed, or in
some way base their authority upon the creed which
already exists. They are at most getting rid of accre-
tions, not introducing novelties. They advance from the
old base. A religion, on its practical side, is a system
of rules of conduct, and therefore involves an appeal
to some authority which must not be disputed, even
in argument. In the earlier period, it is an indistin-
guishable part of the political erced. It does not
persecute because it only extirpates. The rival tribe
has as good a claim to its god as to its chief, and its
. conversion can be only an incident of its conquests, or
of the subjection of its deities to the hostile deities.
' When the creed has both philosophical and ‘ empirical,’


P01S0N0T7S OPINIONS


327


or historical, elements, persecution becomes logical.
The faith of a foreigner is not merely different, but
mong ; his god is not another god, but a devil ; for
my creed, as philosophical, should be universal. But,
in so far as it includes historical elements, a recogni-
tion of the sanctity of beings only known to me, and
of facts of which you have never heard, I can enforce
your allegiance only by the universally intelligible
argument of the sword. You are a Turk, whom,
perhaps, I should like to conquer for other reasons,
and it must be right to prevent forcibly your allegiance
to a devil. The same ai'gument applies within the
ecclesiastical society, so long as the creed includes
dements which are not demonstrable by reason. If
the central core depends upon mysteries, which rest
upon authority in this sense, that the individual must
take them without asking questions, a recalcitrant
individual can only be suppressed by force. The
Ohurch is the embodiment of the Divine element in
human affairs ; its decisions must belong to the region
in which all question is profane ; and every attempt
to go ‘ behind the record ’ must be suppressed by every
applicable means. The inquirer has shown by the
very act of inquiring that, in his case, reason is not
an efficient weapon, and we must therefore try what
can be done by the stake.

The reason, then, is a faculty which, by the nature
df the case, has to intrude itself tacitly and gradually,
Vnd under disguises. It may slowly disintegrate old


828


roisoNots oriNioNS


opinions under cover of ambiguities and the gradual
infiltration of new meanings into old words. The
determining factors are evident when we consider a
Church as a great society, intended to meet certain
practical requirements, and not as a system of philo-
sophy developed by abstract thinkers. It has to rule
by obeying ; to adapt itself to the state of mind of the
l)olievers, to incorporate old superstitions, to make
use of the imaginative construction embodied in the
juevious half-instinctive conceptions of the universe,
to sanction whatever appeals to the crude masses of
mankind, and only to consider the requirements of
the more thoughtful so far as is necessary to secure
their co-operation. If they will accept the official
formulae, they may be allowed, within limits, to
introduce elements really inconsistent, so long as
the inconsistency is carefully hidden away. A vigor-
ous religion is a superstition which has enslaved
a philosophy. Slowly, and by sof^ degrees, indeed,
the now leaven of thought may produce a vast revolu-
tion. If the philosopher is tolerated (m condition of
proving the orthodox conclusions, the admission that
a proof is desirable leads to a recognition that it will
not always work in the desired direction. But the
reason is still bound by inexorable necessity to pre-
sent itself as a development instead of a contradiction.
Its successes are won only when it can point to some
conclusion comprehensible by the majority. Thfe
abstract arguments against the authority of th^


POISONOUS OPINIONS


829


Church will be regarded with indifference until abuses
have grown up which supply a palpable redwtio ad
absurdum. The theory of indulgences might be illo-
gical, but no one cared till they were obviouslj used
for commercial purposes. Persecution may be wrong,
but the abstract arguments were of little efficacy till
the persecuted were able to fight. When, as a
matter of fact, men of different creeds had to live in
the same country, and to deal with each other in
ordinary affairs, they came to see that the differences
w'ore not so vast as to imply that one creed came from
God and the other from the Devil. The way to teach
toleration is to force Protestants and Catholics to
live together on terms of equality. The ordinary
mind still needs some kind of picture-writing, a con-
crete instance, not a general principle. A theory
confutes itself by some logical application which re-
volts even the instinct out of which it originally
sprang. Then, and not before, it becomes evident
that there must be something wrong — somewhere*
When we have learnt by experience that freethinkers
may be decent people, we cannot make up our minds
to burn them. By degrees the moral instincts
have broken through the dogmatic bondage, and
forced the most dogged theologians to find means
of importing liberal theories even into the heart of
their formulae. Persecution has been discredited, till
eifen the most dogmatic disavow indignantly the prin-
ciples of which they once boasted. All that remains


830


POISONOUS OPINIONS


is a survival of certain claims carefully divorced
from their practical application. Although the dog-
matic system renounces the aid of the secular arm, it
is forced to claim the same spiritual position. It still
represents the one body of truth upon which the salva-
tion of men hereafter, and their morality and welfare in
this world, are essentially dependent. Its antagonists
are still instruments, though not the conscious instru-
ments, of the Devil. So long as it claims to be a
supernatural revelation, it must invert the true order
of thought, and represent itself, not as one stage in a
slow development, one step in an approximation, but
as whole, pure, and perfect, and differing from all
other doctrine, not in degree, but in kind.

Persecution clearly implies authority. Does
authority necessarily imply persecution ? That ques-
tion can only be answered when the vague phrase is
made specific. All men have to take most of their
opinions upon authority — that is, to believe because
others believe ; and the reason is often a very good
one. In the doctrines, again, which form the substance
of a religious creed, the great bulk of mankind in-
evitably depends upon authority — that is, they must
accept the beliefs of the few who can reason. In that
sense I take my astronomy and nearly all my mathe-
matics ux)on authority, as well as my belief in Borne
_ or in Julius C*sar. I have not personally investigated
the arguments in one case, or the evidence for facts
in the other. Again, men’s religious beliefs are, affsk


POISONOUS OPINIONS


831


fact, chiefly determined by the society into which
they are born, and the true history of a religion must
be sought, not in an examination of the logical rela-
tions of its official creed, but in the development of the
organised society which we call a Church. And, there-
fore again, it is sufficiently obvious that the religious
belief is a development of traditions, and is impressed
upon the individual by the more or less organised
action of the society. The other side of the same fact
is that the Church can onl^’ thrive by embodying the
beliefs and satisfying the instincts of its members.
It is not an arbitrary form imposed from without,
but simply a development and co-ordination of the
various elements of the popular creed by means of
the social organ. The fact, therefore, that most
people believe on authority is the explanation of the
fact that most people believe so much nonsense : that
every creed hitherto established includes survival of
superstitions, and*inadequate solutions of difficulties,
and unstable combinations of heterogeneous elements
of thought. A belief in the fact of authority is,
therefore, really incompatible with a belief in the
fact of infallible authority. When we see how creeds
are formed, we see why they must be full of error and
inconsistency.

But, again, the Church is developed by its prac-
tical utility: its power of satisfying certain human,
aspirations and imaginations. The utility of a
Petrine is only indirectly related to its truth; or


882


rOLSONOUS OPINIONS


rather, before we can say what is the element of
truth or falsehood, we have to consider the doctrine
from outside : to ask, as we have done in the case of
the savage tribe, whether the value of a belief in a
certain deity lies in the fact that such a deity exists, or
in the fact that a certain youthful instinct is connected
in the savage mind with the existence of the deity.
Is the real pith and meaning of the belief in the direct
meaning of the words, or in the utOity which it
indirectly ascribes to certain modes of conduct ? The
meaning of dogmas in a semi-civilised race is that a
certain organisation is invested with sanctity, and
can, therefore, secure obedience and co-operation.
The Church may have been a highly useful organisa-
tion, as a counterpoise to the more brutal system of a
military aristocracy. But it does not follow that the
utility depended upon the superstitious attributes, a
belief in which may, in a historical sense, have
been necessary to its efficiency. They may have been
the mere trappings, the ceremonial outside, which could
be advantageously abolished when men became more
reasonable. We can be loyal to a king now without
believing that kingship involves any mysterious or
supernatural attributes, and we may believe that a
Church was useful though the magical powers attri-
buted to it were a mere appendage to its utility.

The authority of the Church, when the Church is
regarded as a social organisation, is simply a trans-
lation into ecclesiastical of the loyal doctrine Of


POISONOUS OPINIONS


883


sovereignty. Jhe lawyer shows that every political
Constitution implies the existence of a sovereign
somewhere. That is to say, simply, that the condi-
tion of unity of action is the existence of some ulti-
mate body for deciding upon the action of the whole.
There must be some ultimate court of appeal, or dis-
putes cannot be decided, as the corporate body cannot
act as a unit. The unity of the Church implies an eccle-
siastical, as the unity of the State implies a political,
sovereign, whether the sovereign be the Pope or any
other body, constituted according to certain rules.
Authority, in this sense, is the antithesis of authority
in the pliilosophical sense. The authority of a
number of people, considered politically, varies with
their mutual dependence. They can act more ener-
getically as each individual is subordinated to the
rest. The authority, in a philosophical sense, varies
as the independence. If two qualified people come
to the same conclusion, its value is doubled, or more
than doubled. If one accepts the opinion of the
other, the authority is only the authority of the first.
If every member of the Royal Society told me that
he had reached a scientific ti'uth independently, I
should probably believe it to be established. If each
told me he accepted it because the President of the
Society had declared it to be true, I should have only
the authority of one man. Therefore, the closer the^
political union, the less the real philosophical authority.
While, however, we believe in the sujiernatural


334


POISONOUS OPINIONS


character of a Church, and are preiwed to accept
miracles, we can, of course, believe in its uniting
authorities of both kinds. The fact of the unity, of
the antecedent resolution to agree, which is really
fatal to the philosophical authority, because it proves
that the unity is the result of other than philosophical
considerations, may induce me to accept the creed, so
long as I consider faith to be a matter of obedience
instead of conviction. As politicians used to consider
a Constitution to be the cause of all the supposed
political virtues of a country, instead of seeing in it a
product of the political qualities, so the organisation
of a miraculous Church which could reveal the truth
and bestow the means of salvation because; it could
suppress dissent and enforce conformity, was supposed
to be the source of all the instincts to which it really
owed its origin.

Where such a confusion exists between the two
kinds of ‘ authority,’ the power to suppress and the
capacity to know, per.occution cannot be inconsistent.
If I know that a certain body is the manifestation
of God upon earth, and that its regulations are parts
of the divine law, they may be enforced by either
branch of ‘authority.’ And so long as the creed
includes ‘empirical,’ or purely historical elements,
persecution must be necessary. If the divine power
is identified with an institution existing only within
certain limits of time and place, the theory must
include an arbitrary clement : and such a theory


POISONOUS OPINIONS


335


cannot be propagated by pure reason. A scientific
doctrine gives general, not particular, laws ; a science
of mechanics is true wherever there is existing and
moving matter ; and a science of psychology, wherever
there are human beings. Doctrines of such a nature
can be, therefore, taught independently of particular
conditions. The scientific doctrine, as such, has not
to deal with this or that bit of matter — with St. Paul’s
Church in London, or the Observatory at Greenwich —
but with all matter ; not with Paul or Gsesar, but with
human beings. Therefore the arguments are as
applicable at the Antipodes as in England. So the
arguments for theology, so long as they are philo-
sophical, are equally good in London or China, now
or 10,000 years ago. But if your theology asserts
that a particular person who appeared at a given
time and place was also God Almighty, it includes
an element of which the vast majority of the race
have been necessarily ignorant, and which is irrelevant
to pure philosophy. In such a case, authority is at
least highly convenient. You have got to believe
simply because I toll you to believe ; and, as belief
is essential to your eternal happiness, 1 shall make
you believe. My ‘ telling ’ shall have the force of an
order, not simply of a bit of useful information. So
long as such an empu’ical element remains, the door
is open for some fragment of persecution. So lon^
as* the religion supx>oses a belief in facts which are
n&t capable of establishment by reason, it has a


386


POISONOUS OPINIONS


natural afl&nity to support by ‘ authority ’ in the sense
of coercion. The duty is allied to a particular sot
of institutions and events. Though persecution, in
the grosser sense, has gone out of fashion, and, we
may hope, for over, the spirit is still left wherever this
element remains. For if the creed is divine, its oppo-
nents are diabolical. The heretical view is taken to be
— not part of the imperfect process of clumsy dialectics
by which the human mind gradually works out a
trustworthy creed — but an absolute denial of the truth.
We are learning, in political questions, that a revolu-
tion in some sense justifies itself. It proves that the
old order was defective, though it does not prove that
the innovation gives the final solution. So the
growth of materialism, and atheism, and agnosticism,
and other wicked doctrines, should be recognised as
proving, at least, that the system of thought, which
has broken down in practice, was defective in theory.
But so long as opinions are regarded, not as moments
in a great intellectual development, but as things
injected from without, suggested by the Devil or
revealed by a deity; so long, therefore, as there
is something essentially arbitrary in the whole pro-
cess ; so long as a particular creed or Church can be
regarded as monopolising the whole divuie element,
and only the anti-divine can be left to its opponents,
. there is a natural leaning to coercion of some kind,
whether the bigotry can use appropriate instruments
or must relieve itself by simply anathematising its


POISONOUS OPINIONS


337


opponents, ^he final and adequate solution can
only be reached when ‘authority’ in matters of
opinion means simply that kind of authority which
is in principle also demonstration ; the authority of
the coincidence of independent thinkers, not of the
agreement of a body to put down all dissent. In
that case the superstitions, arbitrary, and temporary
element might disappear, and philosophy be the
ally instead of the slave of religion. But it is
difficult to say how much of the old creed will have
to be sacrificed before such a consummation comes
within a distance measurable by the imagination.


388


THE RELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN

Thebe is, we Imow, a religion common to all men of
sense; though men of sense never say what that
religion may be. There may be more reasons than
one for their reticence. A man of sense is well aware
that he can say what he pleases without shocking the
most delicate orthodoxy. He requires no crypto-
graphic art to hide his meaning, for plain letters are
ciphers to all who are not men of sense. The average
reader is frightened by the use of certain counters,
not by the ideas which they symbolise for the under-
standing. Kefrain from dotting your i’s and crossing
your t's, and your utterance will be for him an insoluble
mystery. He would be shocked if you said in plain
terms ‘ there is no God ’ ; but it is easy to give quite
an orthodox and edifying turn to the sentiment. We
have all read defences of Agnosticism, which pass for
assaults upon the wicked ‘ deist,’ and elaborate expo-
sitions of downright materiah'sm intended to support
Christianity. Men of sense, 1 fajicy, often wish to
avoid scandal rather than to conceal their sentimehts
from their peers. They trust to a freemasonry whi6h


THE RELIGION OJ? ALL SENSIBLE MEN 339

exists among themselves, and presents an impenetrable
barrier to the sagacity of fools. One may guess that
the esoteric creed drops some articles of the orthodox
faith; but the man of sense, while he has a coji-
temptuous smile for anyone who (as M. Benan says
of St. Paul) ‘believes heavily/ or takes all creeds
seriously, has a hearty dislike for the man who too
openly discards the established tenets. Why drop a
veil so easily worn ? Keligion is, after all. useful ; and
we are even bound — for the sensible man can take a
high moral tone when he pleases — to invent the God
who does not exist.

But how arc we to be guided in these troublesome
days, when rash persons have insisted upon revealing
the open secret, and the esoteric creed of the sensible
man has been proclaimed so that they who run may
read ? On the whole, the sensible man would reply ;
You had better hold your tongue. We, at least, who
have no new gospel to preach, will- not set up for
prophets. Let us look on as calmly as may be at the
huge turmoil of conflicting controversy; smile with
equal calmness at the bigots who would damn people
for losing their way in the dark; at the pompous
dogmatists who would face it out that they can see as
clearly as in broad daylight ; at the feather-headed
enthusiasts who take the first will-o’-the-wisp for a safe
guide, and patch up a new religion out of scraps and
tatters of half-understood science ; and at the simple-
uflnded philosophers who fancy in all seriousness that


340 THE KELIOIOX OF ATJi SENSIBLE MEN

men are about to become reasoning animals. Vanitjr
Fair is a queer place at best; and, amid all the
confused outcries that rise ceaselessly from its noisy
inhabitants, the screams and curses of rival religious
quacks are surely the fittest to provoke a bitter smile.
We may pity the poor pilgrim groaning in Doubting
Castle, and despise the impotent fury of Giant Pope
in his ancient den ; but the empty brag of charlatans
and humbugs in the Fair itself, thougli they are
masquerading in the most imposing of robes, is best
met with silent contempt. Let ns trust that, somehow
or other, the mad bustle will subside in time ; that the
great world will blunder in its own clumsy fashion
into some tolerable order, and some scum of effete
superstition be worked off in the chaotic fermentation.
Meanwhile, let us cultivate our little area of garden,
knowing well that, long before a brighter day dawns, we
too shall have been swept off into the great darkness,
and our little crotchets and nostrums have become as
ludicrous as those of our forefathers. Let us possess
our sotds in peace, and acknowledge that Swift has
pretty well summed up the fittest epilogue for Jove to
pronounce upon the farce of the world, ‘ I damn such
fools ! ’

Truth may be hidden in a sneer, and the language
of the satirist may be translated into most amiable
, phrasedogy. Substitute the sentimental for the
scornful tone, and many tender and generous natures
will echo the conclusion. Intellectual indolencb^


THE KEUGION OE Ali SENSIBLE MEN 841

which 8hrmk|froin the painful effort of rearranging
first principles, and a real scrupulosity as to hurting
the feelings of babes and sucklings, may be com-
bined in the sensible man’s remonstrance against
stirring the waters needlessly. The judgment of
•eommon-sonse is not final, but it always has a certain
presumption in its favour. We must at least show
why it is so plausible. It is easy enough to retort by
calling names, by accusing your sensible adversary of
cynicism, falsehood, and want of faith in the power of
truth. But, when pne descends from mere generalities,
one feels that a view which commends itself not only
to the wary, to the prudent, and the worldly-wise, but
to many generous and lofty natures, deserves a more
distinct answer. It should be met, so far as it can be
met, point by point, and any element of truth wliich
it contains should be fairly and frankly acknowledged.
And any answer should begin by admitting the really
strong part of the opponent’s case. There can, 1
think, be no doubt as to where the strength lies.

It is plain that the appeal for reticence would be
thrown away upon anyone who seriously believed
himself able to answer the great question. What is to
be the religion of the futm'c ? If I have a gospel, I
am bound to proclaim it. But, so long as that ques-
tion remains unanswered and unanswerable, there is a
practical difficulty which, however frequently overloo]fe4,
or denied, recurs in one form or other with provoking
persistency. You may cut the knot by a simple


842 THE REUOIOK OF ALL ,'<ENSIBIiE MEH


declaration that truth is above everything ; but you
do not clear away the honest scruples of your
antagonist : he still shrinks from the duty, even if he
acknowledges it, and replies by awkward cases of
conscience. It is very easy, and at the present time
very safe, to tilt against the established creeds. I
should be the last to dispute that the men mIio assail
them are animated by the purest love of truth. And
yet, when all is said and done, we ai'e often tempted
to think that the creeds might be left to decay of
themselves, and expire by the method of explanation.

Let ns, however, look at the question a little more
distinctly. And, in the first place, let us admit fully
and frankly that the problem about the religion of the
future is simply insoluble. Inspii’cd prophecy is out
of date ; and though we talk about scientific prediction
in such matters, the phrase is little better than a
mockery. To predict history is to make a guess with
an indefinite chance of error. Pethaps we may say
pretty confidently that the dead will not come to life,
nor two and two be proved to make five ; but to give
any precise form to our vague anticipations of the
future is simply to court the ridicule of posterity — if
posterity is silly enough to study our guesses. There
is, indeed, a royal road to prophecy in this particular
case, which is taken often enough. My opinion, says
each man, is true ; moreover, the truth will prevail ;
and hence it follows that my opinion, whatever it may
be, represents the future faith of the world. However


THE KELIGION OE ALL SENSIBLE MEN 343

satisfactory t(^the individual mind, there are difficulties
about using this argument in controversy. Doubtless
to believe an opinion is to believe that it is true, and
to doubt that truth will ultimately prevail is to suppose
that the development of thought is nothing but a vague
fluctuation hither and thither of endless and contra-
dictory blundering. And yet the man who can believe
that his own conception is definitive and complete, and
that truth is to be fully reached the day after to-
morrow, shows that ho possesses the sanguine temper
and dogmatic self-confidence which are, indeed, neces-
sary conditions of the successful propagation of a creed,
but which are very far from being sufficient conditions.
Too many philosophers and preachers have an-
nounced themselves to be in possession of the truth
to leave us much confidence in such predictions. M.
Comte was very confident of the future of his Church ;
but it has not yet covered the civilised world. ■ Every
new Church aimsut being universal and eternal ; but
the one thing certain is, that aU creeds have perished.
Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal, passes
for a good syllogism. May we not say, with an equal
show of a sound inductive basis. Positivism is a
religion, therefore positivism will die ?

I hold, after a fashion, the pleasant old doctrine
that truth has a tendency to prevail. I believe that
we may discern in the past history of mankind a sldw.
approximation toward truth — a gradual substitution
df more comprehensive and accurate views of the


844 THE RELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN


world for the narrower and less verifiable — and I

(|

need not expound the familiar arguments for that
doctrine. It follows, too, that in believing any
doctrine we believe also that it will slowly force
its way to a wider recognition in the clash and con-
flict of rival creeds. We believe it to be part of
that solid core of truth which is gradually freeing
itself from superincumbent masses of error and
assumption. But we have still to ask how far this
doctrine can be applied to any given contingency.
May we infer, for example, from the triumph of
Christianity that it included more truth than the
beliefs which it ousted ; or, from the assumed troth
of any new creed of our own, that it will triumph
over the adverse force of existing orthodoxy ?

Here we have at once to confront a fact which
lies on the very. surface of history. The doctrine
of a continuous and uniform progress of opinion
is simply untenable. Historians of philosophy
manage occasionally to twist the records of past
thought into a confirmation of some such view.
But, to gain even a show of continuity, they have to
limit their view to a few scattered men of exceptional
eminence. They make one boimd from the ancient
to the modern world, or, if they admit a few
stepping-stones in the interval, they at least assume
peifiods of many centuries when thought was stagnant
or retrograde, and when countless millions remained
in placid ignorance, plunged in errors long detected


THE BEUOION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN 345


by the few. The torch ia not really passed from
hand to hand by the masses. Solitary watchers
upon rare eminences catch a glimpse of distant lights
across proformd valleys, or rather vast breadths of
continent, steeped in supine indifference. Beligious
thought is as little continuous as philosophical. If
you are a disbeliever in Christian theology, you
can hardly deny that ancient philosophers had
reached truths destined to long ages of oblivion, and .
opened paths which had fallen into complete disuse
till again opened by inquirers in the last few
generations. If you are a Christian, you hold im-
plicitly that truths once recognised by the strongest
minds have become obscure or been openly rejected
as modern society has become more enlightened,
but, upon this hypothesis, more corrupt. It may
be possible to detect a slow evolution in certain pro-
found conceptions which underlie all methods of
thought; but it* is impossible to deny that the
evolution is extremely slow, often imperceptible,
and consistent with the rise and decay of various
forms of religious belief, and therefore, presumably,
with the growth of new error or the loss of ancient
truth. If there has been a slow accumulation of
treasure in the long run, yet the race has rejected
much that it once thought valuable, and probably
lost for long periods much which had intrinsic^
^orth.

* The rationalist may well feel that on many points


846 THE BELIGJON OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN

he would sympathise more closely ,, with Marcus
Aurelius than with St. Paul. The Stoical view of
the woi’ld and life may appear to him worthier, freer
from antiquated mythology, and more congenial to
modern thought than that of the great Apostle.
And yet the Christian triumphed; and why? For
reasons which the Christian apologist never tires of
enforcing, and of which I am quite content to assume
the substantial accuracy. It triumphed, doubtless,
because it was better suited to human nature, that is,
the nature of average men of the time ; because philo*
sophy flew above their heads, while religion grasped
their imagination, provided an utterance for their
emotions, and presented an ideal character which
they could love and understand. The prinid facie
inference, indeed, is not that which the apologist
wishes to draw. A creed may thrive because it falls
in with the weakness as well as with the strength of
its adherents; because it is easily assimilated at
once with the current superstitions and the current
philosophy ; because it gives that half-truth which is
for the time the most congenial to the popular mind.
There is something in Charles II.’s explanation of the
preacher’s success — that ‘his nonsense suited their
nonsense ’ ; and, in short, there is a presumption that
a religion fitted to the actual stage of. mental
development must be, so far, unfitted for the most
advanced minds. The apologist is therefore anxious
to point out that, though the creed exactly meets the


THE KELICHON OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN 847

wants of tha time, its purity and perfection prove
that it could not be the product of the time. We
can understand its success when once originated ; ' we
can not understand its originating, except from some
superhuman intelligence. And here, again, omitting
the illegitimate leap to the supernatural, we can fully
admit the general force of the argument. To dis-
cover a creed capable of clothing the vague emotions
of that and so many succeeding generations was
clearly a work requiring genius of the rarest and
highest order, or, more probably, the concentrated
activity of many men of genius combined in un-
conscious co-operation by the collective sentiment
of their age. The phenomenon is of the same kind
which it is a commonpbice to notice in a sphere only
one degree less exalted. Given your man of genius —
your Shakespeare or Dante — we can dimly see how
he was created by the conditions of the time. He is
great in virtue of'his capacity for gathering into one
focus and uttering in articulate language the thoughts
and emotions indistinctly fermenting in the minds
of innumerable contemporaries. Yet no one can pre-
dict the appearance of a man of genius, or show
deductively that a Shakespeare must have arisen
under Elizabeth. The founder of a religion belongs
to an order still more exalted than that of poets,
philosophers, or statesmen. When he has solved the.
problem, the answer is simple enough. Till he has
solved it, we are still blindly groping in the dark,


843 THE BELI&IOH OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN


conscious of a want, but totally unable- to give it dis-
tinct utterance, or to predict what will satisfy it. It
may be true — let us hope it to be true — that the hour
will always bring the man; that we have Shake-
speares by the dozen ready to burst into song when-
ever spring-time comes ; that society, like the air, is
everywhere full of germs of genius requirhig only the
occurrence of the ])articular degree of temperature
necessary to give them life and vigour. Yet we arc
still as unable as ever to say what are the conditions
productive of those flowering times in art or literature
which have made a few great epochs remarkable to
all future ages ; no advance of social science brings
us perceptibly nearer to a power of prediction ; and,
as no human being can foretell the advent of the
next world-poet, still less foretell what his poem will
be like, it would be evoi more futile to guess at the date
or the contents of the next groat religious message.

If a religion were simply a philosophy, we should
have some specious basis fur speculation. Comte,
for example, traces the gradual ebb of theological
modes of conception, which banishes the supernatural
from one sphere of knowledge after another, and
liberates the direct vision from the distorting haze of
superstition. When the stars no longer require the
guidance of gods, we get a rational astronomy ; and
by a similar process we shall reach a really scientific
system of sociology and ethics, resting on demonstra-
tion instead of assumption, and free from the elemefit


THE RELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN 349

of mystery. Bat, as Comte again maintained, we
should still no more have a religion than we have an
architecture when we understand the laws of mechanics,
or a music when we understand the laws of sound.
Of Comte’s attempt to take the next step 1 need say
nothing. His religion has been ridiculed, 1 think,
more than enough ; but I cannot doubt that it has
the fatal daw of every attempt to construct by rule
and lino what can only bo dono, if it can be done at
all, by the genial energy of a creative imagination.
The strange thing is that, recognising so clearly the
nature of tho task, he should not have recognised his
own incapacity for succeeding in it. A religion is the
synthesis of a philosophy and a poetry. It is the
product of a theory of the universe working in the
imagination of a people until it projects itself into
vivid concrete symbolism. It must have a double
aspect, corresponding on one .side to the conceptions
which men have actually framed of the constitution
of the world in which they live, and, on the other,
embodying those conceptions in a shape capable of
being grasped by the imagination and of serving as a
framework to the profound but indistinct emotions
which it suggests. The ordinary theological anti-
thesis between faith and reason corresponds to the
distinction. A creed must appeal to men’s direct
and ‘ intuitive ’ perceptions as well as to their logical
fAculties. It must be capable of being presented
dogmatically as well as proved by chains of syllogisms.


860 THE EEUGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN

Most men, of course, do not reason at all, and accept
their religion as they accept their science — at second-
hand. The man of science believes the truths of
astronomy, because they are proved; and the non-
scientific man, because he believes that they are
provable, and has had them directly presented to him
by vivid and intelligible pictures. The ideal religion
would be suited, in the same way, both to the philo-
sophic and the popular mind. Only in this case the
condition is incomparably more difficult of fulfil-
ment. Even in physical science, direct vision lags
behind analysis and demonstration; and it often
requires the highest imaginative power to see the
results of a mathematical proof, though each step of
proof may be fully understood. But to convert a
philosophy into a religion, to give to abstract specula-
tion the form and colouring which alone can bring it
within reach of the ordinary understanding, is a task
requiring the loftiest genius under most congenial
influences.

It is this - double aspect of any vigorous religion
which bafiles, not only our powers of prediction, but
even of conjecture, as to the future of faith. What
form of belief will satisfy at once the philosophic
thought and the popular impulses of the time ? How
is it to attract at once the thinkers, whose sole aim is
the extension of our narrow circle of intellectual day-
light, and the poor and ignorant, who are moved only
by the direct power of the creed .to grasp their


THE RELICHOX OF ALL SENSIBLE JWEN 351


imaginations and stimulate their emotions? If it
alienates one class, it can only render more chaotic
the chaotic mass of struggling superstition; if it
alienates the other, it cannot spread beyond a pro-
fessor’s lecture-room. Even if we have a decided
opinion as to the philosophical doctrines which are
ultimately to prevail, we shall still be only at the
threshold of the problem. How can they be made
acceptable to the struggling masses of society ? If
not made acceptable, how can wc be sure that they
will not be crushed ? If thought is to advance, we
say, this must be its final stage. But how do we
know that the final stage is at liand ? May not
philosophers once more find that they are losing
their hold upon their hearers ; that they have gone
too fast and too far; and that, being in a small
minority, they are likely to get the worst of it?
There may be a retrograde movement in the tidal
wave which has, often advanced so fitfully and
irregularly. We have reached the edge of the
promised land, but who can tell that the race may
not be turned back to wander for forty years or forty
centuries in the wilderness ? The philosophical
movement destroys the old forms of emotional
utterance ; and, till new forms have been elaborated,
the emotions remain as a disturbing force. How will
men satisfy the needs hitherto met by the varibus
fbrms of worship ? Wliat will be the heaven and hell’
W the future? Will men pray at all, and, if so, to


362 THE REUOIOxS OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN


•whom? How will they express whM have been
called the sapernatural dictates of the conscience?
What will be the precise meaning given to such words
as holy, spiritual, and divine, which have hitherto
expressed some of the profoundest moods of which we
are conscious ? Or, is it possible that we shall simply
shut up our churches and keep our museums and
theatres ; and that all the emotions which have
hitherto been the moving forces of the greatest
organisations will flow in other channels without
producing any social catastrophe ?

Theologians ask such questions to pronounce the
answer impossible. They cannot conceive any answer
but their own ; and calmly assume that the destruction
or radical transformation of the old symbols is equiva-
lent to the destruction of the things symbolised, and
the alteration of the human nature which created
them, for my part, I cannot even understand the
doctrine that the conscience, for exftmple, was created
by a belief in hell, and will perish when hell ceases to
be credible. It seems to me clear that the conscience
created the old hell, and will presumably create a new
one, sufficient for practical purposes, whenever the
ancient mythology decays. But if it is asked, What
will be the precise form which is to supersede the
old? I can only reply, that is the question to be
sofved by the coming generations and the coming
men of genius, lilor can I, or anyone, tell how laic
the solution of the immediate future will be a com'


THE llELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN 863

promise, incli^ding many ancient elements or a
definitive acceptance of the soundest philosophical
principles. The problem is not one of abstract
reasoning, but of practice. We have to inquire- how
an artistic form is to be given to the ancient chorus
of lamentation and aspiration which has been steaming
up for so many ages from the race of men, not how
we are to formulate with scientific accuracy the ac-
cumulating body of ascertained truth. Wo are not
simply looking forward to the next stage in the
evolution of a theory, but guessing what will be tho
resultant of a confused struggle of conflicting im-
pulses, whose success is only affected indirectly by
the truth of the doctrines which they embody.

The rashness of any attempt to unravel the
mystery of the future might be abundantly con-
firmed, if confirmation be necessary, from past
experience. We should perhaps find the best-
guidance, in sxny attempt at prophesying the future
of religion, from studying the history of tho last
gi'eat revolution of faith. The analogy betweei' the
present age and that which witnessed the introduction
of Christianity is too striking to have keen missed by
very many observers. The most superficial acquaint-
ance with the general facts shows how close a parallel
might be drawn by a competent historian. There are
none of the striking manifestations of the present day*
to which it would not be easy to produce an analogy,
though m some respects on a smaller scale. Now, as»


854 THE EELICrlON" OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN


then, we can find mystical philosoj^hers trying to
evolve a satisfactory creed by some process of logical
legerdemain out of theosophical moonshine; and
amiable and intelligent persons labouring hard to
prove that the old mythology could be forced to
accept a rationalistic interpretation — whether in
regard to the inspection of entrails or prayers for fine
weather ; and philosophers framing systems of
morality entirely apart from the ancient creeds, and
sufficiently satisfactory to themselves, while hopelessly
incapable of impressing the popular mind; and
politicians, conscious that the basis of social order
was being sapped by the decay of the faith in which
it had arisen, and therefore attempting the impossible
task of galvanising dead creeds into some semblance
of vitality ; and strange superstitions creeping out of
their lurking-places, and gaining influence in a
luxurious society whose intelligence was an ineffectual
safeguard against the most grovfUing errors ; and a
dogged adherence of formalists and conservatives to
ancient ways, and much empty profession of barren
orthodoxy; and, beneath all, a vague disquiet, a
breaking-up of ancient social and natural bonds, and
a blind groping toward some more cosmopolitan creed
and some deeper satisfaction for the emotional needs
of mankind. Yet there is one thing which we do not
• ^ce, and at which we cannot guess : What sect is
analogous to the ancient Christiaiis ? Who are’ the
Christians of the present day? Which, in alltYhe


THE RELIGION OF AUj SENSIBLE MEN 865


huddle of convicting creeds, is the one which is
destined to emerge in triumph? Will it triumph
because its theory contains most truth, or because it
contains that mixture of truth and error which is
most congenial to the circumstances of the time ?. If
we could have asked an ancient philosopher for his
forecast of the future during the first century of the
propagation of Christianity, ho would, we know, have
treated that exitiabUis siiperstitio with contempt, and
pointed out, to his own satisfaction, the miserable
gullibility of its professors and the inherent absurdity
of the tenets which they professed. And yet the creed
triumphed. Why should not some creed which to us
— whether Christians or infidels — seems equally absurd
have in it the seeds of victory ? Nothing could have
seemed more revolting to the philosopher than the
doctrine of the atonement and of the crucified God.
We are beginning to admit that, in a certain sense,
both the pliilosopljcv and the object of Ms contempt
might be right. The dogma is quite as incredible
to a modem thinker as to the ancient philosopher.
Yet he may think that it contained the assertion of a
principle— distorted and perverted as much as you
please— -which the philosopher had left out of account ;
and supplied a want which he could not satisfy,
because he did not feel it. May there not be
doctrines, apparently too absurd for discussion, which
are spreading in obscure regions far below the surface


856 THE IlELIGHON OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN


of consciouB and articulate thought, ^nd destined ta
have their day ?

If it is not an idle optimism to assume that super-
stition is henceforth impossible, 1 should at least be
glad to know distinctly upon what grounds our
security rests. Is it that w'e individually are so much
wiser than our forefathers ? T do not wish to under-
rate modern progress, but surely there is something
grotesque in the hypothesis that the average shop-
keeper or artisan of the present day is too clever to
believe in the creeds of his forefathers. I fancy that
no one has yet ascertained that the brain of to-day is
more capacious than the brains of the-contcmporaries
of Caesar or St, Paul. Or, if I fancy for a moment
that minds trained by modem schools are above the
reach of sophistry, the doctrine becomes very un-
tenable when I take a journey, say, in the Metropolitan
Kailway from Kensington to Blackfriars. Take a
cursory glance on such an occasion at any of your
companions : look at that respectable grocer studying
the ‘ Daily Telegraph ’ ; or the intelligent citizen ab-
sorbed in the records of the great Mr. Peace, prince
of burglars and murderers. Can you pierce hisi armour
of solid indifference b}' arguments about the principle
of evolution and the survival of the fittest? Will

the teaching of Comte, or Mr. Herbert Spencer, or
%

Hegel, be as savoury to him as the rhetoric of hia
dissenting oracle? Is he likely to see through
fallacies which imposed upon Augustine or Aquinab ?


THE EELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN 857


Macaulay propli^sied that the Catholic Church 'would
endure for ever, on the ground that, if Sir Thomas More
could believe in the nonsense of transubstantiation,
men might always believe in it. If some modem
intellects are in advance of More, the great bulk .are
still far behind him. To found any hopes of an
emancipation from superstitioti upon a belief in the
elevation of the average intellectual standard is,
indeed, to build upon a flimsy foundation. I ato
quite unable to see that the cultivation of the masses
•has reached a point at which — I will not say
■Catholicism, but— paganism is made impossible by
the intelligence of mankind. If even witchcraft has
become obsolete, it is not because its absurdity has
been demonstrated, but because men’s imagination
has been directed elsewhere. Indeed, the phenomenon
‘Of a survival of superstition in the upper classes is too
common to excite astonishment. A mind which can
be edified by the tricks of a ‘ medium ’ is saved, not
•by intrinsic ability, but by tlie accidents of time and
place, from sharing the grossest superstitions of Zulus
or Esquimaux.

Nor, indeed, if we inquire into the average state
■of mind, even of people who profess to discuss philo-
sophical problems, is the result much more en-
couraging. Discussions of the first principles of
religious belief have lately become common in popufiCr
magazines. People argue about materialism or
.idealism, about the existence of God and a soul, and


868 THE RELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN


another world, with a freedom which js a remarkable
symptom in many ways, and to which I certainly
have no objection. I do not think for one moment
that such inquiries should he restricted to a class of
specialists, or that anybody should be discouraged
from frank revelations of his state of mind : they
are often very interesting. But neither is it possible
to doabt, when reading such discussions, that most
people think it an ample qualification for the most
difficult i)roblems to be tolerably familiar with a few
technical words. The result is, that most disputants
go into a modern line of battle armed with antiquated
bows and arrows. They placidly confute positions
which were abandoned by their adversaries two or
three centuries ago. They argue about free-will, for
example, or materialism — I will not say, as if they
had never read the latest discussions upon those
ancient controversies, but as if they had been pre-
decessors of Jonathan Edwards and Berkeley. Or, in
a rather different direction, it would be almost
amusing, if it were not rather irritating, to note the
impossibility of impressing upon the ordinary dis-
putant the fact that a man may disbelieve in hell
without disbelieving in the value of all morality. He
can see no difference between a denial that murderers
will be tormented for ever and an assertion that murder
is* unobjectionable. The most amiable and candid
critics will inform you that to deny the supernatural
character of morality is to deny its existence ; and that,


THE KELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN 859

in denying the^existence of supernatural sanctions, you
are not only unconsciously removing a useful safeguard
of morality, but consciously and explicitly denying
that there is any difference between right and wrong.

But I need not gather illustrations of a fact -which
no serious thinker will deny, that much argumentation
on such matters rests on simple misunderstanding ;
and it is inevitable that it should be so : for religious
development is a complex process, of which the logical
aspect is only one, and, it may be, a subordinate factor.
The question of its importance in determining the
whole must depend upon the relation between the
select few who are accessible to reason and the vast
majority who are profoundly indifferent to truths not
immediately applicable to practical purposes. What
hold do the thinkers possess upon the masses ? How
docs a change of scientific or philosophical conceptions
become operative upon popular religious beliefs?
The philosophers may be compared to the brain of
the so-called social organism ; but then the organism
is one of a very low type. It has innumerable nervous
centres, possessed of a certain subordinate i.etivity,
and only indirectly stimulated and co-ordinated by
the central organ. Impulses may continue to be
propagated upon which the brain has little influence ;
though it may be that there is sufficient unity to
make the co-operation of the brain necessary to eon-
tinuous and energetic vitality.

• Philosophers may condemn the old creed as effete ;


860 THE EELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN


men of sense may simply shrug their shoulders when
a serious attempt is made to apply its teaching to
contravene their palpable interests; but they are
equally contemptuous, and not without some primd
fade justification, when the attempt is made to sup-
plant it by more satisfactory doctrine. They feel
instinctively that philosophy has not found the
necessary leverage to move the world. It has not
the power to put any real stress upon the ordi:
nary mass of mankind. No creed can be said to have
a genuine vitality Avhicli is not one of the forces to be
taken into account in the actual, everyday conduct of
life, which cannot make itself heard, if not actually
obeyed, in the blind struggles of passion which stir
the vast bulk of the social organism. The man of
sense can give reasons enough for doubting whether
the thinking part of his fellows represents any such
genuine force. There is no want of ominous symp-
toms of profound movements slowly evolving them-
selves in the subterranean strata of society — to which
scarcely a gleam penetrates from the polite upper
world of civilisation and plausible philosophy. We
may listen, if we will, to stifled rumblings significant
of inarticulate discontent, gradually accumulating
like explosive gases in confined caverns, till some
sudden convulsion may rend the whole existing fabric
inti) chaotic fragments. Society sometimes seems to
‘ resemble Milton’s ‘ small night-foundering skiff *
moored to the scaly rind of Leviathan. If the huge


THE RELIGION OF .VLL SENSIBLE MEN 361

dumb monstej fairly rouses himself, can -we hope to
put the hook of philosophy in his nostrils, or send
him to sleep with judicious opiates of sociology and
political economy, and demonstrations of the general
fitness of things ? 1 have lately read lamentations
over the supposed incompatibility between democracy
and Free-trade principles. Scientific expositions of
the mischief done by Protection are likely to be
thrown away, it is urged, upon the illiterate rulers of
the future. It sounds probable enough ; and to me
the only surprising thing seems to be the agreeable
opinion that people, were ever really persuaded by the
arguments of Adam Smith. Free-Trade, I imagine,
triumphed in England because the people who wanted
bread cheap were stronger than the people who wanted
it dear ; the twaddle so often talked about the great
‘ law of supply and demand ’ is enough to show the
hopeless illogicality of even pretentious advocates of
economical orthodoxy. Toleration, again, has become
a popular name in politics ; and 1 sincerely hope that
it is being slowly drilled into people’s minds. Yet it
would be hard to prove that it really rests upon any
stronger basis than that of general indifference. We
don’t burn people for not believing what we don’t be-
lieve ourselves, and so far we arc right ; but is it
quite plain that, if the world wore again agreed in
believing anything, it would refirain from enforcing* it
ty the old physical arguments ? When struggles be-
*tween rival classes are developed, involving deeper


362 THE BEUGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN

issues than those of tariffs — when Lazarus and Dives
come, if they ever do come, to a downright tussle — I
cannot feel certain that philosophers will be allowed to
arbitrate. They may give a watchword here and there ;
they may influence some of the commanding intellects,
and so indirectly affect the contest ; but I fear that their
best arguments may be as ineffectual as the trumpet-
blast of modern times to the destruction of a city wall.

The improbability that ancient creeds should
simply revive must, therefore, depend upon other
conditions than the increase of the average intelli-
gence. It seems, it is true, to be a law that there
can be no resurrection of decaying mythologies.
They cease, after a time, to stimulate the imagina-
tion, and are no longer the spontaneous growth of
the intellectual and social forces of the day. No
conscious process of rehabilitation can, then, give
them real vitality. The more elaborate the attempt
to revive, the more painfully dead and mechanical is
the result. The new impulses can no more be forced
into the old channels than made to conform to the
cut-and-dried theories of innovators. In one case, it
is attempted to make a river flow in its old bed when
the whole configuration of a continent is altered ; in
the other, to force it into a neat rectangular canal
defined by mathematical rule and measure. To ex-
plain fully how and why creeds perish and are
renewed would be to give a complete answer to the'
most perplexing problems of social science. Yet we*


THE RELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN .863

may admit ^he uegative conclusion that it is rarely a
process of simple and continuous advance. It is not
a ease in which the greater minds can form their own
conclusions, and impose them directly upon the vplgar.
The so-called leader is as much a follower, and guides
by sharing the popular impulse. But neither could
the mass advance at all without its leaders. The
man of genius cannot simply dictate, but he may
insinuate some element of advanced thought. There
is a reciprocity, a continual give nnd take, in which
the conquering creed is to some e.'ctent permeated and
coloured by the higher elements of thought, though
it undergoes some trainsformation in the process.

It is natural that men who realise tins difficulty
should attempt to soften the transition by some
dexterous process of conciliation, which may allow
the old to melt gi’adually into the new, and give on
one side free play to the expansion of philosophical
thought, while on the other it leaves the mass in
possession of their ancient symbols. Why should
not the new thoughts leaven the ancient mass without
setting up any convulsive action ? To avo’d revolu-
tion is the great aim of sensible men, for they see
how vast is the cost and how doubtful the gain, and
if danger can bo avoided by a judicious reticence on
the part of philosophers, by allowing speculation to
filtrate gradually through the pores of the old cr6e4,
is it not folly to attempt to force upon the average
mass doctrines which they can never understand, and


864 THE HELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN


vrhich will only cause odium to their expounders?
You cannot impose your new creed upon mankind,
even if you had a definite creed. Why not encourage
them to glide into it quietly and unconsciously ? I
will not here insist upon the difficulty that the pro-
posal covers simple insincerity, and that what would
be very convenient, if it were a spontaneous or un-
conscious process, involves an uncomfortable approach
to deliberate lying and equivocation when it is
deliberately adopted from motives of policy. But the
truth seems to be that the whole process is inappro-
priate to the conditions of the time. It amounts to
proposing that we should try to annihilate a danger
by ignoring it. As a matter of fact, an ancient
creed ends by working itself so thoroughly into alli-
ance with' the conservative forces of society that it is
no longer possible to separate the two interests. Its
influence is rigorously dependent upon the strong
conviction of the governing classes that the old creed
is bound up with the old order. The supported creed,
which is popular with all the old women in the world,
certainly a most estimable and venerable class, is
also bound to support their prejudices. Their great
desire — natural to their age and sex— is to keep
things as they are. The old belief is valuable in
their eyes because (though not solely because) it is
the’’ symbol of all opposition to the subversive and
revolutionary forces. If you could prove that Chris-
tianity really meant to aid, not denounce Communism,


THE KELIGIOH OF i\LL SENSIBLE JIEN 365


the effect ir^ht be to destroy the faith, of this class
of adherents. The alliance between the various con-
servative forces of the world is far too intimate and
close, and the hostility between conservatives and
revolutionists far too hitter and deadly, to -allow of
any conciliation by dexterous manipulation of dogmas.
If there is no great social struggle underlying the
religious movement, it may no doubt be easier than
people suppose to reconcile the purely intellectual
differences, and to make the old dogmas mean any-
thhig, or nothing. But if the revolt against the
doctrine is chiefly a symi)tora of a more profound and
internecine struggle beneath the surface, the proposal
to cover the divergence by terms capable of being
used by both parties is doomed to inevitable failure.
The proposal to take the wind out of the sails of
agitators — to prove that the Christian is the true
socialist and the true reformer — is very plausible,
and may succeed so long as the agitation is super-
ficial; but, when passions are really inflamed and
the contest has become bitter, each party feels that it
is a juggle. The hatred between republicans and
priests m France does not depend upon mere ques-
tions of speculative thought, and, so far from
welcoming any mode of softening the difference of
creed, they would be glad to accentuate them, and to
provide fresh modes of insulting each other’s feelings.
*In such a case the philosophic warfare is but the
* superficial symptom of a deeper social struggle, and


366 THE RELIOION OF .iLL SENSIBLE MEN

the fate of the creed is bound up with ti\e fate of the
organisation by which it is defended. Nor can we
suppose that the alliance is merely accidental. The
objections to a creed which weigh with a philosopher
are not those, as I have suggested, which weigh with
or perversely affect the masses. A creed is not
destroyed immediately by attacks of a philosophical
kind, though they may give a fatal blow to its
vitality. There has long been plenty of latent seep*
ticism; it is only when whole classes come into
existence, ready for revolt upon other than specula-
tive gi'onnds, that the spark could produce an
explosion. The prevalence of disbelief among the
masses must be accounted for by the various causes
which have undermined the whole of European
society with the raw materials of revolutionary
movement. But we may also assume that, unable
as the masses may be to appreciate the more purely
inteUectual grounds of dissatisfaction, they have a
dumb instinct which makes them more or less pre-
pared to accept the conclusions of the abstract
reasoner. Christianity itself was doubtless the pro-
duct of an analogous spirit of social discontent. But
in its origin it proposed a remedy no longer appro-
priate to modern wants ; and greatly as it has been
developed, and radically as its modem supporters
ma^ differ from its original apostles, it has not been
developed in the required direction. The old doctrine,
for example, makes poverty sacred and inevitable/


THE BEUGION OF ALL SENSIBLE JIEN 367


instead of regarding it as an evil to be extirpated ;
it places all our hopes in a world differing from
this in all its conditions, and to be reached only
through a supernatural catastrophe, instead of hoping
everything from gradual development, and a recog-
nition that the world can only be conquered by
accepting its conditions as unalterable. This is but
one aspect of a divergence between two modes of
thought, which is too deeply impressed in their very
structure to be overlooked or surmounted, and which
corresponds, not merely to a speculative difference,
but to a new direction impressed upon human
aspirations, and upon a change of fundamental con-
ceptions which has been thoroughly worked into the
emotions as well as the beliefs of mankind. Though
people may not think more clearly than of old, they
have slowly assimilated certain results of the pro-
gressive development of thought, and society has
acquired a different structure, which makes the
ancient teaching inapplicable.

To state these obvious considerations in the
briefest terms is enough to show the complexity of
the problem, and to raise a strong presumption
against any hasty solution. To develop them com-
pletely would require a knowledge of the actual
conditions of modern society such as no one, perhaps,
possesses in the necessary degree, and a pow^ of
* impartial judgment upon the most exciting questions
*• which is as rare as the requisite intellectual grasp.


868 THE RELIGION OF AIX SENSIBLE MEN


To infer from them with any confidence what will be
the outlines of the creed of the future would require
the insight of the rarest genins to be superadded to
the other qualifications of a competent observer. To
my mind, therefore, it is simply absurd for any man
to answer with the slightest confidence the challenge of
the hasty inquirer, What is to be the religion of the
future ? I have not the slightest idea. I am perfectly
certain of my own ignorance, and I have a strong im-
pression that almost everyone else is equally ignorant.
I can see, as eA'eryone else can see, that a vast social
and intellectual transformation is taking place — and
taking place, probably, with more rapidity now than
at almost any historical period. I can dimly guess at
some of the main characteristics of the process. I
can discover some conditions, both of the social and
the speculative kind, which will iwobably influence the
result. I cannot doubt that some ancient doctrines
have lost their vitality, and that some new beliefs
must bo recognised by one who would influence the
minds of the coming generations. 1 cannot believe
in the simple resurrection of effete religious ideas;
nor, on the other hand, do 1 believe that the ideas
which still have life have as yet been effectually em-
bodied in any system which professes to take the
place of the old. In saying this, I take myself to be
simply expressing the conviction of most men who
think upon such topics at all; though it is, for*
obvious reasons, natural for many writers to affect to


THE RELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN 869

themBelves aiyl others more confidence than they feel
at the bottom of their hearts, both in the complete-
ness and in the approaching victory of their own
creed. It is as well to get rid of that as of other
affectations, and to admit frankly that the future is
shrouded in impenetrable darkness. I cannot say
what will be the outcome of this vast and chaotic
fermentation of thought. Doubtless all the elements
which it contains will be somehow represented in the
next crystallisation of opinion : but I envy, or rather
I do not envy, the confidence of any man who takes
upon himself to define its precise character.

The argument of the more hopeful would be that,
after all, modern science is what people call a ‘ great
fact.’ The existence of a vast body of definitively
established truths, forming an organised and coherent
system, giving proofs of its vitality by continuous
growth, and of its ability by innumerable applications
to our daily wante, is not only an important element
in the question, but it is the most conspicuous point
of difference between the purely intellectual conditions
of the contemporary evolution and that which resulted
in the triumph of Christianity. Here is the fixed
fulcrum, an unassailable nucleus of definite belief,
round which all other beliefs must crystallise. It
supplies a ground, intelligible in some relations to the
ordinary mind, upon which the philosopher may base
^8 claims to respect. Wliatever system would really
'•prevail must be capable of assimilating modern


870 THE EELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN

scientific theories; for a direct assauljb is hopeless,,
and to ignore science is impossible. The enormous
apologetic literature destined to reconcile faith and
reason is a sufficient proof that the reconciliation is a
necessity for the old faith — and that it is an impossi*
bility. The ablest thinkers are always taking up the
impossible problem afresh ; and the emptiest charlatan
tries to surround himself with some halo of scientific
twaddle. Science, moreover, touches men’s interests
at so many points that it has the key of the position.
The common-sense of mankind, as well as their lower
passions, would crush any open attack upon the
tangible material results of modem scientific pro-
gress. Science means steam-engines, telegraphy, and
machinery, and, whether the reflection be consolatory
or the reverse, we may be fully confident that all the
power of all the priests and all the philosophers in the
world would be as idle wind if directed against these
palpable daily conveniences. And,- undoubtedly, this
consideration is enough to imply that scientific
thought is a force to be taken Into account. There
are directions in which the incompatibility between
its results and those of the old creeds is felt by
ordinary minds. We still pray for a fine harvest;
but we really consult the barometer, and believe more
in the prophecies of the meteorologist than in an answer
to ‘bur prayers : Te Detniis for victories excite more
ridicule than sympathy ; and we encounter tha
cholera by improved systems of drainage, without


THE BELIOION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN 871

attributing much value to fasting and processions.
In other words, the old belief in the supernatural is
80 far extinct that it could not be restored without
encountering some of the most vigorous beliefs of the
time. Science need, so far, fear no direct antagonism.
But it is easy for the theologian to withdraw ostensibly
from the positions which are obviously untenable. A
believer in transubstantiation has no more scruples
than his neighbour in using the telegraph, and the
most orthodox doctrines about the Trinity imply no
physiological heresy. No one can doubt that Newton’s
discoveries have greatly modified the old conception
of the universe implied in Christian mythology ; and
yet, after a time, they have been accepted and are
enforced in all sincerity by the most orthodox theo-
logians. We see, indeed, ingenious mathematicians
at the present day trying to force the latest dis-
coveries in physics into the service of old-fashioned
theology ; and the operation is performed so skilfully
as to pass for a genuine argument with the intelligent
public.

The danger is, not that scientific results will be
attacked, but it is conceivable, at least, that the
scientific spirit may be emasculated. You may
destroy a limb as certainly, though not as quickly,
by a ligature as by an amputation. The line of argu-
ment is ready at hand. You have only to object *to
the abuse instead of the use of the scientific spirit ;
lo allow people to invent as many telegraphs as they


872 THE BELtQION OF AIJ< SENSIBLE MEN


please, so long as they don’t draw uiipleasant con-
clusions from scientific discoveries. You may de>
nounce specialists who insist upon using physiological
facts as weapons against theology, whereas nobody
has a right to mix theology and science except in
support of arguments from final causes. The positivist
warns ns against the indulgence of an idle curiosity,
and proposes to discourage all researches which have
no definite aim of immediate utility. The senti-
mentalist appeals from the head to the heart, and
pronounces a love of truth to be immoral whenever it
hurts his feelings. The Catholic, of course, attacks
the all-corroding energy of the intellect, and tries to
enslave Darwinism as his precursors enslaved Aristotle.
Though the common-sense of mankind may regret
such assaults when they come into contact with
useful results, it may not be so clear about the
methods to which the results are owing. The bound-
less curiosity of the scientific mind, its resolution to
test every dogma — whatever the authority on which
it reposes— to sift and re-sift all established beliefs, are
undoubtedly troublesome and inconvenient to the
indolent, that is, to the vast majority. It can scarcely
be regarded as certain that some form of creed may
not become popular which would tend to stifle thought
and sap the sources of its energy. A political empire
may be ruined from internal weakness as well as by
* external assaults ; and the empire of science is df
such a nature that, unless it extends, it must decline^


THE HEUGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN 878


It is not impossible, perhaps, though 1 certainly do
not think it to be probable, that the creed of the
future may flatter the natural weakness of mankind by
gradually diminishing the interest in scientific inquiry.
Popular writers are fond of describing Utopias in
which man’s power over Nature has indefinitely
increased, and machinery been applied to hitherto
unimaginable results. An imaginative writer might,
1 fancy, employ himself to equally good purpose in
describing a state of things in which some mechanical
discoveries should remain, but serve only as a
memorial of a distant past, their principles forgotten,
their use only known by tradition; in which the
l)ower of discovery should have perished, and a steam-
engine be the object of superstitious reverence— like
a gun in the hands of a savage — as a mysterious
survival from the days of the ancient domi-gods. To
bring about such a result, it would only be necessary
so far to emasculate the intellect that men should
be reluctant to encounter the labour necessary for
extending the borders of science. There are abun-
dant precedents for decay as well as for progre(-s, and
regions enough in which authority has succeeded in
shifting the impulse to active thought. "Why should
we regard such an ellipse of intellectual energy as
henceforth impossible ?

I need go no further. When we think of B\)oh
•things — of the vast complexity of the processes b^
•.which new religions evolve themselves, of the small


874 THE BELI6I0N OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN


ittfluenoe of pnrely intellectnal considerations with
the vast bulk of mankind, of the enormous improba-
bility of any speedy extirpation of error, of tbe
difficulty of impressing men’s imaginations, even
when you have convinced their reasons — we can
hardly doubt, it seems to me, that the sensible man
has a very strong case indeed. Why should we be
so impatient of error ? The enormous majority of
the race has, on any hypothesis, been plunged in
superstitions of various kinds, and, on the whole, it
has found that it could thrive and be decently happy
and contented in its ignorance. Science declines to
accept catastrophes; and no catastrophe would be
more startling than a sudden dispersal of the mists
that have obscured the human intelligence for so many
ages. If they grow a little thinner in our time, we
may well be content; but is it not childish to be
impatient about the rate of development of these
vast secular procesbos ? Why be in^ such a hurry to
* change the errors of tbe Church of Borne for those
of the Church of the Future’? The generations
come and go, and the external form of their creeds
changes rapidly enough ; but the substance changes
little. Philosophers wrangle over the old doubts, and
even old pagan superstitions survive in but slight
modifications in the midst of Christian populations.
Tbp, study of ‘ sociology ’ shows at l^st— if it shows
nothing else — that even the most trifling customs*
survive vast periods of apparently revolutionary J


THE EELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN 876


change. Wh^ should we expect to transform in a
day or in a century the fundamental beliefs of man-
kind?

It is certainly well to moderate our anticipations.

1 feel, indeed, the heartiest respect for the enthusiasts
who show the hopefulness of boyhood in proclaiming
truth in season and out of season, and accept the
reproaches of the world as gratifying testimony of
their fidelity to truth. Undoubtedly they may fre-
quently err — the man must be fortunate, indeed, who
has never to reproach himself for such errors — by
forgetting the duty of courtesy and tenderness for
the weak and the stupid. Beformers are often too
anxious to tell fools of their folly, and to reproach
unduly those who are behind the times. It is
difficult to draw the line accurately between a justi-
fiable reticence and a mean equivocation ; it is easy
to confound the obvious duty of telling no lies with
the more questionable practice of proclaiming, at all
hazards, every conclusion as soon as you have reached
it. But it is needless to insist upon a point involving
some difficult casuistry. The orthodox may be safely
trusted to give all the necessary emphasis to that
aspect of the question which is least favourable to
full utterance of thought. That class, in particular,
which is accustomed to argue by a sneer is most
emphatic upon the wickedness of their opponents in,
using the same weapons. I simply take note of the
tact, which all will admit, that the employment of


876 THE EELIGION OF AIL SENSIBLE MEN


such poisoned arro\irs should be forbidden on all sides ;
but 1 confess that, to me, themost serious danger does
not appear to be that an excessive love of truth and
plainness of speech will ever become unduly pre-
valent.

Buoyancy of spirit and confidence in the approach-
ing decease of the devil are, indeed, only too likely to
be checked by the considerations to which I have
referred. I cannot, for my part, understand how the
frame of mind which is eager for proselytes should
survive very early youth. I would not conceal my
own views, but neither could 1 feel anxious to thrust
them upon others ; and that for the very simple
reason that conversion appears to me to be an ab-
surdity. You cannot change a man’s thoughts about
things as you can change the books in his library.
The mind is not a box which can have opinions
inserted and extracted at pleasure. No belief is good
for anything which is not part of on organic growth
and the natural product of a man’s mental develop-
ment under the various conditions in which he is
placed. To promote his intellectual activity, to en-
courage him to think, and to put him in the way of
thinking rightly, is a plain duty ; but to try to insert
ready-made opinions into his mind by dint of autho-
rity is to contradict the fundamental principles of free
^ inquiry. Persons who believe in miraculous inter-
vention, and the magical efficacy of special beliefs,
may consistently compass sea and land to make onh


THE KELIOION OK ALL SENSIBLE MEN 377

proselyte ; they may scatter tracts, hoping that the
sight of a text will upset the convictions of a lifetime,
or, as some fanatics arc said to do, baptize the dying
infants of the heathen to give them a passport to
heaven. Bnt the man who counts upon no .super-
natural assistance can only endeavour to help his
follow-creature by stimulating any faint spark of
intellectual activity — a task which is generally difficult
enough for any human power. Nor, again, is it
possible to overlook or deny the fact that there is
simply no answer to the question which will deter-
mine, however illogieally, the choice of many most
amiable and excellent people. If a man will not
abandon a religion till he has another to put in its
place, we must confess that his demand cannot be
met. The creed of the future, whatever it may be,
exists only in germ. You cannot give to a believer
anything in place of his cult, of the sacred symbols
which reflect hip emotions, of the whole system of
disciplined and organised modes of worship, of prayers,
of communion with his fellows, which to him are the
great attraction of his religion. You cannot even tell
him what system is likely to replace them hereafter,
or whether human nature is so constituted that it
will be able simply to drop the old without replacing
it by anything directly analogous. And, therefore,
you must admit that for the present a man»who
* would abandon the old doctrines is compelled to stand
** alone. He must find sufficient comfort in the con-


378 THE RELIGION OF ALL SENSIBLE MEN


sciousness that he is dealing honesjily mth his
intellect ; he must be able to dispense with the old
consolations of heaven and hell ; he must be content
to admit explicitly that the ancient secret has not
been revealed, and to hold that people will be able to
get on somehow or other, even if the most ignorant
and stupid cease to consider it a solemn duty to dog-
matise with the utmost confidence upon matters of
which the wisest know absolutely nothing, and never
expect to know anything. Undoubtedly, this is to
accept a position from which many people will shrink ;
and it is pleasanter to the ordinary mind to reject it
summarily as untenable, or to run ii]) some temporary
refuge of fine phrases, and try to believe in its per-
manence. 1 only say that I do not see how an
honest dissenter from the orthodox opinions can act
otherwise.

How we are to act in regard to individuals is a
problem which may admit of discussion, and in
regard to which I can only express the belief that
such problems generally solve themselves pretty
easily for people who are true to themselves and
gentle to their neighlMJurs. The duty of those who
take any part in forming what is called public opinion
is less complex. It resolves itself into a simple ac-
ceptance of the undeniable facts. It is impossible to
overlook the distinction between philosophical specu-
lation and the propagation of a new creed. If a man
is not a St. Paul, or even a St. John the Baptist, he -


THE KELIGION OF AfX SEN’MIHLE MEN . 379

should not tjke the tone of an apostle or a prophet.
He may fully believe in the soundness of the doctrines
which he preaches, and believe in their ultimate
victory ; l)ut he may equally realise the undeniable
fact that he is at most only contributing to lay the
philosophical basis of a religion, not propagating a
fully-developed religion. The part is strictly sub-
ordinate, though it may be essential. The utmost
that he can do is to help to clear the air from effete
superstitious, to c-Ktricate moral truths from the mis-
leading associations with which they have been en-
tangled, and to encourage, as far as in him lies, the
spread of truths which may find embodiment in any
fresh developments of thouglit. Tlie vast and enor-
mously complex processes which are taking place
cannot be governed and regulated by any single
mind. A man who fancies that ho can dictate a
complete system to the world only shows that he is
arrogant to the verge of insanity. Some little may
be done by any honest thinker — by anyone who
really aims at advancing inquiry, instead of trying to
throw dust in people’s eyes. He may help, ae -ording
to the measure of bis powers, to stimulate the im-
pulses which are on the side of free thought, and
which are the best guarantee for a healthy instead of
a morbid development. It is not merely the right
but the duty of everyone competent to the task to*do
what in him lies to strengthen the fitful and uncertain
mfluence of a sound intellect upon the vast and


880 THE IlEUlxION OE ALI< SENSIBLE MEN


intricate jumble of conflicting opiniouB ipi the world at
large. The man of sense will probably condemn him, if
good-sense is taken to mean an enlightened regard for
our own private interest ; for certainly such advocacy is
often very unwelcome to the world. But if good-sense
means chiefly a sound estimate of a man’s real position
and talents, and a judicious application of his talents
to honourable ends, a sensible man will surely approve
of every rigorous exposition — not given in an irri-
tating and insulting spirit— of the truths which must
be the groundwork of a satisfactory religion ; for the
degree in which that mysterious creed of the future is
founded upon tenable and verifiable pliilosophy must
be the measure of its success in laying down per-
manent principles for the regulation of human con-
duct. Modest expectations and calm estimates of a
man’s real value to the world are not productive of
any high degree of enthusiasm ; but, perhaps, in the
long run, they ure useful qualities.*'


litlN’lUf %IY

Si’O'lTlJ^WOulHS AND CO., NEW-fillUvKT SCjUAHK
JA>ND4>N


SMITH, ELDER, & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS


WORKS BY LESLIE STEPHEN.

HOURS IK A LIB^RY. New, Revised, Rearranged, and Cheaper

Edition. With%dditional Chapters. In 3 vols. Crown 8vo. 6s. each.

Contents ok thb Volumes.

VoLUMK I,— Dc Foe’s Novels— Richardson— Pope as a Moralist— Sir Walter Scott -
Nathaniel Hawthorne — Balzac — De Quincey— Sir Thomas Browne— Jonathan
Edwards — Horace Walpole.

Volume II. — Dr. Johnson's Writings— Crabbe— William lia/iitt— Disraeli’s Novels—
Massinger— Fielding— Cowper and Rousseau— First Edinburgh Reviewers— Words-
worth s Ethics— Landor's Conversations — Macaulay.

Volume III. —Charlotte Bronte— Charles Kingsley— Godwin and Shelley— Gray and
his School — Sterne— Country Books— George Eliot — Autobiography — Carlylc'.s
Ethics— State Trials- -J. T, Coleridge.

PALL HALL GAZETTE — * All lovers of good l^iks will welcome a new and
cheaper edition of Mr. I.eslie Stephen's “ Hours in a Library.*' There is no need now
to say anything as to the merits of the work . tliese are sufficiently well known. The
only complaint that has hitherto been made respecting it has been that it was not
procurable at anything like a popular price. That complaint will hold good no longer.’

LIFE OP HENRY FAWCETT. With 2 Steel Portraits. Fifth

Edition. Large crown 8vo. t 2 s. td.

THE SCIENCE OF ETHICS : an Essay upon Ethical Theory, as

Modified by the Doctrine of Evolution. Demy Svo. ifir.

A HISTORY OF ENGLISH THOUGHT IN THE EIGHTEENTH

CENTURY. Second Edition, a vols. Demy 8vo. a&r.

WORKS BY THE LATE MATTHEW ARNOLD.

PASSAGES FROM THE PROSE WRITINGS OF MATTHEW

ARNOLD. Crown Svo. ^s. 6ti.

Contents: — i. Literature. — a. Politics and Society. — 3. Philosophy and Religion.

LAST ESSAYS ON CHURCH AND RELIGION. With a Preface.

Crown Svo, ^s,

MIXED ESSAYS. Second Edition. Crown Svo. gs.

Contents Democracy — Equality — Irish Catholicism and British Liberalism—
Partv Unum est Necessarit(m—k Guide to English Literature— Falkland— A French
Critic on Milton— A French Critic on Goethe — George Sand.

LITERATURE AND DOGMA : an Essay towards a Better Apprehen-

sionof the Bible. Popular Edition, with a new Preface. Crown Svo. ar. 6(/.

GOD AND THE BIBLE : a Sequel to * Literature ard Dogma.’

Popular Edition, with a new Preface. Crown Svo. ax. 6d.

ST. PAUL AND PROTESTANTISM ; with Other Essays. Popular

Edition with a new Preface. Crown Svo. ax. 6d.

Contents ; —St. Paul and Protestantism— Puritanism .ind the Church of England—
Modem Dissent — A Comment on Christmas.

CULTURE AND ANARCHY: an Essay in Political and Social

Criticism, Popular Edition. Crown Svo. ts. 6d.

IRISH ESSAYS, AND OTHERS. Popular Edition. Cr. 8vo. 6ar.
€N THE STUDY OF CELTIC LITERATURE. Popular Editibn.

Crown Svo, ax. 6d.


London : SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 Waterloo Place.

O D


SMITH, ELDER, & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS.


THE JOCKEY CLUB AND ITS FOUNDERS. By Robert Black,

M.A., Author of ‘Horse Uacingin France ’ &c. Crown 8vo. loj. 6</.

THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF ROBERT BROWNING. By Mrs.

Sutherland Orr. With Portrait, and Steel Engraving of Mr. Browning's
Study in De Vere Gardens. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 12s. 6d.

ENGLISH PROSE : its Elements, History and Usage. j3y John

Earle, M.A,, Rector of .Swanswick, formerly Fellow and Tutor of Oriel College,
Professor of An^lo>Saxon in the University of Oxford, Author of * The Philology
of the English Tongue,' &c. 8vo. i6^.

THE HISTORIC NOTE-BOOK ; with an Appendix of Battles. By the

Rev. E. CoBHAM Bkbwkk, LIi.D., Author of ‘ The Dictionary of Phrase and
Fable,' * The Reader’s Handliook,* &c. Crown 8vo. over 1,000 pp., 7s. 6d.

GEOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE VOLCANIC ISLANDS

AND PARTS OF SOUTH AMERICA, visited during the Voyacc of H.M.S.

‘ Beagle.' By Charlbs Darwin, M.A., F.K.S. Third Edition. With Maps and
Illustrations. Crown 8vo. i2j. (uL

THE STRUCTURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF CORAL REEFS*

By Charles Darwin, M.A., F.R.S., F.G.S. With an Introduction by Professor
T. G. Bonney, D.Sc., F.R.S., F.G.S, Third Edition. Crown 8vo. Zs. 6d.
HAYTI ; or, the Black Republic. By Sir Spenser St. John, K.C.M.G.,

formerly Her Majesty’s Minister Resident and Consul-General in Hayti, now
Her Majesty's Special Envoy to Mexico. Second Edition, revised. With a Map.
Large crown 8vo. 8Lr. 6 d.

THE REIGN OF QUEEN VICTORIA: a Survey of Fifty Years of

Progress. Edited by T. Humphry Ward. 2 vols. 8vo- 32J.


A COLLECTION OF LETTERS OF W. M. THACKERAY, 1847 -

1855. With Portraits and Reproductions of Letters and Drawings. Second
Edition. Imperial 8vo. X2S, td.

A JOURNAL KEPT BY DICK DOYLE IN THE YEAR 1840. lllu&-

(rated by several hundred Sketches by the Author. With an Introduction by J.
Hunubkford Pollen, and a Portrait. Second Edition. Demy 4(0. us.

The Journal has been reprotluced in facsimile, and is printed on fine paper. It
is handsomelyjbound in cloth, and forms a very elegant gift-book.

LIFE OF FRANK BUCKLAND. By his Brother-in- Law, George C.

Bompas, Editor of ‘ Notes and Jottings from Animal Life.’ With a Portrait.
Crown 8vo. sj. : gilt edges, 6 j.

NOTES AND JOTTINGS FROM ANIMAL LIFE. By the late

Frank Buckland. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. fj. ; gilt edges, 6s.

THE INGENIOUS GENTLEMAN, DON QUIXOTE OF LA

MANCHA. By Mic.ubl Db Cervantbs Saavedra. A Translation, with
Introduction and Notes, by John Ormsbv, Translator of ' The Poem of the Cid.*
Complete in 4 vols. 8vo. £z.' xos.

SHAKESPEARE, Certain Selected Plays Abridged for the Use of the

Young. By Samull Bkandkam, M.A. Oxon. Fourth and Cheaper Edition.
Large crown 8vo sj.

Titles of the Pi-AYS : -The Merchant of Venice— Romeo and Juliet — A Midsummer
Night’s Dream -Much Ado about Nothing —Twelfth Night— ’As You Like it—
Hamlet — Macbeth— The Tempest.

*•* Also the 9 Plays separately, crown 8vo. neatly bound in cloth limp, price 6d, each.

SHAKSPEARE COMMENTARIES. By Dr. G. G. Gervinus, Pro-
fessor at Heidelberg, Translated, under the Author's superintendence, by
F. E. Bunnktt, With a Preface by F. J. Fuknivall. Fifth Edition. 8vo. 14^.


ROGERS AND HIS CONTEMPORARIES. By P. W. Claydbn,

/ftithor of * Samuel Sharpe, Egyptologist and 'J'ranslator of the Bible * &c. a vols.
- large po« Svo.


THE EARLY LIFE OF SAMUEL ROGERS. Large post 8vo. 12s. M,

O


London : S.MITII, ELDER, & CO., IS Waterloo Place.


SMITH, EI,DER, & CO.’S PUBLICATIONS


THE WHITE COMPANY. By A. Conan Doyi.e, Author of ‘ Micah

Clarke ’ &c. Seventh Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.

THE NEW RECTOR. By Stanley J. VVeyman, Author of ‘The

Hou.se of the Wolf’ &c. Crown 8vo. 6^.

THE HISTORY OF DAVID GRIEVE. By Mrs. Humphry Ward,

Author of * Robert E!.sniere ’ &c. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.

ROBERT ELSMERE. By Mrs. Humphry Ward, Author of ‘Miss

Brethcrton ' &c. Cheap Edition, crown 8vu. limp cloth, 7s. (td.

Also the POPULAR EDITION, t vol. crown 8vo. 6r. : and the Cabinet Edition,

3 volh. small 8vo. isr.

THE GAMEKEEPER AT HOME ; or, Sketches of Natural IlistoiY,

Poaching', and Rural Life. By Ricmakd Jitfkrkiks. New Edition, with all the
lllu&tr.ations of the former edition. Crown ?vo. sr.

By the same A utkor.

WILD LIFE IN A SOUTHERN ; HODGE AND HIS MASTERS.

COUNTY. New Edition. Cr. 8vo. 6s. New Edition. Crown 8vo. ^s. td.

THE AMATEUR POACHER. : ROUND ABOUT A GREAT

New Edition. Crown 8vo. sj. ESTATE. Crown 8vo, $5.

WOODLAND, MOOR, AND STREAM ; l>eing the Notes of a Naturalist.

Edited byj. A. Owhn. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. sj.

FALLING IN LOVE ; with other Essays treating of some more Exact

Sciences. By Gkant Am.hn. Cheap Popular Edition. Fcp. 8vo. limp {n’een
cloth, or cloth hoards, gilt top, sx. 6d.

A BRIDE FROM THE BUSH. By K. W. Hornung. Crown 8vo.

limp red cloth, sx. 6d.

SIX MONTHS IN THE RANKS; or, the Gentleman Private. Crown

8vo. limp red cloth, 3X. 6d.

CHARLES FRANKLYN OF THE CAMEL CORPS. By Hasmhib.

Crown 8vo. 6x.

HOLIDAY PAPERS. Second Series. liy the Rev. Harry Jonrs,

Author of ‘ East and West London * &c. Crown 8vo. 6x.

JESS. By H. Rider Haggard, Author of ‘King .Solomon’s Mines’

&c. Crown Svo. limp red cloth, 3X. 6d.

VICE VERSA ; or, •a Lesson to Fathers. By F. Anstey. Crown Svo.

limp red doth, -is. 6d.

By the same Author.

A FALLEN IDOL. Crown Svo. i THE GIANT’S ROBE. Crown

fix. Cheap Edition, crown 8vo. limp i 8vo. fix. Cheap Edition crown Svo.

red cloth, 2 X. 6d. j limp red cloth, 2X. 6d.

THE PARIAH. Crown 8vo. 6r. i THE TALKING HORS®, an<l

Cheap Edition, crown Svo. limp red ! other Tales. Second Edition, crown

* cloth, ax. 6d. I Svo. fix.

MORE T LEAVES ; a Collection of Pieces for Public Reading. By

EinvAKO F. Turmer, Author of 'T Leaves," Tantler's Sister, ’&c. Cr. Svo. 4 X. 6d^

By the same A uthor.

T LEAVES ; a Collection of Pieces for Public Reading. Sixth Edition.

Crown Svo. 3 X. 6d.

• TANTLER’S SISTER ; AND OTHER UNTRUTHFUL STORIES :

being a Collection of Pieces written for Public Reading. Third Edition. Crown
Svo. 3 x. 6d.

London : SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 Waterloo Place.

1) u 2


SMITH, ELDER, & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS.


WORKS BY JOHN ADDINGTON SYMONDS.

«

RENAISSANCE IN ITALY : Age of the Despots. Second Edition.

Demy 8vow i 6 s

RENMSSANCE IN ITALY: The Revival of Learning. Second

Edition Demy 8va 16,^

RENAISSANCE IN ITALY : The Fine Arts. Second Edition. Demy

8vo. i6j.

RENAISSANCE IN ITALY : Ihe C'atholu Reaction. 2 vols. Demy
8vo,

SKETCHES IN ITALY AND GREECE. Second Edition, ("ro^n

8vo. gs»

THE SONNETS OF MICHEL ANGELO BUONARROTI AND

TOMMASO CAM I'AN ELLA Now for the fiist time Translated in Rhymed
English. Crown 8vo jx

NEW AND OLD ; a Volume of Verse. Crown 8vo. gs,

MANY MOODS : a Volume of Verse. Crown 8vo. 91.

ANIHI FIGURA. Fcp. 8vo. sr.

ITALIAN BYWAYS. Crown 8vo. lOu. &/.

SHAKSPERE’S PREDECESSORS IN THE ENGLISH DRAMA.

Demy 8vo. x6x.

WORKS BY SIR JAMES FITZJAMES STEPHEN.
liberty, equality, FRATERNITY. Second Edition, with a

new Preface 8vo t4x.

DEFENCE OF DR. ROWLAND WILLIAMS ; being a Report of the

speech delivered 111 the Court of Arches. Post 8vo lox fn/. *

WORKS BY SIR ARTHUR HELPS, K.C.B.

FRIENDS IN COUNCIL. Fj.st Series, i vol. C rown 8vo. yj.
FRIENDS IN COUNCIL. Second Series, i vol. Crown 8vo. yj. 6</-
COMPANIONS OF MY SOLITUDE. Es>say.s written during the

Intervals of Business. An Eway on Organisation in Daily Life, x vol. Crown
8vo. ^x. 60.

V aim the following Volame!.or a small crown 8vo Edition, 3s M. eath.

FRIENDS IN COUNCIL Second Series. 2 vols. Small crown 8vo. Js,
COMPANIONS OF MY SOLITUDE. Small crown 8vo. 3 j. 6d,

IN the INTERVALS OP BUSINESS. To

which IS added an Essay on Organisation in Daily Life. Small crown 8vo. 3X. 6rf.

London: SMITH, ELDER, & CQ., 15 Waterloo Place.


ROBERT BROWNING’S WORKS

AND ‘LIFE AND LETTERS.’


UNIFOBH EDITION OF THE WORKS OF
ROBERT BROWNING.

Sixteen Volumes^ email eroufn 8vo», lettered eeparately, or
in set binding, price Sa, each.

This Edition contains Three Portraits of Mr, Browning, at different
periods of life, and a few Illustrations.


GOlTTElSrTS OS'
I. PAULINE: and SCRDELLO.

а. PARACELSUS: & STRAFFORD.

3. PIPPA PASSES: KING VICTOR

AND KING CHARLES : THE
RETURN OF THE DRUSES:
and A SOUI/S TRAGEDY. With
a Portrait of Mr. Rrowninir.

4. A BLOT IN THE ’SCUTCHB: 0 N :

COLOMRE'S BIRTHDAY: and
MEN AND WOMEN.

5. DRAM-VriC ROMANCES: and

CHRISTMAS EVE Sc EASTER
DAY.

б . DRAMATIC LYRICS :aind LURIA.

7. IN A BALCONY: and DRAMATIS

PERSON.^!. With a Portrait of
Mr. Brownina.

1 THE RING AND THE BOOK.
Bookh i to 4. With Two lUnstra-
tions.


THK VOIiUMBJS.

11. BALAUSTIONS ADVENTURE:

• PRINCE HOHENSTIBL-

SCHWANGAU.Saviourof Society:
and FIFINE AT THE FAIR,
la. RED COTTON NIGHTCAP
COUNTRY: and THE INN

; ALBUM.

: 13 ARISTOPHANES' APOLOGY, in
eluding a Transcript from Enii*
pides,l)eing the liHst Adventure of
Balaustion: and THE AGAMEM-
NON OF AiSCHYLUS.

14. PACCHIAROTTO, and How he
Worked in DiKtemper; with otifer
Poems; LA SAISIAZ: and THE
TWO POETS OF CROISIC.

1^. dramatic IDYLS. FirstSories:
DRAMATIC IDYLS, Second
Series : and JOCOSERIA.


9. THE RING AND THE BOOK.
Books 5 to 8.

10 THE KINO AND THE BOOK.
Books 9 to 12. ^yith a Portrait of
(hiido I* nmceschini.


16, FERISHTAH’S FANCIES: and
PARLEYINGS WITH CER-
TAIN PEOPLE OF IMPORT-
ANCE IN THEIR DAY. With
a Portrait of Mr. Browning.


Also Mr. BROWNING'S last Volume,


ASOLANDO: Fancies and Facts, t’cp. 8vo. 5^.


A SELECTION FROM THE POETICAL WORKS
OF ROBERT BROWNING.

First Skkiks. Cnuvn Svo. 3 J. 6d. Second Series. Crown Svo. ^s. 64.


Small fcp. 8vo. bound in hnlf-cloth, with cut or uncut edges, price Onr SHILLING.

POCKET VOLUME OF SELECTIONS
FROM THE POETICAL WORKS OF
ROBERT BROWNING.

THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF ROBERT BROWNING.

By MRS. SUTHERI.AND ORR. With Portrait, and Steel Engraving of Mr,
Browning’s Study in i>e Vete Gardens. Second Edition. Crown Svo. lar. 6 d»

London; SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 Waterloo Place.


W. M. THACKERAY’S WORKS,


THE LIBRARY EDITION.

Twenty-four Volumes, Large Crown 8vo. js. each,- with Illustraiions by the
Author, Richard Doyle, and Frederick Walker.

Sets in cloth, ; or, in half-russia, 13s. ^

THE BOOK OP SNOBS: SKETCHES

AND TRAVELS IN LONDON; AND
CHARACTER SKETCHES. With Illus-
trations by tile Author.

BURLESQUES


VANITY FAIR. A Novel without a

HERO. Two Volumes. With Forty Stocl
EngiaviMK and x49Wo<KlcutB by the Author.

THE HISTORY OF PENDENNIS : His

FORTUNES AND MISFORTUNES : H(S
FRIENDS AND HIS GREATEST ENRMY.
Two Vdlumes. With Forty-ciRht Steel Un-
gravtna:! and numerous Woodcuts by the
Author.

THE NEWCOMBS : M bmoirs op a most

RBSPECTADLH Family. Two Volumes.
With Forty-ot|;ht Steel LnKraviufrs by RICH-
ARD Doyle, and numerous Woodcuts.

THE HISTORY OF HENRY ESMOND,

Esq. : A colonel in the servici- of
HER MAJESTY QUKKN ANNK. With Eight
Ulustratious by Guorok iiu M aukiur, and
numerou-s Woodcuts.

THE VIRGINIANS: a ‘ rAl.K OF THE
Last CUNTURY. Two Volumes. With
Forty-dRht Steel Fngravings and numerous
Woodcuts by the Autbor.

THE ADVENTURES OF PHILIP ON

HIS WAY THROUGH THE WORLD,
SHOWING WHO ROHDFI) HIM. WHO
HELPED HIM, AND WHO FASSF.D HIM B\.
To which is prefixed A SHABBY GENTEEL
STORY. "Two Volumes. With Twenty
Illustrations by the Author .ind h'KfinpRlCK
W.\LKFR.

THE PARIS SKETCH-BOOK OF MR.

M. A.TITMARSH AND THE MF.MOIR.S
OF MR. C. J. YELLOWPLUSH. With
Illustrations by the Author.

THE MEMOIRS OF BARRY LYNDON,

Esq., Wri ithn myHimsflf : with THE
HIST'ORY OF SAMUEL TITMARSH,
AND THE GREAT IIOGGARTY DIA-
MOND. With Illustrations by the Author.

THE IRISH SKETCH-BOOK : AND

NOTES OF A TOURNEY FROM CORN-
HILL TO GRAND CAIRO. With Illustra-
tions by the Author.


Novels by Eminent Hands— Adventures of
Major Gaiiagaa-Jeanies's Diary...A Legend uf
the Rhine— Rebecca and Kowena— The tiistory
of the Next French Revolution— Cox’s Diary.
With Illustrations by the Autliorand RICHARD
DOYI.F..

CHRISTMAS BOOKS OF MR. A. TIT-

MARSH •_

Mrs. Perkins's Ball— Dr. Birrh—Out Street- .The
Kicklcbiitys on the Rhine. .'I'he Rose and the
Ring. With Seventy-four Illustrations by the
Author,

BALLADS AND TALES. With lllustra.

tions by tlic Author.

THE FOUR GEORGES; THE ENG-
LISH HUMORISTS OF THE EIGHT-
EENTH CENTURY. With Portraits and
other Illustrations.

ROUNDABOUT PAPERS. To which is

added the SECOND FUNERAL OF NAPO-
LEON. WItli Illustrations by the Author.

DENIS DUVAL; LOVEL THE

WIDOWER; A.-Sj) OTHER STORIES.
With Illustrations by FKFDkKiCK WAl.KIlk
and the Author

CATHERINE, a Story; LMTLK

TRAVELS; THE FTTZBOODLE
PAPERS, CKITICAI. REVIEWS; AND
THE WOl VES AND THE LAMB.
Illustrations by the Author, and a Portrait.

MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS,

SKETCHES, AND REVIF.WS. With Illus-
trations by the Author.

CONTRIBUTIONS TO ‘PUNCH.* With

illustrations by the Author.


THE POPULAR EDITION.

Complete in 'I'hirieen Volumes, Crow ivo with Kroniisyiecu to each Volume,

f trice sa. each.

, , olh, g»lt top, price £3- 5-r- ; or in half-morocco,

gilt, price jC 5. loj.

i.~VANITY FAIR.


3 .-THE HISTORY OF PENDENNIS.
3 .-THE NEWCOMBS.

^.-ESMOND AND BARRY LYNDON.

5. -THE VIRGINIANS.

6 . -THE ADVENTURES OF PHIUP,

to wU^ch b preftxad A SHABBY GENTEEL
STORY.

7 . -PARIS. IRISH. AND EASTERN

SKETCHES

Paris Sketch Book— Irish Sketch Book— Com-
hlll to Cairo.

8. -~H0GGARTYDIAM(WD.Y5LL0W.

PLUSHtTAPERS. and BURLESQUES •-
The <^t HoEBa^ Dlamo^ - Yenowpiush
Fbpftn-Noveb by Eminent Hands. Jeames’s
Diary— Adventuresof MjJor Gahagan— Al-egend
of the ^iue— Rebecca and Rowena— The His-
tory of the Next French Revdution— Cox's Diary
—The Fatal Boots.


g.-THE BOOK OF SNOBS, AND

SKETCH LS OF LIFE & CHARACTER
Tlie Book of Snobs— Skettliub and Traveb in
London — Cluiracter Sketches— Men’s Wives—
the Fit^boodle Papers— The Bedford Row Con-
sfWracy— A I .ittle Dinner at Timmins’s.

IO.-R0UNDAB0UT PAPERS AND

LECTURES u-

Roundabout Papers. The Four Georges— The
Hnglisl) Humorists of the Eighteenth Century—
The Second Funeral of Napofeon.

11 - CATHERINE, &c.

C atherine ..Lovel the Widower Denis Duval—

Dalladk— The Wolves and the l.amh— Critical
Reviews— Little Travels and Roadside Sketches.

12 . CHRISTMAS BOOKS : -

Mrs. Perkins’s Dali— Dr. Birch— Our StreeU-The
Kickleburys on the Rhine— The Rose and the
Ring.

13. -MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS,

SKETCHES. AND REVIEWS; CONTRI-
BUTIONS TO ’PUNCH •


lAindon : SMITH, ELDER, CO,, 15 Waterloo Place.


WORKS

HV

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.

— - —

THE POETICAL WORKS OF
ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.

UirXE'ORXMK EDirrXOXi'. .

«

Six Votutn^fi, i»t Ht‘t tiinfihif/, small erotm Sro, . 7 m . pavh.

Volume 6.— ‘ AURORA LEIGH'— can also be had bound as a separate

volume.

This Edition is uniform with the 16- Volume edition of Mr. Robert
BroumiHg':^ IVorhs. ft { on tains the folloivins^ Portrait's and Jllustra^
tions . —

Portrait of Flli/abeth Barrcli Mtiuhoii- Barrett at the age of nine.
Coxhoe Hall, C'oiinty of Durham.

Portrait of Klizabeth Barrett Moulton -Barrel I in early youth.
Portrait of Mrs. Browning, Rome, l''ebruary 1859.

Hope Kml, Herefordshire.

Sitting Room of Casa (Juidi, Florence.

‘ May’s Ix)vc,* - Facsimile of Mrs. Browning’s tlarul writing.
Portrait of Mrs. Browning, Rome, March 1859.

Portrait of Mrs. Browning, Rome, 1861,

The Tomb of Mrs. Browning in tlie Cemetery at Florence.


A SELECTION FROM THE POETRY OF
ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.

Fi Ks r Sekils ; crown Svo, .Vf. 6d. .Sei’OND Skries ; crown 8vi>. p. 6d.


POEMS.

Small fcp. 8^o, half-cloth, cut or uncut edges, is.

EXTRACT FROM PREFATORY NOTE BY MR. ROBERT BROWNING.

* In a recent “ Memoir of Elizabeth Barrett Browning,*’ l:)y John
H. Ingram, it is observed that “such essays on her personal history
as have appeared, either in England or elsewhere, are replete with
mistakes or misstatements.” F'or these he proposes to .substitj^te “a
correct if short memoir : ” but, kindly and appreciative as may; be
Mr. Ingram’s performance, there occur not a few passages in it etiually
“mistaken and misstated.” *


London: SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 Waterloo Place.


W. M. THACKERAY’S WORKS.


MISCELLANEOUS VOLUMES.
VANITY FAIR. Waterloo Edition.

Complete in One Crown 8vo. Volume of 780 pages, 141 Illustrations,
neatly IxDuncl in cloth, price 2s,

VANITY FAIR. People’s Edition.

Complete in One Volume, large demy 8vo. with 8 Full-page Illustrations,
Ixjund in paper cover, price One Shilling.

THE FATAL BOOTS; and COX’S DIARY. People’s Edition.

Folio, Sixpence.

BALLADS.

By WILLIAM MAKEPEACK THACKERAY.
.Small 4to. i6.r.

With 56 Illu-stralions by the Author, Lady Butler
(Miss Elizabeth Thompson), Georiie du Maurier,
John Collier, H. Fijrniss, G. G. Kilburne,
M. Fit/crrali), and J. P. Atkinson.

Printed on toned paper by Clay, Sons, and Taylor,
and elegantly Ixiiind in cloth, gilt edges, by Burn.

THE ORPHAN OF PIMLICO.

And other Sketches, Fraoments, and Drawinu.s.

With a Preface and Kditorial Notes by Miss Thackeray. Royal 4ta 2is.

LECTURES ON THE ENGLISH HUMORISTS OF THE
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

Fcp. 8vo. limp green cloth, or cloth boards, gilt top, 2s. (id.

THE ROSE AND THE RING;

OR, THE HISTORY OF PRINCE GIGLIO AND
PRINCE BULBO.

Square i6mo. gj.

A Fireside Pantomime for Great and Small Children.
With Illustrations by the Author.

EXTRACTS from the WRITINGS of W. H. THACKERAY.

CHIEFLY PHILOSOPHICAL AND REFLECTIVE.

Cheap Edition. Fcp. 8vo. limp green cloth, or cloth boards, gilt top, 2s. 6 d.

A COLLECTION OF LETTERS OF W. M. THACKERAY,

-- 1847-185S

With Portrait.^ and Reproductions of Leiters and Drawings.

Second Edition. Imperial 8vo. I2.r. 6r/. ^

LondonTl^MITH, ELDER, ik CO., 15 Waterloo Place.


W. M. THACKERAY’S WORKS


THE CHEAPER ILLUSTRATED EDITION.


In 26 Volumes, crown 8vo.
3s. 6d. each.

Sets In cloth, £4. 11s. :
or handsomely bound In half-
morocco, £8. 8s.

Containing nearly all the small
IVoodcnt Illustrations of the former
luiitivns.

And many Nfav iLLUSTKAnoNS, uv
Kminent Artists.


THIS EDITION CONTAINS ALTOGETHER


The Author.

Luke Fildbs, A.R.A.
Lady Sutler (Miss Eli/u-
beth Thompson).
George du Maukier.
Richard Doyle.

Krrdk. Walker, A.R.A.
George Ckuikshank,


John Leech.

Frank Dicksbb.
Linlky Samhouknb.
F. Sarnard
F,. J. Wheeler
F. A. Fra.srr.
C'hari.e.<; Krknk.

*R. H. Walla<-k.


1.773 ILLUSTRATIONS BY
J. P. Atkinson.

W. J. Werr

T. R. Macquoid.

M. F'itzcrrai.d.

W. Ralston.

John 0)llibr.

I(. Furniss.

G G. Kildurnb, &c.


VANITY FAIR. llluMr.ited by the

Aulhor. s vuls.

PENDENNIS. illustrated bj' the Author.

a vols.

THE NEWCOMES. Illustrated by

KlCIfAKD DOYl.K. vols.

ESMOND. lIlustratiMi bv George oir
Maurihk.

THE VIRGINIANS, illustrated by the

Author. -J voLs


THE IRISH SKETCH BOOK;CKL

nCAL Kr,VIkW.S. IlIiiKtratetl by the
Aiuhur, CKUIKsHANK, JOH.N

I.KEC H, and M. MT/GKKALU.


THE MEMOIRS of BARRY LYNDON ;

THH FATAL HOOTS. Illustrated by
GROkr.r CKUIKSHANK and W. Raision


CATHERINE: a Story. MENS
WIVhS, Tlilf IIEOFORD ROW CO.N-
SPIRACV. Illustr.ite<l by the Author, I.
I’lLOKS, A.R.A., and R. B. WALLAk.K.


THE ADVENTURES OF PHILIP.

I'owhich isprohaed A SHABBY GKNTFF.L
S TORY, ninstratcd by thcB^iilhor, Frho-
EKICK WALKI’K. and K. B Wali VCK.
3 vols.


THE GREAT HOGGARTY DIAMOND ;

A LITTLE DINNER AT TIMMINS'S:
CORNHILL TO CAIRO. Illustrated by
the Autlior, J. 1*. Atkinson, and w. j.
Whbb.


BALLADS: THE ROSE AND THE

KINC*. Illustrated by the Author, Lad>
Ur (LER (Miss Elizabeth Thoiupson ),
OOKGR m) MAUKlkR, JOHN COI I U-K,
H. FURNISS, C'r t,. KlI.RUBNB. M. FI'Ia-
GERALD, and J. 1*. A'l KINSON.


ROUNDABOUT PAPERS. To whidi

is added THE SE( OND FUNERAL OF
NAPOLEON. Ilfustrated by the Author,
CHARLES KbkNB, and M. Fl IZGKRALU.


CHRISTMAS BOOKS. Illu.stratcd by

theAuthor and Richard Doyle.

THE BOOK OF SNOBS; .SKETCHE.S

AND TRAVELS. Illustrated by the
Author.

BURLESQUES. Illustrated by the

Author aud GKOKC.h C'ruikshank.


PARIS SKETCH BOOK; LITTLE

TRAVELS & ROADSIDE SKETCHES.
Illustrated by the Author,T. K. MacuUOID
andj P. Atkinson.

THE YELLOWPLUSH PAPERS ;

• ,THF. FITZnoODLK PAPERS ; COX’S
DIARY; CHARACTER SKETCHES,
llhistratfd by tho Author and (rltuRf.R
IL CRUIKSIIANK


THE FOUR GEORGES, and THE

KNOLISH HUMORIST.S OF THli
EIGHTEENTH CliNTURY Illustrated
by the Author, I'RANK DlfK.SKE, LINLFV
SAMunuRNF, FRFDKRiCK Walkek. and
F. Barnard.

LOVEL THE WIDOWER ; THE

WOLVES AND THE LAMB, DENIS
DUVAL. niu.<itratcd l>y the Author and
Frederick Wai KtiR. To which Is added
an Esmy on the Wnttnijfs of W. M.
Thackeray, by l.fslieS'iephen.
MISCELLANEOUS ESMYS,

SKFTCHhS. AND RF.V f t WS. With Uluv
tmtion*! by the Author

CONTRIBUTIONS TO 'PUNCH.’

With itu llltistratioiis by the Auttior,


London; SMITH, ELDER, & CO.. 15 Waterloo Place.


XXiirtUSTRATED XSRI’TXON

OF

MRS. GASKELL'S NOVELS AND TALES.


In Seven Volumes, each containing Four Illustrations.
Price 3J. 6^/. each^ hound in cloth.


CONTENTS OF THE VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

WIVES AND DAUGHTERS.

Voi,. II.

NORTH AND SOUTH.

Voi,. III.

SYLVIA’S LOVERS.


VOL. IV.

CRANFORD.


tOMI'ANY MANNKRS
I HK WELL OK PKN-MOKPUA.

THE HKAKT OF JOHN MIDDLETON.
TRAITS AND STORIES OF IHh
Hl/DUKNOTS.

SIX WEEKS AT HEPPENllF.IM.

THE squire’s story.

1 iBBir. marsh's THKKF LKA.S.


<UI<IOUS IK TRUK.

THE MOORLAND COTTAGE.
TUB SEX ton’s HKRO.
DISAPPEARANCES.

RIGHT AT LAST.

THU MANCHESTER MAKRIAG
LOIS, THE WrUlf.

THU CROOKED BRANCH.


VOL. V.

MARY BARTON.

COUSIN PHILLIS. ‘ BESSY'S TROUBLES AT HOME.

MY FRENi'li MASTER CHRISlCJlAS* SlOHMS AND SUN&HINB

IHK 01.0 NORSK’S '/TORV


VOL. VI.

RUTH.

IHK GREY WOMAN. MR. HAKRISON’s CONFESSIONS.

MORION HALL. \ HAND AND HEAR!.


VOL. VII.


LIZZIE LEIGH.


A DARK night’s WORK.
ROUND THE SOKA.

MY LADY LUDLOW'.

AN ACCURSED RACK.


THE DOOM OK THE GRIFFITHS.
HALF A LIFETIME AGO.

THE POOR CI.AKh.

THE HALF-BROTHERS.


*(,* The Volumes are also to be had in small post 8vo. limp cloth, price
2s. 6d. each ; or in Eight Volumes, small fcp. 8vo. bound In balf-eloth,
cut OP uncut edges, price Is. 6d. each. ^


London: SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 Waterloo Place.


iidX^us’rRA'rxiD edx'Txon


LIFE AND WORKS

CHARLOTTE BRONTE

(CURRER BELL),

AND HBR SISTRKS

EMILY AND ANNE BRONTE

(ELLIS AND ACTON BELT.).

Ill Seven Volumes, Large Crown 8vo. handsomely bound in cloth.
Price 5 .«'. per Volume,


The descriptions in * Jane Eyre’ and the other Fictions by Charlotte Bronte and her
Sisters being mostly of actual places, the Publishers considered that Views were the most
suitable Illustrations for the Novels. They were indebted for a clue to the real names of
the most interesting scenes to a friend of the Bronte (aiiiily, who enabled the artist, Mr. G.
M. Wimperis, to identily the places descrilrcil He in.ide faithful sketches of them on
the spot, and drew them on wood.


i. — JANE EYRE. Hy C’harlotte Bronte. With Vive illustrations
I.OWOOD. MOOR HOUSK.

OATBSHKAD HALL. l«H«NDriAN MANO

THOANF1RLD HALL.


SHIRLEY. By Charlotte Bronte

VOKKE’s HOtrSK.

NHNNKLV COMMON ANIJ VVWO.
PIKLDHEAl) llAl.l..


With Fiv€» Illustrations,

I hollow's mu I..

I BKIARKIELI) CHURCH.


3. “ VILLETTE. By Charlotte lironte. With Five llliisi rations.

THE PARK, BRU.SSELS | OAKDKN IN TIIH RUB FOS,‘?KTit*.

Or)MH OK ST. pawl’s. I i.RXNOK PLA( k, HKI’SSBI.S.

PBNSIONNAT DKS UEMOISKI LKS, I

BKUS.SBLS. I

4. -THE PROFESSOR, and POEMS. By Charlotte Bronte. With Po.

her Sisters and Father. With Fi\e Illustrations.

VIEW FROM CRIMSWOK’I'H HAl.l.. I PRO 1 LSTANT CEMF.TKRV.

HOUSK IN DALSV LANK. VIEW OF THE MOORS.

RUK ROYALF,, BRUSSELS. ^ I

5 -WUTHERING HEIGHTS. By Eiuily Bronte. AGNE.S GREY. By Anne
Bronte. With a Preface and Biographical Notice of both Authors, by Charlotte
Bronte. With Five Illustrations.

HAWORTH CHURCH ANO PARSttNAGR, THK MOORS.

VAI.I.RY OF GTMMKKTON. UOK’I ON I.ODOK.

WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

6.-THE TENANT OF WILDFELL HALL. By An Bronte. With Five Il'u;
trations.

WILDFELL HALL. ON THE MOORS.

ORASSDALR MANOR. WILDFELL HALL (^Second VtCW).

HARKINGHV HALL.


7. -LIFE OF CHARLOTTE BRONTE. By Mrs. Gaskell. With Seven Illustrations

PORTRAIT OF CHAKLOrTR ISRON TE. HAWORTH PARSONAOR.


THK BRONTE WATERFALL.

FACSIMILE OF A SKK.TCH BY PATRICK
DRANWBLL BRONTU. _


PORTKAir OF THE KKV. PATRICK
BKONTf^

CASTBKTON SCHOOL.

ROB HEAD.

Volumes are also to be had in small post Svo. limp cloth, prleS
^s. 6d. oach ; or In small fcp. Svo. bound In half-cloth, with Frontispiece
Vo each volume, out or uncut edgres, price Is. 6d. each.


London: SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 Waterloo Place.


POPULAR NOVELS.


Bach Work complete in One Volume^ crown 8vo»
price Six ShilUngSm^

THE HISTORY OF DAVID GRIEVE. By Mrs. HtiMPiiRv Ward.
Author of ‘ Robert KKmere ’ &c.

THE WHITE COMPANY. By A. Conan Doylk, Author of ‘Micah
Clarke ’ &c.

THE NEW RECTOR By Stani.ky J. Wkyman, Author of ‘The
House of the Wolf’ &c.

NEW GRUB STREET. By Ceoroe Gissing, Author of ‘ Demos’ &c.
EIGHT DAYS. By R. K. Forrest, Author of ‘ The Touchstone of
Peril.’

A DRAUGHT OF LETHE. By Roy Tkllet, Author of ‘The
Outcasts ’ &c.

THE RAJAH’S HEIR. By a New Author.

THE PARIAH. By F. Anstey, Author of ‘ Vice Versa’ &c.

THYRZA. By (jEORGR Gissing, Author of ‘ Demos’ tVc.

THE NETHER WORLD. By(; EOROK Gissing, Authorof ‘Demos’ 8 cc.
ROBERT ELSMERE. By Mrs. iruMl’IlUV Ward, Author of '• Miss
Bretherton ’ M:r.

RICHARD CABLE : the Lightshipman. By the Author of ‘ Mehalah,'

* John Heirinj;,’ ‘ ('ourt Royal,’

THE GAVEROCKS. By the Author of ‘Mehalah,’ Herring,’

* Court Royal,’ t\:c.

DEMOS : a Story of Socialist Life in England. By Geokgf. Gissing,
Author of ‘ Thyr/a ’ itc.

A FALLEN IDOL. By F. Anstey. Autlmr f»f ‘ Vice Versa’ &c.

THE GIANT’S ROBE. By F, Anstey, Author of ‘ Vice Versa ’ &e.
OLD KENSINGTON. By Miss Tii.agker/^'.

THE VILLAGE ON THE CLIFF. By Miss Thackeray.

FIVE OLD FRIENDS AND A YOUNG PRINCE. By Miss

Thackeray.

TO ESTHER, and other Sketches. By Miss Thackeray.
BLUEBEARD'S KEYS, and other Stories. By Miss Thackeray.

THE STORY OF ELIZABETH ; TWO HOURS ; FROM AN ISLAND.

By Miss Thackeray.

TOILERS AND SPINSTERS. By Miss Thac keray.

MISS ANGEL; FULHAM LAWN. By Miss Thackeray.

MISS WILLIAMSON’S DIVAGATIONS. By Miss Thackeray.
DIRS. DYMOND. By Miss Thackeray.

• LLANALY REEFS. By Lady Verney, Author of ‘ Stone Edge ’ ftc.
LETTICE LISLE. By Lady Verney. With 3 Illustrations. ^


London: SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 Waterloo Place.


ILLUSTRATED EDITIONS


POPUf^AR WORKS.

Handsomely bound in cloth gilt, each voiume containing
Four lilustrations. Crown Svo. 3s. 6d. each.


THE SMALL HOUSE AT ALLINGTON. By Anthony Trollote.
FRAHLEY PARSONAGE. By Anthony Troi lote.

THE CLAVERINGS. By Anthony Tkoi.loit..
TRANSFORMATION: a Romance. By N \ru \ vn<:! 1 1 avvthor ne.
DOMESTIC STORIES. By the Author of ‘John Halifax, Gentleman.’
THE MOORS AND THE FENS. Hy^Irs. I fJ, Khipeli..

WITHIN THE PRECINCTS. By Mr.s. OuniAN t .

CARITA. By Mrs. Oliphani".

FOR PERCIYAL. By Maiujarki Vki.kv.

NO NEW THING. By W. E. Norris.

LOVE THE DEBT. By Richard Ashr Ki.ng (‘Ba.sir;.

WIVES AND daughters. By Mrs. Gaskkll.

NORTH AND SOUTH. By Mrs. Gaskelu
SYLVIA’S LOVERS. By Mrs. Gaskeli..

CRANFORD, and other Stories. By Mrs.. Gaskei.l.

MARY BARTON, and other Stories. By Mrs. Gaskem,.

RUTH ; THE GREY WOMAN, and other Stories. By

Mrs. Gaskell.

LIZZIE LEIGH; A DARK NIGHT’S WORK, and other Stories?

•By M^s. Gaskei.l.

London: SMITH, ELDEK, & CO., 15 Waterloo Blace.


WORKS BY F. ANSTEY.


SECOND EDITION. Crown 8vo. 6s.

THE TALKING HORSE;

AND OTHER TALES.

From THE SATURDAY REVIEW. A capital set of stories, thoroughly clever
and witty, often pathetic, and always humorous.*

From THE ATHEN/BUM. —‘The grimmest of morttTlb, in his most surly mood,
could hardly resist the fun of “The Talking Horse.” '


POPULAR EDITION. Crown 8vo. 6s.

CHEAP EDITION. Crown 8vo. limp red cloth, 2s. 6d.

THE GIANT’S ROBE.

From THE PALL MALL GAZETTE. — ‘ The main interest of the book, which is
very strong indeed, begins when Vincent returns, when Harold Caflfyn discovers the secret,
when every page threatens to brin^ down doom on the head of the miserable Mark.
Will he confess t Will he drown himself? Will Vincent denounce him? Will Caflfyn
inform on him? Will his wife abandon him?- -we ask eagerly a.s we read and cannot
cease reading till the puzzle is solved in a series of exciting situations.'


POPULAR EDITION. Crown 8vo. 6s.
CHEAP EDITION, Crown 8vo. limp red cloth, 2f. 6c/.

THE PARIAH.


From THE SATURDAY REVIEW.- ‘in “The Pariah ” we arc more than ever
struck by the sharp intuitive perception and the satirical balancing of judgment which
makes the author's writings such extremely entertaining reading. There is not a dull
page— we might say, not a dull sentence — in it, . . , The_ girls are delightfully drawn.
e.specially the bewitching Margot and the childish Letticc. Nothing that polish and
finish, cleverness, humour, wit, and sarcasm can give is left out.’


CHEAP EDITION, Crown 8vo. limp red cloth, 2 s. 6(i.

VICE VERSA;

OR, A LESSON TO FATHERS.

From THE SATURDAY REVIEW.— ‘ If ever there was a hook made upfront
beginning to end of laughter, and yet not a comic book, or a “merry'' book, ora book
of joke.s_, or a book of pictures, or a je.st book, or a tomfool book, hut a perfectly sober
and serious book, in the reading of which a sober man may laugh without shame from
beginning to end, it is the new book called “Vice VersS ; or, a Lesson to Fathers.” . . .
We close the fjook, recommending it very earnestly to all fathers in the first instance,
and their sens, nephews, uncles, and male cousins next.’

CHEAP EDITION. Crown 8vo. limp red cloth, 2s. 6cl.

A FALLEN IDOL.

«rom THE TIMES. —'Mr. Anstey's new story will delight the multitudinous
public that laugned over “Vice VersS.’*, . . The boy who brings the accursed image
to Champion's house, Mr. Bales, the artist's factotum, and above all Mr. Yarkei^tne
ex-butier who has turned policeman, arc figures whom it is as pleasant to meet as it is
impossible to forget.’ ^

London: SMITH, ELDER, & CO.^ 15 Waterloo Place.


RURAL ENGLAND.

* Aaeries of books of really incomparable freshness and interest.' — ATHBHjnuM.

‘ Books unsurpassed in power of observation and sympathy with mtnral objeeis
by anything that has q^eared since the days of Crilbert fTAwfc.’— D aily News.

WORKS BY THE lATrRjCpD JEFFERIES.

N£W EDITION, with all the Ilhiatratioiis oC the former Edition. Grown 8vo. Sx.

THE GAMEKEEPER AT HOME;

Or, SKETCHES of NATUltAL HISTORY and RURAL LIFE.

'Delightful Rketches. We <lo not need the author’s uRSiirancc that his facts have licen
gathered from personal observation, lliis is so obvious from every page that, excepting the
"Natural History of aelbome,” remember nothing that luw imprcsswl ua so certainly
with the convictioji of a minute and vivid exactness. The lover of the country can hardily
fail to be fascinated whenever he luuy happen to oimyii the pages. It is a book to rcorl and
keep for reference, and should bo on the slicivea of every country gentleman's library.' —
Saturday Kgview.

NEW EDITION. Crown 8vo. 5.*.

ROUND ABOUT A GREAT ESTATE.

' To read a book of hfa is really like taking a trip into some remote part of tlie country,
where the surroundings of life remoiti very much wh<it tlmy were thirty or forty yeaw ago.
Mr. Jefferies has mode up a very pleasant volume.*— The Gtx>uk.

NEW EDITION. Crown 8vo. 6s.

WILD LIFE IN A SOUTHERN COUNTY.

‘A volume which is worthy of a place beside Whlto’s “Solnorue." In (5loacncsg of obsei'-
vation, in power of giving a picture far beyond the power of a mere word- painter, lie is the
equal of the Sollwme rector- -perhaps his superior. The author’s observation ox nan is a^s
close and as true as his oixservatton of tho lower Huimals. This is u book to read and to
treasure.’— The Atuesasum.

NEW EDITION, thrown 8vo. 5s.

THE AMATEUR POACHER.

'Unsurpassed in power of observation and sympathy with natural objects by any thing
that hasappearcrl since tho days of Gilbert While.*-- Daily Nkw«.

‘ We have rarely met with a book in whieixpo much that is entertaining is c.ombined with
matter of real practical worth. TlfUs fascinating and interesting volume is the work of amnn of
keen and cultured observation, and will afford delight and instruction to aU.’~Tii>j OHAPnic.

NEW EDITION. Crown 8vo. 7x. 6d.

HODGE AND HIS MASTERS.

' The one great ohann of Mr. .Tefferies’ writings may bo summed up in the single word
"graphic." He has a rare power of description, and in "Hodge and Ids i\rai..ers” we find
p^ty of good reading.’— S tan DAiin,

'Mr Jefferies knows his ground well and thoroughly, and writes with ranch of his wonted
straightforwardness and assurance. . . . Pleasant and easy reading throughout.’— A thknasum.

SECOND EDITION. Crown 8vo. 5s.

WOODLAND, MOOR, AND STREAM;

BEING THE NOTES OF A NATURALIST.

Enimi) BY J. A. OWEN. >•

a specimen of word.painting, the description of the quaint old fishing village iffosa
to the edge of the North Kent marshes can hardly be surpassed. . . Tho book is capitally
wrii|i 9 n, full of good stories, and thoroughly commendable.’-— T he ATHUNAtitM.


London: SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 Waterloo Place.


A work absolutely Indispensable to every well-fUrntsh^d library.* -I'Hb i imes


Price 15s. net per volume, in cloth; or In half«moroeoo, marbled
edges, 20s; net. v


DIGTIONARYofNmALBMRAPHT

Edited by LESLIE STEPHEN and*SIDNET LEE.


I


Volume /. was published on January i, 1885, and a volume has been issued
every three months since that date,

A fwthef Volume 7 vill be published on January 1, April i^July i, and
Oitober 1 oj each year until the completion of the work.


EXTRAGTS FROM A FEW PRESS NOTICES OF THE WORK.


Tru th.— ‘ I am glad you abate, my ad-
miration for Mr. Stephtiu^ mofHum epus-—
1 HE MAGNUM OPUS OF OUS pS^RATIQN-^

‘‘The Dictionaiy of NationSf Biograpl|y*‘*
A dictionary of tna kind had been at^ffnp^
so often before by the strongebt men ^pub-
lishers and editors->-of the day that X hardly
expected it to succeed. No one expected
such a success as it has so far achieved*'

Thb ArHEN/BtuM.— *The latest volumes
of Mr. Stephen's Dirtionary are ruu. op

IMPORTANT AND INTBRBbTINC ARTICUES.
Great names strike the Cye eonstaqtlbrA* we
turn the pages. . . . Albuwdiev the volumes
are good re«iding. What li motiMaipoitant,
the aiticles, wK^er they as^ Otf mall or
great personages, are newly all up to the
high standard which hks been set in the
eaniei portions of the work, and orcasion-
ally above it.*

.SaturqAy Rrview— 'From the name
we have cited it will be seen that great pain
have been talmn with that poition of rbe
Dictionary whitdi relates to modern times,
and this has been rmhtly done i for often
nothing is more dlfflcult tlian to find a concise
record of the UlhfOf A man who belonged to
our own times or to those just preceding
them* Consnumtly enough, the Editor has
been Careful to the work ttasonably up

to date.*

The MANCHgkTER Examiner and
Tim EJi.—* This magaifMpt reference
has now left the tentativustnro or its existence
hir behind, and Mr. Leslie^ephen and hx$
contributors'^are well under weigh. . We
extend a hearty weTc 6 me to the latest instal-
ment of a most magniooeirt work, in which
both Rie editing ana the smfUig appear; stiU
to improve.*


The Quarterly Rfvifw. -‘A “Dk-
tiowary of Napional Biography,’ oi

WHICH FHP COUNTRY MAY M JUSriV
PROUD, which, though it may need correct
tng and supplementing, will probably never
be saporseded, and which, in unity of con
ception and aim, in number pf the
names ipserted, in fulness and accuracy of
details, 40 ^ care and nreciston with which
the uuthoistties are cltea, And in the biblio-
|;rapniCBl information given, wdl not Only be
immeasurably superior to any work of the
kind which has been produced in Great
Bntsin, but will as far surpass the German
And Belgian biographical dictionaries now
in progress, as these two important under-
ukings are in advance of the two great
French collections, which until lately reigned
supreme «u the department of Biography?

Ihk SpEcrAiOR, — * As each volume of
vhe Dictionigry appears, its merits become
more conspicuous . . The book ought to
commend itself to as wide a circle ot buyers
as the " EncyeiopUdia Britannica." *

Thk Lancft.— ‘Its contents show no
falling ofiT in accuracy and completeness, so
far as by a critical examination we have been
able to discover, from those of the previous
Volumes, of which we have on all occasions
^ken with praise. When completed, the
DiCTIOHARV will BB well nigh INVAtU-

ablb.

The Pall MALL'GAiFrTF,— ‘A s co^e
general ^ecution, we can only repeat the
high praise which it has been our pleasing
duty to bestow on former volumes. To End
a nameomitted that should have been insened
is well-nig^ impossible.’
