The Unseen Universe: or, Physical Speculations on a Future State
Balfour Stewart & P. G. Tait, 1875
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Stewart and Tait's 1875 'Unseen Universe' — two physicists arguing for an invisible spiritual universe on thermodynamic grounds: Victorian physics meets the afterlife. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/unseenuniverseo06taitgoog). This 1875 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

«\'!.‘£r<lQl.S3LJiS35’


C


v‘"



y.v-.


THE


UNSEEN  UNIVERSE

_ ^ - OR

PHYSICAL  SPECULATIONS


ON  A


FUTURE  STATE


ty

NEW  YORK;

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.


1875.


• , , , <TKorroT^vT(i}v  rj/nuv  to,  ^Xeir6fj.€ua,  dWcL  rd  fir]  ^XeTrSfieva’  rd  yhp
l3X€7r6/xeva,  Trp6<rKatpa'  rd  p.^  pXeirbpeva,  auhvLa.  II/j6s  Kopivdiovs,  B'.  5'.


Animula  ! vagula,  blandula,

Hospes  comesque  corporis,

Quae  nunc  abibis  in  loca, —

Pallidula,  rigida,  nudula  ...

Hadkian.

“ God  hath  endowed  us  with  different  faculties,  suitable  and  proportional  to  the  dif-
ferent objects  that  engage  them.  We  discover  sensible  things  by  our  senses,  rational
things  by  our  reason,  things  intellectual  by  understanding  ; but  divine  and  celestial  things
he  has  reserved  for  the  exercise  of  our  faith,  which  is  a kind  of  divine  and  superior  sense
in  the  soul.  Our  reason  and  understanding  may  at  some  times  snatch  a glimpse,  but
cannot  take  a steady  and  adequate  prospect  of  things  so  far  above  their  reach  and  sphere.
Thus,  by  the  help  of  natural  reason,  I may  know  there  is  a God,  the  first  cause  and
original  of  all  things  ; but  his  essence,  attributes,  and  will,  are  hid  within  the  vail  of
inaccessible  light,  and  cannot  be  discerned  by  us  but  through  faith  in  his  divine  revela-
tion. He  that  walks  without  this  light,  walks  in  darkness,  though  he  may  strike  out
some  faint  and  glimmering  sparkles  of  his  own.  And  he  that,  out  of  the  gross  and
wooden  dictates  of  his  natural  reason,  carves  out  a religion  to  himself,  is  but  a more
refined  idolater  than  those  who  worship  stocks  and  stones,  hammering  an  idol  out  of  his
fancy,  and  adoring  the  works  of  his  own  imagination.  * For  this  reason  God  is  nowhere
said  to  be  jealous,  but  upon  the  account  of  his  worship.” — Pilgriiris  Progress y Part  III.


PREFACE.

Forgetful  of  the  splendid  example  shown  by  intellectual
giants  like  Newton  and  Faraday,  and  aghast  at  the  materi-
alistic statements  nowadays  freely  made  (often  professedly
in  the  name  of  science),  the  orthodox  in  religion  are  in
somewhat  evil  case.

As  a natural  consequence  of  their  too  hastily  reached
conclusion,  that  modern  science  is  incompatible  with
Christian  doctrine,  not  a few  of  them  have  raised  an  outcry
against  science  itself.  This  result  is  doubly  to  be  deplored  ;
for  there  cannot  be  a doubt  that’  it  is  calculated  to  do
mischief,  not  merely  to  science  but  to  religion.

Our  object,  in  the  present  work,  is  to  endeavour  to  show
that  the  presumed  incompatibility  of  Science  and  Religion
does  not  exist.  This,  indeed,  ought  to  be  self-evident  to
all  who  believe  that  the  Creator  of  the  Universe  is  Himself
the  Author  of  Revelation.  But  it  is  strangely  impressive
to  note  how  very  little  often  suffices  to  alarm  even  the
firmest  of  human  faith.

Of  course  we  cannot,  in  this  small  volume,  enter  upon
the  whole  of  so  vast  a subject,  and  we  have  therefore
contented  ourselves  with  a brief,  though,  we  hope,  suffi-
ciently developed,  discussion  of  one  very  important — even


IV


FI^EFACE.


fundamental — point.  AVe  endeavour  to  show,  in  fact,  that
immortality  is  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of
Continuity  (rightly  viewed)  ; that  principle  which  has  been
the  guide  of  all  modern  scientific  advance.  As  one  result
of  this  inquiry  we  are  led,  by  strict  reasoning  on  purely
scientific  grounds,  to  the  probable  conclusion  that  a life
for  the  unseen,  through  the  unseen,  is  to  be  regarded  as  the
only  perfect  life.”  (See  Chap,  vii.)  A¥e  need  not  point
out  here  the  bearing  of  this  on  religion.  Incidentally,  the
reader  will  find  many  remarks  and  trains  of  reasoning
which  (by  the  alteration  of  a word  or  two)  can  be  made  to
apply  to  other  points  of  almost  equal  importance.

We  may  state  that  the  ideas  here  developed — very
imperfectly,  of  course,  as  must  always  be  the  case  in
matters  of  the  kind — are  not  the  result  of  hasty  guessing,
but  have  been  pressed  on  us  by  the  reflections  and  discus-
sions of  several  years.

We  have  to  thank  many  of  our  friends,  theological  as
well  as  scientific,  for  ready  and  valuable  assistance.  The
matter  of  our  work  has  certainly  gained  by  this,  though  it
is  likely  that  the  manner  may  have  suffered  by  the  intro-
duction, here  and  there,  of  peculiarities  of  style  which
could  not  easily  be  removed  without  damage  to  the  sense.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  I.


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


Object  of  tbe  Book,  .....

Article

1

Page

1

Two  classes  of  speculators,

.

2

2

Why  doubters  of  iiumortality  have  lately  increased,

3

3

Belief  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians —

•

•

Separation  between  priests  and  people,

4

4

The  abode  of  the  dead,

,

5

5

Transmigration  of  souls,  . ’ . .

• ,

6

5

Embalming  of  the  body,

•

7

7

Belief  of  the  Ancient  Hebrews —

Position  of  Moses,  ....

.

8-9

7

His  task,

,

10

8

Belief  of  the  Jews  in  an  unseen  world.

. .

11

9

Their  belief  in  a future  state.

.

12

9

Their  belief  in  a resurrection,

.

13

10

Belief  of  the  Ancient  Greeks  and  Romans —

Unsubstantial  nature  of  Elysium,

. .

14

11

Transmigration  introduced.

.

15

13

Rise  of  the  Epicurean  school.

.

16

13

Uncertainty  of  philosophic  opinion,  ' .

•

17

14

Belief  of  the  Eastern  Aryans —

The  Rig'Yeda,  .....

.

18

15

It  inculcates  immortality,  .

.

19

16

Double  source  of  corruption.

.

20

17

Zoroastrian  reformation  and  tenets.

21-22

.17

Yl


CONTENTS.


Article

Page

Eeformation  of  Buddha,  .....

23

18

Meaning  of  Nirva?ia,  .....

24

19

Observations  on  ancient  beliefs,  .....

25-29

20

Belief  of  the  Disciples  of  Christ —

The  resurrection  of  Christ,  . . .

30

24

Future  state  taught  by  Christ,  ....

31-32

25

Perishable  nature  of  that  which  is  seen,

33

26

The  Christian  Heaven  and  Hell,

34

27'

General  opinion  regarding  the  person  of  .Christ,  .

. 35

28

General  opinion  regarding  the  position  of  Christ,  .

36

29

Spread  of  the  Christian  religion,  ....

37

30

Eise  of  Mohammed,  . . .

38

31

Materialistic  conceptions  of  the  dark  ages,  .

39

33^

Extreme  scientific  school,  ......

40-41

34^

Points  of  similarity  between  this  school  and  Christians,

42

35

Varieties  of  opinions  among  Christians,

43-44

36

Believers  in  a new  revelation,  .....

45

37

Swedenborg  and  his  doctrines,  .....

46

38

Eemarks  on  Swedenborg,  . ...

47

40

Modern  spiritualists,  ......

48-49

42

CHAPTEE  II.

POSITION  TAKEN  BY  THE  AUTHORS — PHYSICAL  AXIOMS.


Class  of  readers  to  whom  the  Authors  appeal.

•

50-53

44

Position  assumed  hy  the  Authors —

Laws  of  the  universe  defined.

.

64

47

Embodiment  of  some  sort  essential.

.

55

48

Materialistic  position  described,  .

.

55

48

Unjustifiable  assumptions  of  materialists.

.

56-58

49

Intimacy  of  connection  between  mind  and  matter.

59

51

Essential  requisites  for  continued  existence —

An  organ  of  memory,  ....

.

60

52

Possibility  of  action  in  the  present,

61

52

CONTENTS.

Vll

Article

Pag«

Principle  of  Continuity —

Illustrated  by  reference  to  astronomy,

. 62-75

53

Breach  of  the  principle  illustrated,

76

59

Extension  to  other  faculties  of  man,  .

77

60

Application  of  this  principle  to  Christian  miracles—

Erroneous  position  of  old  divines.

78

60

Such  opposed  to  the  genius  of  Christianity,  .

79

61

New  method  of  explanation.

. 80-82

61

Application  of  this  Principle  to  the  doctrines  of  the  extreme
scientific  school —

The  visible  universe  must  come  to  an  end  in  trans-


formable  energy,  ......

83-84-

63

It  must  have  been  developed  out  of  the  invisible,

85

64

The  Universe, —

86

65

Similar  errors  committed  by  the  extreme  schools

of  theology  and  science,  .....

87

66

Application  of  this  principle  to  Immortality —

Three  conceivable  suppositions,  ....

88

66

These  reduced  to  two,  .....

89

67

Future  course  of  our  argument,  .

90

67

The  problem  may  be  profitably  discussed.

91

67

CHAPTEE  III.

THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


Definition  of  the  term  “Physical  Universe,”

92

69

It  contains  something  else  besides  matter  or  stuffs  .

93

70

Grounds  of  our  belief  in  an  external  universe,

These  in  accordance  with  our  definition  of  the  laws  of

94

71

the  universe  (Art.  54),  . . . -.

95

72

Meaning  of  conservation,  .....

96

73

Conservation  of  Momentum,  ....

97

74

Conservation  of  Moment  of  Momentum,

• 97

74

Conservation  of  Vis  Viva,  .....

97

75

Definition  of  energy,  . ...

98-99

75

Vlll


CONTENTS.


Newton’s  second  interpretation  of  his  Third  Law,

Article

99-100

Page

76

Friction  changes  work  into  heat,

101

77

Historical  sketch  of  the  theory  of  energy,

102-103

79

Transformability  of  energy  constitutes  its  use.

104

81

Case  where  energy  is  useless,  ....

105

82

Historical  Sketch  of  Second  Law  of  Thermodynamics —

Carnot’s  perfect  heat-engine,  . . . .

106

83

Sir  W.  Thomson’s  definition  of  absolute  tempera-

ture, .......

107

84

Melting  point  of  ice  lowered  by  pressure,

108

85

Sir  W.  Thomson’s  rectification  of  Carnot’s  reason

ing,

109-110

85

Professor  J.  Clerk-Maxwell’s  demons,  .

111-113

87

Degradation  of  energy,  ....

114

90

Future  of  the  physical  universe, ....

114-115

91

Past  of  the  physical  universe,  ....

'116

92

. CHAPTER  IV.

MATTER  AND  ETHER.

Inquiry  regarding  structure  and  material  of  the  universe,  117

94

Various  hypotheses  regarding  matter—

(1.)  Greek  notion  of  the  Atom,  .

118

95

Speculations  of  Lucretius,

. 119-130

96

(2.)  Theory  of  Boscovitch  (centres  of  force), .

131

102

(3.)  Theory  of  infinite  divisibility.

132

102

(4.)  Vortex-atom  theory,  ....

. 133-134

103

Remarks  on  these  theories, ....

. 135-136

105

Relative  quantity  of  matter  associated  with  energy,

.137-138

106

Universal  gravitation —

Is  a weak  force,  .....

. 139

107

Two  ways  of  accounting  for  it,  .

140

109

' Le  Sage’s  hypothesis,  . • .

. 141-142

109

CONTENTS.


IX


The  Ethereal  medium —

Its  principal  properties  apparently  incongruous,
Analogy  of  Professor  Stokes,

Distortion  and  displacement  of  ether,

Inferior  limit  of  its  density.

Its  supposed  imperfect  transparency,

Eemarks  on  ether,.  .

Eemarks  on  the  speculations  of  this  chapter.
Modification  of  the  vortex-ring  hypothesis,  .

Possible  disappearance  of  the  visible  universe,


Article  Page

143  111

144  111

145  112

146  112

147  113

148  115
149-150  116
151-152  117

153  118


CHAPTEE  V.


DEVELOPMENT.

Nature  of  inquiry  stated,  .....
Chemical  development —

Changes  in  lists  of  elementary  substances,  .
Prout’s  speculations,  .....
j Experiments  of  M.  Stas,  ....
Family  groups,  . . • .

Mr.  Lockyer’s  speculations.

Globe  development —

Hypothesis  of  Kant  and  Laplace,

Tendency  to  aggregation  of  mass.

Process  cannot  have  been  going  on  for  ever.
Peculiarity  of  products  developed  inorganically.
Life  develojpment —

Morphological  and  physiological  species.

Species  regarded  physiologically.

Position  of  a certain  class  of  theologians.
Tendency  to  minor  variations.

Artificial  selection,  .....
Natural  selection,  .....
Unproved  point  in  the  Darwinian  hypothesis,
Eemarks  of  Mr.  Darwin,  . . • ,


154  120

155  121

156  121

156  122

157  122
158-159  123

160  124
161-162  125

163  127

164  127

165  128

166  130

167  131

168  132

169  134

170  135

171  135

172  136


X


CONTENTS.


Development  of  the  Darwinian  hypothesis,  .

Article

173

Page

137

Mr.  Wallace’s  views,  .....

174

138

Professor  Huxley’s  remarks.

175

138

Position  assumed  by  the  authors.

176

138

CHAPTER  VI.


SPECULATIONS  AS  TO  THE  POSSIBILITY  OF  SUPERIOR  INTELLIGENCES
IN  THE  VISIBLE  UNIVERSE.


Position  of  life  in  the  present  physical  universe,  . , 177

Two  kinds  of  equilibrium,  . . . . .178

Two  kinds  of  machines  or  material  systems,  . . 179

Two  respects  in  which  a living  being  resembles  a machine,  180
A living  being  resembles  a delicately  constructed  machine,  181
The  delicacy  is  due  to  chemical  instability,  . . 182

Delicacy  of  construction  derived  from  the  sun’s  rays,  . 183

Delicacy  of  construction  in  atmospheric  changes,  .'  . 184

Worship  of  powers  of  nature — mediaeval  superstitions, . 185

Theory  which  attributes  a soul  to  the  universe,  . . 186

Real  point  at  issue  stated,  . . . . . 187

Man  presents  the  highest  order  of  the  present  visible

universe,  . . ' . . . • . . . 188

The  same  idea  pervades  the  Old  Testament,  . . 189

And  it  likewise  pervades  the  New  Testament,  . . 190-191


140

141

142

143
145

145

146
146  '

148

149

150


150

151  '


CHAPTER  YII.

THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE

Decadence  of  the  visible  universe.

Its  arrangements  apparently  wasteful.
Explanation  of  this,  .....
Memory  of  the  universe,  ....
Connection  between  seen  and. unseen,  .

Physical  explanation  of  a future  state.

Dr.  Thomas  Young’s  conception  of  the  unseen,


i

I

0


192-193

154

194

155  (

195

156  I

196-197

157  f

197-198

157  1

199-201

159  P

202-203

160  C

CONTENTS.


XI


Article  Page

Ohjections  to  the  proposed  theoiy  of  a future  state  replied  to —


Eeligious,  . , ...  . . ^

204

161

Theological,  .......

205-206

162

Scientific,  ........

207-210

163

Miracles  and  the  Resurrection  of  Christ —

Objections  of  extreme  school  stated,  .

211

165

Development  has  produced  the  visible  universe,  .

212

166

Its  atoms  resemble  manufactured  articles.

213

167

Development  through  intelligence,

214-215

167

Idea  clothed  in  concrete  form,  ....

216

169

Christian  theory  of  the  development  of  the  uni-

verse, ........

217-223

172

Life  development — Biogenesis,  . .

224-225

176

Life  comes  from  the  unseen  universe,  .

226

177

Christian  theory  of  life  development,  .

227

179

Position  of  life  in  the  universe  discussed.

228-233

179

Meteoric  hypothesis  implies  Discontinuity,  .

231-235

186

Position  reviewed,  ......

236

188

Miracles  possible  without  breach  of  Continuity,  .

237

189

Peculiar  communication  with  the  unseen  in  the  case  of

Christ, .........

238

190

Apparent  breaks  are  concealed  avenues  leading  to  the

unseen,  ........

239

190

Probable  nature  of  present  connection  between  seen  and

unseen,  ........

240

191

Angelic  intelligences,  ......

241

192

Eemarks  on  God’s  providential  government.

243-244

194

Our  argument  may  be  very  much  detached  from  all  con-

ceptions of  the  Divine  essence,  ....

245

198

Christian  conceptions  of  Heaven,  ....

246

199

Two  ideas  in  all  Christian  hymns,  ....

247

201

Possible  glimpse  into  the  conditions  of  the  future  life,  .

248-249

202

Darker  side  of  the  future,  . . ;

250

203

Plato  on  the  markings  of  the  soul,  ....

251

205

Christian  Gehenna,  .

252

205

xii  C0i\2^ENTS.

Article

Mediae vtil  idea  of  Hell,  . . . . . . 253

The  process  in  the  Gehenna  of  the  New  Testament

apparently  an  enduring  one,  . . . . 254

Personality  of  the  Evil  One  asserted  by  Scripture,  . 255

Brief  statement  of  the  results  of  this  discussion,  . . 256

The  scientific  conclusion  is  directly  against  the  oppo-
nents of  Christianity,  . . . . . . 257

Criticism  invited  from  leaders  of  scientific  thought  or
of  religious  inquiry,


Page

206

207

208
210

210


258  211


! ■'  ^


J


CHAPTEE  I.

INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.

“ L’immortalite  de  r&,me  est  une  chose  qui  nous  importe  si  fort,  et  qui  nous
touche  si  profond4ment,  qu’il  faut  avoir  perdu  tout  sentiment  pour  ^tre  dans
I’indifference  de  savoir  ce  qui  en  est.” — Pascal.

“For  he  should  persevere  until  he  has  attained  one  of  two  things;  either  he
should  discover  or  learn  the  truth  about  them,  or,  if  this  is  impossible,  I would
have  him  take  the  best  and  most  irrefragable  of  human  notions,  and  let  this  be
the  raft  upon  which  he  sails  through  life — not  without  risk,  as  I admit,  if  he
cannot  find  some  word  of  God  which  will  more  surely  and  safely  carry  him.” —
Plato’s  Phoedo;  translated  by  Jowett.

1.  The  great  mass  of  mankind  have  always  believed  in
some  fashion  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul ; but  it  is
certain  that  we  may  find  disbelievers  in  this  doctrine  who
yet  retain  the  nobler  attributes  of  humanity.  It  may,
however,  be  questioned  if  it  be  possible  even  to  imagine
the  great  bulk  of  our  race  to  have  lost  their  belief  in  the
souks  immortality,  and  yet  to  have  retained  the  virtues  of
civilised  and  vrell-ordered  communities.

We  have  said  that  the  disbelievers  in  this  doctrine  form
a minority  of  the  race ; but  at  the  same  time  it  must  be
acknowdedged  that  the  strength  of  this  minority  has  of
late  years  greatly  increased,  until  at  the  present  moment  it
numbers  in  its  ranks  not*  a few  of  the  most  intelligent,  the
most  earnest,  and  the  most  virtuous  of  men.

It  is,  however,  possible  that,  could  we  examine  these,  we
should  find  them  to  be  unwilling  disbelievers,  compelled  by


A


2


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


the  workino;  of  their  intellects  to  abandon  the  desire  of  their

O

hearts,  only  after  many  struggles,  and  much  bitterness  of
spirit.

Others  again,  without  absolutely  abandoning  all  hope  of
the  soul’s  immortality,  are  yet  full  of  doubt  regarding  it,
and  have  settled  down  into  the  belief  that  we  cannot  come
to  any  reasonable  conclusion  upon  the  subject.  Now,  these
men  can  have  had  nothing  to  gain,  but  much  to  lose,  in
arriving  at  this  result.  It  has  been  reached  with  reluc-
tance, with  misgivings,  not  without  a certain  kind  of  perse-
cution, nor  without  the  loss  of  friends  and  the  stirring  up
of  strife ; they  have  fearlessly  looked  things  in  the  face,
and  have  followed  whithersoever  they  imagined  they  were
led  by  facts,  even  to  the  brink  of  an  abyss.

It  is  the  object  of  the  present  volume  to  examine  the
intellectual  process  that  has  brought  about  these  results,
and  we  hope  to  show  that  the  conclusion  at  which  these
men  have  arrived  is  not  only  not  justified  by  what  we
know  of  the  physical  universe,  but  that  on  the  other  hand
there  are  many  lines  of  thought  which  point  very  strongly
towards  an  opposite  conclusion.

2.  A division  as  old  as  Aristotle  separates^  speculators  into
two  great  classes, — those  who  study  the  How  of  the  Uni-
verse, and  those  who  study  the  Why.  All  men  of  science
are  embraced  in  the  former  of  these,  all  men  of  religion  in  the
latter.  The  former  regard  the  Universe  as  a huge  machine,
and  their  object  is  to  study  the  laws  which  regulate  its
working  ; the  latter  again  speculate  about  the  object  of  the
machine,  and  what  sort  of  work  it  is  intended  to  produce.
The  disciples  of  How  are  accused  by  their  adversaries  of
being  willing  to  sacrifice  the  individual  to  the  system  ;

See  W estmimter  Sermons,  by  the  Rev.  Charles  Kingsley.


INTR OD  UCTOR  Y SKETCH.


3


while  the  disciples  of  Why  are  accused  by  their  adversaries
of  being  willing  to  sacrifice  the  system  to  the  individual.

We  may  compare  the  Universe  to  a great  ship  plying
between  two  well-known  ports,  and  carrying  with  her  two
sets  of  passengers.  The  one  set  keep  on  deck  and  try  to
make  out,  as  well  as  they  can,  the  mind  of  the  steersman
regarding  the  future  of  their  voyage  after  they  have  reached
that  port  to  which  they  know  they  are  all  fast  hastening,
while  the  other  set  keep  down  below  and  examine  the
engines.  Occasionally  there  is  much  wrangling  at  the  top
of  the  ladder  where  the  twQ  sets  meet,  some  of  those  who
have  examined  the  engines  and  the  ship  asserting  that  the
passengers  will  all  be  inevitably  wrecked  at  the  next  port,  it
being  morally  impossible  that  the  good  ship  can  carry  them
further.  To  whom  those  on  deck  reply,  that  they  have  per-
fect confidence  in  the  steersman,  who  has  informed  some  of
those  nearest  him  that  the  passengers  will  not  be  wrecked,
but  will  be  carried  in  safety  past  the  port.  And  so  the
altercation  goes  on ; some  who  have  been  on  deck  being
unwilling  or  unable  to  examine  the  engines,  and  some  who
have  examined  the  engines  preferring  to  remain  below.

3.  Our  readers  will  perceive  from  what  we  have  said,
that  difiiculties  regarding  the  soul’s  immortality  are  most
likely  to  arise  amidst  the  disciples  of  How  or  those  who
study  the  machinery  of  the  Universe,  and  inasmuch  as  this
class  has  greatly  increased  of  late,  it  follows  that 'the  dis-
believers in  or  doubters  of  the  soul’s  immortality  have
increased  likewise.  The  disciples  of  Why  have,  on  the
other  hand,  existed  from  time  immemorial,  and  in  the
plenitude  of  their  power  have  frequently  carried  them-
selves with  much  violence  towards  the  disciples  of  How,
who  are  of  comparatively  modern  origin.  It  must  notj^


4


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


however,  be  inferred  that  this  old  and  venerable  family
have  always  been  at  peace  amongst  themselves,  for  there
have  been  numerous  contentions  between  their  various
branches,  not  the  less  acrimonious  because  the  contending
members  have  been  to  some  extent  supporters  of  a common
cause,  believing  in  some  fashion  in  the  immortality  of  the
soul  and  the  reality  of  the  world  to  come.  We  shall  there-
fore begin  by  giving  our  readers  a sketch,  necessarily  a very
meagre  one,  of  the  various  beliefs  on  these  subjects  held  by
the  different  branches  of  this  great  family.

4.  Let  us  begin  with  the  Egyptians,  who  are  perhaps  the
most  ancient  people  of  whom  we  have  historical  records.
The  manners  and  customs  of  this  nation  have  been  very
minutely  described  by  Sir  Gardner  AVilkinson,  to  whose  work
we  are  chiefly  indebted  for  the  following  account.  In  the
first  place  it  appears  that  we  must  separate  between  what
the  priests  believed  and  what  was  held  by  the  great  body
of  the  people.  The  bulk  of  the  nation  were  left  by  the
priests  to  believe  in  a multiplicity  of  deities,  and  even  to
reverence  animals  as  divine,  while  on  the  other  hand  the
higher  orders  of  the  priesthood,  who  were  initiated  into  the
greater  mysteries  of  their  religion,  appear  to  have  acknow-
ledged the  unity  of  God.  These  believed  in  one  Eternal
God,  from  whom  all  other  deities  were  produced,  and  whom
they  did  not  permit  themselves  even  to  name,  far  less  to
represent  under  any  visible  form.  The  Egyptians  likewise
believed  in  the  existence  of  Daemons  or  Genii,  who  were
present  unseen  amongst  mankind — a belief  apparently
shared  by  Plato,  who  seems  to  have  adopted  many  of  the
Egyptian  notions,  and  who  supposed  that  the  deity  dele-
gated the  creative  power  to  beings  inferior  to  himself
denominated  Daemons.  It  may,  however,  be  questioned


INTR  OD  UCTOR  Y SKE  TCH.


5


whether  the  Daemons  of  Plato  are  equivalent  to  the  Genii
of  the  !l^yptians.

5.  The  earliest  Egyptian  records  attest  the  belief  of  this
nation  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  : — “ Dissolution,  ac-
cording to  them,  is  only  the  cause  of  reproduction — nothing
perishes  which  has  once  existed,  and  things  which  appear
to  be  destroyed  only  change  their  natures  and  pass  into
another  form.”^

Anubis  held  in  Egypt  an'  office  sirtiilar  to  that  of  Mercury
among  the  Greeks,  being  the  usher  of  souls  in  their  passage
to  the  future  state.  Amenti  was  the  region  to  which  the
souls  of  men  were  supposed  to  go  after  death,  and  Sir
Gardner  Wilkinson  notices  the  resemblance  between  this
name  and  that  of  Ement  “ the  West’"’ — the  west,  where  the
sun  was  seen  to  sink,  being  looked  upon  as  the  end  of  the
world.  The  guardian  of  the  lower  regions  was  called
Ouom-n-Amenti,  or  the  Devourer  of  Amenti.  It  had  fre-
quently the  appearance  of  a hippopotamus,  but  was  drawn
sometimes  with  the  head  of  a fanciful  creature  something
between  the  hippopotamus  and  the  crocodile.

‘‘The  judgment  of  the  soul  was  conducted  by  Osiris,
aided  by  forty-two  assessors,  supposed  to  represent  the
forty-two  crimes  from  which  a virtuous  man  was  expected
to  be  free  when  judged  in  a future  state,  or  rather  the  accus-
ing spirits,  each  of  whom  examined  if  the  deceased  was  guilty
of  the  peculiar  crime  which  it  was  his  province  to  avenge.

6.  As  regards  the  fate  of  the  soul  when  once  the  judg-
ment had  been  passed  upon  it, — the  Egyptians  considered
the  souls  of  men  to  be  emanations  of  the  Divine  soul,  and
each  was  supposed  to  return  to  its  Divine  origin  when  suf-
ficiently pure  to  unite  with  the  Deity.  On  the  other  hand,

1 Wilkinson.  2


6


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


those  who  had  been  guilty  of  sin  were  doomed  to  pass
through  the  bodies  of  different  animals  in  order  that  they
might  at  last  become  sufficiently  purified.  It  was  probably
imao’iued  that  the  disgusting  nature  of  sin  would  be  best
realised  by  a lengthened  sojourn  in  the  bodies  of  unclean
animals  like  the  pig.

This  doctrine  of  transmigration  appears  to  have  become
changed,  at  least  among  some  of  its  disciples,  into  the  form
described  by  Herodotifs  and  Plato.  The  latter,  referring
no  doubt  to  the  doctrine  of  the  pre-existence  of  souls,
and  to  the  view  that  it  is  a punishment  to  become  cor-
poreal at  all,  tells  us  : — ^‘If  any  one’s  life  has  been  virtu-
ous he  shall  obtain  a better  fate  hereafter ; if  wicked
a worse.  But  no  soul  will  return  to  its  pristine  condi-
tion till  the  expiration  of  ten  thousand  years,  since  it  will
not  recover  the  use  of  its  wings  until  that  period,  except
it  be  the  soul  of  one  who  has  philosophised  sincerely
or  together  with  philosophy  has  loved  beautiful  forms.
These  indeed  in  the  third  period  of  a thousand  years,  if  they
have  thrice  chosen  this  mode  of  life  in  succession, . . . shall  in
the  three  thousandth  year  fiy  away  to  their  pristine  abode,  but
other  souls,  being  arrived  at  the  end  of  their  first  life,  shall
be  judged.  And  of  those  who  are  judged,  some,  proceeding
to  a subterraneous  place  of  judgment,  shall  there  sustain  the
punishments  they  have  deserved ; but  others,  in  consequence
of  a favourable  judgment,  being  elevated  into  a certain
celestial  place,  shall  pass  their  time  in  a manner  becoming
the  life  they  have  lived  in  a human  shape.  And  in  the
thousandth  year  both  the  kinds  of  those  who  have  been
judged,  returning  to  the  lot  and  election  of  a second  life,
shall  each  of  them  receive  a life  agreeable  to  his  desire.  Here
also  the  human  soul  shall  pass  into  the  life  oi  a beast,  and


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


7


from  that  of  a beast  again  into  a man  if  it  has  first  been
the  soul  of  a man.  For  the  soul  which  has  never  perceived
the  truth  cannot  pass  into  the  human  form.’'^

7.  It  is  considered  probable  that  the  Egyptian  custom  of
embalming  the  body  had  some  relation  to  this  - religious
doctrine,  and  before  the  mummy  was  allowed  burial  it  had
to  be  judged  and  acquitted  by  terrestrial  authorities,  in
imitation  of  the  judgment  which  was  believed  to  take  place
in  the  world  of  spirits.  Diodorus  gives  a detailed  account
of  the  ceremonies  which  then  took  place,  in  which  forty -two
judges  were  summoned  to  act  as  assessors  and  determine
the  fate  of  the  body.  If  it  could  be  proved  that  the
deceased  had  led  an  evil  life,  his  body  was  deprived  of
the  accustomed  burial,  and  on  such  occasions  the  grief
and  shame  felt  by  the  family  were  excessive.  Diodorus
considers  that  this  was  in  itself  a strong  inducement  to
every  one  to  abstain  from  crime,  and  praises  very  strongly
the  authors  of  so  wise  an  institution.

With  this  we  must  agree,  remarking  however  that  the
inducement  to  abstain  from  crime  was  in  all  probability
derived  more  from  the  disgrace  brought  upon  the  family,
when  sepulture  was  refused,  than  from  the  awful  sentence
in  the  world  of  spirits,  which  this  refusal  was  supposed
to  foreshadow.

8.  Let  us  next  consider  the  ancient  belief  of  the  Hebrew
nation.

Eef erring  to  the  records  of  this  nation,  we  find  that  at  an
early  period  they  had  been  slaves  or  serfs  to  the  Egyptians,
from  whom  they  were  delivered  by  Moses,  who  became  after-
wards their  lawgiver.  Moses  had  by  a species  of  adoption
obtained  a very  prominent  position  among  the  Egyptians,

1 PhcedruSy  quoted  by  Wilkinson.


8


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


and  had  probably  been  initiated  into  their  sacred  mysteries,
for  we  read  that  he  was  “ learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the
Egyptians/’  Without  discussing  the  question  of  inspiration,
we  may  readily  imagine  that,  himself  a believer  in  the
unity  of  jQod,  this  sagacious  leader  must  have  perceived  the
deficiency  of  a religious  system  in  which  the  truth  was  con-
fined to  a few,  while  the  many  were  allowed  to  remain  in
the  most  degrading  idolatry.

He  was  thus  in  a fit  state  to  recognise  the  paramount
importance  of  the  whole  mind  and  mass  of  the  nation  being
pervaded  with  a belief  in  one  invisible,  ever-present,  ever-
living  God.  We  do  not,  however,  mean  to  assert  that
Moses  got  his  religious  notions  from  Egypt,  but  we  think
it  possible  that  his  mind  may  have  been  prepared  by  the
failure  of  the  Egyptian  system  to  receive  a better  one.

9.  In  the  Egyptian  system  there  were  two  peculiarities
which  were  probably  connected  together.  We  have  seen
(Art.  4.)  that  amongst  the  higher  orders  of  the  priesthood
there  was  a profound,  but  at  the  same  time  a superstitious,
reverence  for  the  name  of  God,  who  was  unnamed  and  un-
approachable, unless  under  some  deified  attribute.  At  the
same  time  there  was,  and  probably  in  consequence  of  the
former,  an  ignorance  of  the  unity  of  God  amongst  the  great
mass  of  the  people,  and  a worship  of  the  various  deified  attri-
butes of  one  supreme  being  as  so  many  separate  divinities.

10.  Now  the  task  that  Moses  believed  himself  divinely
commissioned  to  accomplish  was  the  revelation  of  this  one
living  and  ruling  God  to  the  whole  body  of  his  country-
men. Thus  we  find  God,  in  the  sacred  writings  of  the
Jews,  saying  to  Moses,  “I  am  the  Lord  (Jehovah),  and  I
appeared  unto  Abraham,  unto  Isaac,  and  unto  Jacob,  by  the
name  of  God  Almighty  (El  Shaddai) ; but  by  my  name


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


9


Jehovah  was  I not  known  to  them/^^  do  not  howevor
intend  to  discuss  the  precise  meaning  of  the  two  names
of  God,  which  we  find  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures — sufficient
for  us  that  Moses  endeavoured  to  impress  upon  his  people
the  unity  and  ever-living  presence  of  the  Divine  Being.

11.  Again,  it  would  appear  that  the  Jews,  in  addition  to
their  belief  as  a nation  in  the  unity  of  God,  believed  also
in  the  reality  of  an  invisible  world  containing  spiritual
intelligences,  some  of  whom  were  the  loyal  servants  and
messengers  of  God ; while  others  delighted  in  the  endea-
vour to  thwart  His  counsels,  and  were  in  rebellion  against
Him.  Apparently  both  orders  of  these  were  supposed  to
have  very  considerable  power,  not  only  over  the  minds  and
bodies  of  men,  but  also  over  the  operations  of  nature.  Thus
two  angels  were  commissioned  by  God  to  destroy  Sodom  ; ^
and  again,  in  the  poem  of  J ob,  when  Satan  received  power
over  the  Patriarch,  he  overwhelmed  him  by  at  once  inciting
robbers  who  plundered  his  substance,  killing  his  children
by  a wind  from  the  wilderness,  and  finally  smiting  the  body
of  Job  himself  with  a loathsome  disease.

It  is  perhaps  worthy  of  note  that  while  we  read  in  these
records  of  various  appearances  of  good  spiiits  in  the  human
form,  we  have  no  certain  account  of  any  such  manifestation
of  evil  spirits.  It  may  even  be  supposed  that  a good  deal
of  the  Demonology  of  Scripture  belongs  to  poetic  or  semi-
parabolic representation  of  spiritual  truths.  Thus  Coleridge
and  others  have  thought  that  the  Satan  of  Job  is  only  the
dramatic  accuser  or  adversary  imagined  by  the  poet.

12.  Very  little  is  said  about  man's  future  state  in  the
Scriptures  of  the  Jews,  and  although  there  are  a few  scattered
passages  which  favour  immortality,  yet  these  are  so  few


1 Exod.  vi.  3.


2 Gen.  xix.  12.


10


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


that  we  cannot  err*  if  we  maintain  that  this  doctrine  was
not  brought  before  the  mind  of  the  Hebrew  nation  in  the
same  way  as  was  the  presence  and  unity  of  God.  It  seems
to  us  that  Dean  Stanley’s  conjecture  is  probably  correct  where
he  says,  with  reference  to  this  omission,  ‘‘  Not  from  want  of
religion,  but  (if  we  might  use  the  expression)  from  excess  of
religion,  was  this  void  left  in  the  J ewish  mind.  The  future
life  was  not  denied  or  contradicted,  but  it  was  overlooked,  set
aside,  overshadowed  by  the  consciousness  of  the  living,  actual
presence  of  God  Himself.  That  truth,  at  least  in  the
limited  conceptions  of  the  youthful  nation,  was  too  vast  to
admit  of  any  rival  truth,  however  precious.  When  David
or  Hezekiah  shrank  from  the  gloomy  vacancy  of  the  grave,
it  was  because  they  feared  lest,  when  death  closed  their  eyes
in  the  present  world,  they  should  lose  their  hold  on  that
Divine  friend  with  whose  being  and  communion  the
present  world  had  in  their  minds  been  so  closely  inter-
woven.”^ It  ought,  however,  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  all
along  the  Jews  believed  in  Hades  (Sheol),  of  which  there
are  numerous  proofs  throughout  the  Old  Testament.  In-
deed a learned  Hebraist  has  assured  us  that  the  Hebrew
word  for  the  abstract  notion  “ life,’'  whenever  it  refers  to
a rational  being,  is  a pluralis  ta7itum,  ‘‘IJayim,”  while
the  word  for  the  abstract  notion  “ death  ” is  a singular,
maveth,”  thus  establishing  by  tlie  very  character  of  the
language  the  existence  among  the  people  of  the  belief  in
more  than  one  condition  of  life.

13.  As  the  nation  grew  older  we  find  frequent  and
distinct  allusions  indicating  a belief  in  a resurrection  of
some  kind.  Thus  we  find  the  angel  saying  to  Daniel,
“ Go  thy  way  till  the  end  be  ; for  thou  shaft  rest  and


^ Lectures  on  the  Jewish  Church.


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


II


stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days/^^  Again  in  the
Apocrypha,  we  find  one  of  seven  brethren  who  were  put  to
death  by  Antiochus,  saying  to  that  tyrant, — It  is  good,
being  put  to  death  by  men,  to  look  for  hope  from  God,  to
be  raised  up  again  by  Him  ; as  for  thee,  thou  shalt  have  no
resurrection  to  life,'’^  and  the  other  brethren  spoke  in  like
manner.  Here  it  is  evident  from  the  whole  chapter  that
the  hope  expressed  was  rather  the  result  of  perfect  trust  in
God  than  derived  from  any  process  of  their  own  reason,  or
even  from  any  revelation  on  the  subject  which  they  imagined
to  have  been  made.

We  have  likewise  the  testimony  of  Josephus  as  well  as
of  the  New  Testament  that  the  Pharisees  believed  in  a
resurrection.  Josephus  tells  us, — ‘‘  They  [the  Pharisees]  say
that  all  souls  are  incorruptible,  but  that  the  souls  of  good
men  only  are  removed  into  other  bodies,  but  that  the  souls
of  bad  men  are  subject  to  eternal  punishment.'’^  Again,  we
learn  from  the  same  two  authorities  that  the  Sadducees  held
sceptical  notions  on  the  subject,  and  Josephus  says — They
take  away  the  belief  of  the  immortal  duration  of  the  soul,
and  the  punishments  and  rewards  in  Hades."

14.  If  we  next  turn  to  the  Greek  and  Eoman  mythologies
we  find  ideas  of  a future  state  very  similar  to  those  enter-
tained by  the  Egyptians,  from  whom  probably  the  Greek
notions  were  originally  largely  derived.

They  called  by  the  name  of  Elysium  the  abode  ap-
propriated to  the  souls  of  the  good,  while  those  of  the
wicked  suffered  punishment  in  Tartarus.  It  has  been  well
remarked  by  Archbishop  Whately  that  these  regions  were
supposed  to  be  of  the  most  dreamy  and  unsubstantial
nature : —

1 Dan.  xii.  13.  ^ 2 Macc.  vii.  14.  3 ffars  of  the  Jews,  ii.  viii.  14.


12


THE  UNSEEN  UNJ  VERSE.


‘‘  The  poet  [remarks  WhatelyJ  from  whom  so  many  were
content  to  derive  their  creed  [meaning  Homer]  represents
Achilles  among  the  shades  as  declaring  that  the  life  of  the
meanest  drudge  on  earth  is  preferable  to  the  very  highest  of
the  unsubstantial  glories  of  Elysium  : —

BovXol/jbTjv  K eTrdpovpo^i  e^v  Or^revipbev  dXk(pt
^AvBpl  Trap  aK\rip(p,  w p,^  ^loro<;  etr],

’'H  irdaiv  veKveacTL  KaTa^Sipevoiaiv  dvdaaeLV,

It  is  remarkable  too  that  the  same  poet  seems  plainly  to  regard
the  body  not  the  soul  as  being  properly  ‘‘the  man”  after  death
has  separated  them.  We  should  be  apt  to  say  that  such  a
one’s  body  is  here,  and  that  he,  properly  the  person  himself,
is  departed  to  the  other  world ; but  Homer  uses  the  very
opposite  language  in  speaking  of  the  heroes  slain  before
Troy  : viz.,  that  their  souls  were  despatched  to  the  shades,
and  that  they  themselves  were  left  a prey  to  dogs  and
birds : —

JloXXa?  ^ l(j)0lpov<;  WTXAX  TTpoLayfrev

^HpdcDv,  ATTOTX  Se  eXdpia  T6V')(e  Kvveacnvd^  ^

We  agree  with  this  writer  that  the  belief  in  an  unsub-
stantial  region  of  this  description  can  have  had  no  real
influence  either  in  deterring  men  from  vice,  or  encouraging
them  to  virtue.  Indeed  its  inevitable  tendency  was  to  foster
an  undue  regard  for  the  pleasures  of  this  present  life  to  the
absolute  discouragement  of  goodness  and  virtue.  For  while
we  of  the  present  day  regard  the  future  life  as  in  some  sense
the  reward  of  piety  and  goodness,  the  ancients  looked  upon
Hades  rather  as  a penalty  which  inexorable  fate  had  re-
served for  all  men,  and  from  which  even  piety  and  goodness
were  powerless  to  exempt  their  possessors.

^ Essays  on  some  of  the  •peculiarities  of  the  Christian  Religion,


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH,


13


Cum  semel  occideris,  et  de  te  splendida  Minos
Fecerit  arbitria ;

Non,  Torquate,  genus,  non  te  facundia,  non  te
Restituet  pietas.

Infernis  neque  enim  tenebris  Diana  pudicum
Liberat  Hippolytum ;

Nec  Lethsea  valet  Theseus  abrumpere  caro
Vincula  Pirithoo.

15.  The  active-minded  as  well  as  the  gross-minded  mem-
bers of  the  community  could  hardly  be  expected  to  care
much  for  such  an  unsubstantial  future,  and  this  considera-
tion may  probably  have  led  to  the  readier  acceptance  of  the
doctrine  of  some  of  the  Greek  philosophers  who  introduced
a bodily  state  after  death.  But  these,  in  so  doing,  rather
favoured  the  doctrine  of  transmigration  than  that  of  a resur-
rection of  the  body  which  was  seen  to  die,  and  which,  after
being  devoured  by  dogs,  or  destroyed  in  some  other  manner,
they  could  hardly  conceive  to  rise  again.  It  is  well  known
that  Pythagoras  taught  the  doctrine  of  transmigration,
although  as  none  of  his  writings  have  come  down  to  us  we
are  not  sure  of  the  exact  manner  in  which  he  held  it.  Plato
also,  in  a passage  already  quoted  (Art.  6)  alludes  to  a
similar  doctrine  which  he  had  probably  derived  from  the
Egyptians.  A certain  degree  of  choice  is  here  supposed
to  be  left  to  the  soul,  and  those  who  cannot  attain  to  the
more  ethereal  and  refined  existence,  have  to  choose  a bodily
one,  returning,  after  they  have  become  sufficiently  purified,
once  more  into  human  shape.

16.  As  a matter  of  course,  a dim  belief  of  this  nature
gave  rise  to  a class  of  philosophers  who  denied  the  possibility
of  a future  state  altogether.  The  advent  of  this  school  of
thought  was  probably  hastened  by  outward  events.  In  the
golden  age  of  Greece  a vigorous  republic  served  to  concen-
trate upon  itself  the  energies  of  the  citizens,  and  under  these


14


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


circumstances  their  minds  were  not  likely  to  question  the
truth  of  the  national  creed.  While  the  gods  smiled  upon
them  they  were  content  to  acknowledge  their  active  exist-
ence. It  has  been  remarked  by  Schmitz,  that  the  unfavour-
able political  circumstances  of  the  time  may  have  been
concerned  iii  the  rise  of  the  Epicurean  school — thinking
men  were  led  to  seek  within  for  that  which  they  could  not
find  without.’'  The  gods  of  Epicurus,  this  writer  goes  on
to  remark,  consisted  of  atoms,  and  were  in  the  enjoy-
meut  of  perfect  happiness,  which  had  not  been  disturbed
by  the  laborious  business  of  creating  the  world,  and  as  the
government  of  the  world  would  interfere  with  their  happi-
ness, Epicurus  conceived  them  as  exercising  no  influence
whatever  upon  the  world  or  man.”

It  is  of  such  gods  the  poet  speaks  when  he  says —

For  they  lie  beside  their  nectar,  and  the  bolts  are  huil’d
Far  below  them  in  the  valleys,  and  the  clouds  are  lightly  curl’d
Round  their  golden  houses,  girdled  with  the  gleaming  world
Where  they  smile  in  secret,  looking  over  wasted  lands.

Blight  and  famine,  plague  and  earthquake,' roaring  deeps  and  fiery  sands,
Clanging  fights,  and  flaming  towns,  and  sinking  ships  and  praying  hands.”

The  ancient  Eoman  poet  Lucretius,  in  his  well-known
poem  De  Eerum  Natura,”  has  beautifully  interpreted
the  Epicurean  philosophy.  Adopting  like  Epicurus  the
atomic  or  corpuscular  theory  of  things,  he  tells  his  readers
that  the  soul  of  man  perishes  along  with  the  body,  and  that
it  is  the  height  of  folly  for  man  to  be  afraid  of  that  which
may  happen  to  him  after  death.

17.  It  is  unnecessary  to  discuss  in  detail  the  tenets  of  the
various  Greek  and  Eoman  philosophers.  A number  of  inde-
finite and  sometimes  contradictory  expressions  sufficiently
betray  the  uncertainty  of  their  opinions.  Desirous,  it  may


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


15


be,  to  believe  themselves — desirous  at  least  that  the  body
of  their  countrymen  should  believe  in  a future  state,  yet  it
is  not  wonderful  that  they  should  have  felt  strongly  the
difficulty  of  believing,  or  have  expressed  their  doubts  in
writings  which  were  not  intended  to  be  read  by  the  great
mass  of  the  people.

18.  Proceeding  now  to  the  extreme  east,  it  is  well  known
that  of  late  years  very  great  light  has  been  thrown  upon
the  ancient  religions  of  the  Brahmans,  the  Magians,  and
the  Buddhists.  In  an  admirable,  collection  of  essays  by
Professor  Max  Muller,^  we  have  a good  epitome  of  what  has
been  accomplished  by  the  laborious  investigations  of  oriental
scholars.  We  learn  from  these  that  the  most  ancient  docu-
ment is  the  Rig-Veda,  or  Sacred  Hymns  of  the  Brahmans,
in  which  we  have  the  religious  belief  of  a large  section  of
the  Indo-Germanic  race  at  a period  supposed  to  be  from  1200
to  2000  years  before  the  Christian  era.  In  these  hymns
the  gods  are  called  Deva,  a word  which  is  conjectured  to  be
the  same  with  the  Latin  Deus.  ‘‘  It  would  be  easy,”  says
Max  Muller,  ‘‘  to  find  in  the  numerous  hymns  of  the  Veda
passages  in  which  every  important  deity  is  represented  as
supreme  and  absolute.  Thus  in  one  hymn,  Agni  (fire)  is
called  ‘ the  ruler  of  the  universe.’  ....  In  another  hymn,
another  god,  Indra,  is  said  to  be  greater  than  all.  ‘ The
gods,’  it  is  said,  ‘ do  not  reach  thee,  Indra,  nor  men, — thou
overcomest  all  creatures  in  strength.’  ....  Another  god.
Soma,  is  called  the  king  of  the  world,  the  king  of  heaven

and  earth,  the  conqueror  of  all Another  poet  says

of  another  god,  Varu?ia,  ^ Thou  art  lord  of  all,  of  heaven
and  earth  ; thou  art  the  king  of  all,  of  those  who  are  gods,
and  of  those  who  are  men.’  ....  This  surely,”  remarks

^ Chljpii  from  a German  Workshop.


i6


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.  .


Max  Muller,  is  not  what  is  commonly  understood  by  Poly-
theism. Yet,  it  would  be  equally  wrong  to  call  it  Mono-
theism. If  we  must  have  a name  for  it,  I should  call  it
Katheno theism.  TJie  consciousness  that  all  the  deities  are
but  different  names  of  one  and  tiie  same  godhead,  breaks
forth  indeed  here  and  there  in  the  Veda.  But  it  is  far  from
being  general.  One  poet  for  instance  says,  ‘ They  call  him
Indra,  Mitra,  Yaruna,  Agni ; then  he  is  the  beautiful- winged
heavenly  Garutmat — that  which  is  one,  the  wise  call  it,  in
divers  manners  ; they  call  it  Agni,  Yama,  Matarisvan.”

. 19.  We  learn  from  the  same  author  that  ‘Hhere  is  in  the
Veda  no  trace  of  metempsychosis,  or  that  transmigration  of
souls  from  human  to  animal  bodies,  which  is  generally  sup-
posed to  be  a distinguishing  feature  of  Indian  religion.  In-
stead of  this  we  find  what  is  really  the  sine  qud  non  of  all  real
religion,  a belief  in  immortality  and  in  personal  immortality.

. . . . Thus  we  read,  He  who  gives  alms  goes  to  the

highest  place  in  heaven ; he  goes  to  the  gods

Again  we  find  this  prayer  addressed  to  Soma  : —

Where  there  is  eternal  light,  in  the  world  where  the  sun
is  placed,  in  that  immortal,  imperishable  world,  place  me,
0 Soma!

‘‘Where  King  Yaivasvata  reigns,  where  the  secret  place
of  heaven  is,  where  these  mighty  waters  are,  there  make  me
immortal  1

“ Where  there  is  happiness  and  delight,  where  joy  and
pleasure  reside,  where  the  desires  of  our  desire  are  attained,
there  make  me  immortal

Max  Muller  further  remarks,  that  the  Kig-Veda  contains
allusions,  although  vague,  to  a place  of  punishment  for  the
wicked.  “ The  dogs  of  Yama,  the  king  of  the  departed,
present  some  terrible  aspects,  and  Yama  is  asked  to  protect


INTR  OD  UCTOR  Y SKE  TCH,


17


the  departed  from  them.  Again,  a pit  is  mentioned,  into
which  the  lawless  are  said  to  be  hurled  down,  and  into
which  Indra  casts  those  who  offer  no  sacrifices.”

20.  A religion  like  this,  however  pure  at  its  commence-
ment, was  likely  soon  to  become  corrupted.  It  soon  merged
into  idolatry  and  polytheism,  as  far  at  least  as  the  main
body  of  the  worshippers  were  concerned,  while  at  the  same
time  the  rule  of  the  Brahmins  or  officiating  priests  became
strengthened  into  an  insupportable  social  tyranny.  Thus  a
double  reformation  was  to  be  apprehended,  corresponding
on  the  one  hand  to  the  religious,  and  on  the  other  to  the
ceremonial  and  social,  development  of  the  system.

21.  The  first  reformation  was  that  attributed  to  Zoro-
aster and  his  disciples,  whose  belief  is  contained  in  the
Zend-Avesta.  In  his  confession  of  faith,  the  disciple  of
the  Eranian  or  Zoroastrian  religion  declares,  I cease  to  be
a worshipper  of  the  daevas.”

It  must  however  be  remembered  that  in  this  religion
daeva  means  devil,  or  evil  spirit.  Thus  the  earliest  forms
of  the  Zoroastrian  religion  need  not  have  excluded,  and
apparently  did  not  exclude,  the  worship  of  good  spirits.

Whilst  the  Zoroastrian  disciples  believed  in  a supreme
God  who  rules  the  world,  they  yet  gave  a prominent  place
to  a spirit  of  evil,  which  afterwards  received  the  name  of
Ahriman,  and  was  supposed  to  exercise  very  considerable
influence  over  the  order  of  nature  and  the  minds  of  men.
Indeed,  Ahriman  is  apparently  an  independent  power  so
strong  that  but  for  the  fact  that  he  acts  before  he  thinks,
while  Ormuzd  (the  good  spirit)  thinks  before  he  acts,  the
victory  of  good  would  be  doubtful.  The  whole  system
hinges  on  this  and  on  the  fact  that  everything  noxious  and
evil  in  creation  is  the  work  of  Ahriman.

B


i8


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


Max  IMliller  is  of  opinion  that  the  Zoroastrian  religion
was  founded  on  a solemn  protest  against  the  whole  worship
of  the  powers  of  nature  involved  in  the  Vedas  ; ” and  again
the  same  writer  says,  The  characteristic  change  that  has
taken  place  between  the  Veda  and  Avesta  is,  that  the  battle
is  no  longer  a conflict  of  gods  and  demons  for  cows  (allud-
ing to  a Vaidik  myth),  nor  of  light  and  darkness  for  rain.
It  is  the  battle  of  a pious  man  against  the  power  of  evil.”  .

22.  The  disciples  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion  believed  in
a future  state ; the  ill- speaker  (the  devil),  we  are  told  in
the  Zend-Avesta,  shall  not  destroy  the  second  life.

The  following  extracts  given  by  Max  Muller  from  a
catechism  of  the  modern  Parsis  or  disciples  of  Zoroaster  give
us  a very  good  idea  of  their  present  creed  : —

Q.  Whom  do  we  of  the  Zarthosti  community  believe  in  ?

“A.  We  believe  in  only  one  God,  and  we  do  not  believe
in  any  besides  Him.

Q.  Do  we  not  believe  in  any  other  God  ?

“ A.  Whoever  believes  in  any  other  God  but  this  is  an
infidel,  and  shall  suffer  the  punishment  of  hell.”

Tn  another  extract  the  disciples  are  told  that  in  the  world
.to  come  they  shall  receive  the  return  according  to  their
actions.

23.  The  next  reform  of  the  Brahminical  system  had  refer-
ence to  its  social  characteristics,  and  was  occasioned  by  the
insupportable  tyranny  of  the  priesthood.  The  reformer,  a
young  prince,  was  born  about  500  years  B.c.,  and  from  his
life  and  doctrines  received  the  name  of  Buddha,  or  the
Enlightened.  After  having  learned  from  various  famous
Brahmans,  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  their  austerities
and  doctrines  could  neither  free  men  from  the  miseries  of
this  life  nor  from  the  fear  of  death.  From  this  stage


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH,


19


Buddha  passed  into  the  belief  that  all  we  see  is  vanity — a
delusion,  a dream — and  that  the  highest  wisdom  consists
in  perceiving  this,  and  in  desiring  to  enter  into  Nirv4?2a,
or,  in  other  words,  to  be  blown  out  like  a flame.

It  would  seem  from  these  words  that  Buddha  himself
regarded  annihilation  rather  than  immortality  as  the
summum  honum ; but  no  account  of  Buddhism  would  be
satisfactory  which  did  not  pay  special  regard  to  the  notion
so  widely  diffused  in  heathenism,  that  matter  is  the  source
of  all  evil.  To  be  liberated  from  matter  is  to  be  liberated
from  evil;  and  this  would  seem  to  be  the  fundamental
thought  in  the  Nirvana  in  all  its  difierent  senses.  But
however  this  may  be,  we  know  that,  allied  to  these  extreme
metaphysical  opinions,  Buddha  inculcated  a moral  code
which  is  one  of  the  purest  the  world  has  ever  known.  M.
Laboulaye  says,  “It  is  difficult  to  comprehend  how  men
not  assisted  by  revelation  could  have  soared  so  high  f and
M.  Barthelemy  Saint- Hilaire  does  not  hesitate  to  assert,

that  with  the  sole  exception  of  Christ  there  is  not
amongst  the  founders  of  religion  a more  pure  or  touching
figure  than  that  of  Buddha.^’

24.  In  process  of  time,  among  the  followers  of  the
Buddhist  religion,  the  word  Nirva?ia  came  to  have  a very
different  meaning  from  that  which  it  had  at  first.  Buddha
was  himself  worshipped  as  a divinity,  and  his  Nirva^ia
came  to  denote  a state  in  which  there  was  a total  absence
of  pain,  or  in  other  "words  an  Elysium.

In  illustration  of  this  we  may  quote  the  account  given  by
Max  Muller  of  the  dying  words  of  Hiouen-thsang,  a famous
pilgrim  from  China  to  the  shrine  of  Buddha,  who  died  in
the  year  of  our  era  664  : —

“I  desire,’’  he  said,  “that  whatever  merits  I may  have


20


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


gained  by  good  works  may  fall  upon  other  people.  May  I
be  born  again  with  them  in  the  heaven  of  the  blessed,  be
admitted  to  the  family  of  Mi-le,  and  serve  the  Buddha  of
the  future  who  is  full  of  kindness  and  affection.  When  I
descend  again  upon  earth,  to  pass  through  other  forms  of
existence,  I desire  at  every  new  birth  to  fulfil  my  duties
towards  Buddha,  and  arrive  at  the  last  at  the  highest  and
most  perfect  intelligence.''

25.  Having  thus  surveyed,  however  imperfectly,  the
belief  regarding  a future  state  held  by  the  greater  nations
both  of  the  East  and  West  before  the  advent  of  Christi-
anity, let  us  now  make  a few  observations.

In  the  first  place,  there  are  manifestly  two  ways  in  which
such  a belief  may  be  held.  In  one  of  these  it  becomes  the
natural  result  of  an  implicit  faith  in  God  and  his  goodness,
which  will  not  suffer  him  to  disappoint  the  natural  and
innate  longings  of  his  intelligent  creatures.  And  such  a
belief  is  more  likely  to  arise  amongst  a nation  which  has
already  vividly  realized  the  living  presence  and  goodness  of
God.  Now  the  ancient  Jews  were  such  a nation,  and  the
belief  that  even  death  cannot  break  the  fellowship  of  the
believer  with  God  comes  out  clearly  enough  in  several
Psalms.  Moreover,  the  notion  of  some  sort  of  future  life
lies  clearly  in  what  is  said  of  Enoch.  All  this  goes  beyond
the  mere  notion  of  Sheol,  which  is  not  thought  of  as  a
happy  place.  But  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees  this  had
grown  into  a definite  belief  in  the  resurrection,  and  with-
out insisting  on  the  truthfulness  of  the  Second  Book  of'
Maccabees  as  an  historical  document,  we  may  yet  be  sure
that  it  has  embodied  the  feelings  of  the  Jewish  nation.  It
is  of  little  consequence  whetlier  a mother  and  seven  brethren
were  actually  put  to  death  because  they  would  not  trans-


21


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH,

gress  what  they  believed  to  be  the  laws  of  God,  or  whether
in  dying  they  expressed  their  belief  that  they  would  be
continued  in  a bodily  existence  by  the  Creator.  For  it  is
manifest  from  what  we  know  of  the  Jews,  that  not  merely
one  family  but  many  would  under  similar  circumstances
have  acted  in  the  manner  described  by  the  historian,  dying
with  the  same  fortitude  and  encouraged  by  the  same  hope.
We  have  here  a region  in  which  there  is  no  thought  of  the
How — this  troublesome  question  has  not  yet  arisen,  nor  is
it  likely  to  arise.  No  doubt  has  yet  been  entertained  regard-
ing the  power  of  God,  nor  would  such  a doubt  be  likely  to
receive  much  encouragement  here.

26.  But  the  human  mind  will  not  refrain  from  specula-
tion, and  this  brings  us  to  the  second  method  in  which  a
belief  regarding  a future  state  may  be  held.  It  may  be
held  after  a mode  determined  by  speculations  regarding  the
possible  conditions  of  a future  state.  Such  speculations
may  of  course  take  every  variety  of  form,  but  yet  there  are
three  well-defined  classes  into  which  they  naturally  group
themselves : —

hi  the  Jirst  place,  we  have  the  doctrine  of  an  ethereal
state,  which  may  or  may  not  be  eternal ;

Secondly,  we  have  the  doctrine  of  a bodily  existence,
which  may  or  may  not  be  eternal ; and,

In  the  third  p)lctce,  we  have  the  doctrine  that  a future
state  is  inconceivable  or  impossible.

27.  The  first  of  these  beliefs  was  probably  held  by  a por-
tion of  the  Egyptians,  Greeks,  and  Eomans,  and  by  most  of
the  Jews.  It  was  likewise  held  by  many  amongst  the
eastern  nations.  It  formed  indeed  one  of  the  two  ways  of
imagining  a future  state,  but  it  was  of  a very  vague  and
dreary  nature  ; and  from  the  passage  of  Homer  already


22


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


quoted  (Art.  14),  we  realize  the  longing  supposed  to  be
felt  by  the  inhabitants  of  such  a place  to  escape  into  a
more  substantial  region.  Unquestionably  it  was  not  a
place  in  which  practical  men  like  the  Jews,  for  instance,
Avould  wish  to  dwell,  and  yet  no  doubt  it  had  great  attrac-
tion for  minds  of  a visionary  and  ecstatic  nature,  who  held
matter  to  be  the  source  of  evil.

The  return  of  the  soul  to  its  divine  original,  an  Egyptian
doctrine,  the  entrance  into  Nirva^ia,  proclaimed  by  Buddha,
and  the  absorption  into  Buddha  himself,  proclaimed  by
some  of  his  followers,  are  all  proofs  that  a doctrine  of  this
nature  has  peculiar  fascinations  for  a dreamy  order  of  minds.
Nor  must  we  analyse  too  rigidly  the  exact  meaning  and
tendency  of  such  doctrines,  inasmuch  as  we  cannot  easily
enter  into  the  real  feelings  of  those  who  propounded  them,
and  who  probably  entertained  conceptions  which  cannot
adequately  be  clothed  in  words.

28.  Coming  now  to  the  belief  of  a bodily  existence,  it
is  remarkable  that  the  doctrine  of  a transmigration  of  souls
was  extensively  prevalent  amongst  all  the  nations  we  have
named,  if  we  except  the  Jews.  It  was  believed  in,  as  we
have  seen,  by  a large  class  of  the  Egyptians ; it  was  intro-
duced into  Greece  by  Pythagoras  and  his  followers ; it  is
considered  to  have  been  from  time  immemorial  a common
property  of  the  various  religions  of  the  extreme  East ; and
it  is  recorded  by  Caesar  that  the  Druids  believed  in  the
same  doctrine,  although  they  confined  the  transmigration  to
human  bodies.

It  will  perhaps  surprise  many  of  our  readers  to  learn  the
extensive  prevalence  of  such  a doctrine,  wondering  as  they
must  how  it  is  possible  to  attach  certainty  to  an  existence
which  passes  through  the  body  of  various  men  and  animals


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


23


— something  perhaps  like  a draught  of  Lethe  being  adminis-
tered at  the  moment  of  passage.  But  the  ancients,  being
unable  to  rise  to  a higher  conception  of  a bodily  future,  were
compelled  either  to  admit  this  doctrine  or  one  yet  more
absurd,  namely,  that  the  very  same  body  which  was  laid  in
the  tomb  will  once  more  be  animated  by  the  spirit  which
formerly  possessed  it.  It  does  not  therefore  surprise  us
that  the  ancients,  with  the  exception  probably  of  a portion
of  Egypt,  and  some  of  the  Jews,  should  have  preferred  the
doctrine  of  transmigration ; but  we  are  exceedingly  surprised
that  the  other  alternative  doctrine,  of  manifestly  Egyptian
parentage,  should  have  come  to  be  accepted  by  the  modern
nations  of  Europe  under  the  garb  of  Christianity.  We
shall  return  again  to  this  subject,  but  meanwhile  let  us
observe  that,  when  men  first  began  to  ask  the  How  of  a
future  state,  the  reply  was  something  extremely  vague  and
unsatisfying.  No  wonder,  then,  that  a class  of  men  who
had  not  unlimited  confidence  in  God,  and  who  could  not
believe  in  either  of  the  doctrines  of  a future  state,  should
have  lapsed  into  philosophical  infidelity  and  denied  the
immortality  of  the  soul  altogether.

29.  We  have  thus  arrived  at  a stage  of  development  in
which  we  may  imagine  the  next  step  to  be  one  which  will
throw  some  light  upon  this  same  question  of  How— that
will  give,  or  at  any  rate  profess  to  give,  some  information
regarding  the  conditions  of  a future  life.  The  intellect  of
man  had  attempted  to  obtain  such  knowledge  for  itself,  but
the  result  was  a conspicuous  failure;  the  sword  was  not
sharp  enough,  nor  the  arm  which  wielded  it  powerful
enough,  to  hew  down  the  thick  and  seemingly  impenetrable
barrier  which  fringes  the  avenue  to  the  world  of  spirits.

‘‘We  cannot  go  to  them,’’  was  the  unanimous  wail  of  the


24


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


ancient  pliilosophers,  till  some  of  the  more  hopeful  of  them
suggested  as  an  alternative  that  they  might  come  to  us.
For  clearly,  if  A and  B are  separated  from  each  other  by
a barrier,  and  there  yet  remains  good-will  between  them,
two  courses  are  possible,  and  only  two,  if  they  are  to  be
made  acquainted  with  each  other.  If  A is  so  weak  as  to  be
unable  to  overleap  the  barrier,  and  if  at  the  same  time  it
would  be  a matter  of  importance  to  him  to  become  better
acquainted  with  B,  then  B may  be  expected  to  surmount
the  barrier  if  it  be  surmountable,  and  exhibit  himself  to  A.

30.  As  a matter  of  history,  it  appears  that  about  the
time  of  the  birth  of  Christ  there  was  an  expectation,  how-
ever vague,  that  something  of  this  nature  was  about  to  take
place.  And  when  Christ  made  His  appearance,  and  gathered
round  Him  a little  band  of  disciples,  there  can  be  no  doubt
tliat  He  claimed  to  be  the  bearer  of  intelligence  from  the
world  of  spirits.  Those  who  differ  from  one  another  as  to
the  light  in  which  they  regard  His  person  and  doctrine  will
yet,  we  think,  agree  in  this.  The  claim  made  by  His  dis-
ciples for  His  gospel  was  that  it  brought  life  and  immor-
tality to  light  (see  Whately  s Essays),  and  the  grounds
of  the  claim  were  built  upon  the  belief  that  Christ  had
risen  from  the  dead,  and  showed  Himself  after  his  resur-
rection to  a body  of  men  who  had  not  previously  believed
that  the  Messiah  Himself  was  to  die  and  rise  again.

His  disciples  in  fine  took  His  resurrection  for  a proof, that
life  is  possible  after  death.  Christ  was  believed  to  be  the
first-fruits  of  a system  that  was  destined  ultimately  to
embrace  in  the  same  glorious  immortality  all  those  of  His
disciples  who  were  united  to  their  Master  by  a sincere  and
living  faith.  Evidently  Paul  attached  much  im|)ortance  to
the  fact  of  Christas  resurrection,  for  he  says  (l  Cor.  xv.  14),


INTROD  UCTOR  Y SKETCH.


25


‘‘  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  our  preaching  vain,  and  your
faith  is  also  vain.  Yea,  and  we  are  found  false  witnesses  of
God  : because  we  hc\ve  testified  of  God  that  he  raised  up
Christ ; whom  he  raised  not  up,  if  so  be  that  the  dead  rise
not.  For  if  the  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not  Christ  raised :
and  if  Christ  be  not  raised,  your  faith  is  vain ; ye  are  yet
in  your  sins.''

31.  Let  us  now  try  to  ascertain  what  sort  of  future  state
was  taught  by  Christ.  In  the  first  place,  it  was  a bodily
state — a state  which  could  even  adapt  itself  with  some
modification  to  the  views  of  the  Pharisees  who  believed  in
the  resurrection  of  the  body.  But  the  modification  intro-
duced is  sufficiently  important.  The  occasion  of  its  an-
nouncement was  a disputation  with  the  Sadducees,  who
attempted  to  perplex  Christ  by  stating  to  Him  the  case  of  a
woman  who  had  been  married  in  this  life  to  seven  brethren
in  succession,  and  then  asking  Him  whose  wife  she  should  be
in  the  resurrection.  We  are  told  (Matthew  xxii.  29)  that
in  reply  to  the  question,  “Jesus  answered  and  said  unto
them.  Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  scriptures,  nor  the  power
of  God.  For  in  the  resurrection  they  neither  marry  nor
are  given  in  marriage,  but  are  as  the  angels  of  God  in
heaven."  We  may  gather  by  implication  from  this  narra-
tive, that  the  question  would  have  puzzled  the  Pharisees,
who  had  certainly  not  arrived  at  this  idea  of  the  resurrec-
tion state.

They  must  evidently  have  thought  that  the  resurrection
body  was  to  be  similar  to  the  present  one,  and  although
they  believed  in  the  existence  and  occasional  appearance
of  angels,  they  cannot  have  risen  to  the  idea  that  it
was  possible  for  man  to  reach  a similar  state  after
death.


26


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


32.  It  may  perhaps  be  said  that  many  of  Christas  sayings
would  seem  to  lead  towards  the  doctrine  of  a resurrection
of  the  very  same  particles  which  ar6  laid  in  the  graye.
To  this,  however,  it  may  be  replied  that  Christ  undoubtedly
wished  to  impress  upon  His  hearers,  wdio  were  for  the
most  part  unlearned  and  ignorant  men,  the  substantial  and
bodily  reality  of  the  future  state,  and  therefore  spoke  in
plain  language  without  entering  into  scientific  minutiae,
which  would  only  have  perplexed  them,  and  diminished  the
impression  which  His  words  were  otherwise  calculated  to
produce.  Few  of  His  hearers  would  trouble  themselves
about  the  mode,  nor  was  it  until  an  objection  was  started
by  the  learned  Sadducees  that  Christ  took  occasion  to  de-
velop His  doctrine.  In  accordance  with  this  view  we  see
that  a similar  difficulty  must  have  occurred  more  than  once
in  the  life  of  Paul,  who  was  brought  into  contact  with
the  philosophy  of  Greece  and  Kome.  For  in  one  of  his
Epistles^  he  asks  the  question, — How  are  the  dead  raised
up  ? and  with  what  body  do  they  come  ? He  then  replies  to
the  supposed  objector  in  the  following  noble  and  beautiful
language  : — “ There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another  glory
of  the  moon,  and  another  glory  of  the  stars ; for  one  star
differeth  from  another  star  in  glory.  So  also  is  the  resur-
rection of  the  dead  ; it  is  sown  in  corruption,  it  is  raised  in
incorruption  : it  is  sown  in  dishonour,  it  is  raised  in  glory  :
it  is  sown  in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in  power  : it  is  sown
a natural  body,  it  is  raised  a spiritual  body.  There  is  a
natural  body,  and  there  is  a spiritual  body.’'

33.  In  the  next  place  we  remark,  that  this  conception  of
a spiritual  body  similar  to  that  of  the  angels  is  accompanied
in  the  religious  system,  of  Christ  by  a conviction  that

1 1 Cor.  XV.  35.


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


27


the  present  visible  universe  will  assuredly  pass  away
This  is  expressed  in  both  divisions  of  the  writings  acknow-
ledged as  sacred  by  the  disciples  of  Christ.  Thus  it  is
said  : — “ Of  old  hast  thou  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth  ;
and  the  heavens  arc  the  work  of  thy  hands.  They  shall
perish,  but  thou  shalt  endure ; yea,  all  of  them  shall  wax
old  like  a garment : as  a vesture  shalt  thou  change  them,
and  they  shall  be  changed.^' ^ Again,  Paul  tells  us  that
‘‘  the  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal,  but  the  things
which  are  not  seen  are  eternal.”^  Likewise  also  Peter
says — “ The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a thief  in  the
night : in  the  which  the  heavens  shall  pass  away  with
a great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent
heat ; the  earth  also,  and  the  works  that  are  therein,  shall  be
burned  up.  . . . Nevertheless  we,  according  to  his  promise,
look  for  new  heavens  and  a new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth
righteousness.^'^  In  like  manner  John  tells  us  that  he  saw
in  a vision  a great  white  throne,  and  him  that  sat  on  it,
from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away  ; and
there  was  found  no  place  for  them."  ^

From  all  this  we  may  conclude  that  the  more  advanced
disciples  of  Christ  supposed  .the  resurrection  body  to  be
angelic  in  its  nature,  and  similar  to  that  which  they  believed
Christ  had  himself  assumed ; and  further,  that  they  supposed  y
this  body  would  remain  when  the  present  visible  universe  '
had  passed  away.

34.  We  have  already  remarked  that  it  was  the  object  of
Christ  to  bring  the  future  state  in  a very  vivid  manner  be-
fore His  disciples,  so  that  they  might  realize  its  substantial
existence,  and  He  has  accordingly  given  them  on  the  one
hand  exalted  descriptions  of  the  joys  of  heaven,  and  on  the

^ Psalm  cii.  25.  ^ 2 Cor.  iv.  18.  ^ 2 Peter  iii.  10.  ^ Rev.  xx.  11.


28


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


other  awful  accounts  of  the  place  of  torment.  Heaven  was
variously  described  as  a banqueting  house,  as  a beautiful
city,  as  Abraham’s  bosom,  and,  when  speaking  to  His  im-
mediate disciples,  as  a place  where  they  shall  dwell  together
with  their  Master.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  believed  that
Christ’s  description  of  hell  was  borrowed  from  the  valley  of
Hinnom,  a place  near  Jerusalem,  which  formed  the  re-
ceptacle for  every  species  of  filth,  the  combustible  parts  of
which  were  consumed  by  fire.  Putrefaction,  or  the  worm,
was  always  busy  there,  and  the  fire  was  always  burning,
and  this  may  have  given  rise  to  the  expression  : “ Where
their  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched.”  There
can  be  no  doubt,  we  think,  that  such  descriptions  were
meant  to  be  allegorical,  the  intention  being  by  forcible
earthly  images  to  convey  an  idea  of  what  could  not  other-
wise be  conveyed.

3 5.  It  is  well  known  that  many  varieties  of  opinion  havebeen
entertained  regarding  the  person  of  Christ  even  by  those
Avho  profess  to  be  His  disciples.  It  is  not  how^ever  here  our
object  to  enter  into  theological  controversies  ; our  treatment
of  this  subject  is  at  present  historical,  and  we  will  therefore
bring  before  our  readers  the  views  held  by  the  large  majority
of  those  who  call  themselves  Christians  regarding  the  person
of  Christ  and  tlie  constitution  of  the  invisible  world.

Whilst  all  the  Christian  Churches  believe  in  one  God,
yet  by  most  of  them  the  Godhead  is  believed  to  consist  of
three  persons,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.
The  first  of  these  appears  to  be  regarded  as  the  Being  or
Essence  in  virtue  of  whom  the  Universe  exists.  Thus  in
reciting  the  Apostles’  Creed  the  Christian  disciple  says  : —
“ I believe  in  God,  the  Father  Almighty,  maker  of  Heaven
and  Earth ; ” and  the  laws  of  the  Universe  are  regarded  by


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


29


Christian  theologians  as  being  expressions  of  the  will  acting
in  conformity  with  the  character  of  this  Being.  Thus
Nature  (according  to  Whately)  is  the  course  in  which  the
Author  and  Governor  of  all  things  proceeds  in  his  works.

But,  in  addition  to  this,  the  majority  of  Christian
Churches  virtually  assert  that  we  have,  besides  man  and  an
invisible  hierarchy  of  angels,  two  Divine  Persons,  who  work
through  and  by  the  Universe.  One  great  object  of  the
second  Person  of  the  Trinity  is  held  to  be  the  manifestation
of  God  to  man,  and  possibly  to  other  beings,  in  a manner
and  to  an  extent  which  could  not  be  accomplished  by  finite
intelligences.  One  great  object  of  the  third  Person  again
is  to  enter,  as  Lord  and  giver  of  life,  into  the  souls  of  men,
and  possibly  of  other  beings,  and  to  dwell  there  in  such  a
manner  as  to  fit  them  for  the  position  which  they  are
destined  ultimately  to  occupy  in  the  universe  of  God.

36.  In  Christ  it  is  supposed  that  we  have  an  incarnation
of  the  second  Person  of  the  Trinity,  and  the  work  which  He
accomplished  is  regarded  as  done  not  in  violation  of  the
order  of  things  as  established  by  God  the  Father,  but  rather
in  strict  obedience  to  it.  But  while  this  is  generally  ac-
cepted by  the  Church  of  Christ,  yet  the  doctrine  of  the
submission  of  Christ  to  law  has  been  held  by  some  as  not
inconsistent  with  a view  which  regards  the  miraculous
works  of  Christ  as  manifestations  of  His  divine  nature,  so
changing  the  order  of  things  as  to  denote  something  wrought
upon  the  universe  rather  than  something  wrought  through  it
and  by  its  means.  We  do  not  think  that  this  theory  is
borne  out  by  the  words  of  Christ  himself  He  says  :
“ I seek  not  mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of  the  Father  who
sent  me.”^  Again,  we  are  told  by  Paul,  that  ‘'when  the

^ John  V.  30.


30


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made
of  a woman,  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem  them  that  were
under  the  law,  that  they  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons/'^

Christ  also  frequently  represents  His  works  as  wrought
by  the  Father,  as  for  instance  when  he  says  : — I do
nothing  of  myself ; but  as  the  Father  hath  taught  me,  I
speak  these  things/’^  In  fine,  the  whole  genius  of  Christi-
anity would  point  towards  a total  submission  of  Christ  in
every  respect  towards  all  the  laws  of  the  universe,  which,
indeed,  form  but  another  expression  for  the  will  of  God
acting  in  conformity  with  His  character.  To  make  our
meaning  clear,  we  may  say  that  the  will  of  man  is  accom-
plished in  conformity  with  the  laws  of  the  universe,  while
on  the  other  hand  the  will  of  God,  as  above  defined,  con-
stitutes in  itself  the  laws  of  the  universe.  Now  it  appears
to  us  from  what  we  find  recorded  in  the  records  of  the  Chris-
tian religion,  that  Christ  must  in  this  sense  be  regarded  as
similar  to  man  ; but,  inasmuch  as  the  relation  of  Christ  to
the  universe  was  different  from  that  of  any  mere  man,  so
the  works  of  Christ  are  to  be  regarded  as  difierent  from
those  which  any  mere  man  can  accomplish.

37.  The  Christian  system,  of  which  we  have  now  briefly
described  the  peculiarities,  was  soon  called  upon  to  do  battle,
on  the  one  hand  with  the  ancient  philosophies  of  Greece
and  Eome,  and  on  the  other  with  the  less  civilised  races  of
man,  including  those  wdiich  were  destined  ultimately  to
overpower  the  Roman  Empire.  But  it  was  chiefly  when
the  apostolic  pioneers  came  into  contact  with  the  acute
minds  of  the  ancient  philosophers  that  we  have  light  struck
regarding  what  may  be  termed  the  philosophical  system  of
Christianity  ; thus  we  have  already  remarked  (Art.  32),  that

1 Galatians  iv.  4.  ^ John  viii,  28.


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


31


the  nature  of  the  glorified  body  is  most  clearly  given  us  by
the  Apostle  Paul.  As  respects  the  more  barbarous  nations
which  afterwards  embraced  Christianity,  they  were  not
likely  to  puzzle  themselves  about  the  physical  possibilities
of  a future  state,  nor  even  to  contest  the  physical  reality  of
a place  of  eternal  torment.  And  so  it  happened,  that  when
dealing  with  a lower  class  of  converts,  the  Christian  religion
appealed  more  to  their  fears  than  to  their  hopes,  bringing
vividly  before  them  the  awful  nature  of  hell  ; while  on  the
other  hand,  the  higher  class  of  converts,  if  they  had  not  a
very  clear  idea  of  heaven,  were  yet  drawn  with  intense
longing  to  a future  which  they  were  to  spend  in  the  com-
pany of  Christ.

38.  In  the  course  of  a few  hundred  years  we  find  the
whole  Koman  Empire  converted  to  Christianity,  while,  how-
ever, in  Arabia  and  the  East  it  appears  either  to  have  made
very  little  progress,  or  to  have  become  corrupted  into  some-
thing very  different  from  that  which  we  read  of  in  the  New
Testament.  It  had  not  become  the  national  religion  of  the
Arabs;  and  we  can  well  imagine  that  this  nation,  with  their
pretensions  to  be  regarded  as  the  most  ancient  representa-
tives of  the  Semitic  race,  would  not  look  kindly  upon  a
religion  that  took  its  origin  in  a rival  branch  of  the  same
family.  We  can  further  imagine  that,  with  such  a feeling,
they  would  be  very  ready  to  welcome  a religious  system
that  should  spring  up  amongst  themselves.  Such  an  oppor-
tunity was  afforded  them  by  Mohammed.  Acknowledging
in  some  measure  the  claims  of  Moses  and  Christ,  Mohammed
^ yet  claimed  for  himself  and  his  religion  a superiority  over
his  rivals,  flattering  by  this  means  the  vanity  of  his  own
countrymen,  who  considered  themselves  the  elder  branch
of  the  Semitic  race.  The  heaven  that  was  promised  by


32


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


Mohammed  was  altosfether  of  a sensuous  character,  and  well
calculated  to  strike  the  imagination  of  his  disciples.  He
succeeded  equally  well  in  describing  hell  as  a place  of
torment  reserved  for  those  who  did  not  believe  in  his  reli-
gion. He  further  commissioned  his  followers  to  propagate
his  tenets  by  the  sword,  so  that  men  became  converts  from
dread  of  earthly  punishment,  and  were  retained  in  his
ranks  by  the  success  which  attended  his  arms,  and  by  the
promise  of  a paradise  that  was  full  of  earthly  delights,  as
well  as  by  the  threat  of  a hell  which  was  reserved  for
unbelievers.  We  could  not  possibly  have  a better  or  more
graphic  description  of  such  a system  than  that  which  is
given  us  by  Byron  : —

“ But  him  the  maids  of  paradise
Impatient  to  their  halls  invite,

And  the  dark  Heaven  of  Houris’  eyes
On  him  shall  shine  for  ever  bright ;

They  come — their  kerchiefs  green  they  wave,

And  welcome  with  a kiss  the  brave !

Who  falls  in  battle  ’gainst  the  Giaour
Is  worthiest  an  immortal  bower.

But  thou,  false  Infidel ! shalt  writhe
Beneath  avenging  Monkir’s  scythe  ;

And  from  its  torment  ’scape  alone
To  wander  round  lost  Eblis’  throne.

And  fire  unquench’d,  unquenchable.

Around,  within,  thy  heart  shall  dwell ;

Nor  ear  can  hear  nor  tongue  can  tell
The  tortures  of  that  inward  hell ! ”

The  disciples  of  Mohammed  believed  in  the  unity  of  God,
but  it  is  evident  that  they  had  not  a very  exalted  concep-
tion of  his  character.  Their  trust  in  him  could  infuse  zeal
into  their  hearts  and  vigour  into  their  arms  when  they  went
to  make  proselytes  by  the  sword,  but  could  not  produce


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


33


that  lofty  type  of  character  which  has  so  frequently  ap-
peared amongst  the  followers  of  Christ.

39.  We  have  now  reached  in  the  history  of  our  problem
the  period  known  as  the  dark  ages,  during  which  the  spirit
of  scientific  inquiry  was  well-nigh  extinct.  At  length,
however,  there  arrived  a time  when  the  human  mind,
from  a variety  of  causes,  suddenly  awoke  from  the  lethargy
into  which  it  had  sunk.

When  scientific  tl] ought  was  once  more  directed  to  the
subject  of  immortality,  it  was  easily  seen  that  the  doctrine
of  the  resurrection  in  its  vulgar  acceptation  could  not  pos-
sibly be  true,  since  a case  might  be  imagined  in  which
there  might  even  be  a contention  between  rival  claimants
for  the  same  body.  We  might,  for  instance,  imagine  a
Christian  missionary  to  be  killed  and  eaten  by  a savage,
who  was  afterwards  killed  himself.  It  is  indeed  both
curious  and  instructive  to  note  the  reluctance  with  which
various  sections  of  the  Christian  Church  have  been  driven
from  their  old  conceptions,  and  the  expedients,  always
grotesque,  and  som.e  times  positively  loathsome,  with  which
they  have  attempted  to  buttress  up  the  falling  edifice.
Some  deem  it  necessary  that  a single  material  germ  or
organised  particle  of  the  body  at  death  should  survive  until
the  resurrection,  forgetting  that  under  such  an  hypothesis  it
would  be  easy  to  deprive  a man  of  the  somewhat  doubtful
benefits  of  such  a resurrection,  by  sealing  him  up  when  yet
alive  in  a strong  iron  coffin,  and  by  appropriate  means
reducing  the  whole  into  an  inorganic  mass.  Boston,  again,
in  his  Fourfold  State,  goes  still  further,  adopting  the  idea
that  a single  particle  of  insensible  perspiration  which  has
escaped  from  us  during  life,  will  be  sufficient  to  serve  as  a
nucleus  for  the  resurrection  body.  So  that  according  to  the

c


34


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


disciples  of  this  school,  the  resurrection  will  be  preceded  by
a gigantic  manufacture  of  shoddy,  the  effete  and  loathsome
rags  of  what  was  once  the  body  being  worked  up  along
with  a large  quantity  of  new  material  into  a glorious  and
immortal  garment,  to  form  the  clothing  of  a being  that  will
live  for  ever ! Unquestionably  we  have  continuity  in  this
hypothesis,  but  it  is  the  continuity  of  the  Irishman’s  coat  in
the  story,  the  owner  of  which  always  made  a point  of  retain-
ing as  many  as  possible  of  the  rags  that  were  present  on
the  last  occasion,  those  only  which  had  absolutely  fallen  to
pieces  being  replaced  by  something  new  ! We  have  only  to
compare  this  hideous  and  grotesque  conception  with  the
noble  and  beautiful  language  of  Paul,  to  recognise  the  depth
of  abasement  into  which  the  Church  had  sunk  through
the  materialistic  conceptions  of  the  Dark  Ages.

40.  But  it  is  needless  to  say  that  this  very  liberal  offer
of  a certain  class  of  theologians  to  surrender  everything
except  a single  shred  of  the  worn-out  body  was  nevertheless
rejected  by  the  school  of  scientific  men.  Death,  they
replied,  must  be  regarded  as  a total  and  complete  destruc-
tion of  the  visible  body  as  far  at  least  as  the  individual  life
is  concerned.  At  the  same  time  professing  themselves
unable  to  conceive  such  an  existence  as  a disembodied  spirit,
they  were  forced  to  conclude  like  Priestley,^  that  the  soul
in  its  nature  is  not  immortal.  At  this  point,  however,  the
scientific  school  splits  up  into  two  or  even  three  sections,
one  believing  with  Priestley  and  others  that  immortality  is  a
fresh  and  miraculous  gift  conferred  upon  man  at  the  resur-
rection ; another,  unable  to  conceive  the  possibility  of  a
miracle  in  the  case  of  each  individual,  denying  a future
state  altogether;  while  a third  section  maintains  that  there


^ See  Professor  Huxley’s  Birmingham  Lecture.


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


35


is  no  use  in  discussing  the  subject,  because  man  after  death
has  passed  beyond  the  sphere  of  human  inquiry.

41.  Regarding  the  existence  and  nature  of  the  Deity,
various  opinions  have  been  entertained  by  the  disciples
of  what  we  may  term  the  extreme  school  of  science.  Some
have  maintained  that  we  have  no  evidence  of  the  exist-
ence of  any  such  Being,  others  that  we  have  no  evidence  of
His  personality,  while  others  argue  that  although  we  may
become  convinced  of  His  great  power  and  wisdom  from  the
works  of  creation,  there  are  other  attributes  of  His  character
which  are  not  so  revealed.  We  cannot,  for  instance,  say
they,  maintain  the  benevolence  of  the  Deity  in  the  way  in
which  we  understand  the  word  benevolence,  nor  have  we
any  evidence  .that  He  is  just  in  the  way  in  which  we  under-
stand the  word  justice.  It  is  well  known  that  the  late
John  Stuart  Mill  would  have  regarded  the  claims  of
Christianity  with  more  favour  had  its  character  been  more
Manichaean,  that  is  to  say,  had  the  spirit  of  evil  been
allowed  a position  more  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  spirit  of
good  in  the  government  of  the  universe.

42.  Let  us  here  pause  to  indicate  two  points  of  similarity
between  the  scientific  school  and  the  system  of  Christianity.
Both,  we  conceive,  maintain  in  some  sense  the  supremacy  of
law  or  the  invariability  of  the  procedure  adopted  by  the
Deity  in  the  government  of  the  universe  (Art.  36)  ; both
maintain  likewise  that  the  outer  works  of  the  visible
universe  are  insufficient  to  manifest  certain  attributes  of  the
Deity.  Here,  however,  the  likeness  ends ; the  scientific  school
conceive  they  have  no  information  beyond  the  visible
universe,  while  the  Christian  system  asserts  the  existence  of
an  invisible  order  of  things,  and  the  fact  of  communica-
tions having  taken  place  between  the  two  for  the  purpose


36


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


of  revealing  God  to  man,  and  of  raising  man  towards
God.

43.  Leaving  now  tlie  views  of  those  who  may  be  said  to
constitute  the  extreme  left,  let  us  shortly  consider  the  various
opinions  held  regarding  a future  state  by  those  who  yet
rank  themselves  within  the  pale  of  Christianity.  Not  a few
who  revere  the  sacred  writings,  believe  nevertheless  that
the  descriptions  of  the  unseen  world  contained  therein  are
purely  allegorical.

They  do  not  believe  in  the  existence  of  evil  spirits  exer-
cising an  influence  over  the  mind  of  man.  Satan  is  re-
garded as  a personification  of  evil  {Ata^6\o<^,  the  accuser,
Devils  advocate)  rather  than  as  possessing 'a  real  objec-
tive existence.  Having  thus  got  rid  of  the  .worst  half  of
the  unseen  world,  the  other  half  follows  in  due  course.
They  do  not  believe  in  the  unseen  jDi’^sence  of  angels
(’'^ryryeXo?,  mcssenger ) j and  in  fine  they  conceive  there  is
nothing  above  man  but  the  Deity,  who  always  acts  accord-
ing to  rigid  law.  It  is  a step  from  this  to  believe  in  the
futility  of  prayer,  which  is  looked  upon  as  devoid  of  any
objective  influence,  although  the  practice  of  it  may  be
regarded  as  possessing  a beneficial  subjective  efiect.  A future
life  is  believed  to  be  conceivable,  but  only  under  conditions
and  in  a universe  about  which  we  know  nothing.  At  this
point,  however,  the  views  of  what  may  be  called  the  left
centre  come  into  contact  with  those  of  the  extreme  left.

44.  But  there  are  others  quite  disposed  to  believe  in  the
existence  of  the  unseen  world,  who  yet  regard  as  figurative
a large  part  of  the  Biblical  descriptions.  Some,  like  the
Church  of  Rome,  consider  the  separation  of  the  souls  of  men
after  death  into  two  categories,  and  only  two,  as  insufficient
and  unsupported  by  the  spirit  of  Scripture  ; while  others


. INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


37


cannot  imagine  the  eternity  of  punishment,  but  believe
that  the  most  reprobate  will  ultimately  be  brought  back  and
elevated  into  the  regions  of  bliss.

Others  again,  arguing  from  some  expressions  in  the  Bible,
regard  immortality  as  a boon  reserved  only  for  the  good,
believing  that  the  wicked  will  be  destroyed,  both  soul  and
body,  in  hell.  No  doubt  by  an  energetic  nature  such  a fate
would  be  regarded  as  even  worse  than  endless  punishment :

, Sad  cure  ! for  who  would  lose,

Though  full  of  pain,  this  intellectual  being  'i
Those  thoughts  that  wander  through  eternity
To  perish  rather,  swallow’d  up  and  lost
In  the  wide  womb  of  uncreated  night,

Devoid  of  sense  and  motion.

So  speaks  Milton,  putting  the  idea  into  the  mouth  of
Belial,  the  fallen  spirit,  when  addressing  his  peers.

45.  These  are  a few  of  the  ways  •in  which  the  state-
ments of  Christ  and  his  Apostles  regarding  immortality
have  been  interpreted  by  those  who  call  themselves  Chris-
tians. But  amid  this  great  diversity  there  is  yet  one
principle  common  to  all.  It  is  imagined  that  some-
thing peculiar  in  the  history  of  the  world  took  place  at
the  coming  of  Christ,  which  has  not  since  been  repeated.
Communications  were  then  made  to  mankind  which  are
regarded  as  unique,  and  the  truth  of  which  it  is  held  wiU
only  be  verified  in  the  case  of  each  individual  when  he
has  passed  into  that  country  from  which  we  receive  no
travellers’  tales.

Notwithstanding  this  general  belief,  not  a few  have
arisen  pretending  to  have  received  a new  and  supplemen-
tary revelation.  In  most  of  these  cases  the  scientific  his-


38


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.  •


toriaii  may  at  once  come  to  a conclusion  without  any
violation  of  liis  impartiality, — they  are  so  manifestly  the
products  of  delusion  if  not  of  imposture.  There  is  how-
ever one  system  which  merits  fuller  treatment,  inasmuch
as  it  has  led  to  a mode  of  viewing  the  spiritual  world
which  has  many  followers  at  the  present  day.

46.  Emanuel  Swedenborg,  the  apostle  of  this  system,
was  in  many  respects  a remarkable  man.  Living  more
than  a century  ago,  and  during  the  time  when  Science
was  pausing  for  the  spring  she  has  since  made,  he  seems
to  have  foreshadowed,  if  he  did  not  anticipate,  many  of
the  doctrines  of  the  present  day.  We  are  not  however
now  concerned  with  his  purely  physical  speculations.

Swedenborg  has  written  at  great  length  regarding  the
nature  and  destiny  of  man,  and  the  constitution  of  the
unseen  world  into  which  he  asserts  he  had  the  power  of
entering.

He  assumes  the  existence  of  a human  or  semi-human
race  before  Adam,  of  which  he  remarks  that  they  lived  as
beasts.  Man,’'  he  tells  us,  “ considered  in  himself,  is
nothing  but  a beast.  . . . Man  s peculiarity  over  animals
— a peculiarity  they  neither  have  nor  can  have — consists
in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  in  his  will  and  understanding.
It  is  in  consequence  of  this  conjunction  with  the  Lord  that
man  lives  after  death  ; and  although  he  should  exist  like  a
beast,  caring  for  nothing  but  himself  and  his  relations,
yet  the  Lord’s  mercy  is  so  great,  being  Divine  and  Infinite,
that  He  never  leaves  him,  but  continually  breathes  into
him  His  own  life,  whereby  he  is  enabled  to  recognise
what  is  good  and  evil  and  true  and  false.”

Kegarding  man’s  mortal  nature  we  are  told  by  Swe-
denborg that  ''  man  at  birth  puts  on  the  grosser  substances


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


39


of  nature,  his  body  consisting  of  such.  These  grosser
substances  by  death  he  puts  off,  but  retains  the  purer
substances  of  nature,  which  are  next  to  those  that  are
spiritual.  These  purer  substances  serve  thereafter  as  his
body,  the  continent  and  expression  of  his  mind.’"’^

“ A man  at  death,''  he  tells  us  again,  escapes  from  his
material  body  as  from  a rent  or  worn-out  vesture,  carrying
with  him  every  member,  faculty,  and  function  complete,
with  not  one  wanting,  yet  the  corpse  is  as  heavy  as  when
he  dwelt  therein."

Eegarding  the  spiritual  world,  he  tells  us  ‘‘that  the
whole  natural  world  corresponds  to  the  spiritual  world
collectively  and  in  every  part ; for  the  natural  world  exists
and  subsists  from  the  spiritual  world,  just  as  an  effect
does  from  its  cause."  He  also  tells  us  “that  if  in  the
spiritual  world  two  desire  intensely  to  see  each  other,  that
desire  at  once  brings  about  a meeting.  When  any  angel
goes  from  one  place  to  another,  whether  it  is  in  his  own
city,  or  in  the  courts,  or  the  gardens,  or  to  others  out  of
his  own  city,  he  arrives  sooner  or  later,  just  as  he  is  ardent
or  indifferent,  the  way  itself  being  shortened  or  lengthened
in  proportion.  . . . Change  of  place  being  only  change
of  state,  it  is  evident  that  approximations  in  the  spiritual
world  arise  from  similitudes  of  mind  and  removals  from
dissimilitudes ; and  thus  spaces  are  merely  signs  of  inner
differences.  . . . From  that  cause  alone  the  hells  are
altogether  separated  from  the  heavens."

Of  God  he  says  : “ The  Divine  is  incomprehensible  even
by  the  angels,  for  there  is  no  ratio  between  the  finite  and
the  infinite.

“No  man  or  angel  can  ever  approach  the  Father  and

^ Life  and  Writings  of  Swedenborg,  by  William  White.


40


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


immediately  worship  Him ; for  He  is  invisible,  and  being
invisible  can  neither  be  thought  of  nor  loved.”

Of  God^s  Providence  he  says  : ‘‘As  in  the  Lord  we  are
and  act,  His  Providence  is  over  us  from  birth  to  death,
and  even  to  eternity.  ...  To  talk  of  the  Lord’s  Pro-
vidence as  universal,  and  to  separate  it  from  particulars,
is  like  talking  of  a whole  in  which  there  are  no  parts,  or
of  something  in  which  there  is  nothing.  Consequently  it
is  most  false,  a mere  picture  of  the  imagination,  and  down-
right stupidity,  to  say  that  the  Lord’s  Providence  is
universal,  and  not  at  the  same  time  in  the  minutest  par-
ticulars ; for  to  provide  and  rule  in  the  universal,  and  not
at  the  same  time  in  the  minutest  particulars,  is  not  to  rule
at  aU.”

Swedenborg  likewise  believed  in  an  intermediate  state
analogous  to  purgatory,  although  he  objected  to  the  name.
This  was  called  by  him  the  world  of  spirits,  after  staying
in  which,  for  a longer  or  shorter  time,  the  souls  of  the
departed  were  drafted  off  to  heaven  on  the  one  side,  and
to  hell  on  the  other.

47.  We  have  now  said  enough  to  give  our  readers
some  idea  of  Swedenborg’s  spiritual  system.  Unques-  *
tionably  it  is  the  system  of  a profound  thinker,  and  many
great  men  have  not  hesitated  to  express  their  admiration  of
Swedenborg  and  his  works.  It  is  one  thing  however  to
admit  the  beauty,  the  philosophical  completeness,  and  even
the  possible  truth  of  many  of  his  statements,  and  another
thing  to  believe  that  he  actually  conversed  with  the  in-
habitants of  another  world  in  the  way  in  which  one  man
converses  with  another.

But,  after  all,  suppose  that  the  everyday  experience  of
men  is  that  only  he  who  lives  in  the  world  as  not  of  the


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


41


world  lives  a true  life,  and  this  is  the  Bible  teaching, —
whose  then  is  the  true  doctrine  ? Swedenborg  errs  if  he
claims  this  as  his  exclusive  personal  experience.  Paul
claimed  it  as  belonging  to  all  men.  Surely  men  of  science
should  of  all  men  claim  this  likewise.

Now,  when  a man  unquestionably  honest  makes  an  asser-
tion such  as  Swedenborg  made,  there  are  only  two  possible
conclusions  to  which  we  can  come,  unless  we  choose  to  remain
in  a state  of  mental  suspense.  We  must  either  believe  that
he  really  saw  what  he  professes  to  have  seen,  or  that  he  was
the  victim  of  some, strange  hallucination,  in  virtue  of  which
his  subjective  impressions  became  transferred  into  the  realms
of  objective  realities.  We  know  very  well  that  the  human
mind  is  extremely  prone  to  such  delusions,  and  that  the
nature  of  the  case  is  frequently  betrayed  by  some  indiscreet
admission  that  we  have  external  grounds  for  believing  to  be
incorrect.  Had  Swedenborg  confined  himself  to  the  invisible
world  it  would  have  been  very  difiicult  to  prove  him  the
subject  of  a delusion,  but  when  he  visits  the  planets,  and
describes  their  inhabitants,  he  enters  at  once  upon  danger-
ous ground.

Concerning  his  description  of  the  various  planets  it  has
been  remarked  that  his  visits  were  only  paid  to  those,
the  existence  of  which  was  known  when  he  wrote,  Uranus
and  Neptune  being  passed  over.  This  of  itself  is  a sus-
picious circumstance.  Again,  he  peoples  the  planets  Jupiter
and  Saturn  with  inhabitants  as  well  as  our  own  Moon ;
now,  scientific  analogy  is  strongly  against  either  of  these
two  planets  being  inhabited,  while  it  is  next  to  certain  that
our  moon  is  entirely  without  inhabitants.

In  fine,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  speculations
of  Swedenborg  were  anything  else  than  the  product  of  his


42


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


own  mind,  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the  speculations  of
this  volume  may  be  regarded  as  the  product  of  the  minds  of
its  authors.

48.  Before  concluding  this  historical  sketch  let  us  say  a
few  words  about  modern  spiritualists  in  as  far  as  their  pre-
tensions have  reference  to  our  subject.  They  assert  the
presence  among  them  of  the  spirits  of  the  departed,  assum-
ing sometimes  a visible  shape,  and  they  compare  these
appearances  to  those  which  are  recorded  in  the  Sacred
writings.  But  there  is  this  prominent  distinction  between
the  two  : the  spiritual  communications  recorded  in  the
Scriptures  are  represented  as  made  to  those  who  were  un-
prepared to  receive  them,  and  also  for  the  most  part  as
taking  place  in  open  daylight,  or,  to  speak  more  properly,
having  no  sort  of  reference  to  light  or  darkness.  Whatever
be  their  explanation  they  have  an  open-air  look  about
them.  On  the  other  hand,  the  manifestations  recorded  by
the  spiritualists  take  place  as  a rule  in  insufficient  light,  if
not  in  total  darkness,  and  in  presence  of  those  who  are  in  a
state  of  mental  excitement.

Now,  for  our  own  part,  we  should  not  be  disposed  to  credit
any  communication  from  the  world  of  spirits  that  was  not
made  in  open  daylight,  and  to  those  unprepared  to  receive
it,  and  therefore  unprejudiced.

The  man  of  science  must  be  perfectly  recipient,  but  he
must  in  the  interests  of  truth  guard  himself  against  the
possibility  of  delusion.  We  know  the  almost  infinite
power  of  the  mind  not  only  to  delude  itself,  but  to  propa-
gate its  delusions  to  the  minds  of  others,  and,  as  we  have
already  remarked,  the  conditions  of  these  manifestations  are
favourable  to  the  spread  of  such  delusions.  We  do  not
therefore  hesitate  to  choose  between  the  two  alternative


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH.


43


explanations,  and  to  regard  these  pretended  manifestations
as  having  no  objective  reality.

49.  But  while  we  altogether  deny  the  reality  of  these
appearances,  we  think  it  likely  that  the  spiritualists  have
enlarged  our  knowledge  of  the  power  that  one  mind  has  in
influencing  another,  which  is  in  itself  a valuable  subject  of
inquiry.  We  agree  too  in  the  position  assumed  by  Sweden-
borg, and  by  the  spiritualists,  according  to  which  they  look
upon  the  invisible  world  not  as  something  absolutely  distinct
from  the  visible  universe,  and  absolutely  unconnected  with
it,  as  is  frequently  thought  to  be  the  case,  but  rather  as  a
universe  that  has  some  bond  of  union  with  the  present.

This  line  of  argument  will  be  developed  in  the  following
chapters  of  our  book.


I


CHAPTER  II.

POSITION  TAKEN  BY  THE  AUTHORS— PHYSICAL  AXIOMS.

“We  have  but  faith  : we  cannot  know ;

For  knowledge  is  of  things  we  see ;

And  yet  we  trust  it  comes  from  thee,

A beam  in  darkness ; let  it  grow.” — Tennyson,

50.  In  the  preceding  chapter  we  have  given  a very  brief
epitome  of  the  various  beliefs  regarding  immortality  and
the  invisible  world  held  by  the  civilised  nations  of  the
earth,  from  the  earliest  dawn  of  history  to  the  present  day.
It  is  now  time  to  say  something  about  the  object  of  this
book,  as  well  as  to  define  the  position  from  which  we  mean
to  start  in  pursuance  of  this  object.  We  shall  therefore
commence  by  dividing  those  who  concern  themselves  about
our  theme  into  three  great  classes.

In  the  first  place,  we  have  those  who  are  so  absolutely
certain  of  the  truth  of  their  religion,  and  of  the  immortality
which  it  teaches,  that  they  are  not  qualified  to  entertain  or
even  to  perceive  any  scientific  objection.  They  acknow-
ledge that  certain  deductions  made  by  men. of  science  appear
to  contradict  the  truth  of  their  religion.  But  these  they
regard  as  premature  conclusions,  averring  that  when  the
laws  of  nature  have  been  more  deeply  investigated,  there
will  be  found  a perfect  concord  between  science  and  revela-
tion. rjertain  scientific  truths  they  readily  assent  to,  and  it
is  only  the  altogether  human  superstructure  of  speculation

44


PHYSICAL  AXIOMS.


45


built  upon  these  that  they  profess  to  question.  “You  have
built,”  they  say,  “upon  the  rock  of  truth  a structure  of
wood,  hay,  stubble,  and  you  wish  to  persuade  us  that  it
is  the  very  temple  of  God.  We  will  not  enter  it,  but  will
patiently  wait  in  the  expectation  of  seeing  it  speedily  con-
sumed with  fire.”

Now,  whatever  be  the  merits  or  demerits  of  such  men,
it  is  not  for  them  we  write.  Their  merit  may  consist  in
‘ having  made  a perfectly  true  charge  against  certain  classes
of  scientific  men — their  demerit  probably  in  ha\  ing  them-
selves done  for  religion  precisely  the  same  that  they  accuse
their  adversaries  of  doing  for  scientific  truth.  We  must
let  them  alone— they  will  not  be  influenced  by  anything
that  we  can  say.  We  may  perhaps  be  praised  if  it  be
thought  that  we  have  helped  to  overthrow  the  superstructure
of  their  adversaries ; we  shall  certainly  be  condemned  if  it
be  thought  that  we  have  helped  to  weaken  any  portion  of
that  superstructure  which  they  themselves  have  reared.

51.  In  the  next  place,  and  occupying  a middle  position,
we  have  those  who  see  strong  grounds  for  believing  in  the
immortality  of  man  and  the  existence  of  an  invisible
vrorld,  but  who  at  the  same  time  are  forced  to  acknow-
ledge the  strength  of  the  objections  urged  against  these
doctrines  by  certain  men  of  science.  Some  of  this  class
attach  much  weight  to  the  evidence  in  favour  of  these
doctriues  derived  from  the  Christian  records ; others  again,
unable  to  believe  in  these  records,  are  yet  powerfully  im-
pressed by  the  universal  longing  for  immortality  which
civilised  man  has  always  shown,  while  others  attach  nearly
equal  importance  to  both  kinds  of  evidence.  Neverthe-
less, all  of  the  class  of  whom  we  now  speak  have  deeply
studied  the  scientific  objections,  and  do  not  well  see  how  to


46


7HE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


surmount  them.  It  is  to  this  class  that  we  shall  especially
address  ourselves  in  the  following  chapters.

52.  The  third  class  of  men  are  those  of  the  extreme  mate-
rialistic school.  All  human  history,  including  the  life  of
Christ  and  that  which  took  place  in  connection  with  it,
all  yearnings  of  man  for  immortality,  all  life,  from  that
of  the  noblest  of  human  beings  to  that  of  the  primordial
animated  germ,  are  explained  by  this  class  as  the  result
of  the  interaction  of  material  atoms  guided  by  certain
measurable  physical  forces.  They  have  no  reason  to  believe
there  is  anything  beyond  the  visible  universe,  and  in  conse-
quence they  decline  entering  into  any  argument  upon  the
subject.  Their  premiss  may  be  wrong,  but  their  conclusion
follows  as  a matter  of  course.  We  have  examined  (say
they)  all  the  evidence  in  favour  of  another  universe,  and
find  it  utterly  worthless,  why  then  should  we  discuss  the  sub-
ject ? — it  is  one  of  those  delusions  that  are  common  to  man.
When  a traveller  pretends  to  have  received  information
about  some  strange  and  distant  country,  our  first  step  is
to  inquire  whether  he  is  a trustworthy  and  sane  man,  and
if  we  find  he  is  otherwise,  it  is  quite  unnecessary  for  us  to
discuss  either  the  information  which  he  brings,  or  the
objections  to  that  information.  You  pretend  to  show  the
scientific  possibility  that  this  information  may  be  correct,
but  why  should  we  study  your  argument  since  there  is  no
evidence  for  supposing  that  there  is  any  such  place?

53.  To  these  men  we  would  reply,  that  even  assuming  their
own  point  of  view,  our  scheme  will,  we  venture  to  suggest,
be  found  to  give  a more  complete  and  continuous  explana-
tion of  the  visible  order  of  things  than  one  which  proceeds
upon  the  assumption  that  there  is  nothing  else.  In  this
respect  we  may  liken  it  to  the  hypothesis  of  atoms,  or  that


PHYSICAL  AXIOMS,


47


of  an  ethereal  medium,  for  neither  of  which  we  have  the
direct  evidence  of  our  senses,  but  which  have  nevertheless
been  adopted  as  affording  the  best  explanations  of  the
phenomena  of  the  visible  universe.

54.  Having  thus  classed  our  readers  they  will  now  be
anxious  to  learn  oiir  position.  Let  us  begin  by  stating  at
once  that  we  assume,  as  absolutely  self-evident,  the  existence
of  a Deity  who  is  the  Creator  of  all  things.  ‘^We  are
obliged,''  says  Herbert  Spencer  in  his  First  Principles,  ‘‘  to
regard  every  phenomenon  as  a manifestation  of  some  Power
by  which  we  are  acted  upon  ; though  omnipresence  is  un-
thinkable, yet,  as  experience  discloses  no  bounds  to  the  dif-
fusiou  of  .phenomena,  we  are  unable  to  think  of  limits  to  the
presence  of  this  Power  ; while  the  criticisms  of  science  teach
us  that  this  Power  is  Incomprehensible."  We  further  look
upon  the  laws  of  the  universe  as  those  laws  according  to
which  the  beings  in  the  universe,  are  conditioned  by  the
Governor  thereof,  as  regards  time,  place,  and  sensation.

It  is  for  instance  on  account  of  these  laws  that  we  cannot
be  present  in  different  places  at  the  same  time ; or  move
over  more  than  a certain  space  in  a certain  time  ; or  think
more  than  a certain  number  of  thoughts ; or  feel  more  than
a certain  number  of  sensations  in  a certain  given  time.

And  hence  while  we  can  very  easily  imagine  an  intelli-
gence superior  to  ourselves,  but  yet  finite,  to  be  very
differently  conditioned,  we  cannot  imagine  any  finite  intelli-
gence to  be  absolutely  without  conditions.  At  any  rate,  if
finite  intelligences  unconditioned  with  respect  to  time  and
space  be  conceivable  existences,  yet  they  are  so  absolutely
unconnected  with  the  present  universe,  which  has  reference
to  these  elements,  that  their  existence  need  not' be  con-
templated as  far  as  the  present  argument  is  concerned.


48


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


55.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  we  cannot  conceive  of
purely  finite  intelligences  existing  in  the  universe  without
some  sort  of  embodiment ; but  we  now  come  to  a point
which  deserves  a somewhat  fuller  discussion.  We  can
imagine  the  materialists  saying  to  us : You  are  right  in
asserting  the  inconceivability  of  such  intelligence  as  that
of  man  existing  without  some  sort  of  embodiment,  or  to
speak  plainly,  without  some  association  with  matter — that
is  precisely  the  view  we  ourselves  take.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  we  can  very  well  conceive  of  matter  existing  without
intelligence,  as  for  instance  a block  of  wood,  or  a bar  of  iron.

Thus  the  connection  between  these  two  things,  matter
and  mind,  is  of  such  a nature,  that  mind  cannot  exist
without  matter,  while  matter  can  and  does  exist  without
mind.

Is  there  not  therefore  a reality  about  matter  which  there  is
not  about  mind  % Can  we  conceive  a single  particle  of  matter
to  go  out  of  the  universe  for  six  or  eight  hours  and  then
to  return  to  it ; but  do  we  not  every  day  see  our  con-
sciousness disappearing  in  the  case  of  deep  sleep,  or  in  a
swoon,  and  then  returning  to  us  again  ? Far  be  it  from  us
to  deny  that  we  have  something  which  is  called  conscious-
ness, and  is  utterly  distinct  from  matter  and  the  properties
of  matter,  as  these  are  regarded  in  Physics.  But  may  not
the  connection  between  the  two  be  of  this  nature  ? — When
a certain  number  of  material  particles,  consisting  of
phosphorus,  carbon,  oxygen,  hydrogen,  nitrogen,  and  per-
haps some  others,  are,  in  consequence  of  the  operations  of
their  physical  forces,  in  a certain  position  with  respect  to
each  other,  and  in  a certain  state  of  motion,  conscious-
ness is  the  result,  but  whenever  this  connection  is  brought
to  an  end,  there  is  also  an  end  of  consciousness  and  the


PHYSICAL  AXIOMS.


49


sense  of  individual  existence,  while  however  the  particles  of
phosphorus,  carbon,  etc.,  remain  as  truly  as  ever.

56.  Now  this  means  that  matter  must  be  looked  upon  as
mistress  of  the  house,  and  consciousness  as  an  occasional
visitor  whom  she  permits  to  take  of  her  hospitality,  turning
him  out  of  doors  whenever  the  larder  is  empty.  It  is  worth
while  to  investigate  the  process  of  thouglit  which  gives  rise
to  this  curious  conception  of  the  economy  of  the  universe.

It  is  clear  that  certain  arranfrements  are  made  in  the
universe,  in  virtue  of  which  similar  sensations  are  produced
simultaneously  in  different  individuals,  while  in  other
arrangements  the  sensations  produced  are  the  peculiar  pro-
perty of  some  one  individual.  The  one  set  have  come  to
be  associated  with  objective  realities,  while  the  other  set  are
concerned  with  subjective  impressions.  I am  affected  by  a
pain  in  ray  liead,  and  I am  also  affected  by  the  sun^  but
the  one  affection  is  the  peculiar  product  of  my  brain,  and  I
carry  it  about  with  me,  while  experience  has  shown  me
that  I cannot  appropriate  the  other ; yet  it  also  becomes
mine  so  soon  as  it  has  reached  my  brain.

It  will  further  be  allowed,  that  there  are  certain  material
particles  which  may  become  vehicles  for  both  of  these  kinds
of  sensations,  while  there  are  others  that  have  only  the
power  of  producing  one.  Gold,  silver,  and  platinum  are  sub-
stances which  may  become  the  vehicle  of  common  impres-
sions, but  not  of  peculiar  impressions,  since  they  do  not
occur  in  our  brains.  Phosphorus,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a
substance  which  may  become  the  vehicle  of  both  kinds.  When
we  burn  a piece  of  phosphorus  in  a lecture-room  it  is  the
vehicle  of  a common  impression,  while  the  phosphorus  in  our
brain. is  the  vehicle  of  a peculiar  impression.  Now  there  is
this  difference  between  portions  of  phosphorus  playing  these

D


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


50

two  parts.  When  in  the  common  state,  we  can  experiment
upon  it  and  investigate  its  properties,  but  this  we  cannot  do
when  it  exists  in  the  brain  in  its  peculiar  state.  The  asser-
tion, therefore,  that  phosphorus  and  its  allied  particles,  whose
motions  and  positions  are  accompanied  by  consciousness,  are
nevertheless,  when  in  this  state,  essentially  the  same  as
they  are  in  the  ordinary  state,  appears  to  us  to  be  without
foundation.  We  cannot  thus  argue  from  the  one  state  to
the  other.  For  that  most  peculiar  and  interesting  condition
of  phosphorus  and  other  matter  in  which  it  is  intimately
connected  with  the  production  of  consciousness,  and  where
some  peculiarity  due  to  this  connection  might  perhaps  be
thought  likely  is  the  very  thing  we  cannot  investigate.
To  say  therefore  that  the  brain  consists  of  particles  of
phosphorus,  carbon,  etc.,  such  as  we  knoiv  them  in  the  com-
mon state,  and  that  when  the  particles  of  the  brain  have,
in  consequence  of  the  operation  of  physical  forces,  a certain
position  and  motion,  then  consciousness  follows,  is  to  assign
a peculiar  relation  between  the  brain-particles  and  conscious-
ness which  we  are  not  justified  in  doing.

57.  Allied  to  this  assumption  there  is  another  in  the
materialistic  argument  as  we  have  stated  it.  If  in  the
body  there  be  no  other  materical  than  the  visible  particles,
and  in  the  brain  no  other  material  than  a (pertain  quantity  of
phosphorus  and  other  things,  such  as  we  know  them  in  the
common  state,  and  if  consciousness  depends  upon  the
structural  presence  of  these  substances  in  the  body  and
brain,  then  when  this  structure  falls  to  pieces  there  are  of
course  reasonable  grounds  for  supposing  that  consciousness
has  entirely  ceased.  But  it  is  the  object  of  this  volume  to
exhibit  various  scientific  reasons  for  believing  that  there  is
something  beyond  that  which  we  call  the  visible  universe.


PHYSICAL  AXIOMS,


51


58.  There  remains  yet  that  part  of  the  argument  which
hints  that  consciousness  is  less  permanent  than  matter,
inasmuch  as  individual  consciousness  frequently  departs
from  the  universe  for  six  or  eight  hours  and  then  returns  to
it  again.  In  one  sense  this  is  unquestionably  true,  while,
however,  there  is  a potential  or  latent  consciousness  or  pos-
sibility of  consciousness  that  remains  behind.  It  will  be
seen  in  the  sequel  that  this  fact  of  latent  consciousness  will
be  used  by  us  to  strengthen  our  argument  in  favour  of  a
future  state.

59.  We  may  conclude,  as  the  result  of  this  discussion,
that  the  connection  between  mind  and  matter  is  a very
intimate  one,  although  we  are  in  profound  ignorance  as  to
its  exact  nature.

The  intimacy  of  this  ‘connection  is  a doctrine  almost
universally  held  by  modern  physiologists.  Just  as  no  single
action  of  the  body  takes  place  without  the  waste  of  some
muscular  tissue,  so,  it  is  believed,  no  thought  takes  place
without  some  waste  of  the  brain.  Nay,  physiologists  go
even  further,  and  assert  that  each  specific  thought  denotes
some  specific  waste  of  brain  tissue,  so  that  there  is  some
mysterious  and  obscure  connection  between  the  nature  of
the  thought  and  the  nature  of  the  waste  which  it  occasions.
In  like  manner  memory  is  looked  upon  as  dependent
upon  traces,  left  behind  in  the  brain,  of  that  state  in
which  it  was  when  the  sensation  rememl)ered  took  place.
Thus  Professor  Huxley  in  his  Belfast  address  (1874)  tells
us : “ It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  those  motions  which
give  rise  to  sensation  leave  on  the  brain  changes  of  its
substance  which  answer  to  what  Haller  called  ‘vestigia
rerum, ^ and  to  what  that  great  thinker  David  Hartley
termed  ‘ Yibratiuncules.’  The  sensation  which  has  passed


52


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


away  leaves  behind  molecules  of  the  brain  competent  to  its
reproduction — ‘ sensigenous  molecules/  so  to  speak — which
constitute  the  physical  foundation  of  memory.”

60.  It  will  be  inferred  from  what  we  have  said  that  one
of  the  essential  requisites  of  continued  existence  is  the
capability  of  retaining  some  sort  of«^hold  upon  the  past,
and,  inasmuch  as  we  are  unable  to  contemplate  such  a
thing  as  a finite  disembodied  spirit,  it  is  further  evident
that  this  hold  implies  an  organ  of  some  sort.  This  we  con-
ceive to  be  a perfectly  general  proposition.  We  do  not
limit  ourselves  in  making  it  to  any  particular  arrangement
of  bodily  form,  or  to  any  particular  rank  of  finite  organised
intellio’ence.  From  the  archano'el  to  the  brute  we  conceive

O O

that  something  analogous  to  an  organ  of  memory  must  be
possessed  by  each.

61.  But  if  one  general  requisite  of  life  be  a connection
with  the  past,  another  is  the  possibility  of  action  in  the
present.  A.  living  being  must  have  in  his  frame  the
capacity  of  varied  movement.  He  must  possess  a bodily
organisation  in  which  there  is  the  power  of  calling  internal
forces  into  play  at  irregular  intervals  dependent  on  his  will.
We  cannot  imamne  life  to  be  associated  with  a motionless

O

mass  or  with  a mass  which  moves  in  an  invariable  manner.

The  living  being  need  not  always  be  in  motion,  but  he
must  retain  the  capacity  of  moving.  He  need  not  always
be  thinking,  but  he  must  retain  the  capacity  of  thought.

To  sum  up — it  thus  appears  that  there  are  two  general
conditions  of  organised  life.  There  must  in  the  first  place
be  an  organ  connecting  the  individual  with  the  past,  and  in
the  next  place  there  must  be  such  a frame  and  such  a uni-
verse that  he  has  the  power  of  varied  action  in  the  present.
We  particularly  request  our  readers  to  keep  well  in  mind


PHYSICAL  AXIOMS.


53


these  two  propositions,  since  it  is  upon  these  that  our  argu-
ment will  ultimately  be  built.

62.  We  come  now  to  a very  important  part  of  our
inquiry.  It  will  be  necessary  to  discuss  the  Principle  of
Continuity,  and  desirable  to  begin  by  defining  exactly  what
is  meant  by  us  when  these  words  are  used.^  Let  us  illus-
trate this  by  an  example.

Let  us  take  a particular  problem,  that  of  astronomy,  for
instance,  and,  beginning  at  the  very  commencement,  let  us
suppose  an  early  Egyptian  or  Chaldean  astronomer  to  be
observing  the  sun  in  the  middle  of  summer.  Day  after
day,  for  perhaps  a week,  he  has  noticed  that  this  luminary
rises  over  a certain  place  and  sets  over  a certain  other
place,  and  he  conceives  that  he  has  now  obtained  some
definite  information  regarding  the  sun.  His  idea  is,  that
the  sun  will  always  go  on  doing  tlie  same  thing,  and  he
therefore  predicts  to  his  fellows,  who  are  less  observant
than  himself,  exactly  where  it  will  rise  and  where  it  will
set.  They  join  him  in  observing  the  luminary  for  a week
or  more,  and  the  sagacity  of  our  primeval  astronomer  is
triumphantly  vindicated  : the  sun  is  found  doing  as  ueaife
as  possible  that  which  had  been  predicted  of  it. ' uj

63.  These  men  have  now  got  hold  of  the  idea  that  theSilife^-'
will  always  rise  and  set  at  the  same  places,  that  ijdt\fac#li^
daily  journey  is  always  the  same,  and  that  he  performs  dt
in  the  same  time.  But  in  the  course  of  six  memtte
suspect  they  are  mistaken.  Discredit  is  thrown:  uponf^tte
sagacity  of  our  astronomer,  and  he  broods  ov^^his  dis-
grace for  six  months  longer.  At  the  end  of  this  time,  on
turning  his  eyes  towards  the  sun,  what  is  his  surprise


' See  Essay  on  this  subject  by  the  Honourable  Sir  W.  R.  Grove,  in  his  book
on  The  Correlation  of  Physical  Forces.


54


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


and  delight  to  find  that  luminary  doing  the  very  thing
that  he  had  all  along  predicted,  returning  once  more  to  his
old  points  of  rising  and  setting, — places,  we  may  presume,
that  could  easily  be  remembered  on  account  of  some
peculiarity  of  landscape.  He  is  not  yet  prepared  however
for  a higher  generalisation,  but  again  calls  for  his  fellows,
and  while  he  suspects  a certain  amount  of  irregularity  in
the  sun,  yet  succeeds  in  convincing  them  that  his  guess
was  after  all  not  far  from  the  truth.  Once  again  he  is
reinstated  in  their  good  opinion.

64.  However,  six  months  after,  precisely  the  same  thing
recurs  once  more  ; the  rising  and  setting  points  are  now
considerably  different  from  those  predicted.  Our  astro-
nomer again  loses  credit,  and  regains  it  only  partially  six
months  afterwards,  when  the  points  are  once  more  right.
But  he  has  now  learned  a lesson.  He  perceives  a method
in  all  this,  and  ultimately  rises,  by  means  of  the  difficulty,
to  a higher  generalisation.  He  sees  that  the  rising  and
setting  points  of  the  sun  come  back  to  their  original  posi-
^on- in  about  365  days  ; and  he  has  thus  learned,  in  a rude
\\^ayj  that  the'  sun  has  two  motions,  one  of  which  he  accom-
plish^ in  24^hours,  or  one  day,  while  the  other  has  a period
days,  or  one  year.

k ' 6'M  While  these  things  are  in  progress,  a portentous  and
iVhcJiy  unexpected  event  takes  place  : the  sun  for  four
' is  totally  extinguished.  Our  astronomer  meditates

iltfcht^fthis  strange  phenomenon,  and  is  inclined  to  regard
ir^l^^TOiumph  of  the  powers  of  Darkness,  in  personal  con-
flict with  those  of  Li^ht.  Nevertheless  he  docs  not  neffiect

O ' o

to  keep  a record  of  the  precise  day  on  which  it  took  place.

66.  Years  pass  away,  and  our  astronomer  has  passed  away
with  them — he  and  all  his  generation ; but  a regular  re-


FJETYSICAL  AXIOMS.


55


cord  is  now  kept  of  celestial  occurrences,  and  especially  of
eclipses.  At  length  it  comes  to  be  perceived  that  there  is
a periodicity  even  in  such  untoward  phenomena,  and  an
attempt  is  ultimately  made,  by  means  of  this  knowledge,
to  predict  when  the  next  eclipse  will  take  place.  It  is  per-
fectly successful,  and  this  event  loses  from  thenceforth
much  of  its  portentous  significance.

67.  Centuries  move  on,  and  the  apparent  motions  of
the  heavenly  bodies  have  now  been  gradually  reduced  to
system.  . The  stars  in  particular  are  found  to  move,  just  as
if  they  were  attached  to  the  roof  of  a great  hollow  vault
which  moves  round  the  earth  once  in  twenty-four  hours.
But  even  amongst  them  there  are  five  exceptions — namely,
Mercury,  Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn — which  perform
a sort  of  wandering  or  zigzag  motion  in  the  midst  of  their
stationary  brethren,  and  have  in  consequence  received  the
name  of  planets.  All,  however,  are  supposed  to  move
round  the  earth,  which  forms  the  centre  of  the  universe.

68.  In  process  of  time,  this  superiority  of  the  earth  over
the  heavenly  bodies  comes  to  be  questioned.  There  is  a
rising  tendency  to  regard  our  earth  as  a somewhat  insignifi-
cant member  of  a great  system,  rather  than  as  something
apart. by  itself.  These  tendencies  are,  however,  strongly
opposed  by  the  authorities  of  a large  section  of  the  Christian
Church,  on  the  ground  that  the  language  employed  in  the
Jewish  Scriptures  is  against  such  a method  of  regarding
the  universe.  Nevertheless  the  Copernican  system  ulti-
mately prevails,  and  the  planets  and  the  earth  are  as'Soci-
ated  together  as  stars  which  travel  round  the  sun  ; while
the  diurnal  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies  is  attributed  to
a motion  of  the  earth  round  its  axis.  And  we  cannot
help  thinking  that  philosophers  of  the  present  day  are  too


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


56

miicli  disposed  to  undervalue  the  absolutely  enormous
stride  that  was  made  when  the  Copernican  system  was
fully  established.

69.  But  the  planets  are  still  supposed  to  move  in  perfect
circles  round  the  sun ; for  besides  agreeing  very  well  with
observation,  there  is  a simplicity  in  the  circle  that  leads
philoscpliers  to  believe  that  nature  would  adopt  it  in  pre-
ference to  any  more  complicated  curve.  Has  it  not  been
found  that  all  apparent  deviation  from  simplicity  was  in
reality  due  to  the  fact  that  our  point  of  view  is  a moveable
one,  and  does  not  this  lead  us  to  believe  that  the  real  truth
will  be  found  in  a circular  orbit  ?

VO.  AYhile  such  speculations  are  indulged  in,  Tycho  Brahe
is  busy  with  his  instruments.  He  is  a thoroughly  accurate
man  of  science,  and  makes  most  excellent  observations  of
the  various  planets.  Tliese  are  ultimately  discussed  by
Kepler,  who  finds  that  the  planets  do  not  move  round  the
sun  in  circles,  but  in  ellipses,  having  the  sun  in  one  focus.
He  finds  too  that  any  one  planet  describes  areas  which  are
proportional  to  the  times  of  description  ; while  the  squares
of  the  periodic  times  of  the  various  planets  are  proportional
to  the  cubes  of  their  mean  distances  from  the  sun.  These
are  Kepler  s laws  ; they  are  yet,  however,  only  empirical.
We  know  them  to  be  true,  but  we  cannot  tell  why  they
should  be  as  they  are  and  not  otherwise.

71.  It  was  reserved  for  the  genius  of  Newton  to  show
us  why  the  planets  should  obey  these  laws,  and  to  reduce
the  qjlanetary  system  under  the  domain  of  ordinary  me-
chanics. He  succeeded  in  showing  that  every  mass  of  matter
attracts  every  other  mass  with  a force  which  is  directly
proportional  to  the  product  of  the  masses,  and  inversely
proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance,  and  that  this


PHYSICAL  AXIOMS.


57


universal  force  accounts  not  only  for  Kepler’s  laws  of
planetary  motion,  but  for  the  orbit  of  the  moon,  as  well  as
for  that  of  a projectile  discharged  at  the  surface  of  the
earth.

72.  If  we  now  pause  for  a moment,  and  review  the  pro-
gress of  this-  problem,  we  shall  see  that  it  began  with  a dis-
position to  regard  simplicity  of  motion  as  a test  of  truth,
and  when  the  Copernican  system  showed  that  our  point  of
view  is  a moveable  one,  it  was  at  first  thought  that  this
would  explain  all  departures  from  absolute  simplicity.
But  Tycho  Brahe  and  Kepler  soon  showed  that  the  planets
do  not  move  in  circles,  and  we  now  know  that  their
motions,  as  well  as  that  of  the  moon,  can  only  be  repre-
sented by  curves  of  extreme  complexity.  Simplicity  of
motion  has  disappeared,  but  it  has  been  replaced  by  sim-
plicity of  relation  between  the  various  members  of  the
system  which  are  supposed  to  attract  each  other  according
to  a simple  and  definite  law.  This  law  may  be  supposed
to  contain  in  itself  implicitly  all  the  various  and  compli-
cated motions  of  the  solar  system.  If  applied  to  the  past
it  will  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  exact  date  of  the  ancient
historical  eclipses  ; if  applied  to  the  future  it  will  enable  us
to  foretell  all  the  important  astronomical  occurrences.

While  we  are  writing  these  words,  expeditions  are  in
progress  to  observe  the  transit  of  Venus,  which,  we  know,
will  take  place  in  December  1874  ; but  by  the  time  this
book  has  been  published  that  occurrence  will  doubtless  be
a thing  of  the  past.

73.  Turning  now  to  another  branch  of  the  same  problem,
when  Galileo  first  applied  his  telescope  to  the  sun,  he  dis-
covered the  existence  of  sun  spots.  Their  solar  origin  was
however  for  some  time  disputed,  the  schoolmen  of  that  day


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


S8

being  indisposed  to  believe  that  there  could  be  any  possible
imperfection  in  the  sun.  There  was  even  a sermon  preached
on  Galileo,  the  text  of  which  was  “ Viri  Galilsei,  quid  statis
in  coeluni  spectantes  ?

However,  as  time  went  on,  observation  showed  that
spots  were  unmistakably  solar  phenomena,  and  we  now
know  that  these  very  imperfections  are  made  use  of  by
modern  science  to  obtain  for  us  information  re^ardinsf  the
chemical  and  physical  structure  of  our  luminary.  It  also
appears  that  the  position  and  size  of  these  spots  depend
upon  the  positions  of  the  planets  Mercury  and  Venus,  and
this  as  well  as  other  phenomena  indicate  the  existence  of
some  mysterious  bond  between  the  sun  and  the  various
members  of  his  system,  possibly  other  than  the  law  of
gravitation,  as  we  now  understand  it,  can  express.  In
fine,  simplicity  of  relation  threatens  to  disappear,  just  as
simplicity  of  motion  disappeared  before  it.

74.  Nevertheless  in  this  triumphal  march  the  progress
has  always  been  from  the  less  to  the  more  perfect,  from  the
glimmering  of  early  dawn  to  the  clear  morning  light,  if  not
to  the  bright  beams  of  the  noonday  sun.  Temporary
obstacles  have  appeared  only  to  be  surmounted,  and  like
Augustine’s  ladder  to  constitute  a platform  from  which  a
higher  and  more  comprehensive  view  might  be  obtained.
Difficulties  too,  other  than  physical, — struggles,  weariness,
opposition  have  been  encountered  and  overcome,  nor  has
there  been  anything  like  a grave  defeat,  or  the  production
of  permanent  confusion.  The  concluding  words  of  the  Te
Deum  have  been  abundantly  fulfilled  in  the  experience  of
the  astronomer.  He  has  trusted  in  God,  arfd  he  has  never
been  confounded.

75.  Here  then  we  have  an  instance  of  what  is  meant  by


PHYSICAL  AXIOMS.


59


Continuity.  It  does  not  imply  an  easy  progress,  or  a
smooth  level  road  ; it  is  consistent  with  a temporary  halt,
perhaps  not  even  inconsistent  with  a temporary  break-
down, or  with  momentary  despair.  We  are  met  by  difficul-
ties of  many  kinds — the  rock,  the  tangled  growth,  the
swamp,  the  thick  darkness,  but  never  by  the  abyss.
Nothing  has  occurred  to  convince  us  that  our  path  has  been
absolutely  wrong  from  the  very  commencement,  and  that
we  must  altogether  retrace  our  steps  ; and  the  same  thing
holds  in  other  problems  besides  astronomy.  Once  we  have
accumulated  sufficient  trustworthy  evidence  to  show  us
that  we  are  in  the  right  way,  we  are  never  afterwards
irretrievably  defeated.

76.  Our  readers  will  now  perhaps  wish  to  have  an
example  of  a breach  of  Continuity, — this  is  easily  given.
Let  us  suppose  for  instance  that  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars
were  to  move  about  in  strange  and  fantastic  orbits  during
a day,  after  which  they  returned  to  their  previous  places.
Here  we  have  an  excellent  example  of  a breach  of  Continuity,
for  even  if  things  were  so  arranged  as  to  prevent  physical
disaster,  it  is  evident  that  the  whole  intelligent  universe
would  be  plunged  into  irretrievable  mental  confusion.
Never  again  could  it  be  said  that  astronomy  is  competent
to  explain  the  varied  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies.
The  observers  of  the  universe  would  lay  down  their  instru-
ments, and  the  mathematicians  their  calculations,  and  the
science  would  come  to  an  end.

Other  examples  of  a breach  of  Continuity  may  be  as  easily
imagined.  Suppose  for  instance  that  the  gold  of  the  world
were  to  disappear  for  six  hours  and  then  return  to  it  again,
— should  we  not  have  all  the  social  relations  of  men  as  well
as  their  conceptions  of  matter  thrown  into  irretrievable  con-


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


6o^

fusion  ? This  would  not,  however,  be  due  to  the  mere  fact
that  something  has  disappeared  from  the  visible  universe.
Individual  consciousness  we  have  seen  is  seemingly  in  the
habit  of  doing  so  and  again  reappearing,  and  we  do  not
trouble  ourselves  much  about  it.

Continuity,  in  fine,  does  not  preclude  the  occurrence  of
strange,  abrupt,  unforeseen  events  in  the  history  of  the
universe,  but  only  of  such  events  as  must  finally  and  for
ever  put  to  confusion  the  intelligent  beings  who  regard
them.

77.  It  thus  appears  that,  assuming  the  existence  of  a
Supreme  Governor  of  the  universe,  the  principle  of  Con-
tinuity may  be  said  to  be  the  definite  expression  in  words
of  a trust  that  He  will  not  put  us  to  permanent  intellectual
confusion,  and  we  can  easily  conceive  similar  expressions  of
trust  with  reference  to  the  other  faculties  of  man.

78.  Let  us  now  endeavour  to  apply  this  principle  to  the
discussion  of  those  events  that  are  alleged  to  have  taken

O

place  in  connection  with  the  life  of  Christ.  We  may  begin
by  assuming  that  had  these  events  been  ordinary  ones  no
doubt  would  have  been  entertained  regarding  their  actual
occurrence ; it  is  not,  however,  our  province  to  discuss  the
historical  evidence  in  favour  of  Christianity.

Now,  until  of  late  years,  the  divines  who  have  asserted
the  actual  occurrence  of  these  events  have  attached  to  this
assertion  an  hypothesis  of  their  own,  representing  the
events  in  question  as  absolute  interferences  of  the  Divine
Governor  with  his  usual  physical  procedure.  Each  was
thus  supposed  to  represent  in  its  physical  aspect  something
that  could  not  possibly  be  deduced  from  that  which  went
before  or  that  followed  after.

It  was  not  exactly  asserted  that  they  were  arbitrary


PHYSICAL  AXIOMS.


6i


events,  or  that  they  were  not  the  results  of  purpose,  but
only  that  the  purpose  of  which  they  were  the  accomplish-
ment could  not  be  carried  out  without  some  physical  break.
In  fine,  for  the  object  of  removing  spiritual  confusion,  intel-
lectual confusion  was  introduced,  as  being  the  lesser  evil  of
the  two,  so  that  each  intelligent  being  will  for  ever  continue
baffled  in  any  attempt  to  explain  these  phenomena,  because
they  have  no  physical  relation  to  anything  that  went  before
or  that  followed  after ; in  fine,  they  form  a universe  within
a universe,  a portion  cut  off  by  an  insurmountable  barrier
from  the  domain  of  scientific  inquiry.

79.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  say  that  we  cannot  see  any
foundation  for  this  hypothesis  introduced  by  theologians
regarding  these  events.  It  is  desirable  to  add,  as  we  have
done  already  (Art.  36),  that  such  a method  of  regarding
them  is  essentially  opposed  to  the  genius  of  Christianity.
Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  person  of  Christ,  it  can-
not for  a moment  be  said  that  He  was  above  law.  He
speaks  of  himself  and  is  spoken  of  by  the  apostles  as  bound
in  all  respects  by  the  laws  of  the  universe.  Nor  will  it
suffice  to  say  that  He  obeyed  the  moral  and  spiritual,
but  broke  occasionally  the  physical  laws  of  the  universe,
or  had  them  broken  for  Him.  In  fine,  what  Christ  accom-
plished was  not  in  defiance  of  law,  but  in  fulfilment  of  it ;
and  that  He  was  able  to  do  so  much  was  simply  due  to  the
fact  that  His  position  with  reference  to  the  universe  was
different  from  that  of  any  other  man.

80.  Of  late  years,  however,  a better  method  of  explana-
tion has  been  adopted.  Charles  Babbage,  the  designer  of
the  well-known  calculating  engine,  showed  in  a very  re-
markable book  which  he  called  a ninth  Bridgewater  trea-
tise,  that  it  would  be  possible  to  design  and  construct  a


62


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


machine,  which  after  having  worked  for  a long  time  accord-
ing to  a particular  method  of  procedure,  should  suddenly  j

manifest  a sino^le  breach  in  its  method,  and  then  resume  '

and  for  ever  afterwards  Iceep  to  its  original  law.  He
argued  from  this  that  an  apparent  breach  in  the  physical
procedure  of  the  universe  is  quite  consistent  with  the
fundamental  idea  of  law.  Jevons  also,  commenting  upon
these  speculations  of  Babbage,  remarks  thus  in  his  Prin-
ciples of  Science  (vol.  ii.  p.  438),  “If  such  occurrences  can
be  designed  and  foreseen  by  a human  artist,  it  is  surely
within  the  capacity  of  the  Divine  artist  to  provide  for
similar  changes  of  law  in  the  mechanism  of  the  atom,  or
the  construction  of  the  heavens.”

81.  We  think  that  this  is  a distinct  advance  upon  the
old  idea,  but  nevertheless  we  venture  to  pronounce  it
incomplete  without  some  further  explanation.

The  power  of  the  Divine  Being  is  surely  unlimited,  but,  .
nevertheless,  we  have  perfect  trust  that  God  will  work
in  such  a way  as  not  to  put  us  to  permanent  intellec-
tual confusion.  Yet  even  on  this  hypothesis,  and  with  this
trust,  a single  apparent  exception  to  the  usual  procedure
may  be  supposed  to  occur,  if  it  be  allowed  that  this  may  be
made  use  of  in  order  to  deduce  from  it  the  great  general
law  of  working  which  includes  both  the  usual  course  arid
the  apparent  exception.  But  it  appears  to  us  that  if  the
exception  be  of  such  a nature  that  it  must  for  ever  confound
all  the  intelligences  of  the  universe  who  regard  it,  then  .
we  gain  nothing  by  the  supposition  that  it  was  allowed
for  in  the  secret  counsels  of  God.

82.  Undoubtedly  we  cannot  permit  certain  events  to
be  set  aside  by  merely  human  authoiity  as  questions  into
which  it  is  deemed  unprofitable  or  useless  for  our  reason  to


PHYSICAL  AXIOMS.


63


pry ; nay,  we  are  tempted  to  advance  even  further  than  this,
and  to  assert  that  it  constitutes  our  duty  as  well  as  our  privi-
lege to  do  our  best  to  grasp  the  meaning  of  all  events  that
come  before  us.  Do  not  all  terrestrial  occurrences  of  what-
ever nature  form  that  material  upon  which  the  intellect  of
man  is  intended  to  work — that  earth  which  man  is  com-
manded to  subdue — a command  equivalent  to  victory  ?

83.  We  have  now  indicated  with  sufficient  clearness  the
fault  we  have  to  find  with  the  theological  position  as  it  stood
until  recently, — let  us  next  briefly  allude  to  the  extreme
school  of  science.  Ignoring  all  but  the  visible  universe,
and  applying  the  principle  of  Continuity  to  its  phenomena,
they  Avere  indubitably  led  to  most  important  general-
isations. regarding  the  method  of  working  of  this  great
system.  They  even  drove  back  with  much  success,  and
very  properly,  certain  detachments  of  theologians  who
had  occupied  portions  of  the  field  in  an  unwarrantable
maimer.  So  far  the  Genius  which  they  had  summoned  up
appeared  to  be  tlie  very  principle  of  order.  But  things
wore  a different  complexion  as  time  went  on.  It  was
fancied  that  historical  Christianity  must  disappear,  and
that  tlie  doctrine  of  immortality  must  follow  after  it.
They  Avere  surrendered.  Bat  it  Avas  extremely  startling
when  the  ‘Genius  invoked,  not  content  Avith  Avhat  he  had
already  devoured,  insisted  upon  the  ultimate  sacrifice  of  the
visible  universe, — then  the  most  extreme  partisans  of  the
school  began  at  length  to-  be  alarmed.  It  was.  too  much
to  be  borne,  that  a Genius  summoned  up  in  the  very  name
of  order  should  turn  out  to  be  such  an  insatiate  demon  as
this ! Must  the  vvhole  visible  uniAmrse,  indeed,  arrive  at
such  a state  as  to  be  totally  unfit  for.  the  habitation  of  living
beings  'i  The  individual  they  Avere  content  to  sacrifice,  per-


64


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


haps  even  the  race,  but  they  would  spare  the  universe.
Undoubtedly,  if  it  be  possible  to  pity  men  who  could  so
easily  dispense  with  Christianity  and  immortality,  they
had  at  length  got  themselves  into  a deplorable  dilemma.
For,  indeed,  the  principle  they  had  invoked  was  absolutely
without  pity,  and  in  the  most  heartless  manner  continued
to  insist  upon  the  sacrifice  of  the  visible  universe.  This,
they  were  told,  was  only  a huge  fire,  and  must  ultimately
burn  itself  out.  Nothing  would  be  left  but  the  ashes, —
the  dead  and  worthless  body  of  the  present  system.

84.  No  wonder,  then,  that  these  men  should  be  startled
at  their  conclusion,  and  try  somehow  to  evade  it.  AVe  sym-
pathise with  their  perplexity ; nay,  we  go  further,  and
assert  that  to  imagine  the  Avhole  universe  to  come  to  an
end  is  a monstrous  supposition,  carrying  its  refutation  on
its  very  face.  Nevertheless,  we  do  not  hesitate  likewise  to
assert,  that  the  visible  universe  must,  certainly  in  trans-
formahle  energy,  and  jyrobahly  in  matter,  come  to  an  end.
We  cannot  escape  from  this  conclusion.  But  the  principle
of  Continuity  upon  which  all  such  arguments  are  based  still
demanding  a continuance  of  the  universe,  we  are  forced  to
believe  that  there  is  something  beyond  that  which  is  visible,
or,  to  use  the  words  of  an  old  writer  (which  we  have  in-
scribed on  our  title-page), — “ the  things  which  are  seen  are
temporal,  but  the  things  which  are  not  seen  are  eternal.”

85.  Lookinor  back  instead  of  forward — to  the  orimn  of

o o

this  visible  universe,  rather  than  to  its  end,  we  are  brought
to  a similar  conclusion.  If  the  visible  universe  is  all  that
exists,  then  the  first  abrupt  manifestation^ of  it  is  as  truly
a break  of  continuity  as  its  final  overthrow.

It  may  sound  strange  to  some  of  our  readers  to  be  told
that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  man  of  science  to  push  back  the


PHYSICAL  AXIOMS.


65


Great  First  Cause  in  time  as  far  as  possible  ; nevertheless,
this  accurately  represents  the  part  in  the  universe  which  he
is  called  upon  to  play.  We  dig  into  the  crust  of  the  earth
and  find  therein  stratified  deposits  containing  fossil  forms,
and  we  may  either  suppose  that  God  created  these  as  they
are,  or  that  they  came  into  their  place  through  the  opera-
tion of  natural  forces,  and  represent  the  relics  of  an  ancient
world  of  life  ; the  latter  of  these  is  undoubtedly  the  scientific
hypothesis.  The  only  other  hypothesis  is  that  of  some
prominent  luminaries  of  the  Eomish  Church,  who  asserted
that  the  devil  put  the  fossils  there.

Or,  again,  we  may  suppose  that  God  created  the  sun,
placed  the  earth  and  the  other  planets  in  their  present
position,  and  gave  them  the  requisite  velocity,  all  at  once,  or
that  the  solar  system  gradually  condensed  into  its  present
state  from  a chaotic  mass  of  nebulous  material ; certainly,
again,  the  latter  is  the  scientific  hypothesis.  In  like  man-
ner, if  we  can  suppose  any  material  phenomenon,  any  con-
ditioned order  of  things,  antecedent  to  the  appearance  of
the  visible  universe,  we  have  gained  a step.  In  fact,  we
conceive  it  to  be  the  duty  of  the  man  of  science  to  treat  the
original  production  of  the  visible  universe  just  in  the  same
way  as  he  would  any  other  phenomenon.  It  is  no  doubt  a
very  large  thing,  but  we  must  not  be  terrified  at  mere  big-
ness,— we  must  mete  out  the  same  scientific  measure  to  all
events,  whether  they  be  great  or  small.  We  therefore  wel-
come an  hypothesis  like  that  of  Sir  W.  Thomson,  which
regards  the  primordial  atoms  of  the  visible  universe  as
vortices  somehow  produced  in  a pre-existing  perfect  fluid,
provided  that  such  an  hypothesis  is  otherwise  tenable.

86.  Let  not  any  of  our  readers  regard  this  process  as  an
attempt  to  drive  the  Creator  out  of  the  field  altogether,  for

E


66


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


this  is  not  the  case.  Is  it  less  reverent  to  regard  the  uni-
verse as  an  illimitable  avenue  that  leads  up  to  God,  than
to  look  upon  it  as  a limited  area  bounded  by  an  impene-
trable wall,  which,  if  we  could  only  pierce  it,  would  bring
us  at  once  into  the  presence  of  the  Eternal  ?

In  fine,  we  do  not  hesitate  to  assert  that  the  visible  uni-
verse cannot  comprehend  the  whole  works  of  God,  because
it  had  its  beginning  in  time,  and  will  also  come  to  an
end.  Perhaps,  indeed,  it  forms  only  an  infinitesimal  por-
tion of  that  stupendous  whole  which  is  alone  entitled  to  be
called  The  Universe.

87.  We  thus  see  that  the  extreme  scientific,  as  well  as
the  old  theological  school,  have  erred  in  their  conclusions,
because  they  have  neither  of  them  loyally  followed  the
principle  of  Continuity.  The  theologians,  regarding  matter
and  its  laws  with  contempt,  have  without  scruple  assumed
that  frequent  invasions  of  these  laws  could  constitute  a
tenable  hypothesis.  On  the  other  hand,  the  extreme
school  of  science,  when  they  were  brought  by  the  prin-
ciple of  Continuity  into  such  a position  that  the  next
logical  step  should  have  been  the  realisation  of  the  unseen,
failed  to  take  it,  and  have  suffered  grievously  in  con-
sequence.

88.  It  remains  now,  before  concluding  this  chapter,  to
apply  the  principle  of  Continuity  to  the  problem  we  have
in  hand.

There  are  three  conceivable  suppositions  with  reference
to  individual  immortality.  It  may  be  regarded  as  a trans-
ference from  one  grade  of  being  to  another  in  the  present
visible  universe ; or  secondly,  as  a transference  from  the
visible  universe  to  some  other  order  of  things  intimately
connected  with  it ; or  lastly,  we  may  conceive  it  to  repre-


■PHYSICAL  AXIOMS.


67


sent  a transference  from  the  present  visible  universe  to  an
order  of  things  entirely  unconnected  with  it.

89.  This  last  hypothesis  may  however  be  very  speedily
disposed  of  if  we  are  to  maintain  the  principle  of  Con-
tinuity. We  have  seen  that  one  of  the  requisites  for
existence  is  an  organ  connecting  the  individual  with  the
past.  Now,  if  we  suppose  a transference  from  the  present
visible  universe  to  an  order  of  things  entirely  unconnected
with  it,  this  will  imply  the  creation  in  the  future  universe,  in
the  case  of  each  individual  so  transferred,  of  a set  of  organs
having  reference  to  something  entirely  different  from  the  uni-
verse, in  order  that  each  such  individual  may  have  the  sense
of  continued  existence.  But  this  would  be  a manifest  breach
of  the  law  of  Continuity.  Imagine  the  utter  confusion  into
which  this  present  universe  would  be  plunged,  if  a set  of
inhabitants  were  transferred  into  it  having  a past  entirely
unconnected  with  it.  Now,  a confusion  precisely  similar
would  be  occasioned  by  carrying  out  a transfer  according  to
the  hypothesis  in  question ; so  that  we  are  able  at  once  to
reduce  our  suppositions  to  two  : the  first  implying  a trans-
ference from  one  grade  to  another  of  the  visible  universe
and  the  second  a traDsfetence  from  the  visible  universe  to
some  other  order  of  things  intimately  connected  with  it.

90.  In  what  precedes,  we  have  argued  by  anticipation
that  the  present  visible  universe  will  become  effete  ; but  in
the  following  chapters  it  will  be  necessary  to  maintain  this
assertion  by  a minute  examination  of  those  laws  which
represent  the  course  of  things  pursued  in  the  present  uni-
verse. In  other  words,  we  must  settle  the  fitness  or  unfit-
ness of  the  present  visible  universe  before  we  proceed  to
discuss  our  second  hypothesis.

91.  But  whether  the  transfer  be  supposed  to  take  place


68


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


in  the  visible  universe,  or  from  it  to  another  intimately  con-
nected with  it,  the  subject  in  either  case  is  one  on  which  we
may  legitimately  employ  our  reasoning  faculties.  So  far
indeed  is  its  subject  from  being  one  which  it  will  be  utterly
and  for  ever  useless  to  discuss,  that  it  becomes  our  duty  as
well  as  our  privilege  to  make  the  attempt,  in  the  perfect
trust  that  time  will  inevitably  bring  truth  with  it.  We
think  that  this  has  been  too  much  overlooked  by  those  whom
we  may  term  the  moderate  school  of  scientific  thinkers.
Not  denying  immortality,  they  have  yet  shrunk  from  all
attempts  to  investigate  its  conditions.  We  are  in  hopes
that  a perusal  of  this  volume  will  lead  these  writers  to  see
that  the  subject  is  one  which  may  be  profitably  discussed.


CHAPTER  lir.

THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


“ The  cloud-capp’d  towers,  the  gorgeous  palaces,

The  solemn  temples,  the  great  globe  itself.

Yea,  all  which  it  inherit,  shall  dissolve ;

And,  like  this  insubstantial  pageant,  faded,

Leave  not  a rack  behind.” — Shakespeare,  Tempest.

**  All  worldly  shapes  shall  melt  in  gloom,

The  sun  himself  must  die
Before  this  mortal  shall  assume
His  immortality.” — Campbell.

92.  Having  in  the  last  chapter  briefly  indicated  the  nature
of  the  proposition  which  we  intend  to  bring  forward,  we
must  next  study,  as  a preliminary  to  further  discussion,
what  science  tells  us  about  the  present  physical  universe :
what  are  the  general  laws  to  which  it  is  now  subject ; when
and  what  must  have  been  its  beginning ; when  and  what
will  be  its  inevitable  end.

We  have  been  driven  into  becoming  accustomed  to  the
phrase,  ‘‘  the  material  universe,’'  which  is  generally  used  in
a sense  absolutely  identical  with  that  which  we  have
chosen  as  our  title.  We  shall  soon  see  that  the  term  is  a
very  inapt  one,  inasmuch  as  matter  is  (though  it  may  sound
paradoxical  to  say  so)  the  less  important  half  of  the  mate-
rial of  the  physical  universe.

In  the  present  chapter  we  shall  still  further  restrict  our-
selves by  omitting,  as  far  as  possible,  any  reference  to  life

69


70


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


(even  in  its  lowest  aspect),  and  we  likewise  defer  to  a future
chapter  our  account  of  the  more  reasonable  speculations
which  have  been  advanced  with  regard  to  the  intimate
structure  of  matter  and  ether.

93.  It  is  only  within  the  last  thirty  or  forty  years  that
there  has  gradually  dawned  upon  the  minds  of  scientific  men
the  conviction  that  there  is  something  besides  matter  or  stuff
in  the  physical  universe,  which  has  at  least  as  much  claim
as  matter  to  recognition  as  an  objective  reality,  though,  of
course,  far  less  directly  obvious  to  our  senses  as  such,  and
therefore  much  later  in  being  detected.  So  long  as  men
spoke  of  light,  heat,  electricity,  etc.,  as  imponderables,  they
merely  avoided  or  put  aside  the  difficulty.

When  they  attempted  to  rank  them  as  matter, — heat,  for
instance,  as  caloric, — they  at  once  fell  into  errors,  from
which  a closer  scrutiny  of  experimental  results  would
assuredly  have  saved  them.  The  idea  of  substance  or  stv^'
as  necessarj^  to  objective  existence  very  naturally  arises
from  ordinary  observations  on  matter ; and  as  there  could
be  little  doubt  of  the  physical  reality  of  heat,  light,  etc.,
these  were  in  early  times  at  once  set  down  as  matter.  Fire,
in  fact  (including,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  everything  which
involved  either  heat  or  flame,  real  or  apparent),  was  in  early
times  one  of  the  four  so-called  elements.

In  those  days  the  sun  was  supposed  to  be  only  a great
fire ; a lightning-flash,  an  aurora,  or  a comet,  was  merely  a
flame  ; in  other  words,  the  essence  of  all  these  was  the
element  fire,  or,  as  it  was  later  called,  caloric.  The  sun,
except  when  he  appeared  as  the  spreader  of  pestilence,  was
the  beneficent  fire,  as  were  also  some  of  the  planets ; the
lightning,  the  comet,  even  the  moon  and  Saturn,  were  bale-
ful fires.


THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


71


This  endeavour  to  assign  a substantive  existence  to  every
phenomenon  is,  of  course,  perfectly  natural;  but  on  that
very  account  excessively  likely  to  be  wrong.

Humanum  est  err  are  comes  with  quite  as  much  heart-
felt conviction  of  its  truth  from  the  lips  of  the  honest  Pagan
as  from  those  of  the  Christian  believer ; though  perhaps  its
meaning  may  be  considerably  less  extended  in  the  former
than  in  the  latter  case.

94.  But,  before  discussing  what  is  that  something  else
besides  stuff  which  has  an  objective  though  not  a substan-
tive existence,  let  us  in  the  first  place  inquire  into  the
grounds  of  our  belief,  that  matter  itself  has  a real  existence
external  to  us  ; that,  in  fact,  the  so-called  evidence  of  our
senses  is  not  a mere  delusion.  ( Now,  some  extreme  thinkers
write  as  if  they  would  persuade  us  that  a species  of  hallu-
cination affects  with  similar  impressions  every  individual
mind,  so  that,  for  instance,  one  man  may  usefully  warn
another  about  a pitfall  on  a dark  road,  and  so  save  him
from  a catastrophe  which'  might  otherwise  be  caused  by
something  which  exists,  if  at  all,  in  the  mentor’s  mind
only, — at  all  events  not  as  yet  in  that  of  his  pupil ; though,
if  the  warning  be  unheeded,  or  not  given,  there  will  presently
be  another  mind  in  which  the  pitfall  will  certainly  exist  with
startling  vividness.  But  this  is  altogether  repugnant  to
every  conviction  which  experience  (our  only  guide  in  such
matters)  enables  us  to  form  ; and,  in  the  shape  in  which
we  have  put  it,  could  hardly  be  held  at  all  by  any  reason-
able being.  Now  physical  science  furnishes  us  with  the
following  among  many  other  arguments  in  proof  of  the
reality  of  the  external  universe  : — Experience  of  the  most
varied  hind  consistently  shoius  us  that  ive  cannot  p>ro-
duce  or  destroy  the  smallest  quantity  of  matter.  Exer-


72


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


cise  our  greatest  powers  of  imagination,  do  with  it  what  we
please,  we  cannot  make  our  senses  indicate  to  us  an  increase
or  diminution  in  a given  quantity  of  what  we  call  matter.
We  find  it  so  far  amenable  to  our  control  that  we  can  alter
its  arrangement,  form,  density,  state  of  aggregation,  tem-
perature, etc. ; nay,  by  so  approximating  it  to  other  matter
as  to  produce  a chemical  combination,  we  may  entirely
transform  its  appearance  and  properties, — all  hut  one : its
mass  or  quantity  is  completely  beyond  our  control.  Mea-
sure it  by  what  process  we  please,  by  the  “ muscular  sense,
by  weight,  anyhow,  there  it  is,  altogether  independent  of
us,  laughing  our  efforts  to  scorn ! Can  this  be  a mere
mental  idea  which  the  mind  that  conceived  it  (or,  at  all
events,  in  some  way  received  the  conception  of  it)  is  unable
to  destroy '?

But  there  is  one  other  argument  on  this  point  which
must  be  mentioned.  Not  only  do  our  own  senses  invari-
ably indicate  to  us  the  impossibility  of  altering  the  quantity
of  matter,  but  the  senses  of  all  men  alike  point  to  the  same
quantity,  quality,  and  collocation  of  matter  in  the  earth
and  external  to  the  earth.  Whence  this  extraordinary
agreement  between  the  evidences  of  the  senses  in  difierent
men,  when  the  minds  are  so  different  ?

Our  conviction  then  of  the  objective  reality  of  matter
is  based  upon  the  experimental  truth  that  we  can  neither
increase  nor  diminish  its  quantity,  in  fact  on  what  we  may
conveniently  for  our  present  purpose  call  the  Conservation
of  Matter.

95.  Here  let  us  pause  for  a moment  to  compare  together
this  view  of  matter  and  the  definition  of  the  laws  of  the
universe,  which  we  have  already  given.  The  laws  of  the
universe  we  defined  (Art.  54)  to  be  the  laws  according  to


THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


73


which  the  beings  in  the  universe  are  trammelled  by  the
Governor  thereof  as  regards  time,  space,  and  sensation.
Now,  it  may  be  asked,  is  this  definition  consistent  with  a
belief  in  the  objective  reality  of  matter  ? We  reply,  that
the  two  are  in  perfect  accordance.

We  do  not  here  intend  to  enter  into  any  metaphysical
discussion.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  say  that  our  practical
working  certainty  of  the  reality  of  matter  means,  firstly ,
that  it  offers  resistance  to  our  imagination  and  our  wiU,
and,  secondly,  that  in  particular  it  offers  absolute  resistance
to  all  attempts  to  change  its  quantity.  We  shall  soon  see
that  both  properties  belong  to  something  else.

96.  Returning  from  this  digression  let  us  therefore  assume
that  the  objective  reality  of  the  external  universe  has  been
proved,  and  that  this  reality  is  strongly  impressed  upon  us
in  virtue  of  that  principle  which  we  have  called  the  con-
servation of  matter.

But  as  soon  as  we  grant  this,  we  are  obliged  by  our
reason,  however  little  our  senses  may  incline  us  to  it,  or
rather  however  much  they  may  dispose  us  against  it,  to
allow  objective  reality  to  whatever  is  found  to  be  in  the
same  sense  conserved,  (We  have  here  italicised  these  four
words  for  a reason  which  will  afterwards  appear.)  This  is
a question  which  deserves  and  must  get  careful  consideration.

97.  In  abstract  dynamics  several  things  are  said  and
mathematically  proved  by  deductions  from  experiment  to
be  conserved,  but  one  only  of  these  in  the  strict  sense  in
which  we  have  spoken  of  the  conservation  of  matter.  We
will  examine  them  briefly,  and  our  non-mathematical
readers  must  pardon  us  if  in  this  examination  we  make  use
of  certain  technical  expressions  belonging  to  the  domain  of
mathematical  physics.


74


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


(l.)  Conservation  of  Momentum. — What  is  understood
by  this  is  a mere  direct  consequence  of  Newton's  first  i
interpretation  of  his  third  law  of  motion,  viz.,  that  Action
and  Reaction  are  equal  and  opposite.  Stated  in  its
simplest  form  it  asserts  that  the  momentum  of  a system  of
bodies,  measured  in  any  direction  whatever,  is  not  altered  |
by  their  mutual  action,  whether  that  action  be  of  the  nature  |

of  traction,  attraction,  repulsion,  or  impact.  And  we  see  j

at  once  from  this  third  law  of  motion  that  it  must  be  so,
because  the  change  of  momentum,  in  any  direction,  of  any  i
one  part  of  the  system,  per  unit  of  time,  is  the  measure  of  ^
the  force  acting  on  that  part  in  that  direction.  Whatever
momentum  in  this  particular . direction  is  gained  by  one
member  of  the  system  must  have  been  lost  by  other  mem-
bers, but  not  from  their  whole  momentum,  merely  from  the
part  of  it  in  this  direction.  It  thus  appears  that  the
(algebraic)  sum  of  the  momenta  generated  by  the  mutual  '
actions  of  the  system  is  zero.

These  momenta  are  in  fact  directed  magnitudes  (like
the  forces  of  which  they  are  the  measure),  and  are  therefore  j
capable  of  cancelling  one  another.  In  this  sense  the  con-
servation is  of  the  same  nature  as  that  of  the  imagined
electric  or  magnetic  fluids,  where  no  portion  whatever  of
one  kind  can  be  produced  without  the  simultaneous  appear-
ance of  an  equal  quantity  of  the  other,  a quantity  just
capable  of  neutralizing  it.  This  is  obviously  not  in  any
sense  analowus  to  the  Conservation  of  Matter  of  which  we

O

have  just'  spoken.

(2.)  CGnservation  of  Moment  of  Momentum. — Here  we
deal  with  quantities  of  the  order  of  the  moments  of  forces
about  an  axis,  i.e.  couples  in  Poinsot  s sense.  These  also
are  directed  magnitudes  depending  for  their  conservation


THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


7b


upon  the  first  interpretation  of  Newton’s  third  law,  and  there-
fore the  same  remarks  apply  to  them  as  to  the  preceding.

(3.)  Conservation  of  Vis  Viva. — Vis  viva  is  the  old
name  for  energy  or  the  power  of  doing  work.  We  now
deal  with  quantities  which  cannot  possess  direction,  because
they  are  essentially  products  of  pairs  of  quantities  similarly
directed,  and  are  therefore  all  to  be  treated  as  of  the  same
algebraic  sign,  or  rather  (to  adopt  the  language  of  Sir  W.
R.  Hamilton)  as  signless  quantities.  With  such  there  can
of  course  be  no  cancelling.

To  make  our  meaning  clear,  let  us  consider  upon  what
vis  viva  depends.  It  depends  upon  and  is  proportional  to
the  product  of  the  mass  into  the  square  of  the  velocity.
Now  mass  is  of  course  a signless  quantity ; evidently  we
cannot  have  negative  mass.  Then  with  regard  to  the
square  of  the  velocity,  this  will  be  positive  whether  the
velocity  be  positive  or  negative,  whether  it  be  in  one  direc-
tion or  the  opposite.  Vis  viva,  therefore,  or  energy,  is
something  which  is  not  affected  with  the  sign  of  direction,
or,  as  we  have  already  said,  it  is  a signless  quantity.

98.  We  have  said  that  the  energy  which  a body  con-
tains— its  vis  viva — its  power  of  doing  work,  is-  inde-
pendent of  the  direction  in  which  it  is  moving ; and,
further,  that  while  the  mass  is  the  same,  it  is  proportional
to  the  square  of  the  velocity.  For  instance,  we  may  measure
the  energy  of  a cannon  ball  or  of  an  arrow  by  the  dis-
tance it  will  carry  itself  up  against  the  force  of  gravity,
represented  by  its  own  weight,  when  shot  vertically  up-
wards, and  we  find  that  with  a double  velocity  it  will  go
four  times  as  high.  Or  we  may  point  the  cannon  horizon-
tally, and  measure  the  energy  of  the  same  ball  by  the
number  of  planks  of  oak  wood  which  it  can  penetrate,  and


76


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


we  shall  find  that  a ball  with  double  the  velocity  will  pene-
trate nearly  four  times  as  many  as  one  with  the  single  velo-
‘City.  All  these  experiments  concur  together  in  convincing
us  that  the  energy  of  the  ball  is  independent  of  the  direc-
tion in  which  the  cannon  is  pointed,  and  is  proportional  to
the  square  of  the  velocity,  so  that  a double  velocity  will
give  a fourfold  energy.

99.  We  have  just  now  spoken  about  a cannon  ball  fired
into  the  air  against  the  force  of  gravity.  Such  a ball,  as  it
mounts,  will  each  moment  lose  part  of  its  velocity,  until  it
finally  comes  to  a standstill,  after  which  it  will  begin  to
descend.  When  it  is  just  turning  it  is  perfectly  harmless,
and  if  we  were  standing  on  the  top  of  a cliff  to  which  it  had
just  reached,  we  might  without  danger  catch  it  in  our  arms
and  lodge  it  on  the  cliff.  Its  energy  has  apparently  disap-
peared. Let  us,  however,  see  whether  this  is  really  true  or
not.  It  was  fired  up  at  us,  let  us  say,  by  a foe  at  the  bottom
of  the  cliff,  and  the  thought  occurs  to  us  to  drop  it  down
upon  him  again,  which  we  do  with  great  success,  for  he  is
smashed  to  pieces  by  the  ball.

In  truth,  dynamics  informs  us  that  such  a ball  will  again
strike  the  ground  with  a velocity,  and  therefore  with  an
energy  precisely  equal  to  that  with  which  it  was  originally
projected  upwards.  Now,  when  at  the  top  of  the  cliff,  if  it
had  not  the  energy  due  to  actual  motion,  it  had  neverthe-
less some  sort  of  energy  due  to  its  elevated  position,  for  it
had  obviously  the  power  of  doing  work.  We  thus  recog-
nise two  forms  of  energy  ivhich  change  into  one  another,
the  one  due  to  actual  motion  and  the  other  to  position ; the
former  of  these  is  generally  called  kinetic,  and  the  latter
potential  energy.  All  this  appears  to  have  been  clearly
perceived  by  Newton,  who  gave  it  as  a second  interpreta-


THE  PEESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


77


tion  of  his  Third  Law  of  Motion.  His  statement  is  in
language  equivalent  to  the  following : ^ — Work  done  on  any
system  of  bodies  has  its  equivalent  in  the  form  of  work
done  against  friction^  molecular  forces,  or  gravity,  if  there
he  no  acceleration;  hut  if  there  he  acceleration,  part  of  the
work  is  expended  in  overcoming  resistance  to  acceleration,
and  the  additional  kinetic  energy  developed  is  equivalent
to  the  work  so  spent.

100.  Thus  Newton  expressly  tells  us  (though  not  in
these  words)  that  we  are  to  include  in  the  same  category
work  done  by  or  against  a force — whether  that  force  be
due  to  gravity,  friction,  or  molecular  action  (such  as  elas-
ticity, for  instance),  or  even  to  acceleration.

{a.)  When  work  is  done  against  gravity,  as  in  lifting  a
mass  from  the  ground,  we  have  just  seen  that  it  is  (as  it
were)  stored  up  in  the  raised  mass  ; we  can  recover  it  at
any  time  by  letting  the  mass  descend.  Thus  it  is  that  we
furnish  a clock  with  motive  power  sufficient  to  keep  it
going  for  a week  in  spite  of  friction  and  other  resistance,
by  simply  winding  up  its  weights.

Q).)  When  work  is  done  against  molecular  forces,  we
have  a similar  storing  up,  as,  for  instance,  in  drawing  a bow
or  in  winding  up  a watch.

(c.)  When  work  is  done  against  the  inertia  of  a body,  i.e.
to  accelerate  its  velocity,  Newton’s  definitions  show  that  the
kinetic  energy  so  produced  is  equal  to  the  work  so  spent.

(d)  In  abstract  dynamics  we  simply  consider  as  lost  the
work  spent  against  friction.  In  Newton  s time  it  was  not
known  what  became  of  it.

101.  Leaving  out  then,  for  the  present,  the  fourth  alterna-

^ See  Thomson  and  Tait’s  Natural  Philosophy,  § 269  ; or  Tait’s  Thermodynamics,
§91.


78


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


tive,  wc  see  that  whatever  work  is  spent  we  musk  according
to  Newton,  even  in  abstract  dynamics  recognise  that  it  is  not
lost,  hut  only  transformed  into  an  equivalent  quantity  stored  [
up  for  future  use,  either  in  a quiescent  form  (as,  for  instance,  j
a raised  weight  or  bent  spring),  or  in  an  active  form  (as  vis  1
viva  of  a moving  mass).  Here,  then,  at  last,  we  recognise  *
the  same  sort  of  conservation  as  that  which  we  found  in
matter.  But  the  statement  so  far  is  defective,  as  we  have
seen,  in  one  particular.  What  becomes  of  work  spent  in
overcoming  friction  ? or  what  becomes  of  the  energy  of  the
blacksmith’s  hammer  after  it  has  struck  the  anvil  ? To
this  experiment  alone  can  give  the  answer.  Let  us  see
what  it  has  told  us.

Man  has  been  called  a reasoning  animal,  a laughing
animal,  according  to  the  momentary  whim  or  humour
of  the  classifier  ; but  he  is  perhaps  still  more  definitely
separated  from  all  other  animals  when  specified  as  the
‘‘  cooking  animal.”  Now,  it  has  always  appeared  to  us
as  something  little  short  of  marvellous,  that  even  for
the  high  purpose  of  cooking  his  food,  or  of  inflicting
exquisite  torture  on  a vanquished  foe,  savage  man  should
ever  have  hit  upon  the  process  of  procuring  fire  by
friction.  Considering  his  condition,  and  comparing  his  op-
portunities and  his  success  with  those  of  even  our  greatest
modern  physicists,  we  cannot  but  look  upon  this  as  one  of
the  very  greatest  and  most  notable  discoveries  ever  made
in  physics.  All  the  more  notable,  too,  from  the  fiict  that  a
man  like  Newton,  though  of  course  aware  of  it,  absolutely
missed  its  significance  even  at  the  very  moment  when  it
alone  was  wanted  to  fill  a serious  lacuna  in  one  of  his
grandest  and  most  important  practical  generalisations.  The
missing  link  was  all  but  supplied  by  Eumford  and  Davy  at


THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


79


the  very  end  of  last  century.  Eumford’s  boiling  of  water
by  the  heat  generated  in  the  boring  of  a cannon,  and
Davy’s  melting  of  ice  by  friction  in  vacuo,  were  each  con-
clusively demonstrative  alike  of  the  non-materiality  of  heat
and  of  the  ultimate  fate  of  work  spent  in  friction,  which  is
thus  seen  to  be  converted  into  heat ; or  at  least  these  experi-
ments could  easily  have  been  made  demonstrative  by  very
slight  additions  to,  or  modifications  of,  their  authors’  methods
or  reasoning.  But  the  exact  and  formal  enunciation  of  the
equivalence  of  heat  and  work  required  to  fill  the  lacuna  in
Newton’s  statement  was  first  given  by  Davy  in  1812.

102.  Let  us  here  pause  for  a moment  and  contemplate
the  position  to  which  the  problem  had  now  attained.
Visible  kinetic  energy,  such  as  that  of  a cannon-ball  shot
upwards,  is  transformed  as  it  rises  into  visible  potential
energy.  As  the  ball  descends  its  energy  is  re  transformed
from  the  potential  into  the  kinetic  variety  until,  when  it  is
about  to  strike  the  earth,  it  has,  or  rather  would  have  if
there  were  no  atmosphere,  as  much  kinetic  energy  as  it  had
when  it  was  first  shot  upwards.

When  the  ball  has  once  struck  the  earth  its  kinetic
energy  is  changed  into  heat,  and  we  have  very  many
reasons  for  regarding  heat  as  only  another  species  of  energy :
and,  generally  speaking,  in  all  cases  of  friction,  percussion,
and  atmospheric  resistance  we  have  a change  of  visible
energy  into  heat,  as  for  instance  when  a railway  train  is
stopped  by  the  action  of  the  break,  when  a blacksmith
strikes  the  anvil  with  his  hammer,  or  when  a cannon-ball
moves  through  and  heats  the  air.

We  had  thus  come  to  the  stage  of  regarding  heat  as  a
species  of  molecular  energy  into  which  visible  energy  is
very  often  transformed,  and  very  soon  after  it  came  to  be


8o


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


perceived  that  there  were  otlier  forms  of  molecular  energy  |
besides  heat — some  of  these  being  potential  and  some  /
kinetic.  Thus  we  may  have  two  substances  possessing  /
chemical  affinity  separated  from  each  other  just  as  we  may  j
have  a stone  separated  from  the  earth,  and  we  obtain  a ^
form  of  potential  energy  in  the  one  case  as  truly  as  in  the  |
other.  When,  for  instance,  we  have  carbon  or  coal  in  our  [
cellars  or  our  mines,  and  oxygen  in  the  air,  we  are  in  pos-  '
session  of  a store  of  energy  upon  which  we  can  draw  at  any
moment  and  change  it  during  the  process  of  combustion
from  the  potential  to  the  kinetic  form.  Again,  in  a current
of  electricity  we  have  no  doubt  a species  of  kinetic  energy,
although  it  would  puzzle  men  of  science  to  say  what  such
a current  precisely  means.  From  all  this,  without  entering
further  into  scientific  details,  our  readers  will  perceive  that
there  are  a variety  of  forms,  some  of  them  potential  and
others  of  them  kinetic,  in  which  energy  may  appear.

While  we  were  thus  grasping  the  fact  that  energy  can
appear  under  various  forms  we  were  also  beginning  to  per-
ceive tliat  it  had  great  powers  of  transmutation — going
about  from  one  form  to  another,  and  Sir  W.  E.  Grove  did

I

good  work  at  this  stage  of  the  inquiry  in  bringing  together  |
the  various  cases  of  such  transmutations  in  his  work  on  the  '
Correlation  of  the  Physical  Forces.  !

Tn  spite  of  this,  it  was  left  for  Joule  and  Colding,  who  !
worked  almost  simultaneously  and  by  well-devised  experi-
mental methods  from  about  the  year  1840,  independently
to  discover,  and  by  degrees  to  enunciate,  by  means  of  argu-
ments founded  on  the  only  admissible  basis  of  experiment,
the  grand  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy.  In  its  most
general  form,  the  statement  of  the  conservation  of  energy
is  merely  a completed  version  of  the  passage  we  have


THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


8i


already  quoted  from  Newton ; and  the  experimental  dis-
coveries of  Eumford  and  Davy,  extended  and  completed  by
Joule  and  Golding,  allow  us  to  put  Newton’s  second  or
alternative  interpretation  of  his  third  law  of  motion  into
the  modern  statement  of  the  conservation  of  energy.

In  any  system  of  bodies  whatever,  to  which  no  energy  is
communicated  by  external  bodies,  and  which  parts  with  no
energy  to  external  bodies,  the  sum  of  the  various  potential
and  kinetic  energies  remains  for  ever  unaltered.

In  other  words,  while  the  one  form  of  energy  becomes
changed  into  the  other, — potential  into  kinetic  and  kinetic
into  potential, — yet  each  change  represents  at  once  a
ewfition  of  the  one  kind  of  energy  and  a simultaneous  and
equal  annihilation  of  the  other,  the  sum-  of  both,  as  we  have
already  said,  remaining  meanwhile  unaltered.

103.  Taking  as  our  system  the  whole  physical  universe,
we  now  see  that,  according  to  the  test  we  have  already  laid
down,  energy  has  as  much  claim  to  be  regarded  as  an  objec-
tive reality  as  matter  itself.  But  the  forms  of  statement
are  most  markedly  different  for  the  two.  AVe  before  spoke
of  the  quantity  of  matter  without  qualification,  but  we  now
speak  of  the  sum  of  the  two  kinds  of  energy.  Let  us  think
for  a moment  of  this,  and  we  see  that  whereas  (to  our  pre-
sent knowledge,  at  least)  matter  is  always  the  same,  though
it  may  be  masked  in  various  combinations,  energy  is  con-
stantly changing  the  form  in  which  it  presents  itself.  The
one  is  like  the  eternal,  unchangeable  Fate  or  Necessitas  of
the  ancients  ; the  other  is  Proteus  himself  in  the  variety
and  rapidity  of  its  transformations.

104.  And  again,  energy  is  of  use  to  its  solely  because  it  is
constantly  being  transformed.  When  the  sluice  is  shut,  or
the  fire  put  out,  the  machinery  stops ; when  a man  cannot

F


82


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


digest  his  food,  he  breaks  down  altogether.  Coal  in  itself,
except  on  account  of  an  occasional  fossil  it  may  contain,  or  'i
* its  still  somewhat  uncertain  mode  of  formation,  or  (to  take  a ’
lower  point  of  view)  as  a material  for  ornament,  is  a very
useless  thing  indeed  : its  grand  value  consists  in  its  chemi-
cal affinity,  in  virtue  of  which  it  possesses  great  potential
energy  as  regards  the  oxygen  of  the  air,  which  can  very
easily  be  transformed  into  its  equivalent  in  heat.  ‘‘  Keep
your  powder  dry is  merely  one  way  of  saying preserve  the  j
ready  transform  ability  of  your  energy.”  In  fact,  if  we  think
for  a moment  over  what  has  just  been  said,  to  the  effect
that  the  only  real  things  in  the  physical  universe  are  matter
and  energy,  and  that  of  these  matter  is  simply  passive,  it  is
obvious  that  all  the  physical  changes  which  take  place,
including  those  which  are  inseparably  associated  with  the
thoughts  as  well  as  the  actions  of  living  beings,  are  merely  ^
transformations  of  energy.  Thus  it  is  an  inquiry  of  the  very  i
utmost  importance  as  regards  the  present  universe  : Are  !
cdl  forms  of  energy  equally  susceptible  of  transformation  ?

To  see  the  importance  of  this  question,  the  reader  has  only  ^
to  reflect  that  if  there  be  any  one  form  of  energy  less
readily  or  less  completely  transformable  than  the  others,
and  if  transformations  constantly  go  on,  more  and  more  of
the  whole  energy  of  the.  universe  will  inevitably  sink  into
this  lower  grade  as  time  advances.  Hence  the  whole  possi-  ■
bility  of  transformation  must  steadily  grow  less  and  less ; in  •
scientific  language,  though  the  quantity  of  energy  remains
for  ever  unchanged,  its  availability  steadily  decreases.

10  5.  Now,  every  one  knows  a case  in  which  there  may
be  an  unlimited  amount  of  energy  present,  no  part  of
which  is  available  for  transformation.  It  is  the  simple  one
of  heat  in  a number  of  bodies,  ivlien  all  are  at  the  same  .


I


THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


83


temperature.  To  obtain  work  from  heat  we  must  have
hotter  and  colder  bodies,  to  correspond,  as  it  were,  with  the
boiler  and  condenser  of  a heat  engine ; and  just  as  we  get
no  work  from  still  water  if  it  be  all  at  the  same  level,  i.e,  if
no  part  of  it  can  fall,  so  in  like  manner  we  can  get  no  work
from  heat  unless  part  of  it  can  fall  from  a higher  to  a lower
temperature.

106.  The  first  step  in  the  investigation  of  the  transforma-
tion of  heat  into  work  was  taken  by  Sadi  Carnot  in  1824  : a
; step  of  inestimable  value  in  every  branch  of  modern  physical
science.  He  devised  a method  of  startling  originality  for
the  purpose  of  attacking  this  special  question  of  the  pro-
-duction  of  work  from  heat.  His  inferences  from  its  appli-
cation were  not  all  correct ; this  was  due  however  to  no
fault  of  the  method,  but  to  the  fact  that  he  unfortunately
assumed  (though  with  caution,  and  under  a protest  almost
I amounting  to  an  assertion  of  the  opposite)  the  materiality
of  heat.  His  method  embraces  two  perfectly  new  ideas  : —
(1.)  That,  at  least  with  our  present  knowledge,  no  inference
is  possible  as  to  the  relation  between  heat  and  work,  until
I the  heated  or  working  substance  is  brought  back,  after  a
complete  Cycle  of  operations,  to  its  initial  physical  state.

' Obvious  as  this  statement,  once  made,  is,  it  was  alto-
gether ignored  (twenty  years  after  Carnot)  by  Seguin  and
Mayer,  whom  some  authors  still  persist  in  setting  forth  as
the  founders  of  the  dynamical  theory  of  heat.  Their  specu-
I lations  were  entirely  vitiated  by  their  violation  of  this
I principle.

' (2.)  That  an  engine  whose  cycle  of  operations  is  revers-

ible is  a perfect  engine,  that  is  to  say,  gives  the  greatest
; possible  amount  of  work  from  a given  quantity  of  heat
with  any  assigned  temperatures  of  boiler  and  condenser.


84


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


The  term  reversible  is  not  here  used  in  the  popular  sense
in  which  a mere  reversal  of  the  direction  of  motion  of  each
part  is  contemplated,  i.e.  what  would  be  more  properly
termed  “ backing,”  it  is  used  in  the  higher  sense  of  taking
an  engine  which  converts  a certain  quantity  of  the  heat
spent  on  it  into  work,  while  it  lets  the  rest  down  from  the
boiler  to  the  condenser,  and  then  changing  or  converting
it  into  an  engine  upon  which  the  same  amount  of  work
is  spent  with  the  result  of  taking  back  the  heat  from  the
condenser,  adding  to  it  the  heat-equivalent  of  the  work
so  spent,  and  thus  restoring  the  whole  of  its  original  loss
in  heat  to  the  boiler ; simply  in  fact  reversing  all  the
results  of  the  direct  action.

107.  Sir  W.  Thomson,  in  1848,  was  the  first  to  recall  atten-
tion to  the  work  of  Carnot,  after  Colding  and  Joule  had  pub-
lished their  discoveries  ; and  he  pointed  out  that  the  action
of  the  reversible  engine  gave  what  had  been  up  to  that  time
vainly  sought,  an  absolute  definition  of  temperature — a
definition,  that  is,  altogether  independent  of  the  properties
of  any  particular  species  of  matter.  In  fact  it  is  obvious
that  as  reversibility  in  the  sense  we  have  just  explained  is
the  stamp  of  perfection  in  a heat  engine,  all  reversible
engines,  whatever  be  the  working  substance,  will,  under  the
same  circumstances,  that  is  to  say,  with  the  same  tempera-
tures of  boiler  and  condenser,  convert  the  same  fraction  of
the  heat  spent  on  them  into  work.  This,  of  course,  still
leaves  wide  scope  for  a definition  of  temperature,  but  that
finally  determined  on  by  Thomson  was  chosen  (in  conse-
quence of  a hint  from  some  experimental  results  of  Joule)
so  as  to  make  the  absolute  measurement  agree  nearly  with
that  of  the  long-known  air-thermometer.  It  therefore
stands  as  follows  : —


THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


8S


The  heat  taken  in  hy  a 'perfect  engine  is  to  the  heat
given  out  hy  it  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  absolute
temperature  of  the  boiler  to  that  of  the  condenser.

Of  course  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  state  that  it  is  only
the  difference  between  the  heat  taken  in  and  that  given  out
by  any  engine  that  can  have  been  converted  into  available
work.  This  follows  from  the  conservation  of  energy.

108.  Experiments^  carried  on  by  Joule  and  Thomson  to-
gether have  shown  that  the  absolute  zero  of  temperature  is
nearly  274°  below  zero  of  the  centigrade  scale  ; so  that  on  the
absolute  scale  the  temperature  of  melting  ice  is  274°  while
that  of  water  boiling  under  the  standard  pressure  is  374°.

In  1849  James  Thomson  made  a very  remarkable
application  of  Carnot’s  reasoning,  the  first  of  a series  of
such  applications  which  have  since  done  immense  service  in
the  extension  of  almost  every  branch  of  physics.  He
showed  in  fact  that,  because  water  expands  in  the  act  of
freezing,  the  melting  point  of  ice  must  be  lowered  by
pressure.  Sir  W.  Thomson  in  the  same  year  verified  this
deduction,  to  its  numerical  details,  by  direct  experiment
Trifling  as  the  predicted  and  measured  effect  appears  (one
degree  centigrade  for  each  2000  lbs.  additional  pressure  per
square  inch),  there  can  now  be  no  doubt  that  it  goes  at
least  very  far  to  explain  the  varied  effects  of  the  extra-
ordinary plasticity  of  glacier-ice  so  beautifully  made  out
by  the  direct  measurements  of  Forbes.

109.  We  have  said  that  Carnot  unfortunately  based  his
reasoning  on  the  assumed  materiality  (and  therefore  inde-

^ They  showed  that  in  a perfect  steam-engine  with  pressure  equal  to  “one
atmosphere”  in  its  boiler,  and  with  its  condenser  at  the  temperature  of  melting
ice, 'the  ratio  of  the  heat  taken  in  to  the  heat  given  out  is  l*335  to  1.  Hence  if
the  difference  between  the  numbers  is  to  be  100,  these  must  be  374,  274. — Phil.
Trans,  f 1854.


86


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


structibility)  of  beat.  It  therefore  became  a question  of
great  importance  to  find  how  properly  to  adapt  his  methods
to  the  true  theory.  James  Thomson  s verified  prediction
had  already  given  a correct  and  absolutely  new  physical
result  from  his  principles.  How  then  must  we  get  rid  of
his  false  assumption  ?

Clausius  attempted  this  in  1850,  but  his  method  is  based
solely  upon  the  observed  fact  that  in  general  heat  tends
from  hotter  to  colder  bodies.  This  we  know  is  not  always
the  case,  for  a fine  wire  may  be  made  red-hot  by  the  cur-
rent from  a thermo-electric  battery  (of  a sufficient  number
of  pairs)  where  ice  and  boiling  water  alone  are  used  to  heat
and  cool  the  alternate  junctions.  Here  heat  certainly  passes
from  colder  bodies  to  a hotter  one.  Clausius  has,  no  doubt,
since  extended  his  original  statement,  so  as  to  make  it
stand  thus : — Heat  cannot  of  itself  pass  from  a colder  to
a hotter  body.  We  do  not  consider  even  this  sufficiently
obvious  for  an  axiom,  were  it  certainly  true,  but,  as
will  be  seen  later,  it  is  not.  In  fact  it  is  constantly
being  violated,  though  on  a very  small  scale,  in  every
mass  of  gas.

110.  It  was  Sir  W.  Thomson  ^ who  (in  1 8 5 1)  first  correctly
adapted  Carnot's  magnificently  original  methods  to  the
true  theory  of  heat ; and  it  is  especially  noteworthy  to
remark  how,  even  at  that  early  time,  he  saw  the  full  danger
of  attempting  to  lay  down  anything  too  definite  on  the
subject.  The  following  is  the  axiom  he  gives : —

“ It  is  imjjossihle  by  means  of  inanimate  material
agency  to  derive  mechanical  effect  from  any  portio7i  of
matter  by  cooling  it  below  the  temperature  of  the  coldest
of  the  surrounding  objects!^

1 SeeTait,  Phil.  Mag.,  1872,  I.  338,  516;  II.  240.


THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


87


But  he  appends  the  following  guarded  note  : —

‘‘  If  this  axiom  be  denied  for  all  temperatures,  it  would
have  to  be  admitted  that  a self-acting  machine  might  be  set
to  work  and  produce  mechanical  effect  by  cooling  the  sea
or  earth,  with  no  limit  but  the  total  loss  of  heat  from  the
earth  and  sea,  or,  in  reality,  from  the  whole  material  world.”
The  full  importance  of  this  will  appear  presently.

To  those  who  can  accept  Thomson’s  axiom  with  the
explanation  appended  to  it,  Carnot’s  proposition  that  a
reversible  engine  is  perfect  (in  the  sense  of  being  the  best
possible)  is  demonstrated  at  once,  as  follows,  ex  absurdo.
Suppose  there  could  be  an  engine,  M,  more  perfect  than
a reversible  engine,  N.  Set  the  two  to  work  together  as  a
compound  engine,  M letting  down  heat  from  boiler  to  con-
denser, and  doing  work  ; N spending  work  in  pumping-
back  again  the  heat  to  the  boiler.  If  N be  made  to  restore
to  the  boiler  at  every  stroke  exactly  what  M takes  from  it,
the  compound  engine  will  do  external  work,  for,  by  hypo-
thesis, M is  more  perfect  than  N.  Whence  does  the  work
come  ? Not  from  the  boiler,  for  it  remains  as  it  was.
Hence  N must  take  more  heat  from  the  condenser  than  M
gives  it ; i.e.  you  get  work  by  cooling  the  condenser.

Carry  the  reasoning  a little  further,  and  we  see  that  if  the
excess  of  work  given  by  M were  spent  upon  N,  and  thus
no  work  on  the  whole  either  spent  or  given  out,  the  con-
denser would  be  still  further  cooled,  and  the  boiler  heated  1
Tliis,  to  most  peo23le,  would  seem  to  imply  an  ample  reductio
ad  absurdum.  But  Clerk-Maxwell  has  shown  it  to  be
ph}.  sically  possible,  and  has  thus  fully  justified  Thomson  s
caution  about  his  axiom.  As  this  is  a point  of  very  great
importance,  we  offer  no  excuse  for  treating  it  pretty  fully.
111.  Maxwell’s  reasoning  is  given  as  depending  upon


8S


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


the  molecular  theory  of  gases,  but  the  only  necessity  for
so  restricting  it  appears  to  be  that  we  thereby  connect  the
reasoning  more  directly  with  Heat,  which,  on  this  theory,
is  suj)poscd  to  be  the  energy  of  motion  of  the  molecules  of
the  gas.  The  illustration,  however,  is  more  general,  and  at
the  same  time  more  simple,  if  we  do  not  at  first  refer  either
to  heat  or  to  the  molecular  hypothesis  of  the  constitution
of  gases,  but  treat  the  question  simply  as  one  concerning
the  possible  motions  of  a number  of  little  material  particles.

x4.ssume,  then,  that  a great  number  of  small  equal  spheri-
cal particles  of  matter  are  enclosed  in  a vessel  of  any  form,
and  assume  further  that  (either  by  collision  or  by  repulsive
force)  each  of  these  has  the'  power  of  rebounding  from
another  or  from  the  wall  of  the  vessel,  as  if  it  were  elastic,
and  had  unit  co-efficient  of  restitution^  as  defined  in  treatises
on  natural  philosophy.  Then  it  can  be  shown,  as  a matter
of  direct  calculation,  that — start  these  particles  as  we  please,
in  all  sorts  of  directions,  and  with  velocities  as  varied  as  we
please — after  a time,  whicli  will  be  shorter  as  the  number  of
particles  is  greater,  a sort  of  permanent  state  will  be  arrived
at  in  which  a certain  law  of  distribution  of  velocity  prevails
among  the  particles  (the  same  law  as  that  of  the  Prohahility
of  Error,  as  it  is  technically  called),  the  greater  number  of
them  haviug  nearly  the  mean  square  velocity,  and  those
which  have  much  less  or  more  than  that  being  fewer  and
fewer  as  the  defect  or  excess  is  greater.  The  tendency  is  to
an  average  distribution  of  these  varieties  of  velocity  through-
out the  vessel,  and  the  impacts  on  the  sides  will  thus  be
nearly  the  same  on  every  square  inch  of  its  surface.  After
this  there  is — alivays  lorovided  the  particles  he  sufficiently

^ Thomson  and  Tait’s  Natural  Philosophy,  § 300;  or  Tait  and  Steele’s  Dynamics
of  a Particle,  3d  ed.  § 290.


THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


89


numerous — no  perceptible  change  in  the  statistics  of  the
group,  except  in  so  far  as  concerns  individual  particles,  which
may  sometimes  be  moving  with  great,  sometimes  with  very
small,  velocity,  but  which,  in  the  long-run,  will  far  more  often
be  moving  with  the  mean  square  velocity,  or  at  least  some
velocity  very  near  it.  Hence,  in  no  part  of  the  vessel  will  the
average  energy  be  sensibly  greater  than  in  another,  and  there-
fore (so  far  as  the  contents  of  the  vessel  alone  are  concerned)
there  is  no  possibility  of  getting  work  from  them.  But  by
enlisting  in  our  service  conceivable  finite  beings  (imagined
by  Clerk-Maxwell,  and  called  demons  by  Thomson),  it
would  he  possible  materially  to  alter  this  state  of  things,
even  although  these  beings  should  do  absolutely  no  work.

112.  For  suppose  a firm  partition,  full  of  little  doors  (them-
selves without  mass)  to  be  placed  so  as  to  divide  the  vessel
into  two,  and  set  a demon  at  each  door,  with  instructions  to
open  it  for  an  instant  whenever  he  sees  he  can  thereby  let
a quick  moving  particle  escape  from  the  first  compartment
to  the  second,  or  a slow-moving  particle  from  the  second
into  the  first.  Then,  because  the  tendency  is  not  to  a uniform
distribution  of  velocity  among  the  particles,  but  to  a distri-
bution which  involves  quicker  and  slower  in  certain  propor-
tions, we  may  imagine  this  process  to  be  carried  on  long
enough  to  make  a considerable  difference  in  the  average
velocities  of  the  particles  in  the  two  compartments,  i.e,  a
greater  pressure  per  square  inch  on  the  walls  of  the  second
compartment  than  of  the  first ; and  thus,  if  the  partition
wall  were  moveable,  a certain  amount  of  work  might  be
obtained  by  allowing  it  to  move.  Thus  a group  of  particles
originally  incapable,  without  external  assistance,  of  doing
work,  may  be  rendered  capable  of  doing  work  .by  mere
guidance  applied  by  finite  intelligence.


90


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


113.  Now  let  us  refer  for  a moment  to  the  molecular
theory  of  gases,  and  we  see  that  what  the  demons  (without
any  expenditure  of  work,  each  being,  so  far  as  he  is  required,
virtually  a combination  of  two  intelligent  perfect  engines,
one  working  direct,  the  other  reversed)  have  guided  the  gas
to  do,  is  to  transfer  heat  from  a colder  to  a hotter  portion
of  the  gas.

The  only  reason  why  this  does  not  occur  without  the
assistance  of  demons  (at  least  to  an  extent,  or  for  a length
of  time,  sufficient  to  produce  a sensible  effect)  lies  in  the
enormous  number  of  particles  per  cubic  inch  in  even  the  most
rarefied  gas.  Hence,  solely  because  of  the  excessive  numbers
and  minuteness  of  the  particles  of  matter,  the  one  chance
of  escape  from  Carnot’s  proposition  is  denied  us,  and
therefore  we  must  allow  that,  so  far  as  the  physical  universe
is  concerned,  a reversible  heat  engine  is  the  best  possible.

114.  But  if  a reversible  heat  engine  be  the  best  possible,
then  the  principle  which  we  have  italicised  in  Art.  107
must  hold  good,  and  from  this  it  follows  that  only  a portion
of  the  heat  passing  through  a perfect  engine  can  be  trans-
formed into  useful  work  unless  the  condenser  of  the  engine
be  at  the  absolute  zero  of  temperature — a condition  which
can  never  be  attained.

It  thus  appears  that  at  each  transformation  of  heat-
energy  into  work  a large  portion  is  degraded,  while  only  a
small  portion  is  transformed  into  work.  So  that  while  it  is
very  easy  to  change  all  of  our  mechanical  or  useful  energy
into  heat,  it  is  only  possible  to  transform  a portion  of  this
heat-energy  back  again  into  work.  After  each  change  too
the  heat  becomes  more  and  more  dissipated  or  degraded,
and  less  and  less  available  for  any  future  transformation.

In  other  words,  the  tendency  of  heat  is  towards  equalisa-


THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


91


tion ; heat  is  par  excellence  the  communist  of  our  universe,
and  it  will  no  doubt  ultimately  bring  the  system  to  an  end.
This  universe  may  in  truth  be  compared  to  a vast  heat
engine,  and  this  is  the  reason  why  we  have  brought  such
engines  so  prominently  before  our  readers.  The  sun  is  the
furnace  or  source  of  high-temperature  heat  of  our  system,
just  as  the  stars  are  for  other  systems,  and  the  energy  which
is  essential  to  our  existence  is  derived  from  the  heat  which
the  sun  radiates,  and  represents  only  a very  small  portion
of  that  heat.  But  while  the  sun  thus  supplies  us  with
energy  he  is  himself  getting  colder,  and  must  ultimately,
by  means  of  radiation  into  space,  part  with  the  life-sustain-
ing power  which  he  at  present  possesses.  Besides  the  cooling
of  the  sun  we  must  also  suppose  that  owing  to  something
analogous  to  ethereal  friction^  the  earth  and  the  other
planets  of  our  system  will  be  drawn  spirally  nearer  and
nearer  to  the  sun,  and  will  at  length  be  engulfed  in  his
mass.  In  each  such  case  there  will  be,  as  the  result  of  the
collision,  the  conversion  of  visible  energy  into  heat,  and  a
partial  and  temporary  restoration  of  the  power  of  the  sun.
At  length,  however,  this  process  will  have  come  to  an  end,
and  he  will  be  extinguished  until,  after  long  but  not
immeasurable  ages,  by  means  of  the  same  ethereal  friction
his  black  mass  is  brought  into  contact  with  that  of  his
nearest  neighbour.

115.  Not  much  further  need  we  dilate  on  this.  It  is  ab-
solutely certain  that  life,  so  far  as  it  is  physical,  depends
essentially  upon  transformations  of  energy ; it  is  also
absolutely  certain  that  age  after  age  the  possibility  of  such
transformations  is  becoming  less  and  less ; and,  so  far  as  we

1 Stewart  and  Tait  on  the  Heating  of  a Dish  by  Rotation  in  vacuo  {Proceedings
of  the  Royal  Society).


92


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


yet  know,  the  final  state  of  the  present  universe  must  be
an  aggregation  (into  one  mass)  of  all  the  matter  it  contains,
i.e.  the  potential  energy  gone,  and  a practically  useless
state  of  kinetic  energy,  i.e.  uniform  temperature  throughout
that  mass.

But  the  present  potential  energy  of  the  solar  system  is  so
enormous,  approaching  in  fact  possibly  to  what  in  our  help-
lessness we  call  infinite,  that  it  may  supply  for  absolutely
incalculable  future  ages  what  is  required  for  the  physical
existence  of  life.  Again,  the  fall  together,  from  the  dis-
tance of  Sirius,  let  us  say,  of  the  sun  and  an  equal  star
would  at  once  supply  the  sun  with  at  least  thirty  times
as  much  energy  for  future  radiation  to  possible  planets  as
could  possibly  have  been  acquired  by  his  own  materials  in
falling  together  from  practically  infinite  diffusion  as  a cloud
of  stones  or  dust,  or  a nebula  ; so  that  it  is  certain  that,  if
the  present  physical  laws  remain  long  enough  in  operation,
there  will  be  (at  immense  intervals  of  time)  mighty  cata-
strophes due  to  the  crashing  together  of  defunct  suns — the
smashing  of  the  greater  part  of  each  into  nebulous  dust
surrounding  the  remainder,  which  will  form  an  intensely
heated  nucleus — then,  possibly,  the  formation  of  a new  and
larger  set  of  planets  with  a proportionately  larger  and  hotter
sun,  a solar  system  on  a far  grander  scale  than  the  present.
And  so  on,  growing  in  grandeur  but  diminishing  in  number
till  the  exhaustion'  of  energy  is  complete,  and  after  that
•eternal  rest,  so  far  at  least  as  visible  motion  is  concerned.

116.  The  study  of  the  necessary  future  has  prepared  us  for
an  inquiry  into  the  long  remote  past.  Just  as  the  present
discrete  stellar  systems  must  finally  come  together,  so  the
materials  which  now  form  them  must  have  originally  been
widely  separate.  Our  modern  knowledge  enables  us  to


THE  PRESENT  PHYSICAL  UNIVERSE.


93


look  back  with  almost  certitude  to  the  time  when  there  was
nothing  but  gravitating  matter  and  its  potential  energy
^ throughout  the  expanse  of  space — ready,  as  slight  local
differences  of  distribution  predisposed  it,  to  break  up  into
portions,  each  converging  to  one  or  more  nuclei  of  its  own,
and  thus  forming  in  time  separate  solar  or  stellar  systems.
AVe  have  thus  reached  the  beginning  as  well  as  the  end  of
the  present  visible  universe,  and  have  come  to  the  conclu-
sion that  it  began  in  time  and  will  in  time  come  to  an  end.
Immortality  is  therefore  impossible  in  such  a universe.


CHAPTER  IV.


MATTER  AND  ETHER.

**  Felix  qui  potuit  renun  cognoscere  causas,
atqiie  metus  omnis  et  inexorabile  fatum
subjecit  pedibus,  strepitumque  Acherontis  avari.”

Vergil.

“ Who  shall  tempt  with  wandering  feet
The  dark,  unbottomed,  infinite  abyss.

And  through  the  palpable  obscure  find  out
His  uncouth  way  ; or  spread  his  airy  flight
Over  the  vast  abrupt,  ere  he  arrive
The  happy  isle  ?” — Milton,  Paradise  Lost.


117.  The  next  portion  of  the  preliminary  inquiry  neces-
sary to  our  concluding  argument  is  that  which  relates  to
the  intimate  nature  of  matter ; and  more  especially  of
that  very  wonderful  form  of  matter  which  is  the  vehicle
of  all  the  energy  we  receive  from  the  sun,  as  it  is  that  of
all  the  information  we  obtain  about  the  position,  motion,
nature,  mass,  condition,  and  properties  of  the  almost  infi-
nitely more  distant  bodies,  which  are  scattered  through
cosmical  space.

To  use  the  comparison  of  a writer  on  energy,  we  have
hitherto  spoken  only  of  the  laws  of  working  of  that  machine
called  the  physical  universe ; let  us  now  endeavour  to
study  the  structure  of  that  material  of  which  it  is  com-
posed.

118.  Various  hypotheses  have  been  proposed  as  to  the
ultimate  nature  of  matter.  To  give  even  a general  account

04


MATTE jR  AND  ETHER,


95


of  all  the  less  absurd  of  these  would  require  a large  volume,
so  we  content  ourselves  with  a few  of  the  more  reasonable
or  historically  more  important.

(l.)  The  foremost  place  must  of  course  be  taken  by  the  old
Greek  notion  of  the  Atom.  The  outlines  of  the  atomic
theory  were  laid  down  very  precisely  by  Democritus  and
Leukippus  {circa  400  B.C.),  who  taught  that  the  whole
universe  is  made  up  of  empty  space  and  eternal  atoms,
differing  only  in  form  (as  A and  N),  order  (as  AN  and
NA),  and  posture  (as  Z and  N).  The  atoms  are  endued
with  a primitive  motion  in  virtue  of  their  weight,  and  clash-
ing together,  produce  vortices  from  which  the  world  is
formed.  The  gradual  progress  of  this  whirl  of  atoms  brings
similar  elements  together,  as  in  the  sifting  of  grain,  and  so
the  atoms  are  grouped  into  homogeneous  masses.  The
great  weakness  of  this  theory  lay  in  the  very  false  ideas
then  held  as  to  the  nature  of  motion  by  weight,  which  was
supposed  to  be  necessarily  in  parallel  lines,  and  with  a
velocity  greater  for  heavy  than  for  light  bodies.  The  diffi-
culty which  arose  from  this  notion  led  Epicurus  to  give  to
the  atoms  a perfectly  arbitrary  and  capricious  side  move-
ment, as  well  as  the  rectilineal  motion  due  to  their  weight,
and  thus,  in  his  school,  the  theory  became  really  a meta-
physical one,  reducing  the  order  of  the  universe  to  pure
chance.  It  is  such  a medley  of  physical  speculations,  with
metaphysical  notions,  that  we  find  in  the  greatest  exponent
of  the  system,  the  ‘‘  poet  philosopher'’  Lucretius.  With  the
help  of  Munro's  splendid  edition  of  the  text  of  Lucretius,
and  his  very  valuable  translation  and  notes,  it  is  now  a com-
paratively easy  matter  to  give  a concise  summary  of  the
principal  points  of  this  most  remarkable  early  physical
speculation.  In  attempting  to  do  so  we  will  endeavour,  so


96


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


far  as  we  can,  to  bear  in  mind  the  awful  but  too  often
disregarded  warning  given  by  the  poet  himself : —

“ Omnia  enim  stolidi  magis  admirantur  amantque,
inversis  qua?  sub  verbis  latitantia  cernunt,
veraque  constituuiit  quae  belle  tangere  possunt
auris  et  lepido  quae  sunt  fucata  sonore.”^

119.  As  the  purpose  of  the  poem  of  Lucretius  is  the  estab-
lishment of  the  very  opposite  of  our  present  theme,  we  must
consider  a good  deal  more  of  his  work  than  the  mere  pro-
perties of  atoms.  Lucretius  tells  us  that  his  object  is  to
dispel  the  fear  of  the  gods,  which  he  supposes  to  arise
simply  from  the  fact  that  there  are  so  many  things  which
men  do  not  yet  understand,  and  therefore  suppose  to  be
effected  by  divine  power.

Eeligion,  which  crushes  human  life  prostrate  upon  earth,
is,  he  says,  now  put  under  foot;  and  the  great  victory
achieved  by  his  Greek  instructor  over  the  immeasurable
universe  (in  finding  what  can  and  what  cannot  come  into
being)  brings  us  level  with  heaven.

His  followers  are  not  to  fancy  that  there  is  any  sin  in
this ; on  the  contrary,  religion  has  perpetually  been  the
cause  of  sinful  deeds.  There  is,  however,  danger  of  their
relapse,  for  the  terror-speaking  seers  may  once  more  over-
come them.  But  if  men  could  only  be  convinced  that  the
soul  is  born  and  perishes  with  us,  then  they  would  be  able
to  take  their  ease,  and  withstand  alike  religious  scruples  and
threatenings  of  the  seers.  For  this  purpose  we  must  find
out  what  mind  and  soul  consist  of,  and  how  everything  on
earth  proceeds ; and  if  we  can  do  this,  we  may,  of  course,
dispense  with  the  gods.

^ i.  641.  Thus  rendered  by  Munro  : — “ For  fools  admire  and  like  all  things  the
more  which  they  perceive  to  be  concealed  under  involved  language,  and  determine
things  to  be  true  which  can  prettily  tickle  the  ears  and  are  varnished  over  with
finely  sounding  phrase.”


MATTER  AND  ETHER.


97


120.  First,  then,  nothing  comes  from  nothing,  which  seems
to  be  meant  in  the  sense  that  there  is  a physical  cause  for
everything ; at  least  all  the  examples  which  are  adduced  in
proof  of  the  statement  are  mere  instances  of  what  might  be
conceived  to  happen  if  there  were  no  fixed  determining
physical  law  or  cause.  But  the  author  is  obscure  on  this
point,  for  he  sometimes  makes  us  inclined  to  think  that  he
is  virtually  only  asserting  the  eternal,  unchangeable,  exist-
ence of  the  atom, — the  first  beginning  of  things.'^

As  a corollary  to  this,  of  course,  nature  does  not  annihi-
late things,  but  dissolves  them  back  into  their  first  bodies.
The  same  negative  proof  is  here  attempted.  Nothing  is
lost,  but  nature  can  beget  nothing  till  she  is  recruited  by
the  death  of  something  else.  Then,  to  reconcile  the  reader
to  the  invisibility  of  these  first  bodies,  he  is  shown  how
nature  works  by  invisible  things,  as  wind  and  moisture  ;
how  marriage-rings  and  paving-stones,  ploughshares  and
statues,  are  worn  away  without  the  loss  of  any  visible
particles.  Nature,  therefore,  works  by  unseen  bodies.
Smell,  heat,  cold,  etc.,  must  consist  of  a bodily  nature,
because  they  afiect  the  senses ; for  nothing  but  body  can
touch  and  be  touched.

121.  But,  SECONDLY,  there  is  also  void  in  things,  else
they  would  be  jammed  together,  and  unable  to  move.  It  is
false  to  say  that  things  may  move  in  a plenum : as,  when  a
fish  presses  on,  it  leaves  room  behind  it,  into  which  the  water
may  stream  ; for  on  what  side  can  the  scaly  creature  move
forwards  unless  the  waters  have  first  made  room ; and  on
what  side  can  the  waters  give  place  so  long  as  the  fish  can-
not move  ? (This  of  course  is  metaphysics,  and  is  altogether
absurd.  It  is  the  old  story  of  the  immovable  body  receiv-
ing the  irresistible  blow.)  Hence  there  cannot  be  motion

(1


98


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


unless  there  be  void  to  allow  of  a start.  Dripping  of  water
in  caves,  the  passage  of  food  throughout  the  whole  body  of
an  animal,  the  fact  that  buds  and  fruit  of  trees  are  nourished
from  the  root,  voices  heard  through  walls,  cold  penetrating
the  very  bones,  all  are  proofs  that  there  is  void  as  well  as
body.  Also  when  one  thing  is  as  large  as  another,  but  yet
lighter,  there  must  be  more  void  in  it.

122.  Third.  Thei'e  can  he  no  third  thing  besides  body
and  void.  For  if  it  be  to  the  smallest  extent  tangible,  it  is
body  ; if  not,  it  is  void.

123.  Fourth.  Bodies  are  either  first  beginnings  of  things
(atoms),  or  a union  of  such.  Any  thing  which  can  be
broken  or  crushed,  or  which  can  transmit  heat  or  electricity,
is  partly  body  and  partly  void.  Hence  body  cannot  be-
crushed,  and  “ therefore  first  beginnings  are  of  solid  single-
ness, and  in  no  other  way  can  they  have  been  preserved
through  ages  during  infinite  time  past,  in  order  to  reproduce
things.”

124.  Fifth.  If  there  be  no  limit  to  breakage,  nothing
could  be  reproduced  ; for  reproduction  is  slower  than  decay,
and  therefore  the  breaking  of  infinite  past  ages  would  have
produced  a state  of  things  incompatible  with  the  reproduc-
tion of  anything  within  finite  time.  Hence  there  exists  a
least  in  things.  This  cannot  be  soft,  else  it  would  consist
partly  of  void,  and  be  therefore  breakable.

First  beginnings,  then,  are  strong  in  solid  singleness.
Hence  the  unreason  of  those  who  held  fire  to  be  the  matter
of  things,  for  what  surer  test  can  we  have  than  the  senses
whereby  to  note  truth  and  falsehood  !

The  doctrine  called  that  of  Homoeomeria  by  Anaxagoras
Ls  folly, — his  notion,  to  wit,  that  everything  is  made  up  of
little  parts  the  same  as  itself — bones  of  little  bones,  flesh


MATTER  AND  ETHER.


99


of  little  fleshes,  etc.  For  thus  corn  and  other  food,  which
go  to  nourish  our  blood,  must  be  in  part  composed  of  blood,
and  must  therefore  bleed  when  crushed  by  the  formidable
force  of  the  millstone !

125.  Sixth.  Are  the  atoms  infinite  in  number,  and  is  the
void  in  vdiieh  they  move  unlimited  f Both  questions  are
answered  in  the  affirmative,  but  the  proof  given  is  meta-
physical and  altogether  ridiculous,  though  it  contains  a
fragmentary  passage  of  real  merit,  hinting  at  Le  Sage’s  ex-
planation (presently  to  be  given)  of  the  cause  of  gravity.
One  illustration  of  it  must  suffice  : — “Nature  keeps  the  sum
of  things  from  setting  any  limit  to  itself,  since  she  compels
body  to  be  ended  by  void,  and  void  in  turn  by  body so
that  either  by  the  alternation  of  the  two,  or  by  the  infinite
extension  of  one  if  the  other  do  not  bound  it,  immeasurable
space  must  be  filled.  If,  for  instance,  body  were  finite,  and
void  infinite,  matter  would  in  a very  short  time  be  scattered
and  borne  along  in  the  mighty  void  ; or,  rather,  could  never
have  been  brought  together.

This  agrees  with  an  idea  which  is  propounded  in  the
second  book,  as  to  the  velocity  which  the  atoms  have  given
them  (he  does  not  say  how  or  whence),  and  which  enables
them  to  cohere  for  a time  and  then  to  break  up  again,  as
everything  wanes.  Those  whose  close-tangled  shapes  hold
them  fast  together  form  enduring  stone  and  unyielding
iron,  others  spring  far  off  and  rebound,  leaving  great  spaces
between ; “ these  furnish  us  with  thin  air  and  bright  sun-
light.” Shortly  afterwards,  we  are  told  that  the  velocity
of  the  first  beginnings  when  passing  through  empty  void
must  be  greater  than  that  of  sunlight !

We  need  not  trouble  ourselves  here  with  Lucretius’s
speculations  as  to  the  formation  of  tangible  bodies  from  a


lOO


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


vertical  downpour  of  atoms,  which,  unlike  drops  of  rain,
now  and  then  swerve  from  their  courses  so  as  to  clash
together,  save  to  mention  that  he  affirms  that,  even  if  he
did  not  know  what  atoms  are,  he  could  be  sure,  from  its
defects,  that  the  world  was  not  made  for  us  by  divine
power.

126.  Seventh.  This,  one  of  the  most  important  points  of
the  whole  theory,  is  entirely  ignored  by  some  good  com-
mentators, and  by  others  who  have  more  or  less  closely  fol-
lowed them  : — The  first  beginnings  of  things  have  different
shapes,  hut  the  number  of  shapes  is  finite.

127.  Eighth.  The  first  beginnings  which  have  a like
shape,  one  with  another,  are  infinite  in  number.

That  is,  there  is  a finite  number  of  kinds  of  atoms,  but
an  infinite  number  of  each  kind.

128.  Ninth.  Nothing  whose  nature  is  apioarent  to  sense
consists  of  one  kind  of  first  beginnings  (only).

129.  We  need  not  trouble  ourselves  with  his  notion  of
the  smallness,  smoothness,  and  roundness  of  the  atoms  which
make  up  the  mind,  qualities  which  he  arrives  at  from  the
rapidity  with  which  the  mind  originates  and  works  out  a
suggestion,  contrasting  here  the  mobility  of  water  and  the
viscosity  of  honey.  Nor  his  proof  (by  the  non-diminution
of  the  weight  and  dimensions  of  the  body  at  death),  that
the  whole  mass  of  the  mind  must  be  exceedingly  small.
But  we  may  quote,  in  two  of  its  many  forms,  his  constant
reiteration  of  the  unreasonableness  of  the  fear  of  death,  and
his  philosophic  mode  of  overcoming  it : —

Some  wear  themselves  to  death  for  the  sake  of  statues
and  a name.  And  often  to  such  a degree,  through  dread
of  death,  does  hate  of  life  and  of  the  sight  of  daylight  seize
upon  mortals,  that  they  consider  self-murder  with  a sorrow-


MATTER  AND  ETHER.


lOI.


ing  heart,  quite  forgetting  that  this  fear  is  the  source  of
their  cares  (this  fear  which  urges  men  to  every  sin),  prompts
this  one  to  put  all  shame  to  rout,  another  to  burst  asunder
the  bonds  of  friendship  ; and,  in  fine,  to  overturn  duty  from
its  very  base,  since  often  ere  now  men  have  betrayed  coum
try  and  dear  parents  in  seeking  to  shun  the  Acherusian
quarters.  For,  even  as  children  are  flurried  and  dread  all
things  in  the  thick  darkness,  thus  we  in  the  daylight  fear
at  times  things  not  a whit  more  to  be  dreaded  than  what
children  shudder  at  in  the  dark,  and  fancy  'sure  to  be.
This  terror,  therefore,  and  darkness  of  mind  must  be  dis-
pelled, not  by  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  glittering  shafts  of
day,  but  by  the  aspect  and  law  of  nature.”  Book  iii.  78.

“ Now  no  more  shall  thy  house  admit  thee  with  glad
welcome,  nor  a most  virtuous  wife  and  sweet  children  run
to  be  the  first  to  snatch  kisses,  and  touch  thy  heart  with
silent  joy.  No  more  mayest  thou  be  prosperous  in  thy
doings,  a safeguard  to  thine  own.  One  disastrous  day  ha^
taken  from  thee,  luckless  man,  in  luckless  wise,  all  the
many  prizes  of  life.  This  do  men  say  ; but  add  not  thereto  :
‘And  now  no  longer  does  any  craving  for  these  things  beset
thee  withal.’  For  if  they  could  rightly  perceive  this  in
thought,  and  follow  up  the  thought  in  words,  they  would
release  themselves  from  great  distress  and  apprehension  of
mind.  Thou,  even  as  now  thou  art,  sunk  in  the  sleep  of
death,  shalt  cfontinue  so  to  be  in  all  time  to  come,  freed  from
all  distressing  pains  ; but  we,  with  a sorro  that  would  not
be  sated,  wept  for  thee,  when  close  by  thou  didst  turn  to
an  ashen  hue  on  thy  appalling  funeral  pile,  and  no  length
of  days  shall  pluck  from  our  hearts  our  ever-enduring  grief.
This  question,  therefore,  should  be  asked  of  this  speaker,
what  there  is  in  it  so  passing  bitter,  if  it  come  in  the  end  to


102


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


sleep  and  rest,  that  any  one  should  pine  in  never-ending
sorrow.”  Book  iii.  894.

130.  To  conclude,  there  is  a great  deal  in  Lucretius
(whether  his  own  or  derived  from  others  does  not  matter
to  us)  which  is  of  considerable  value,  even  from  a modern
scientific  point  of  view,  though,  of  course,  of  far  greater
value  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  student  of  develop-
ment. But  his  attempted  proofs  are  for  the  most  part
absurd,  based,  as  they  generally  are,  upon  mere  metaphy-
sical speculations  and  altogether  preposterous  analogies.

131.  (2.)  Boscovitch  and  others  endeavoured  to  dispense
with  the  atom  altogether,  substituting  in  its  place  the  con-
ception (which  mathematicians  often  find  useful)  of  a mere
geometrical  point,  which  is  a centre  of  force,  as  it  is  called.
Here  we  get  rid  of  the  idea  of  substance  entirely,  but  we
preserve  (all  but  inertia)  those  external  relations  by  wliich
alone  the  atom  is  capable  of  making  known  its  presence.
Even  so  great  an  experimental  philosopher  as  Faraday
may  be  quoted  as,  to  some  extent  at  least,  agreeing  with
this  notion.  It  seems  to  us,  however,  that  this  is  the  em-
bodiment of  an  over-refinement  of  speculation,  surrounded
on  almost  all  sides  by  the  gravest  difficulties.  It  may
suffice  merely  to  mention  again  the  property  of  mass,  or
inertia,  which  Faraday  himself  seemed  to  look  upon  as  the
one  essential  characteristic  of  matter,  and  which  we  can
hardly  bring  ourselves  to  associate  with  the  absence  of  wffiat
we  understand  by  substance.

132.  (3.)  Another  speculation  leads  us  to  imagine  matter
as  not  ultimately  atomic — as,  in  fact,  infinitely  divisible.
But,  if  it  be  so,  it  must  (in  order  that  various  elementary
physical  facts  may  be  capable  of  explanation)  be  prac-
tically continuous  but  intensely  heterogeneous.  That  solid


MATTER  AND  ETHER.


103


or  liquid  matter  has  a grained  structure  of  not  infinitely
small  dimensions  is  proved  by  many  simple  and  generally
known  facts ; among  others  by  the  separation  of  white
light  into  its  constituent  colours  when  refracted  through  a
prism,  by  the  phenomena  of  capillarity,  and  by  those  of
contact  electricity.  If  such  heterogeneity  were  only  pro-
nounced enough,  it  appears  that  the  law  of  gravitation
would  be  capable  of  accounting  for  at  least  the  greater
number  of  effects  at  present  attributed  to  the  so-called
molecular  forces  and  the  force  of  chemical  affinity.  Here,
however,  we  are  met  by  the  grand  difficulty,  that  of
accounting  for  gravitation.  And  the  only  attempt  at  ex-
planation of  gravitation-attraction,  which  can  be  called
even  plausible,  can  only,  with  very  great  straining,  be
made  compatible  with  this  idea  of  the  nature  of  matter.

133.  (4.)  The  fourth  and  most  recent  speculation  revives
the  atom  (in  the  literal  sense  of  the  word),  but  not  “ strong
in  solid  singleness  ” like  those  contemplated  by  Lucretius,
— much  rather  yielding  to  the  least  external  force,  and  thus
escaping  from  the  knife  or  wriggling  round  it,  so  that  it
cannot  be  cut, — not,  however,  on  account  of  its  hardness,
but  on  account  of  its  mobility,  which  makes  it  impossible
for  the  knife  to  get  at  it.

This  is  the  vortex-atom  theory  of  Sir  W.  Thomson,
dimly  foreshadowed  in  the  writings  of  Hobbes,  Male-
branche,  and  others,  but  only  made  distinctly  conceivable
in  very  recent  times  by  the  hydrokinetic  researches  of
Helmholtz.  Helmholtz,  in  1858,  first  successfully  attacked
the  equations  of  motion  of  an  incompressible  frictionless
fluid,  without  introducing  the  great  simplification  which
had  been  adopted  by  his  predecessors,  and  which  consisted
in  supposing  the  motion  to  be  non-rotational.  He  proved.


104


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


among  otlier  valuable  results,  that  those  portions  of  the
fluid  which  at  any  time  possess  rotation  preserve  it  for
ever,  and  are  thus  as  it  were  marked  off  from  the  others ; ^
also  that  these  portions  must  be  arranged  in  filaments
whose  direction  is  at  each  point  the  axis  of  rotation,  and
that  the  filaments  are  either  endless,  i.e.  form  closed  curves
(whether  knotted  or  not),  or  terminate  in  the  free  surface  of
the  fluid.

Hence  Sir  AVilliam  Thomson's  idea  that  what  we  call
matter  may  consist  of  the  rotating  portions  of  a perfect
fluid,  which  continuously  fills  space.  This  definition  in-
volves the  necessity  of  a creative  act  for  the  production  or
destruction  of  the  smallest  portion  of  matter,  because
rotation  can  only  be  produced  or  destroyed  by  us  in  a fluid
in  virtue  of  its  viscosity  (or  internal  friction),  and  in  a per-
fect fluid  there  is  nothing  of  the  kind.

134.  Of  course  it  may  be  objected  to  this  theory  that  it
merely  shifts  the  difficulty  one  step  further  back, — after
all,  explaining  what  we  call  matter  by  certain  motions  of
something  which,  as  it  must  have  inertia,  it  would  appear
we  are  bound  to  call  matter  also.  We  have  mentioned  this
(latest)  speculation  as  to  the  nature  of  matter  for  two  reasons :
1st,  because  it  shows  one  way  of  at  once  thoroughly  ac-
counting for  the  conservation  of  tangible  matter;  2d,  because
it  shows  the  possibility  of  forming  an  idea  of  a true  atom
which  shall  not  require,  even  for  perfect  elasticity,  the  in-
conceivable quality  of  perfect  hardness  necessary  to  the
atom  of  Lucretius.  In  fact,  the  few  words  which  we  have
given  above  about  Helmholtz  s investigations  show  that,  to
cut  a vortex  atom,  it  would  be  necessary  to  give  a free
surface  to  the  perfect  fluid  which  on  this  theory  is  sup-
posed to  fill  space,  i.e.  virtually  to  sever  space  itself!  This


MATTER  AND  ETHER.


105


idea  promises  to  be  very  valuable  from  one  point  of  view
at  least,  viz.,  the  extension  and  improvement  of  mathema-
tical methods ; for  in  its  very  elements  it  requires  the
application  of  the  most  powerful  of  hitherto  invented
processes,  and,  even  with  their  aid,  the  mutual  action  of
two  ring-vortices  (the  simplest  possible  space-form)  has  not
yet  been  investigated  except  in  the  special  cases  of  sym-
metrical disposition  about  an  axis.  Hence  we  are  at  pre-
sent altogether  unable  to  guess  whether  this  idea  will  or
will  not  pass  with  credit  some  of  the  most  elementary
examinations  to  which  a theory  of  the  ultimate  nature  of
matter  must  of  course  be  subjected.

135.  Take  them  for  what  they  are  worth.  The  four  forms
of  speculation  we  have  just  sketched  represent  the  most
plausible  guesses  yet  propounded  as  to  the  ultimate  nature
of  matter,  the  second  being,  probably  because  the  most
artificial  and  the  most  arbitrary,  the  most  completely
developed.  For  in  it  the  representation  is  self-contained
as  it  were ; it  does  not  base  itself  upon  extraneous  pos-
tulates, as  of  ultimate  hard  particles  (of  what'?),  nor  upon
vortex  motion  (of  what '?  again),  nor,  finally,  upon  mere
intense  heterogeneity  (of  what?  once  more),  as  do  the
other  three.  But  we  naturally  object  to  it  as  refining
away  altogether  the  idea  of  stuff  or  substance  which  the
mind  seems  to  require  as  something  underlying  the  notion
of  anything  which  is  found  to  be  directly  capable  of  af-
fecting our  senses.

136.  The  reader  who  has  followed  us  so  far,  must  now
see  that  our  notions  of  the  nature  of  matter  are,  at  best,  but
hazy.  We  know,  it  is  true,  a great  many  of  its  properties
very  exactly,  so  much  so  indeed,  as  to  be  able  to  deduce
from  them  mathematically  an  immense  variety  of  con-


io6


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


sequences  which  subsequent  experiment  shows  to  be
correct,  at  least  within  the  limits  of  accuracy  of  our
methods  of  observation  and  measurement.  But  as  to  what
it  is  we  know  no  more  than  Democritus  or  Lucretius  did,
though  as  to  what  it  may  be  or  may  not  be  we  are  per-
haps considerably  better  prepared  with  an  opinion  than
they  could  possibly  be.

137.  We  have  seen  in  the  preceding  chapter  that  energy
is  never  found  separate  from  matter,  so  that  we  might,  with
perfect  propriety,  define  matter  as  the  seat  or  vehicle  of
energy — that  which  is  essential  to  the  existence  of  the
known  forms  of  energy,  without  which,  therefore,  there
could  be  no  transformations  of  energy,  and  therefore  no
life  such  as  we  now  know  it.

138.  Now  the  transformability  of  a given  amount  of
energy,  or,  at  least,  the  modes  of  its  transformation,  depend  in
a very  curious  manner  upon  the  relative  quantity  of  matter
with  which  it  is  associated.  A pillow  or  bolster  (stuffed
with  eider-down,  let  us  say)  of  30  lbs.  weight,  and  moving
at  10  feet  per  second— i.e.  as  if  it  had  fallen  from  a height
ot  considerably  less  than  two  — has  nearly  the  same
energy  as  a pellet  of  No.  1 shot  when  it  leaves  the  muzzle
of  a fowling-piece.  How  different  the  quality  of  these  equal
quantities  even  of  energy  of  the  same  kind  ! Yet,  delivered
horizontally,  the  one  would  correspond  to  a staggering  push
which  few  men  could  resist  if  it  came  unexpectedly ; while
the  other  would  scarcely  aflfect  one's  equilibrium,  though  it
might  easily  kill  by  penetrating  a vital  organ.  [In  the  brutal
pastimes  of  the  last  generation,  as  we  now  in  our  advanced
humanitarianism  call  them,  this  was  well  known  as  the
difference  between  the  effects  of  a slow  knock-down  blow
by  a heavy-weight,  and  a ‘‘  punishing  facer  " from  a feather-


MATTER  AND  ETHER.


107


weight.  Alas  for  the  good  old  times ! for  our  comparison,
apt  as  it  is,  is  too  probably  thrown  away  on  the  degenerate
inhabitants  of  (once)  merry  England,  erewhile  the  home
of  the  “Miller,''  with  his  honest  quarterstaff,  of  jolly  and
chivalrous  wrestlers,  boxers,  and  bowmen,  now  the  hell  of
running-kicks,  garrotting,  gouging,  and  stabbing.

Aetas  parentum,  pejor  avis,  tulit

nos  nequiores,  mox  daturos

progeniem  vitiosiorem.

The  dissipation  of  energy  is  a great  fact  in  a moral  as  well
as  in  a physical  sense.  In  those  good  old  times  men  fought
with  men, — irrepressible  energy,  rather  than  any  sordid
passion  or  uncontrolled  vice,  constantly  pulling  the  trigger !
Now  creatures  in  the  likeness  of  men  vent  their  despicable
passions  in  murderous  assaults  upon  women  and  children.
But  science  hints  at  an  effectual  cure.  It  is  probable  that
before  many  years  have  passed,  electricity,  which  by  some
mysterious  means  enables  our  nerves  to  call  our  muscles  into
play,  which  enables  us  to  converse  with  one  another  at
distances  of  thousands  of  miles,  which  alike  plates  the
teaspoon  and  illumines  the  lighthouse,  will  be  called  upon
by  an  enlightened  legislature  to  produce  absolutely  inde-
scribable torture  (unaccompanied  by  wound  or  even  bruise),
thrilling  through  every  fibre  of  the  frame  of  such  mis-
creants.]

139.  After  inertia,  which  is  not  accounted  for  by  any  of
the  hypotheses  as  to  the  ultimate  nature  of  matter  which  we
have  just  given,  the  most  general  property  of  matter  which
we  recognise  is  that  of  universal  gravitation,  in  virtue  of
which  portions  of  matter,  if  situated  at  a distance  from  one
another,  are  possessed  of  potential  energy.  AVe  are  apt  to
hold  exaggerated  notions  of  the  immense  power  of  gravity ;


io8


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


but  a little  consideration  will  show  us  that  it  is  in  reality
one  of  the  most  trivial  of  the  forces  to  which  matter  is
directly  or  indirectly  subject.

Think  for  a moment  of  the  fundamental  experiments  in
electricity  and  magnetism,  known  to  men  for  far  more  than
2000  years, — the  lifting  of  light  bodies  in  general  by  rubbed
amber,  and  of  iron  filings  by  a loadstone.  To  produce  the
same  effects  by  gravitation-attraction, — at  least  if  the
attracting  body  had  the  moderate  dimensions  of  a hand-
specimen  of  amber  or  loadstone, — we  should  require  it  to
be  of  so  dense  a material  as  to  weigh  at  the  very  least
1,000,000,000  lbs.,  instead  of  (as  usual)  a mere  fraction  of  a
pound.  Hence  it  is  at  once  obvious  that  the  imposing
nature  of  the  force  of  gravity,  as  usually  compared  with
other  attractive  forces,  is  due  not  to  its  superior  qualitative
magnitude,  but  to  the  enormous  masses  of  the  bodies  which
exercise  it.

In  fact,  the  excessively  delicate  Torsion -balance  of  Mich  ell
was  absolutely  requisite  to  demonstrate,  much  more  to
measure,  the  mutual  attraction  between  a large  and  a small
leaden  sphere.  And  (unless  the  third  of  the  hypotheses  as
to  the  nature  of  matter  above  given  be  correct,  in  which
case  the  form  of  our  statement  would  require  modification)
small  or  even  moderately  large  pieces  of  matter  are  held
together  entirely  by  cohesion,  gravitation  being  absolutely
insensible ; though  in  a huge  mass  like  the  earth,  the  force
exerted  by  one  hemisphere  on  the  other  (i.e.  the  force  which
would  be  called  into  play  to  prevent  its  being  split  in  two)
depends  mainly  upon  gravitation,  in  comparison  with  whose
enormous  amount  even  a cohesive  force  of  500  lbs.  per
square  inch  over  a circular  surface  of  4000  miles  radius
sinks  into  utter  insignificance !


MATTER  AND  ETHER,


109


140.  One  only  of  the  many  hypotheses  which  have  been
advanced  to  explain  the  cause  of  gravitation  has  succeeded
in  passing  the  first  preliminary  tests.  Of  course,  the
assumption  of  action  at  a distance  may  be  made  to  account
for  anything  ; but  it  is  impossible  (as  Newton  long  ago
pointed  out  in  his  celebrated  letters  to  Bentley)  for  any  one
“ who  has  in  philosophical  matters  a competent  faculty  of
thinking’’  for  a moment  to  admit  the  possibility  of  such  action.

Hence  we  have  but  two  ways  of  accounting  for  gravita-
tion : — either  it  is  due  to  differences  of  pressure  in  a sub-
stance continuously  filling  all  space,  except  where  matter
displaces  it  (?),  or  it  is  due  to  impacts,  in  some  respects
analogous  to  those  of  the  particles  of  a gas  which  have  been
found  to  be  capable  of  accounting  for  gaseous  pressure.

Now,  all  attempts  as  yet  made  to  connect  it  with  the
luminiferous  ether,  or  the  medium  required  to  explain
electric  and  magnetic  distance- action,  have  completely  failed ;
so  that  we  are  apparently  driven  to  the  impact  theory  as
the  only  tenable  one.

141.  To  this  theory  Le  Sage  of  Geneva  devoted  a singularly
acute  mind  during  the  whole  of  his  exceptionally  long  life  ;
but,  for  all  that,  his  posthumous  tract  on  the  subject  is  but
little  in  advance  of  the  results  he  had  arrived  at  in  his
eighteenth  year.

He  assumes  the  existence  of  ultra  -mundane  corpuscles ; in
infinite  numbers,  even  compared  with  those  of  the  particles
of  matter ; of  dimensions  excessively  small,  but  flying  about
in  all  directions  with  velocities  enormously  great.  Portions
of  gross  matter  virtually  screen  one  another  to  a certain
extent  from  the  pressure  due  to  this  perpetual  Tain  of  cor-
puscles ; but  only  on  the  sides  turned  towards  one  another.
Hence  a lone  body  would  be  equally  battered  on  all  sides ;


I lO


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


but  the  introduction  of  a second  mass  interferes  with  this
arrangement,  and  diminishes  the  pressure  on  the  side  next
it.  It  is  easy  to  show  that  the  amount  of  this  diminution,
for  given  small  masseSy  is  inversely  as  the  square  of  their
relative  distance.  But  when  larger  masses  are  taken
account  of,  this  diminution  of  pressure  will  not  be  (as  gra-
vity is)  directly  as  the  quantities  of  matter  present,  unless
the  further  assumption  is  made  that  matter,  whether  by  the
great  distance  between  its  particles,  or  by  the  cage-like
form  of  these  particles,  is  almost  perfectly  permeable  to  the
corpuscles  ; so  that,  practically,  the  corpuscles  rain  upon
the  interior  particles  of  a mass  as  freely  as  if  each  of  them
had  been  alone  in  space.

Some  of  the  postulates  of  this  theory  are  hard  to  grant,
and  there  is  additional  difficulty  as  to  the  mode  in  which
the  supply  of  energy  of  the  corpuscles  is  to  be  kept  up.  To
enter  into  details  on  this  subject  is  not  in  accordance  with
our  plan.  We  therefore  refer  the  reader  to  Sir  W.  Thomson's
account  of  Le  Sage’s  theory  (Proc.  R.S.E.,  18 7l),  and  his
suggestions  for  its  improvement,  based  upon  his  theory  of
vortex-atoms.

142.  But  we  must  make  one  remark.  If  Le  Sage’s  theory,
or  anything  of  a similar  nature,  be  at  all  a representation
of  the  mechanism  of  gravitation,  a fatal  blow  is  dealt  to  the
notion  of  the  tranquil  form  of  power  w^e  have  called  poten-
tial energy.  Not  that  there  will  cease  to  be  a profound
difference  in  kind  between  it  and  ordinary  kinetic  energy ;
but  that  BOTH  will  be  henceforth  to  be  regarded  as  kinetic.
What  we  now  call  kinetic  energy  is  that  of  visible  motions,
also  of  motions  of  the  smaller  parts  of  bodies,  and  of  the  lumi-
niferous ether,  etc.,  each  of  these  being  more  refined,  as  it
were,  than  the  preceding.  But  if  Le  Sage’s  theory  be  true.


MATTER  AND  ETHER,


III


potential  energy  of  gravitation  is  a kinetic  form  still  further
refined  than  any  of  these.  And  the  conservation  of  energy
may  perhaps  once  more  be  completely  and  accurately  ex  -
pressed as  the  conservation  of  vis  viva,  though  the  term  will
of  course  have  then  a meaning  incomparably  more  exten-
sive than  its  original  one.

143.  But,  in  speculations  like  these,  we  have  soared  far
beyond  that  which  may  be  called  the  first  refinement  on
ordinary  gross  matter;  i,e.  the  luminiferous,  probably  also
the  electric  and  magnetic,  medium,  provisionally  the  Ether,

To  the  consideration  of  its  principal  properties  we  now
turn  our  attention.

These  are,  at  first  sight  at  least,  of  an  apparently  incon-
gruous character ; for,  from  one  point  of  view,  the  ether
appears  as  a fluid,  from  another  as  an  elastic  solid.  Nothing
is  more  certainly  established  in  physical  astronomy  than  the
excessive  minuteness  of  the  resistance  offered  by  the  ether
to  the  planetary  motions,  if,  indeed,  there  be  such  a resist-
ance at  all  appretiable,  even  when  these  motions  are,  as  in
the  case  of  the  earth,  somewhere  about  100,000  feet  per
second ! On  the  other  hand,  we  learn  from  physical  optics
that  light,  transmitted  with  a velocity  of  188,000  miles  per
second,  depends  upon  transverse  disturbances  of  some  kind
or  other  ; while  several  optical  phenomena  indicate  that  a
disturbance  of  the  nature  of  compression  (if  such  be  possible)
would  be  transmitted  with  velocity  almost  infinitely  great,
in  comparison  even  with  this  enormous  velocity.

144.  Stokes,  however,  has  given  a very  ingenious  illus-
tration which  enables  us  to  see  that  such  an  extraordinary
combination  of  apparently  irreconcilable  properties  is  by
no  means  without  analogy,  even  in  common  matter.  He
takes  the  case  of  a solution  of  glue,  or  isinglass,  or  jelly,  in


1 12


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


different  relative  amounts  of  water.  When  the  quantity  of
water  is  small,  we  have  the  elastic  solid  ; when  large,  a
liquid  little  different  from  water.  And  Stokes  shows  that
it  is  excessively  improbable  that  there  is  any  definite  inter-
mediate stasre  which  we  could  assio'n  as  that  at  which  the

o o

transition  from  the  solid  to  the  liquid  takes  place.  Of
course,  any  such  analogy  must  necessarily  be  excessively
imperfect ; but  a great  deal  is  gained  by  our  being  able  to
trace  even  a very  imperfect  analogy  in  a case  like  this.

145.  The  ether,  in  fact,  must  be  distorted  as  well  as  dis-
placed by  matter  passing  through  it  ; but  any  distortion  of
the  nature  of  a shear,  such  as  would  give  rise  in  water  to
vortex-motion  accompanied  by  friction  (the  whole  energy
being  thus  ultimately  frittered  down  into  heat),  would  in
the  ether  be  handed  on  at  once,  as  vibratory  motion,  with.
the  velocity  of  light.  Thus  vortex-motion  of  the  ether
may  be  conceived  to  be  impossible,  simply  in  consequence
of  the  minuteness  of  its  density  in  comparison  with  the
great  tangential  force  called  into  play  by  a shear ; and  a
body  moving  in  it  with  a velocity  not  so  great  as  that
of  light  would  thus  not  have  eddies  in  its  wake,  as  in
an  ordinary  fluid,  but,  on  the  contrary,  would  be  a source
of  radiation,  even  although  there  may  have  been  no  heating
either  of  the  body  or  of  the  medium  it  is  displacing,  para-
doxical as  this  result  may  appear.

146.  Sir  William  Thomson  has  endeavoured  to  obtain  at
least  an  inferior  limit  to  the  density  of  the  ether  in  planetary
space.  His  method  is  based  upon  the  measurements  by
Pouillet  and  Herschel  of  the  whole  amount  of  radiant
energy  received  from  the  sun  by  a given  amount  of  surface
in  a given  time,  and  upon  an  assumption  that  the  extreme
amplitude  of  distortion  of  the  ether  in  any  radiation  is


MATTER  AND  ETHER.


113

small  compared  with  the  length  of  a wave.  In  this  way  he
finds  that,  as  a cubic  mile  of  the  ether  near  the  earth
contains  about  12,000  foot-pounds  of  radiant  solar  energy,
the  mass  of  the  ether  in  that  cubic  mile  must  be  at  least
T,ow,oW,wo  of  ^ pound. ^ To  show  that  this  is  not  by  any
means  a surprisingly  small  quantity,  he  compares  it  with
the  mass  of  a cubic  mile  of  air  at  a distance  of  only  a few
radii  from  the  earth’s  surface  (supposing  that  the  atmo-
sphere extends  so  far).  This,  he  finds,  will  be  probably
represented  by  a fraction  of  a pound  having  unit  for  a
numerator  and  329  places  of  figures  in  the  denominator! ! !

147.  In  a very  remarkable  paper  by  Struve,^  an  attempt
was  made  to  settle  the  question,  Is  the  ether  perfectly  trans-
parent f or,  as  we  may  now  put  it,  Is  any  radiant  energy
absorbed  by  the  ether,  whether  to  produce  other  forms  of
energy,  or  to  be  dissipated  by  radiation  in  all  directions  1
Long  ago  it  had  been  pointed  out  by  Olbers  and  others,
that  if  the  stars  be  infinite  in  number,  and  be  distributed
with  anything  roughly  approximating  to  an  average  density
through  infinite  space,  the  sky  ought,  night  and  day,  to  be
all  over  of  a brightness  of  the  same  order  as  that  of  the
sun.  Is  the  number  of  stars,  then,  finite  ; or  does  the  ether
absorb  their  light  ? Now,  it  need  not  in  the  least  surprise
us  to  find  that  the  number  of  stars  is  finite,  even  though
matter  be  infinite  in  quantity,  and  distributed  with  some-
thing like  uniformity  through  infinite  space.  For  only  a
finite  portion  of  it  may  yet  have  fallen  together  so  as  to
produce  incandescent  bodies  ; or,  the  other  extreme,  only
a finite  portion  of  it  may  be  left  incandescent.  Either  of

^ Here  it  is  important  to  observe  that  the  speculations  of  Sir  W.  Thomson  with
regard  to  the  density  of  the  Ether  assign  only  the  inferior  limit  of  that  density.
The  real  density  may  possibly  be  very  much  greater.

2 Etudes  d' Astronomie  Stellaire,  1847.

H


1 14  THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.

these  altogether  different  hypotheses  is  perfectly  reasonable
and  scientifically  justifiable ; so  that,  from  this  point  of
view,  we  are  not  at  present  likely  to  obtain  any  information.
Struve’s  reasoning,  which,  by  the  way,  is  not  accepted  by
Sir  J.  Herschel,  introduces  another  consideration,  viz.,  the
nuinhers  of  stars  of  each  visible  magnitude.  To  apply  this  :
suppose  for  a moment  we  make  the  assumption  (actually
measured  values  of  annual  parallax  show  it  is  certainly  at
best  a very  rough  one)  that  the  brighter  stars  are  the  nearer,
and  that  a set  of  stars,  on  the  average  one -fourth  as  bright
as  another  set,  are  on  the  average  twice  as  far  off,  etc.  A
gTeat  deal  of  what  we  know  to  be  certainly  false  is  here
assumed  as  true,  but  it  is  possible  that  the  general  accuracy
of  the  results  of  the  reasoning  from  it  may  not  be  thereby
much  affected.  On  the  supposition  of  a sort  of  rough
uniformity  of  distribution  through  space,  we  can  easily
calculate  approximately  what  ought  to  be  the  relative  num-
bers of  the  stars,  classed  by  astronomers  as  of  the  various
different  magnitudes,  once  we  have  obtained  (as  it  is  not
difficult  to  do)  an  estimate  of  the  relative  brightness  of
typical  stars  of  these  (arbitrary)  magnitudes.  From  their
brightness  we  calculate  at  once  their  relative  distances,  and
thence  (according  to  our  hypothesis  of  approximately  uni-
form distribution)  what  ought  to  be  the  relative  numbers  of
each  magnitude.  When  this  is  done,  it  appears  that  there  is
a great  excess  of  the  calculated  over  the  observed  numbers,
at  least  for  telescopic  stars,  and  the  greater  the  smaller  the
magnitude.  This  is  the  gist  of  Struve’s  method,  and  he
arrives  at  the  result  that  the  light  of  stars  of  the  sixth
magnitude  (the  smallest  visible  to  an  ordinary  unaided  eye,
and  whose  average  distance  from  us  is  supposed  to  be  some-
where about  ninefold  that  of  stars  of  the  first  magnitude)


MATTER  AND  ETHER.


115

loses  about  eight  per  cent,  in  its  passage  to  the  earth.
Thus  the  light  of  stars  of  the  first  magnitude  does  not  lose
so  much  as  one  per  cent.  ; but,  on  the  other  hand,  stars  of
the  ninth  mao’nitude  are  enfeebled  to  the  extent  of  about  30

o

per  cent.  Struve  shows  that,  if  his  result  is  to  be  accepted,
W.  Herschel’s  idea  that  his  40 -foot  telescope  would  show
him  stars  seven  times  further  off  than  those  visible  with  the
10-foot,  was  erroneous.  He  would,  in  fact,  have  been  able
to  see  little  more  than  twice  as  far.

It  will  be  obvious  now  that  an  enormous  increase  of  the
so-called  space-penetrating  of  a telescope  gives  it  in

reality  but  a very  feeble  additional  advantage,  in  fact,  that,
if  there  be  absorption  by  the  ether,  we  have  already  instru-
ments capable  of  showing  us,  at  the  very  least,  half  of  the
whole  number  of  stars  which  any  conceivable  improvement
of  telescopes  would  enable  us  to  see.

148.  It  would  be  out  of  place  here  to  speculate  on  what
becomes  of  the  light  thus  supposed  to  be  absorbed,  for  we
have  as  yet  no  experimeutal  bases  on  which  to  reason.  We
have  not  the  least  idea,  for  instance,  what  is  the  effect  of
change  of  temperature  in  the  luminiferous  ether.  That  it
is  practically  incompressible  we  know  ; it  is  quite  probable
that  it  may  not  be  sensibly  compressed  (if  it  be  subject  to
gravity,  of  which  we  have  no  proof)  even  by  the  attraction  of
the  mass  of  the  whole  earth — though,  so  great  is  the  intensity
of  molecular  or  cohesive  attraction,  we  may  easily  conceive
that  in  the  interior  of  bodies  the  ether  may  be  considerably
compressed.  And  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  ether,  as  a
whole,  may  have,  in  virtue  of  its  internal  forces,  a property
(akin,  as  it  were,  to  a liquid  film)  such  that  the  gravitation
action,  which  appears  to  be  between  particles  of  matter,
may  merely  be  the  visible  result  of  a tendency  to  a mini-


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


116

mum  of  some  affection  of  the  fluid  in  which  they  are
immersed.  Eegard  it  as  we  please,  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  properties  of  the  ether  are  of  a much  higher  order
in  the  arcana  of  nature  than  those  of  tangible  matter.
And  as  even  the  high-priests  of  science  still  find  the  latter
far  beyond  their  comprehension,  except  in  numerous  but
minute  and  often  isolated  particulars,  it  would  not  become
us  to  speculate  further.  It  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to
know  from  what  the  ether  certainly  does  that  it  is  capable
of  vastly  more  than  any  one  has  yet  ventured  to  guess.

149.  If  we  review  the  attempts  recorded  in  this  chapter
we  see  how  the  scientific  mind  is  led  from  the  visible  and
tangible  to  the  invisible  and  intangible.

In  the  first  place,  we  know  that  one  body,  such  as  the
sun,  can  part  with  its  radiant  energy  to  another  body,  such
as  the  earth,  and  observation  and  experiment  alike  lead  us
to  acknowledge  a stage  in  which  the  energy  has  left  the  one
body  and  has  not  yet  arrived  at  the  other.  But  this  means
that  there  is  something  between  these  two  bodies  capable  of
moving  and  transmitting  energy,  and  therefore,  from  the
very  conception  of  energy,  possessing  mass — this  something
we  agree  to  call  the  ethereal  medium.

Again,  we  know  that  different  masses  of  visible  matter
attract  one  another  apparently  at  a distance.  Our  first
attempt  is  to  analyse  the  nature  of  this  force.  Does  it
proceed  from  the  surfaces  of  the  attracting  bodies,  or  does
it  penetrate  their  entire  mass  ? This  question  was  answered
by  Newton,  who  came  to  the  conclusion  that  every  particle
of  matter  attracts  every  other  particle  with  a force  propor-
tional on  the  product  of  their  masses,  and  inversely  propor-
tional to  the  square  of  their  distances.

But  this  only  drives  the  mystery  of  gravitation  from  the


MATTER  AND  ETHER.


117

mass  to  the  particle,  and  here  the  same  set  of  questions
again  occur.  A particle  as  truly  as  a mass  occupies  space,
and  we  wish  to  know  if  the  force  proceeds  from  the  surface
of  the  particle  or  from  its  interior.

150.  Then  again  we  likewise  wish  to  know  how  this  force
is  communicated  between  one  particle  and  another  ? Now
before  we  can  solve  these  questions  we  must  have  some
definite  conception  of  the  nature  of  a particle  and  of  the
constitution  of  the  surrounding  medium.  Sir  W.  Thomson,
as  we  have  seen,  has  attempted  to  advance  towards  the
nature  of  an  atom  or  particle  in  his  supposition  that  atoms
are  vortex-rings  generated  out  of  a perfect  fluid  filling  all
space.  While,  however,  this  conception  accounts  for  some
of  the  properties  of  an  atom  it  does  not  easily  account  for
gravitation,  and  hence  he  adopts  in  addition  the  hypothesis
of  ultra-mundane  corpuscles,  which  he  supposes  to  be  only
a finer  form  of  vortices.

151.  There  is,  however,  one  objection  to  the  precise  form
of  vortex-ring  hypothesis  introduced  by  Thomson  which
from  our  point  of  view  is  very  strong.  The  act  by  which
the  atom  was  produced  must  necessarily  by  this  hypothesis
have  been  an  act  of  creation  (Art.  133)  in  time,  that  is  to
say,  an  act  impressed  upon  the  universe  from  without,  and
it  must  therefore  have  denoted  a breach  of  continuity
(Art.  85)  ; for  if  the  invisible  universe  be  nothing  but
a perfect  fluid,  can  we  imagine  it  capable  of  originating
such  a development  in  virtue  of  its  own  inherent  properties,
and  without  some  external  act  implying  a breach  of  con-
tinuity ? — we  think  not.  In  the  production  of  the  atom
from  a perfect  fluid  we  are  driven  at  once  to  the  uncondi-
tioned— to  the  Great  First  Cause  ; it  is,  in  fine,  an  act  of
creation  and  not  of  development.  But  from  our  point


ii8


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


of  view  (Art.  86)  creation  belongs  to  eternity  and  de-
velopment to  time,  and  we  are  therefore  induced  to  modify
the  hypothesis  so  as  to  make  it  consistent  with  this  view.
We  cannot,  in  fact,  if  we  agree  to  hold  at  the  same  time
the  principle  of  unbroken  continuity  and  the  vortex-ring
theory  of  formation  of  the  visible  universe,  regard  the  in-
visible universe  as  an  absolutely  perfect  fluid.

152.  This  way  of  regarding  the  invisible  universe  is
strengthened  by  the  fact  that  the  hypothesis  which  seems
most  likely  to  account  for  gravitation  presumes  the  existence
of  ultra-mundane  corpuscles,  and  the  observations  of  Struve
upon  the  extinction  of  star-light  tend  (whatever  they  are
worth)  towards  the  same  conclusion,  since  the  absorption
of  light  is  more  compatible  with  a corpuscular  constitution
than  with  that  of  a perfect  fluid.  But  if  the  visible
universe  be  developed  from  an  invisible  which  is  not  a
perfect  fluid,  then  the  argument  deduced  by  Sir  W.  Thom-
son in  favour  of  the  eternity  of  ordinary  matter  dis-
appears, since  this  eternity  depends  upon  the  perfect  fluidity
of  the  invisible.  In  fine,  if  we  suppose  the  material
universe  to  be  composed  of  a series  of  vortex-rings  de-
veloped from  an  invisible  universe  which  is  not  a perfect
fluid,  it  will  be  ephemeral,  just  as  the  smoke-ring  which  we
develop  from  air,  or  that  which  we  develop  from  water,  is
ephemeral,  the  only  difference  being  in  duration,  these
lasting  only  for  a few  seconds,  and  the  others  it  may  be  for
billions  of  years.

153.  Thus,  in  our  last  chapter,  we  came  to  the  conclusion
that  the  available  energy  of  the  visible  universe  will  ulti-
mately be  appropriated  by  the  invisible,  and  we  may  now
perhaps  imagine,  at  least  as  a possibility,  that  the  separate
existence  of  the  visible  universe  will  share  the  same  fate,


MATTER  AND  ETHER.  119

so  that  we  shall  have  no  huge  useless  inert  mass  existing
in  after  ages  to  remind  the  passer-by  of  a form  of  energy
and  a species  of  matter  that  is  long  since  out  of  date  and
functionally  effete.  Why  should  not  the  universe  bury  its
dead  out  of  sight  ?


CHAPTER  V.


DEVELOPMENT.


**  Are  God  and  Nature  then  at  strife,

That  Nature  lends  such  evil  dreams  ?

So  careful  of  the  type  she  seems,

So  careless  of  the  single  life  ;

“ ‘ So  careful  of  the  type  ’ ? but  no,

From  scarped  cliff  and  quarried  stone
She  cries,  ‘ A thousand  types  are  gone  :

I care  for  nothing,  all  shall  go.’  ” — Tennysoh,

“ nature  is  hut  art,  unknown  to  thee ;

All  chance,  direction,  which  thou  canst  not  see,

All  discord,  harmony  not  understood ;

All  partial  evil,  universal  good  ;

And  spite  of  pride,  in  erring  reason’s  spite.

One  truth  is  clear,  whatever  is,  is  right.” — Pope.

154.  In  Chapters  iii.  and  iv.  we  have  dwelt  upon  the  laws
of  energy  and  the  ultimate  constitution  of  matter  ; in  other
words,  we  have  discussed  those  laws  according  to  which  the
machine  called  the  visible  universe  works,  as  well  as  the
probable  nature  of  that  material  of  which  it  is  composed.
AVe  have  in  this  process  (Arts.  8b,  151)  come  to  the  con-
clusion that  the  visible  universe  has  been  developed  out
of  the  invisible.  Once  developed,  it  has  its  own  laws  of
action  which  we  may  discover, — laws  which  at  present
appear  to  be  invariably  followed,  as  far  at  least  as  our
strictly  scientific  experience  can  inform  us.

In  fine,  the  visible  universe  is  that  which  we  are  in  a

120


DEVELOPMENT.


121


position  to  observe,  gaining  an  insight  into  its  present
method  of  working,  and  trying  also  to  reply  to  that  very
interesting  question.  Has  it  always  worked  in  its  present
manner,  or  has  there  ever  been  any  apparent  break  ?

Let  us,  therefore,  take  this  visible  universe  after  its  pro-
duction, and  endeavour  to  become  acquainted  with  the
course  of ‘its  development.  What  did  it  do?.  Was  it
entirely  left  to  itself,  and  to  what  may  be  termed  the
natural  laws  impressed  upon  it  when  it  was  produced  ?

In  replying  to  these  questions,  let  us,  for  the  sake  of
convenience,  consider  development  under  the  three  follow-
ing heads,  viz.,  (a)  Chemical  or  Stuff  Development,  {p)
Globe  Development,  (7)  Life  Development.

155.  To  begin  with  chemical  or  stuff  development,  we
come  at  once  to  a very  interesting  and  important  question.
Assuming  that  the  atoms  of  the  present  universe  were
developed  from  the  invisible,  were  different  kinds  of  atoms
thus  developed,  or  were  they  all  of  one  kind  ?

To  this  question  the  chemist  of  last  century  would  have
replied  : — L^ndoubtedly  there  were  many  kinds  of  primeval
atoms,  and  then  would  follow  a list  of  all  these  various  sub-
stances which  he  was  unable  to  decompose.

The  chemist  of  thirty  or  forty  years  later  would  stiU
reply  to  the  question  in  the  same  way,  but  he  would  pro-
bably have  a different  list  of  primeval  elements  less  formid-
able in  number.

If  the  chemist  of  forty  years  ago  were  asked,  he  would
have  furnished  a list  of  perhaps  fifty  simple  substances ;
but  theu,  probably,  the  minimum  would  have  been  reached  ;
for  ask  the  chemist  of  to-day,  and  he  will  furnish  a list  of
sixty- three  elements.

156.  But  while  the  number  of  undecomposed  bodies  is


122


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


slowly  increasing,  chemists  are  beginning  to  speculate  as  to
the  possibility  of  these  so-called  elements  being  in  reality
nothing  else  than  combinations  of  some  kind  of  primordial
atoms.

This  idea  was  first  entertained  by  Dr.  Prout,  the  well-  ,
known  physician  and  chemist.  He  pointed  out  that  the
atomic  weights  of  the  various  so-called  elements  are  very
nearly  all  multiples  of  that  of  the  half  of  hydrogen,  so  that
they  may  possibly  be  looked  upon  as  formed  by  a grouping
together  of  certain  atoms  of  half  the  mass  of  the  hydrogen
atom.

M.  Stas,  the  distinguished  Belgian  chemist,* instituted  a
laborious  series  of  experiments  with  the  view  of  testing  this
doctrine.  He  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  atomic
weights  of  the  various  elements  were  not  precisely  multi-
ples of  that  of  the  half  of  hydrogen,  there  being  greater
differences  than  could  possibly  be  accounted  for  by  errors  of
experiment.  His  researches,  however,  seemed  to  show
that  in  many  cases  there  was  a very  near  approach  to
Front’s  imagined  law.  But  in  no  case  does  the  discrepance
appear  greatly  to  exceed  what  may  easily  be  attributed  to
unavoidable  impurities  in  the  substances  operated  on  ; say
only  those  due  to  the  condensation  of  gase^  in  the  pores  of
solids,  which  (in  certain  cases  at  least)  is  known  to  amount
to  a very  considerable  quantity.

157.  From  another  point  of  view,  there  appears  to  be
evidence  in  favour  of  the  so-called  elementary  bodies  being
built  up.

There  are  certain  groups  or  families  amongst  these  ele-
ments of  such  a nature  that  the  various  members  of  one
family  appear  to  be  related  to  each  other,  in  the  same  way
as  the  corresponding  members  of  another  family.


DE  VELOPMENT.


123


This  clearly  points  to  some  sort  of  community  of  origin,
and  thus  favours  the  idea  that  the  elements  are  in  reality
composite  structures.  But  the  great  difficulty  in  the  way
of  this  idea  has  been  the  apparent  impossibility  of  decom-
posing such  family  groups.  Thus  fluorine,  chlorine,  bromine,
and  iodine,  while  they  appear  to  be  related  to  one  another-
in  some  peculiar  manner,  have  yet  resisted  all  attempts  at
decomposition,  and  there  are  other  similar  instances  that
might  be  named.

158.  It  has,  however,  at  the  same  time,  come  to  be  recog-
nised, that  high  temperature  is  a very  powerful  decomposing
agent,  and  that  its  office  is  by  no  means  limited  to  causing
the  separation  from  one  another  of  the  molecules  of  a sub-
stance, as,  for  instance,  when  it  separates  the  molecules  of
water  or  H2O  from  one  another  in  the  case  of  steam.  It  is
now  understood  that  high  temperature  has  also  the  power
of  separating  the  atomic  constituents  of  a single  molecule
from  each  other,  so  that  at  an  extremely  high  temperature
water  would  not  only  be  driven  into  steam,  but  steam
driven  into  oxygen  and  hydrogen.  We  are  already  familiar
with  many  instances  of  this  power  possessed  by  high  tem-
perature ; thus  we  see  that  carbonate  of  lime  is  decomposed
by  the  heat  of  the  kiln  into  lime  and  carbonic-acid  gas.
We  see  also  that  at  the  high  temperatures  which  accompany
the  electric  spark  almost  all  compounds  are  momentarily
decomposed,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  spectrum  of  the  light
which  is  given  out.  Carrying  on  this  line  of  thought,  we
are  led  to  imagine  that,  could  we  obtain  higher  tempera-
tures than  those  now  at  our  disposal,  we  might  decompose
some  of  those  substances  which  at  present  seem  to  be  elements.

159.  Lockyer,  in  his  astronomical  researches,  has  recently
started  this  question.  He  argues  that  in  the  sun  and  some


124


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


of  the  brighter  stars  we  are  furnished  with  temperatures
very  much  higher  than  anything  which  has  been  here  pro  -
duced.  He  assumes  too  that  simplicity  of  constitution
accompanies  a simple  spectrum,  an  hypothesis  which  is
verified  by  the  fact  that  compounds  all  give  spectra
•much  more  complicated  than  simple  substances.  Now  it
is  a curious  circumstance  that  some  of  the  brighter  stars,
such  as  Sirius,  do  not  appear  to  contain  anything  but
hydrogen;  at  least  we  have  no  indication  that  they  do;
other  stars  again  of  less  brilliancy,  in  addition  to  hydrogen,
have  such  substances  as  iron,  sodium,  etc.,  while  stars
of  unmistakeably  less  brilliancy,  including  coloured  and
variable  stars,  appear  to  contain  in  their  atmospheres
substances  which  are  compounds.  If  then  it  be  true  that
as  a rule  the  most  brilliant  stars  contain  the  fewest  elements
and  those  of  smallest  atomic  weight,  and  that  as  stars
diminish  in  brilliancy  they  rise  in  complexity  of  structure,
in  fine,  if  we  have  reason  to  associate  together  brilliancy
and  simplicity  this  undoubtedly  tells  in  favour  of  the  power
of  high  temperatures  to  split  up  the  so-called  elements.

No  doubt  it  may  be  said  that  the  brightest  stars  may
only  be  those  nearest  to  us,  but  there  is  also  ground  for
supposing  that  they  may  be  the  hottest  stars,  in  the  fact
that  their  spectra  contain  a greater  proportion  of  the  more
refrangible  rays  than  do  those  of  yellow  or  red  stars.

In  fine,  a speculation  of  this  nature  is  not  to  be  summarily
dismissed,  but  ought  to  be  retained  as  a working  hypothesis
which  may  throw  light  on  the  ultimate  constitution  of  the
chemical  elements.

IGO.  Let  us  now  turn  to  globe  development.  We  have
alluded  to  this  already  when  discussing  the  energy  of  the
universe.  In  doing  so  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the


DEVELOPMENT.


125


oriorinal  state  of  the  visible  universe  was  a diffused  or
chaotic  state,  in  which  the  various  particles  were  widely
separated  from  one  another,  but  endowed  with  the  force  of
gravitation,  and  therefore  possessed  of  potential  energy.
As  these  particles  condensed  or  came  together,  this  potential
energy  was  gradually  transmuted  into  the  energy  of  heat
and  into  that  of  visible  motion.  We  may  thus  imagine  the
cooling  and  revolving  matter  in  course  of  time  to  have
thrown  off  certain  parts  of  itself  which  would  thereafter
form  satellites  or  planetary  attendants,  while  the  central
mass  would  form  the  sun.  We  have  here,  in  fact,  the
development  hypothesis  of  Kant  and  Laplace,  and  it  is
greatly  in  favour  of  the  truth  of  this  hypothesis  that  all
the  planetary  motions  of  the  solar  system  are  nearly  in  one
plane,  and  also  that,  looking  down  on  the  system  from
above,  all  these  motions  are  seen  to  be  in  one  direction.

161.  Assuming,  therefore,  that  the  solar  system  and,pcm
passu,  the  other  sidereal  systems  have  been  formed  in  this
way,  it  is  very  easy  to  see  why  the  central  mass  should  be
so  much  hotter  than  its  attendants.  Two  causes  would
conduce  to  this.  In  the  first  place,  assuming  that  the  heat
of  a mass  is  due  to  the  rushing  together  of  its  particles
under  the  force  of  gravitation,  the  velocities  would  be  much
greater  for  the  central  mass,  and  hence  the  heat  developed
would  be  greater  also.  In  the  next  place,  the  body  being
a large  one  would  cool  less  rapidly  than  its  attendant
planets.  These  two  causes  combine  to  render  the  largest
bodies  of  the  universe  originally  (and  still  more  now)  the
hottest,  so  that  the  same  body  which  forms  the  gravitating
centre  of  the  system  becomes  also  the  dispenser  of  light  and
heat.

162.  Now,  without  speculating  about  the  nature  or  extent


126


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


of  the  ethereal  medium,  we  may  be  sure  of  two  things.  In
the  first  place,  a large  amount  of  the  light  and  heat  of  the
sun  and  stars  goes  out  into  space  and  does  not  return  to
them  again,  or  in  other  words,  the  sun  and  stars  are  slowly
cooling.  In  the  next  place,  the  visible  motion  of  the  large
bodies  of  the  universe  is  gradually  being  stopped  by  some-
thing which  may  be  denominated  ethereal  friction.  It
follows  from  this  that  our  own  sun  will  gradually  lose  his
brilliancy,  and  that  our  earth  will  gradually  lose  its  orbital
energy  and  approach  the  sun  by  a slow  spiral  motion.  At
last  it  will  become  entangled  with  the  sun,  and  the  result
will  be  the  conversion  of  the  remaining  orbital  energy  into
heat,  after  which  the  two  bodies  will  remain  one.

Thus  the  tendency  is  that  the  sun  shall  ultimately  absorb
the  various  planets  of  the  system,  his  heat  and  energy
being  recruited  by  the  process.  Now,  let  us  imagine  that
the  same  process  is  simultaneously  going  on  in  one  of  the
nearer  fixed  stars,  say  for  instance  in  Sirius.

After  unimaginable  ages  these  two  stars,  the  Sun  and
Sirius,  having  each  long  since  devoured  his  attendants,
but  being  nevertheless  exhausted  in  heat-energy  on  account
of  radiation  into  space,  may  be  imagined  to  be  travelling
towards  one  another,  slowly  at  first,  but  afterwards  with  an
accelerated  motion.

They  will  at  last  approach  each  other  with  a great  velo-
city, and  finally  form  one  system.  Ultimately  the  two
will  rush  together  and  form  one  mass,  the  orbital  energy
of  each  being  converted  into  heat,  and  the  matter  being,
in  consequence,  probably  evaporated  and  transformed  into
a gaseous,  nebulous  condition.  Ages  pass  away,  and  the
large  double  mass  ultimately  shares  the  same  fate  that  long
since  overtook  the  single  masses  which  composed  it ; that


DEVELOPMENT,


127


is  to  say,  it  gives  out  its  light  and  heat  into  space  and
becomes  dark,  until  at  length  it  comes  to  form  one  of  the
constituents  of  a still  more  stupendous  collision,  and  has
its  temperature  raised  once  again  by  the  conversion  of
visible  energy  into  heat.

163.  Our  readers  will  remark  how,  by  a*  process  of  this
kind,  the  primordial  potential  energy  of  the  visible  universe  is
gradually  converted  into  light  and  heat,  and  how  this  light
and  heat  are  ultimately  dissipated  into  space.  They  will
also  remark  that,  as  the  process  proceeds,  the  masses  of  the
universe  become  larger  and  larger.  In  fine,  the  dissipation
of  the  energy  of  the  visible  universe  proceeds,  'pari  passUy
with  the  aggregation  of  mass.

The  very  fact,  therefore,  that  the  large  masses  of  the  visible
universe  are  of  finite  size,  is  sufficient  to  assure  us  that  the
process  cannot  have  been  going  on  for  ever ; or,  in  other
words,  that  the  visible  universe  must  have  -had  its  origin
in  time,  and  we  may  conclude  with  equal  certainty  that  the
process  will  ultimately  come  to  an  end.  All  this  is  what
would  take  place,  provided  we  allow  the  indestructibility
of  ordinary  matter ; but  we  may  perhaps  suppose  (Art.  153)
that  the  very  material  of  the  visible  universe  will  ulti-
mately vanish  into  the  invisible.

164.  There  is  one  peculiarity  of  the  process  of  development
now  described,  which  we  beg  our  readers  to  note.  We  have
supposed  the  visible  universe,  after  its  production,  to  have
been  left  to  its  own  laws  ; that  is  to  say,  to  certain  inorganic
agencies,  which  we  call  forces,  in  virtue  of  which  its  develop-
ment took  place.  At  the  very  first  there  may  only  have  been
one  kind  of  primordial  atom,  or  to  use  another  expression,
perfect  simplicity  of  material.  As,  however,  the  various
atoms  aj^proached  each  other,  in  virtue  of  the  forces  with


128


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


which  they  were  endowed,  other  and  more  complicated  struc-
tures took,  the  place,  of  the  perfectly  simple  primordial  stuff.
Various  molecules  were  produced  at  various  temperatures,
and  these  ultimately  came  together  to  produce  globes  or
worlds,  some  of  them  comparatively  small,  others  very
large.  Thus  the  progress  is  from  the  regular  to  the  irre-
gular. And  we  find  a similar  progress  when  we  consider
the  inorganic  development  of  our  own  world.  The  action
of  Avater  rounds  pebbles,  but  it  rounds  them  irregularly ;
it  produces  soil,  but  the  soil  is  irregular  in  the  size  of  its
grains,  and  variable  in  constitution.  Wherever  what  may
be  termed  the  brute  forces  of  nature  are  left  to  themselves,
this  is  ahvays  the  result ; not  so,  however,  when  organisms
are  concerned  in  the  development.  Two  living  things  of
the  same  family  are  more  like  each  other  than  two  grains
of  sand  or  two  particles  of  soil.  The  eggs  of  birds  of  the
same  family,  the  similar  feathers  of  similar  birds,  the  ants
from  the  same  ant-hill,  have  all  a very  strong  likeness  to
each  other.

This  likeness  is  still  more  marked  if  we  regard  certain
products  of  human  industry.  Let  us  take,  for  instance,
coins  from  the  same  die,  or  bullets  from  the  same  mould,  or
impressions  from  the  same  engraved  plate,  and  we  at  once
perceive  the  striking  difference  betAveen  products  developed
through  inorganic  means  and  those  developed  through  an
intelligent  agent  designing  uniformity..

165.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  consider  life  development.
Let  us  imagine  that  the  primeval  atoms  have  long  since
come  together,  various  chemical  substan'ces  being  the  result.
And  let  us  further  imagine  that  these  various  substances
have  long  since  gathered  themselves  into  worlds,  of  various
sizes  at  first ; but  these  worlds  have  gradually  cooled  down,


DEVELOPMENT,


129


until  one  of  them,  the  Earth,  let  us  say,  has  at  length
reached  conditions  under  which  life  (such  as  we  know  it)
becomes  possible.  Accordingly  life  makes  its  appearance  ;
not  the  life  that  now  is,  but  something  much  ruder  and
simpler.  But  in  process  of  time  we  find  quite  a differeut
order  of  organised  beings  ; a higher  and  more  complete
type  has  appeared,  and  the  type  continues  to  rise  until  it
culminates  in  the  production  of  man,  a being  endowed  with
intelligence,  and  capable  of  reasoning  upon  the  phenomena
around  him.  Now,  if  man  reviews  these  organised  forms
which  exist  on  the  earth  side  by  side  with  himself,  he  per-
ceives at  once  that  a number  of  individuals  possess  certain
characteristics  in  common,  and  he  gives  expression  to  this
experience  by  saying  that  these  individuals  are  all  of  one
, species.  ‘‘  When  we  call  a group  of  animals  or  of  plants  a
species,’^  says  Professor  Huxley,^  ‘‘  we  may  imply  thereby,
either  that  all  these  animals  or  plants  have  some  common
peculiarity  of  form  or  structure  ; or  we  may  mean  that  they
possess  some  common  functional  character.  That  part  of
bioloofical  science  which  deals  with  form  and  structure  is
called  Morphology  ; that  which  concerns  itself  with  func-
tion, Physiology.  So  that  we  may  conveniently  speak  of
these  two  senses,  or  aspects,  of  ‘ species  ^ — the  one  as  mor-
phological, the  other  as  physiological.  . . . Thus  horses  form
a species,  because  the  group  of  animals  to  which  that  name
is  applied  is  distinguished  from  all  others  in  the  world  by
the  following  constantly  associated  characters  : — They  have,
1.  a vertebral  column  : 2.  mammae  ; 3.  a placental  embryo  ;
4.  four  legs ; 5.  a single  well-developed  toe  in  each  foot,  pro-
vided with  a hoof ; 6.  a bushy  tail  ; and  7.  callosities  on
the  inner  sides  of  both  the  fore  and  the  hind  legs.  The

^ Lay  Sermons ^ Essays,  and  Reviews.

I


130


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


asses,  again,  form  a distinct  species,  because,  with  the
same  characters,  as  far  as  the  fifth  in  the  above  list,  all
asses  have  tufted  tails,  and  have  callosities  only  on  the  inner
side  of  the  fore  legs.”

But  very  often  the  morphological  peculiarities  of  a species
are  more  easily  recognised  than  expressed.  No  one,  for
instance,  would  fail  to  rank  the  horse  as  one  species  and
the  ass  as  another,  even  while  ignorant  of  some  of  those
specific  peculiarities  which  the  naturalist  selects  as  convey-
ing the  best  scientific  account  of  their  difierence.

166.  Let  us  now  regard  the  question  of  species  from  its
physiological  point  of  view.  Suppose  that  two  individuals,  A
and  B,  of  different  sexes,  breed  freely  together,  producing
ofispring,  and  that  two  individuals,  C and  D,  do  the  like.

Now,  if  the  offspring  of  A and  B is  capable  of  breeding
freely  with  that  of  C and  D,  producing  offspring,  generation
after  generation,  then  A,  B,  C,  and  D may  be  said  to  belong
to  the  same  physiological  species.

To  take  an  illustration  borrowed  from  Professor  Huxley  :
let  us  imagine  that  A is  an  Arab,  and  B a dray-horse  ; also
that  C is  a dray-horse,  and  D an  Arab.  Now  the  progeny
of  these  two  pairs  will  all  be  mongrels,  holding  a position
intermediate  between  that  of  the  Arab  and  the  dray-horse  ;
but  they  will  be  perfectly  fertile  amongst  themselves  when
matched  together.  We  therefore  conclude  that  the  dray-
horse  and  the  Arab  are  not  distinct  physiological  species,
but  only  varieties  of  the  same  species.  Again,  let  A be  a
horse  and  B an  ass,  also  let  C be  a horse  and  D an  ass.
The  pairs  will  still  have  ofispring,  and  these  will  be  mules,
havin"  a character  intermediate  between  that  of  the  horse

o

and  that  of  the  ass  ; but,  on  the  other  hand,  these  mules  will
not  be  able  to  breed  together  amongst  themselves  so  as  to


DEVELOPMENT.


131

produce  offspring.  We  are  therefore  justified  in  asserting
that  a horse  and  an  ass  are  of  different  physiological  species.

If  we  should  ever  attempt  to  pair  together  animals  much
more  unlike  each  other  than  the  horse  and  the  ass,  we  should
simply  fail.  They  will  not  come  together,  and  we  cannot
tell  whether,  if  they  did,  they  would  be  capable  of  producing
progeny.  We  may  therefore  conclude  that,  as  matter  of
fact,  there  are  certain  well-marked  physiological  species
that  will  not  breed  with  each  other  at  all,  while  there  are
other  species  also  physiologically  distinct,  but  not  so
markedly  separated  from  each  other,  that  may  be  brought
to  breed  together,  their  offspring  being  infertile.

167.  The  most  apparent  conclusion  to  be  deduced  from
these  facts  would  be  that  of  the  invariability  of  species,  and
of  the  impossibility  of  its  transmutation — the  infertility  of
hybrids  being  the  law  that  prevents  any  such  transmutation
taking  place.  And  as  the  physiological  species  cannot  be
made  different,  the  apparent  conclusion  is  that  in  times
past  they  have  been  always  the  same  as  they  are  now.  If
this  be  allowed,  it  follows  that  inasmuch  as  they  took  their
origin  in  time,  they  must  have  originally  been  produced
very  much  as  they  are  at  the  present  moment, — a separate
act  of  production  being  required  for  each  species,  or  rather
two  separate  acts  for  each  species.  This  position  has  always
been  regarded  as  a stronghold  by  a certain  class  of  theolo-
gical thinkers,  and  they  have  resented  the  attempts  of  men
of  science  to  obtain  any  other  explanation  of  the  origin  of
species.

Men  of  science  have,  on  the  other  hand,  asserted  their
right  to  discuss  this  question  with  the  same  freedom  as  any
other.  Our  point  of  view  is  somewhat  different  from  that
of  either  of  these  two  parties.  We  think  it  is  not  so  much


132


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


the  right  or  privilege  as  the  bounden  duty  of  the  man  of
science  to  put  back  the  direct  interference  of  the  Great  First
Cause — the  unconditioned — as  far  as  he  possibly  can  in
time.  This  is  the  intellectual  or  rather  theoretical  work
which  he  is  called  upon  to  do-— the  post  that  has  been
assigned  to  him  in  the  economy  of  the  universe.

If,  then,  two  possible  theories  of  the  production  of  any
phenomenon  are  presented  to  the  man  of  science,  one  of  these
implying  the  immediate  operation  of  the  unconditioned,
and  the  other  the  operation  of  some  cause  existing  in  the
universe,  we  conceive  that  he  is  called  upon  by  the  most
profound  obligations  of  his  nature  to  choose  the  second  in
preference  to  the  first.  But  we  have  already  sufficiently
discussed  this  question  in  a previous  part  of  this  book
(Art.  85).

168.  When  we  examine  closely  into  the  phenomena  of  life
we  find  that  side  by  side  with  the  general  law,  that  like
. produces  like,  there  is  a tendency  to  minor  variations.

Thus  we  have  already  agreed  to  consider  dray-horses  and
Arabs  as  varieties  of  the  species  horse  ; and  in  like  mauner
pouters,  carriers,  fan-tails,  and  tumblers  are  all  varieties  of
the  species  rock-pigeon.  We  are  therefore  led  to  ask  how
such  varieties  were  originally  produced  and  how  they
become  perpetuated  after  their  production.

Now  it  is  well  known  that  there  occurs  occasionally  an
unaccountable  variation,  so  marked  in  its  nature  as  to  be
worthy  of  historical  record.  Two  very  interesting  and
instructive  instances  of  this  are  given  by  Professor  Huxley,
and  we  take  the  liberty  of  quoting  these  in  the  Professor  s
own  words  : —

“ The  first  of  them  is  that  of  the  ' Ancon,’  or  ‘ Otter  ’ sheep,  of
which  a careful  account  is  given  by  Colonel  David  Humphreys,


DEVELOPMENT.


133


F.RS.,  in  a letter  to  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  published  in  the  Pliiloso-
'phiccil  Transactions  for  1813.,  It  appears  that  one  Seth  Wright,  the
proprietor  of  a farm  on  the  banks  of  the  Charles  Eiver  in  Massa-
chusetts,‘possessed  a flock  of  fifteen  ewes  and  a ram  of  the  ordinary
kind.  In  the  year  1791,  one  of  the  ewes  presented  her  owner
with  a male  lamb  difleriiig,  for  no  assignable  reason,  from  its
parents  by  a proportionally  long  body  and  short  bandy  legs,  whence
it  was  unable  to  emulate  its  relatives  in  those  sportive  leaps  over
the  neighbours’  fences,  in  which  they  were  in  the  habit  of  indulg-
ing, much  to  the  good  farmers’  vexation.


“With  the  ^ cuteness’  characteristic  of  their  nation,  the  neigh-
bours of  the  Massachusetts  farmer  imagined  it  would  be  an  excellent
thing  if  all  his  sheep  were  imbued  with  the  stay-at-home  ten-
dencies enforced  by  nature  upon  the  newly  arrived  ram,  and  they
advised  Wright  to  kill  the  old  patriarch  of  his  fold,  and  install  the
Ancon  ram  in  his  place.  The  result  justified  their  sagacious  an-
ticipations. . . .•  The  young  lambs  were  almost  always  either  pure
Ancons  or  pure  ordinary  sheep.  But  when  sufficient  Ancon  sheep
were  obtained  to  interbreed  with  one  another  it  was  found  that  the
offspring  was  always  pure  Ancon.”

“ The  second  case  is  that  detailed  by  a no  less  unexceptionable
authority  than  Ecaumur,  in  his  Art  de  faire  eclore  les  Poulets.  A
Maltese  couple  named  Kelleia,  whose  hands  and  feet  were  con-
structed upon  the  ordinary  human  model,  had  born  to  them  a son,
Gratio,  who  possessed  six  perfectly  moveable  fingers  on  each  hand,
and  six  toes,  not  quite  so  well  formed,  on  each  foot.  Ho  cause
could  be  assigned  for  the  appearance  of  this  unusual  variety  of  the
human  species.  But  however  they  may  have  arisen,  what  especi-
ally interests  us  is  to  remark  that,  once  in  existence,  varieties  obey
the  fundamental  law  of  reproduction,  that  like  tends  to  produce
hke,  and  their  offspring  exemplify  it  by  tending  to  exhibit  the
same  deviation  from  the  parental  stock  as  themselves.  Indeed,
there  seems  to  be  in  many  instances  a prepotent  influence  about
a newly  arisen  variety  which  gives  it  what  we  may  call  an  unfair
advantage  over  the  normal  descendants  from  the  same  stock.
This  is  strikingly  exemplified  by  the  case  of  Gratio  Kelleia,  who
married  a woman  with  the  ordinary  pentadactyle  extremities  and


134


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


had  by  her  four  children,  Salvator,  George,  Andr4,  and  Marie.  Of
these  children  Salvator,  the  eldest  boy,  had  six  fingers  and  six  toes,
like  his  father ; the  second  and  third,  also  boys,  had  five  fingers
and  five  toes,  like  their  mother,  though  the  hands  and  feet  of
George  were  slightly  deformed  ; the  last,  a girl,  had  five  fingers  and
five  toes,  but  the  thumbs  were  slightly  deformed.  The  variety
thus  reproduced  itself  purely  in  the  eldest,  while  the  normal  type
reproduced  itself  purely  in  the  third,  and  almost  purely  in  the
second  and  last ; so  that  it  would  seem,  at  first,  as  if  the  normal
type  were  more  powerful  than  the  variety.  But  all  these  children
grew  up  and  intermarried  with  normal  wives  and  husbands,  and
then  note  what  took  place — Salvator  had  four  children,  three  of
whom  exhibited  the  hexadactyle  members  of  their  grandfather  and
father,  while  the  youngest  had  the  pentadactyle  limbs  of  the
mother  and  grandmother ; so  that  here,  notwithstanding  a double
pentadactyle  dilution  of  the  blood  the  hexadactyle  variety  had  the
best  of  it.  The  same  prepotency  of  the  variety  was  stiU  more
markedly  exemplified  in  the  progeny  of  two  of  the  other  children,
Marie  and  George.  Marie  (whose  thumbs  only  were  deformed)
gave  birth  to  a boy  with  six  toes,  and  three  other  normally  formed
children  ; but  George,  who  was  not  quite  so  pure  a pentadactyle,
begot,  first,  two  girls,  each  of  whom  had  six  fingers  and  toes ; then
a girl  with  six  fingers  on  each  hand,  and  six  toes  on  the  right  foot,
but  only  five  toes  on  the  left;  and  lastly,  a boy  with  only  five
fingers  and  toes.  In  these  instances,  therefore,  the  variety,  as  it
were,  leaped  over  one  generation  to  reproduce  itself  in  full  force
in  the  next.  Finally,  the  purely  pentadactyle  Andre  was  the
father  of  many  children,  not  one  of  whom  departed  from  the
normal  parental  type.”

169.  The  instances  now  quoted  illustrate  two  things.
Both  tell  us  how  varieties  arise,  we  may  say  spontaneously,
or  in  other  words  we  cannot  tell  how  ; and  the  former
instance,  that  of  the  Ancon  breed,  shows  us  moreover  that
such  varieties  when  they  do  occur  may  be  rendered  per-
manent by  means  of  artificial  selection.  If  the  six-fingered
descendants  of  Gratio  Kelleia  had  been  forced  to  intermarry
amongst  themselves  it  is  highly  probable  that  we  should


DEVELOPMENT.


135


have  had  a permanent  hexadactyle  variety  of  the  human
race.  It  has  likewise  been  shown  by  Charles  Darwin  that
the  pouter,  the  fan-tail,  the  carrier,  and  the  tumbler  are  all
varieties  of  the  common  rock-pigeon.

170.  It  thus  appears  that  permanent  varieties  may  be  pro-
duced by  artificial  selection.  Now  Darwin  and  Wallace
have  brought  before  us  this  great  fact  that  changes  can  also
be  produced  by  natural  selection.

To  illustrate  this,  let  us  imagine  that  a slight  variety
arises  spontaneously,  we  do  not  know  how.  Having  arisen
there  is  a prepotent  influence  ” about  it  which  enables  it  to
secure  a considerable  proportion  of  offspring  having  its  own
characteristics.  Now,  suppose  that  the  characteristics  are
such  as  to  adapt  the  individuals  possessing  them  more  per-
fectly to  the  conditions  of  nature  that  surround  them.
When,  by  breeding  amongst  themselves,  the  new  variety
is  rendered  permanent,  the  members  of  this  variety  will,
therefore,  have  an  advantage  over  their  elder  brethren  as
far  as  the  conditions  of  nature  are  concerned,  will  in  fine
succeed  better  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  and  will
ultimately  displace  the  elder  branches.  In  fact  the  struggle
for  existence  bears  to  natural  selection  the  same  relation
as  man  bears  to  artificial  selection.

171.  We  now  come  to  the  real  point  of  difficulty,  or  at  least
the  unproved  point  in  the  Darwinian  hypothesis.  We  may
cross  one  race  with  another,  but  we  do  not  obtain,  as  far  as
we  know,  those  phenomena  of  infertility  that  are  exhibited
when  we  cross  distinct  species  with  each  other.  The  Ancon
sheep  were  perfectly  fertile  when  matched  with  their  elder
brethren,  and  the  dray-horse  and  the  Arab,  or  the  pouter
and  the  tumbler,  breed  together  as  easily  as  if  they  were  of
the  same  race.  But  if  we  cannot  produce  infertility  how


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


136

can  we  apply  the  results  of  artificial  selection  to  account  for
the  origin  of  species  1

This  difficulty  is  met  by  Darwin  and  his  followers  in  this
way  : — “ It  is  not  as  yet  proved/’  says  Professor  Huxley,
‘‘  that  a race  ever  exhibits,  when  crossed  with  another  race
of  the  same  species,  those  phenomena  of  hybridisation  which
are  exhibited  by  many  species  when  crossed  with  other  spe-
cies. On  the  other  hand,  not  only  is  it  not  proved  that  all
species  give  rise  to  hybrids  infertile  inter  se,  but  there  is
much  reason  to  believe  that,  in  crossing,  species  exhibit
every  gradation  from  perfect  sterility  to  perfect  fertility.”
This  appears  to  carry  weight  ; the  old  theory  went  with  a
leap  from  perfect  fertility  to  perfect  sterility,  and  did  not
contemplate  the  possibility  of  a continuous  gradation  from
the  one  extreme  to  the  other ; at  least  its  argument  was
founded  upon  the  neglect  of  such  a gradation.  But  if  there
be  a gradation  of  this  kind,  it  follows  that  infertility  will
merely  represent  the  results  of  crossing  two  species  whose
functional  characteristics  are  very  different  from  each  other  ;
and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  reason  why  artificially  produced
varieties  are  not  infertile  when  crossed  with  one  another
may  only  be  that  the  experiment  has  not  been  continued
long  enough.

■ Time,  in  fact,  is  the  essential  requisite  in  all  such
attempts  to  imitate  nature.

172.  In  connection  with  this  subject,  Mr.  Darwin  has  re-
marked that  certain  plants  are  more  fertile  with  the  pollen  of
another  species  than  with  their  own  ; and  Professor  Huxley
tells  us  that  there  are  certain  fuci  whose  male  element  will
fertilise  the  ovule  of  a plant  of  distinct  species,  while  the
males  of  the  latter  species  are  ineffective  with  the  females
of  the  first.  So  obscure  in  some  of  its  branches  is  the  work-
ing of  the  reproductive  system.


DEVELOPMENT.


137


Again,  the  following  remark  by  Mr.  Darwin  is  very
suggestive  : —

First  crosses  between  forms  known  to  be  varieties,  or
sufficiently  alike  to  be  considered  as  varieties,  and  their
mongrel  offspring,  are  very  generally,  but  not  quite  uni-
yersally,  fertile.  Nor  is  this  nearly  general  and  perfect
fertility  surprising,  when  we  remember  how  liable  we  are
to  argue  in  a circle  with  respect  to  varieties  in  a state  of
nature  ; and  when  we  remember  that  the  greater  number
of  varieties  have  been  produced  under  domestication,  by  the
selection  of  mere  external  differences,  and  not  of  differences
in  the  reproductive  system.  In  all  other  respects,  excluding
fertility,  there ' is  a close  general  resemblance  between
hybrids  and  mongrels/^

173.  The  result  of  all  these  speculations  is  to  render  it  pro-
bable that  there  may  be  in  nature,  give  it  time  enough,  a
process  Avhich  leads  to  the  transmutation  of  species.

The  accumulation  of  successive  differences,  each  repre-
senting some  element  of  success  in  the  struggle  for  life,  may
easily  be  imagined  in  the  course  of  ages  to  produce  a very
great  change.

Keasoning  out  this  hypothesis,  the  more  advanced
followers  of  Mr.  Darwin  do  not  hesitate  to  ascribe  all  the
varieties  of  living  things,  including  man,  to  the  result  of
development  from  some  primordial  germ  taking  place
throughout  the  course  of  immeasurable  ages.  And  Mr.
Darwin  himself,  in  his  work  on  the  Descent  of  Man,  lays
great  stress  on  the  occurrence  of  homologous  structures  in
man  and  the  lower  animals,  as  weU  as  on  the  development
in  man  of  rudimentary  structures,  which  are  either  abso-
lutely useless  to  their  possessors,  or  of  very  slight  service
indeed,  but  which  appear  to  serve  as  an  index  of  the


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


138

various  stages  through  which  the  human  species  has  passed
in  its  progress  upwards  from  lower  forms  of  life.

174.  Mr.  Wallace,  however,  sees  in  the  production  of  man
the  intervention  of  an  external  will.

He  remarks  that  the  lowest  types  of  savages  are  in  pos-
session of  a brain,  and  of  capacities  far  beyond  any  use  to
which  they  could  apply  them  in  their  present  condition,
and  that  therefore  they  could  not  have  been  evolved  from
the  mere  necessities  of  their  environments.

175.  Finally,  Professor  Huxley  imagines  the  possibility  of
the  Darwinian  hypothesis  requiring  modification.  Alluding
to  the  assumed  circularity  of  the  planetary  orbits  that  fol-
lowed the  establishment  of  the  Copernican  hypothesis  (Art.
69),  he  remarks  : —

“ But  the  planetary  orbits  turned  out  to  be  not  quite
circular  after  all,  and,  grand  as  was  the  service  Copernicus
rendered  to  science,  Kepler  and  Newton  had  to  come  after
him.  What  if  the  orbit  of  Darwinism  should  be  a little  too
circular  ? What  if  species  should  ofier  residual  phenomena,
here  and  there,  not  explicable  by  natural  selection  ?
Twenty  years  hence  naturalists  may  be  in  a position  to
say  whether  this  is,  or  is  not,  the  case ; but  in  either  event
they  will  owe  the  author  of  ‘ The  Origin  of  Species ' an
immense  debt  of  gratitude.

176.  We  will  defer  to  our  last  chapter  any  further  remarks
on  ^Ir.  Darwin's  hypothesis.  Meanwhile,  before  concluding,
let  us  briefly  allude  to  the  original  production  of  living
things  on  our  globe.  It  may,  perhaps,  eventually  be  possi-
ble by  means  of  an  hypothesis  of  evolution,  to  account  for
the  great  variety  of  living  forms  on  the  supposition  of  a
single  primordial  germ  to  begin  with  ; but  the  difficulty
stiU  remains  how  to  account  for  this  germ.


DEVELOPMENT.


139


It  is  against  all  true  scientific  experience  that  life  can
appear  without  the  intervention  of  a living  antecedent.
How  then  are  we  to  explain  the  production  of  the  primor-
dial germ  ?

The  difficulty  of  doing  so,  from  our  point  of  view,  would
appear  to  be  unusually  great,  for  we  have  come  to  the  con-
clusion that,  as  a matter  of  scientific  principle,  we  cannot
admit  any  such  breach  of  continuity  as  a pure  act  of  crea-
tion in  time  would  imply.

If,  then,  a pure  act  of  creation  in  time  be  an  inadmissible
h}rpothesis,  and  if  the  hypothesis  of  Abiogenesis  be  equally
inadmissible,  our  readers  may  well  ask  how  are  we  to  sur-
mount the  difficulty.  For  our  reply  to  this  question,  we
must  once  more  beg  to  refer  them  to  our  concluding  chapter.


CHAPTER  VI.


SPECULATIONS  AS  TO  THE  POSSIBILITY  OF  SUPERIOR
INTELLIGENCES  IN  THE  VISIBLE  UNIVERSE.

“ The  earth  hath  bubbles,  as  the  water  has,

And  these  are  of  them.” — Shakespeare,  Macbeth.

177.  OuE  readers  are  now  aware  from  what  we  have  said
in  Chapter  ii.  that  the  two  great  requisites  for  organised
existence  are,  in  the  first  place,  an  organ  of  memory,  giving
the  individual  a hold  upon  the  past,  and  secondly,  the  pos-
sibility of  varied  action  in  the  present,  and  that  unless
these  two  things  are  fulfilled  life  is  simply  inconceivable.

Again,  in  Chapters  iii.,  iv.,  and  v.  we  have  sufficiently
discussed  the  visible  universe  and  its  potentialities.  We
have  seen  that  although  at  present  it  contains  the  essential
requisites  for  organised  existence,  yet,  in  the  remote  future,
a time  will  necessarily  arrive  when,  through  a degradation
of  the  Energy  of  this  universe,  that  variety  of  motion  which
is  essential  to  our  conception  of  life  will  be  unattainable.
Immortality  is,  therefore,  impossible  in  such  a universe  ; but
even  allowing  all  this  to  be  the  case,  it  is  at  least  conceiv-
able that  man  may  be  at  death  drafted  off  into  some
superior  rank  of  being  connected  with  the  present  universe,
and  thence  ultimately  removed  into  a new  order  of  things
when  the  present  universe  shall  have  become  effete.

Let  us  now,  therefore,  very  briefly  discuss  the  question
as  to  the  possibility  of  intelligences  superior  to  man  existing

140


POSSIBILITY  OF  SUPERIOR  INTELLIGENCES.  141


in  the  present  visible  universe.  And,  in  order  to  commence
this  inquiry,  let  us  analyse  with  some  minuteness  the  physical
source  of  that  peculiarity  which  the  present  universe  pos-
sesses, in  virtue  of  which  it  affords  living  beings  the  means
of  a varied  existence.  Whence  is  all  this  power  derived  ?
How  comes  it  about  that  a living  being  possesses  that
abruptness  and  spontaneity  of  action  which  peculiarly
characterise  it  ? In  fine,  let  us  consider  the  exact  position
of  life  in  the  present  physical  universe.

178.  Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  well  known  that  equili-
brium may  be  of  two  kinds,  stable  and  unstable,  and  if  we
take  an  egg  balanced  on  its  end  at  the  edge  of  a table  as  the
example  of  mechanical  instability,  as  a recent  writer  has
done,^  we  shall  no  doubt  agree  with  him  that  it  ‘‘depends
uj)on  some  external  impulse  so  infinitesimally  small  as  to
elude  our  observation  whether  the  egg  shall  fall  upon  the
floor  and  give  rise  to  a comparatively  large  transmutation
of  energy,  or  whether  it  shall  fall  upon  the  table  and  give
rise  to  a transmutation  comparatively  small.

But,  just  as  there  are  other  forces  besides  gravity,  so
there  are  other  varieties  of  instability  besides  that  which
we  treat  of  in  mechanics.

We  may,  for  instance,  have  molecular  instability,  such  as
characterises  water  cooled  below  the  freezing  point,  or  a
supersaturated  solution  of  Glauber  s salt,  where  the  advent
of  the  smallest  possible  crystal  of  ice  or  of  Glauber’s  salt  is
sufficient  to  bring  about  a marked  molecular  change  in  the
liquid,  which  immediately  becomes  thick  with  deposited
crystals ; or  again,  we  may  have  chemical  instability  in
which  the  slightest  impulse  of  any  kind  may  determine  a
chemical  change,  just  as  in  mechanical  instability  the

^ See  Stewart  on  the  Conservation  of  Energy.


142


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE,


slightest  possible  impulse  may  determine  a mechanical
change.  Thus  fulminating  silver  or  nitro-glycerine  are
familiar  examples  of  chemical  instability  in  which  the
slightest  blow  or  the  smallest  spark  may  be  sufficient  to
bring  about  an  instantaneous  and  violent  generation  of
heated  gas.

179.  Again,  all  machines — that  is  to  say,  all  material
systems — must  necessarily  be  of  two  kinds,  one  of  which
makes  use  of  the  stable  forces  of  nature  and  the  other  of  the
unstable.  The  following  quotation  from  Stewart’s  work  on
Energy  wiU  sufficiently  explain  what  is  meant : —

“ When  we  speak  of  a structure,  or  a machine,  or  a system,  we
simply  mean  a number  of  individual  particles  associated  together
in  producing  some  definite  result.  Thus,  the  solar  system,  a time-
piece, a rifle,  are  examples  of  inanimate  machines  ; while  an
animal,  a human  being,  an  army,  are  examples  of  animated  struc-
tures or  machines.  Now,  such  machines  or  structures  are  of  two
kinds,  which  differ  from  one  another  not  only  in  the  object  sought,
but  also  in  the  means  of  attaining  that  object.

“ In  the  first  place,  we  have  structures  or  machines  in  which
systematic  action  is  the  object  aimed  at,  and  in  which  all  the
arrangements  are  of  a conservative  nature,  the  element  of  insta-
bility being  avoided  as  much  as  possible.  The  solar  system,  a
timepiece,  a steam-engine  at  work,  are  examples  of  such  machines,
and  the  characteristic  of  all  such  is  their  calculdbility.  Thus  the
skilled  astronomer  can  tell,  with  the  utmost  precision,  in  what
place  the  moon  or  the  planet  Venus  will  be  found  this  time  next
year.  Or  again,  the  excellence  of  a timepiece  consists  in  its
various  hands  pointing  accurately  in  a certain  direction  after  a
certain  interval  of  time.  In  like  manner  we  may  safely  count
upon  a steamship  making  so  many  knots  an  hour,  at  least  while
the  outward  conditions  remain  the  same.  In  all  these  cases  we
make  our  calculations,  and  we  are  not  deceived — the  end  sought  is
regularity  of  action,  and  the  means  employed  is  a stable  arrange-
ment of  the  forces  of  nature.

“ Now,  the  characteristics  of  the  other  class  of  machines  are
precisely  the  reverse.


POSSIBILITY  OP  SUPERIOR  INTELLIGENCES.  143


“ Here  the  object  aimed  at  is  not  a regular,  but  a sudden  and
violent,  transmutation  of  energy,  while  the  means  employed  are
unstable  arrangements  of  natural  forces.  A rifle  at  full  cock,  with
a delicate  hair-trigger,  is  a very  good  instance  of  such  a machine,
where  the  slightest  touch  from  without  may  bring  about  the  ex-
plosion of  the  gunpowder,  and  the  propulsion  of  the  ball  with  a
very  great  velocity.  Now,  such  machines  are  eminently  charac-
terised by  their  incalculability.

“ It  is  thus  apparent  that,  as  regards  energy,  structures  are  of
two  kinds.  In  one  of  these,  tl^e  object  sought  is  regularity  of
action,  and  the  means  employed,  a stable  arrangement  of  natural
forces ; while  in  the  other,  the  end  sought  is  freedom  of  action,
and  a sudden  transmutation  of  energy,  the  means  employed  being
an  unstable  arrangement  of  natural  forces.

“ The  one  set  of  machines  are  characterised  by  their  calcula-
bility — the  other  by  their  incalculability.  The  one  set,  when  at
work,  are  not  easily  put  wrong,  while  the  other  set  are  charac-
terised by  great  delicacy  of  construction.”

180.  Having  thus  defined  the  two  kinds  of  machines,  let
us  now  see  to  what  extent  a living  being  may  be  regarded
as  a machine,  and  also  to  which  of  these  two  categories  he
belongs.

In  all  machines  what  we  do  is  merely  to  transform
energy.  Our  readers  are  well  aware,  by  what  we  have
already  said  (Art.  102),  that  it  is  just  as  impossible  to  create
energy  as  it  is  to  create  matter.

Thus  a clock  has  to  be  wound  up  before  it  will  go  ; an
engine  has  to  be  stoked  with  coal ; a rifle  or  cannon  has  to
be  charged  with  powder ; and  in  fine,  all  machines,  whether
delicately  constructed  or  not,  whether  calculable  or  incal-
culable, are  merely  transmuters  of  energy  and  not  creators
of  it.

To  this  law  the  living  being  is  no  exception.  The  crea-
tures of  this  world  (and  it  is  of  such  we  are  now  speaking)
are  certainly  not  creators  of  energy  ; but  in  respect  of  the


144


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


great  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  such  beings
must  be  regarded  in  the  very  same  light  as  any  other
machines.

But  there  is  yet  another  analogy  between  living  beings
and  inanimate  machines.  When  we  study  the  working  of
any  machine,  we  find  that  each  transmutation  of  energy
brought  about  has  a material  antecedent ; the  effect  pro-
duced has  a cause  from  which  it  springs,  and  this  cause  is
one  which  we  are  probably  able  to  recognise  from  our
knowledge  of  the  laws  of  matter.  To  take  an  example  : in
a steam-engine  the  amount  of  work  produced  depends  upon
the  amount  of  heat  carried  from  the  boiler  to  the  condenser  ;
and  the  latter  depends  in  its  turn  upon  the  amount  of  coal
which  is  burned  in  the  furnace  of  the  engine.  In  like
manner,  the  velocity  of  the  bullet  which  issues  from  a
rifle  depends  upon  the  transmutation  of  the  energy  of  the
powder ; this  in  its  turn  depends  upon  the  explosion  of  the
percussion  cap ; this  again  upon  the  fall  of  the  trigger ;
and  lastly  this  upon  the  finger  of  the  man  who  fires  the
rifle.

Now,  without  attempting  to  define  what  life  is,  and
leaving  all  speculations  regarding  it  to  our  last  chapter,
we  yet  think  it  may  safely  be  said  that  a living  being  is
analogous  to  a machine  in  this  particular  also.

Let  us  take  the  man  who  fires  the  rifle.  We  can
trace  back  the  motion  of  his  forefing^er  to  the  contraction  of
a muscle ; and  we  can  go  even  further  back  and  connect
this  contraction  with  a stimulus  sent  along  the  nerves  from
the  brain,  so  that  a material  effect  is  here  seen  to  be
brought  about  by  a material  antecedent,  just  as  truly  as
in  an  inanimate  machine.  Indeed,  we  may  generalise,  and
say  that,  as  far  as  we  can  physically  investigate  a living


POSSIBILITY  OP  SUPERIOR  INTELLIGENCES.  145


being,  we  may  take  it  for  granted  that  a material  effect  is
due  to  a strictly  material  antecedent  in  his  case  also.

181.  We  have  thus  discussed  two  respects  in  which  a
living  being  is  analogous  to  a machine,  and  the  next  point
is  to  determine  which  of  the  two  classes  of  machines  most
resembles  the  living  being.  Is  he  analogous  to  the  solar
system,  a steam-engine,  or  a clock  ? or  is  he  rather  ana-
logous to  some  delicately  constructed  machine,  such,  for
instance,  as  a rifle  ? There  can,  we  think,  be  no  doubt
that  a living  being  most  resembles  a delicately  constructed
machine.  For  what  is  the  characteristic  of  such  a machine  1
It  is  that  in  it  a comparatively  great  transmutation  of
energy  may  be  brought  about  by  a comparatively  small
physical  antecedent.  Thus  a slight  breath  of  air  may  de-
termine the  fall  of  the  egg  off  the  table,  or  a slight  tap  the
explosion  of  a large  quantity  of  fulminating  silver.  So  in
the  human  being,  a very  small  and  obscure  transmutation
of  energy  in  the  mysterious  brain-chamber  may  determine
some  very  violent  motion.  Speaking  of  this  subject,
Stewart  remarks  : — “ Life  is  not  a bully  who  swaggers  out
into  the  open  universe,  upsetting  the  laws  of  energy  in  all
directions,  but  rather  a consummate  strategist,  who,  sittiug
in  his  secret  chamber  over  his  wires,  directs  the  movements
of  a great  army.”

182.  Granting  then  that  a living  being  is  a delicately  con-
structed machine,  the  next  point  is  to  determine  what  pro-
cess of  delicacy,  what  peculiar  arrangement  of  unstable
forces  is  employed  in  his  construction  ? Now  it  is  very
easy  to  perceive  that  the  delicacy  in  this  case  is  brought
about  by  an  unstable  arrangement  of  chemical  forces.  It
is  plain  that  the  body  of  an  animal  is  a chemically  unstable
product,  and  if,  as  one  consequence  of  this,  great  freedom

K


146


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


of  action  and  delicacy  are  possessed  during  life,  it  is
another  consequence  that  the  extinction  of  life  is  very
speedily  followed  by  decay.

The  body  then  owes  its  delicacy  to  its  chemically,  unstable
nature  ; to  that  peculiar  collocation  of  particles  that  wmuld
not  naturally,  and  in  virtue  of  their  own  forces,  have  united
themselves  together  as  we  find  them  in  the  body.

183.  To  what,  then,  is  due  this  peculiar  grouping  of  par-
ticles in  the  living  body  ?

We  reply  that  it  is,  in  one  sense  at  least,  derived  from  the
food  which  is  eaten.  If  animal  food  is  eaten,  it  is  of  course
derived  from  the  body  of  the  animal  which  is  consumed.
That  animal  may  possibly  have  derived  it  from  another
animal,  but  more  probably  it  has  been  derived  in  this  case
direct  from  the  vegetable  world.  Ultimately,  therefore,  it  is
to  this  world  that  we  must  look  as  the  source  of  that  deli-
cately constructed  substance  which  plays  such  a wonderful
and  important  part  in  the  animal  economy.  If  we  go  one  link
further  back  in  the  chain  of  causation,  we  shall  be  carried
from  the  vegetable  world  to  the  sun  as  the  great  and  ulti-
mate physical  source  of  that  high-class  energy  and  delicacy
of  construction  which  characterise  vegetable  products.  It
is,  in  truth,  owing  to  the  actinic  rays  of  our  luminary  that
vegetable  tissue  is  manufactured  in  the  leaves  of  plants,
the  carbonic  acid  of  the  air  being  decomposed,  and  oxygen
given  out,  while  the  carbon,  united  with  other  sul)stances,
and  modified  thereby,  is  retained  by  the  plant  to  form  part
of  its  substance,  or  perchance  to  become  the  food  of  animals.

184.  We  have  now  therefore  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that
the  delicacy  of  construction  which  our  frames  require  is  ulti-
mately derived  from  the  sun,  as  fiir  at  least  as  the  visible
universe  is  concerned.  If  then  we  would  reply  to  the


POSSIBILITY  OF  SUPERIOR  INTELLIGENCES.  147


question  of  this  chapter,  whether  or  not  there  may  be
beings  superior  to  man  connected  with  this  present  uni-
verse, let  us  look  abroad  and  endeavour  to  ascertain  whether
there  be  in  this  universe  any  other  obvious  process  of  deli-
cacy besides  that  which  characterises  the  bodies  of  animals
like  ourselves.'

Now,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that,  in  the  atmospheriq
changes  of  this  world,  and  more  particularly  of  the  sun,  we
have  processes  of  great  delicacy.  It  is  believed  that  the
positions  of  the  planets.  Mercury  and  Venus,  affect  the
behaviour  of  sun-spots,  and  thus  determine  the  conditions
of  atmospheric  changes  on  the  surface  of  our  luminary  that
are  absolutely  overwhelming  in  their  magnitude.  We  have
only  to  reflect  that  a large  sun-spot  might  swallow  up  fifty
planets  like  our  earth,  and  that  some  of  the  currents  con-
nected with  it  move  at  the  rate  of  100  miles  per  second,
in  order  to  realise  the  enormous  scale  of  these  solar  out-
breaks. Again,  it  is  believed  that  the  state  of  the  solar
surface  with  regard  to  spots  determines  the  storms  of  our
earth,  so  that  there  are  most  hurricanes  in  the  Indian  Ocean
as  well  as  on  the  coast  of  America  during  years  of  maxi-
mum sun-spots.

But  if  such  results  are  brought  about  by  the  relative  posi-
tions of  the  planets  of  our  system,  it  is  evident  that  the
cause  is  more  analogous  to  the  pulling  of  the  trigger  of  a
cannon  ready  to  go  off  than  to  a downright  blow.  In  fact,
a vast  transmutation  of  energy  in  the  sun  is  brought  about  by
some  obscure  and  ill-understood  but  trivial  cause  connected
with  the  position  of  the  nearer  planets  of  our  system.  We  have
here  a case  where  the  magnitude  of  the  effect  is  out  of  all
proportion  to  that  of  the  antecedent ; now  this  is,  in  other
words,  the  definition  of  delicacy  already  given  (Art.  179).


148


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


But,  again,  if  delicacy  of  construction  characterise  the
ineteoroloofical  chano^es  in  the  various  members  of  our

o o

system,  it  is  entirely  absent  from  the  orbital  motions  of
these  bodies.  These  want  that  great  characteristic  of
delicacy,  incalculability ; for  they  are  not  only  pre-emi-
nently calculable,  but  are  now  calculated  years  before-
Jiand  as  part  of  the  regular  business  of  the  world.  On  the
other  hand,  the  meteorological  changes  of  our  earth  and
of  the  sun  come  upon  us  with  all  the  abruptness  char-
acteristic of  delicacy,  and  are  eminently  incalculable.  The
hurricane  and  the  lightning  flash  are  processes  of  Nature
which  man  has  in  every  age  been  prone  to  associate  with
personal  intelligences.  He  has  instinctively  recognised  the
similarity  between  these  abrupt  and  startling  phenomena
and  the  actions  of  an  angry  and  powerful  being.

185.  It  may  no  doubt  be  long  since  there  has  been  any-
thing like  an  extensive  worship  of  the  powers  of  nature
amongst  the  civilised  nations  of  the  earth,  but  there  may
yet  be  found  even  at  the  present  day,  especially  amongst
imaginative  races,  and  in  wild  and  mountainous  regions,  a
lingering  belief  that  personal  agents  are  concerned  in  the
more  startling  natural  phenomena.

Such  a belief  was  extensively  prevalent  during  the
middle  ages,  and  whole  volumes  might  easily  be  filled  with
an  account  of  mediaeval  superstitions  and  legends  relating
to  this  subject,  sometimes  dark  and  terrible,  and  at  other
times  possessing  a peculiar  and  pathetic  beauty  which  does
not  belong  to  anything  else.  The  air,  the  earth,  and  the
water  have  all  been  peopled  with  spirits ; some  of  them
friendly  to  man,  some  of  them  his  deadly  enemies.  They
are  powerful,  and  conscious  of  their  power,  but  at  the  same
time  profoundly  and  mournfully  aware  that  they  are  with-


POSSIBILITY  OF  SUPERIOR  INTELLIGENCES.  149


out  a soul.  Their  life  depends,  it  may  be,  upon  the  con-
tinuance of  some  natural  object,  and  hence  for  them  there
is  no  immortality.  Sometimes,  however,  an  elemental
spirit  procures  a soul  by  means  of  a loving  union  with  one
of  the  human  race,  and  the  beautiful  romance  of  Undine
is  built  upon  this  fancy.

At  other  times'  the  reverse  happens,  and  the  soul  of  the
mortal  is  lost  who,  leaving  the  haunts  of  men,  associates
with  these  soulless  but  often  amiable  and  affectionate  beings.
“The  Forsaken  Merman,”  by  Matthew  Arnold,  expresses
this  fancy  in  a very  beautiful  and  touching  manner : —

“ Children  dear,  was  it  yesterday
(Call  once  more)  that  she  went  away  ?

Once  she  sate  with  you  and  me

On  a red  gold  throne  in  the  heart  of  the  sea,

And  the  youngest  sate  on  her  knee.

She  comb’d  its  bright  hair,  and  she  tended  it  well,

When  down  swung  the  sound  of  the  far-off  bell.

She  sigh’d,  she  look’d  up  through  the  clear  green  sea ;

She  said,  ‘ I must  go,  for  my  kinsfolk  pray
In  the  little  grey  church  on  the  shore  to-day.

’Twill  be  Easter  time  in  the  world-7-ah  me !

And  I lose  my  poor  soul.  Merman,  here  with  thee.’

I said,  ‘ Go  up,  dear  heart,  through  the  waves ;

Say  thy  prayers  and  come  back  to  the  kind  sea-caves.’

She  smiled,  she  went  up  through  the  surf  in  the  bay.

Children  dear,  was  it  yesterday

186.  A conception,  in  some  respects  analogous  to  that
now  mentioned,  but  in  other  respects  very  different  from  it,
is  that  which  attributes  a soul  to  the  universe  ; and  it  has
even  been  imagined  that  the  whole  visible  universe  forms,
as  it  were,  one  gigantic  brain.

Others  again  appear  inclined  to  believe  that  there  may
be  many  cosmical  intelligences,  each  embracing  the  whole
universe,  and  therefore  interpenetrating  one  another,  and  at


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


^50

the  same  time  taking  part  in  its  government  by  means  of
such  processes  of  delicacy  as  those  we  have  mentioned.

187.  Now,  before  proceeding  further  in  the  discussion  of
these  speculations,  let  us  here  state  more  definitely  than  we
have  yet  done  what  is  the  real  point  in  question.

It  is  not  so  much  the  possibility  of  the  delicate  processes
of  nature  being  directed  by  an  intelligent  agency ; this  is
in  reality  a different  question,  and  one  which  will  be  dis-
cussed in  our  concluding  chapter.  But  the  question  now
before  us  is,  whether  any  such  agency  may  be  said  to  belong
to  the  present  visible  universe  ?

To  make  our  meaning  clear : we  know  that  we  ourselves
belong  to  the  present  visible  universe.  Again,  there  are
many  of  us  who  believe  that  angelic  intelligences  are  the
ministers  of  GocTs  providence.  Now,  whether  this  doc-
trine be  true  or  not  (and  we  are  not  now  concerned  about
its  truth),  it  is  evident  that  such  intelligences  cannot  be
said  to  belong  to  the  present  physical  universe.  The  or-
ganisation which  they  possess,  and  without  which  (Art.  61)
we  cannot  imagine  a finite  intelligence  to  exist,  is  most
assuredly  nothing  that  can  be  perceived  by  our  bodily
senses,  nor  can  we  imagine  that  their  existence  is  at  all
dependent  on  the  fate  of  the  visible  universe ; in  fine,  they
do  not  belong  to  it.

Our  present  question,  therefore,  is  whether  we  can  asso-
ciate the  delicate  cosmical  processes  of  the  visible  universe
with  the  operations  of  intelligences  residing  in  this  universe
and  belonging  to  it,  and  to  this  question  we  must  assuredly
give  a negative  reply.

188.  We  entertain  no  doubt  that  man  and  beings  at  least
analogous  to  man  represent  the  highest  order  of  living
things  connected  with  the  present  visible  universe.


POSSIBILITY  OF  SUPERIOR  INTELLIGENCES,  15 1

For,  in  the  first  place,  although  there  is  abundant  evi-
dence of  delicacy  of  construction  in  the  cosraical  processes
of  this  universe,  there  is  no  evidence  of  an  organisation
such  as  that  which  observation  leads  us  to  associate  with
the  presence  of  life.

In  the  next  place,  whatever  view  we  may  entertain  of
the  Darwinian  hypothesis  and  the  relation  of  man  to  the
lower  animals,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  are  all  of  a
similar  physical  construction.  What  physiologists  term
the  matter  of  life  is  very  much  the  same  in  all,  so  tha:t  the
body  of  any  one  animal  may  afford  food  for  any  other.
Now,  is  it  likely  that  there  are  two  living  systems,
absolutely  distinct  and  as  different  from  one  another
as  we  can  well  imagine,  both  connected  with  the  visible
universe  ?

We  think  this  view  would  imply  such  a want  of  unity
in  the  plan  of  development  as  to  be  absolutely  fatal  to  its
reception,  even  as  a working  hypothesis.  On  these  accounts,
therefore,  we  do  not  hesitate  to  dismiss  the  conception  of  a
superior  order  of  beings  connected  with  the  present  physical
universe  as  one  which  is  altogether  untenable.

189.  If  we  now  turn  from  the  verdict  of  science  to  the
sacred  writings  of  the  Jews,  we  find  that  one  grand  idea
which  pervades  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament  is  man  s
absolute  superiority  and  practical  sovereignty  over  all
created  beings  whom  he  can  perceive  otherwise  than  with
the  mind^s  eye.

He  is  supreme,  or  it  is  part  of  his  work  on  earth  to  be-
come supreme,  over  all  that  can  be  perceived  by  his  senses,
i.e.  all  the  visible  and  tangible  world.  Thus  we  read  in
Gen.  i.  28  : And  God  blessed  them  : and  God  said  unto

them,  Be  fruitful,-  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth.


152


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


and  siiLdne  it ; and  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,
and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every  living  thing
that  moveth  upon  the  earth.”

Again,  we  read  (Psalm  viii.  5,  6)  : ‘‘For  thou  hast  made
him  a little  lower  than  the  angels,  and  hast  crowned  him
with  glory  and  honour.  Thou  madest  him  to  have  do-
minion  over  the  works  of  thy  hands  ; thou  hast  put  all
things  under  his  feet.”  [It  appears  that  the  correct  read-
ing of  the  first  part  of  this  is,  “ Thou  hast  made  him  little
less  than  divine,”  etc.]

190.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  same  idea  is  still  more
fuUy  developed  in  the  New  Testament,  where  it  is  con-
fessed that,  in  one  very  important  respect,  this  superiority
of  man  is  seen  to  fail.

He  has  greatly  enlarged  his  powers  over  nature,  and  has
by  these  means  much  ameliorated  the  condition  of  his  race  ;
yet  death  overtakes  him  just  as  remorselessly  and  as  ruth-
lessly as  if  he  were  a savage  of  no  account.  He  may  meet
death  fearlessly,  conscious  that  he  has  at  least  done  some-
thing for  the  good  of  his  fellows.  But  what  does  it  all
amount  to  ? Death  will  ultimately  overtake  the  race  just
as  remorselessly  as  the  individual.  Now  it  is  this  fearful
enemy,  this  terrible  exception  to  the  domination  of  man,
that  Christ,  as  the  Son  and  type  of  man,  is  commissioned
to  destroy.  Thus  we  read  (l  Cor.  xv.  25)  : “For  he  must
reign,  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet.  The  last
enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death.  For  he  hath  put
all  things  under  his  feet.”  And  presently  (verse  54)  the
apostle  breaks  forth  into  the  following  triumphant  and
beautiful  language  : — “ So  when  this  corruptible  shall  have
put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on
immortality,  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying  that


POSSIBILITY  01  SUPERIOR  INTELLIGENCES.  153


is  written,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory/'  Again  we
read  (Heb.  ii.  8)  : “ For  in  that  he  put  all  in  subjection
under  him,  he  left  nothing  that  is  not  put  under  him.  But
now  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  him  : but  we  see
Jesus,  who  was  made  a little  lower  than  the  angels  for  the
suffering  of  death,  crowned  with  glory  and  honour ; that  he
by  the  grace  of  God  should  taste  death  for  every  man.  For
it  became  him,  for  whom  are  all  'things,  and  by  whom  are
all  things,  in  bringing  many  sons  unto  glory,  to  make  the
Captain  of  their  salvation  perfect  through  sufferings.”
[Here  again  it  appears  that  instead  of  the  phrase  ‘‘  made  a
little  lower  than  the  angels,”  we  should  read,  made  for  a
little  time  lower  than  the  angels” — i.e.  an  idea  identical
in  meaning  with  the  phrase  ‘‘made  under  the  law,”  the
Old  Testament  law  being  viewed  as  administered  by  angels.
From  this  dispensation,  in  which  cosmical  powers  come
between  man  and  God,  Christ  frees  us,  by  himself  for  a
little  time  entering  into  it,  and  even  under  it  meeting
death.]

191.  From  all  this  we  may  conclude  that  both  science  and
religion  tell  us  the  same  tale.  They  inform  us  that  man,
and  beings  similar  to  man,  are  at  the  head  of  the  visible
universe.  No  doubt  religion  infoiTns  us,  in  addition  to
this,  that  there  are  other  beings  above  man,  but  these  do
not  live  in  the  visible  universe,  but  in  that  which  is  unseen
and  eternal.


CHAPTEE  VII.


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.

“Rabbi  Jacob  said,  ‘This  world  is  as  it  were  the  anteroom  of  the
world  to  come.  Prepare  thyself  in  the  anteroom  so  that  thou  mayest
be  lit  to  enter  the  banquet  room.’  ” — Mishna,  Pirke  Aboth^  chap.  iv.  .
par.  16.

“ For  I reckon,  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy
to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us.  For  the
earnest  expectation  of  the  creature  waiteth  for  the  manifestation  of  the
sons  of  God.” — St.  Paul  (Rom.  viii.  18,  19).

“ Eternal  process  moving  on

From  state  to  state  the  spirit  walks.

And  these  are  but  the  shatter’d  stalks,

Or  ruin’d  chrysalis  of  one.” — Tennyson.


192.  In  the  preceding  chapters  we  have  examined  by  the
light  of  our  present  knowledge  the  possibilities  contained
in  the  visible  universe.  What  is  it  good  for  in  the  way  of
immortality  is  the  question  we  have  tried  to  answer.  It
will  have  been  seen  that  the  reply  is  eminently  unfavour-
able. If  we  take  the  individual  man  to  begin  with,  we  find
that  he  lives  his  short  tale  of  years,  and  that  then  the
visible  machinery  which  connects  him  with  the  past,  as
well  as  that  which  enables  him  to  act  in  the  present,  falls
into  ruin  and  is  brought  to  an  end.  If  any  germ  or  poten-
tiality remains,  it  is  certainly  not  connected  with  the  visible
order  of  things.

If  we  next  consider  the  human  race  we  shall  find  that
the  state  of  advancement  to  which  they  have  attained  is

154


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


^55


greatly  due  to  tlieir  physical  surroundings.  Coal  and  iron
have  been  as  instrumental  in  promoting  knowledge  as
Galileo  and  Newton,  but  both  of  these  materials  will  come
to  an  end.  By  economy  it  may  be  possible  to  lengthen  out
our  present  supplies,  but  is  it  not  manifest  that  we  are  year
by  year  exhausting  them  as  sources  of  available  energy  ?

Are  we  not  inevitably  led  to  conclude  that  our  present
state  cannot  last  even  for  a lengthened  period,  but  will  be
brought  to  an  end  long  before  the  inevitable  dissipation  of
energy  shall  have  rendered  our  earth  unfit  for  habitation  ?

193.  But  even  supposing  that  man,  in  some  form,  is  per-
mitted to  remain  on  the  earth  for  a long  series  of  years,  we
merely  lengthen  out  the  period,  but  we  cannot  escape  the
final  catastrophe.  The  earth  will  gradually  lose  its  energy  of
rotation,  as  well  as  that  of  revolution  round  the  sun.  The
sun  himself  will  wax  dim  and  become  useless  as  a source  of
energy,  until  at  last  the  favourable  condition  of  the  present
solar  system  will  have  quite  disappeared.

But  what  happens  to  our  system  will  happen  likewise
to  the  whole  vdsible  universe  (Art.  116),  which  will  inevit-
ably become  a lifeless  mass,  if  indeed  it  be  not  doomed  to
utter  dissolution.  In  fine,  it  will  become  old  and  effete,  *
no  less  truly  than  the  individual — it  is  a glorious  garment
this  visible  universe,  but  not  an  immortal  one — we  must
look  elsewhere  if  we  are  to  be  clothed  with  immortality
as  with  a garment.

194.  Now,  if  we  regard  the  dissipation  of  energy  which  is
constantly  going  on,  we  are  at  first  sight  forcibly  struck  with
the  apparently  wasteful  character  of  the  arrangements  of  the
visible  universe.  All  but  a very  small  portion  of  the  sun's
heat  goes  day  by  day  into  what  we  call  empty  space,  and
it  is  only  this  very  small  remainder  that  is  made  use  of  by


156


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


the  various  planets  for  purposes  of  their  own.  Can  any-
thing be  more  perplexing  than  this  seemingly  frightful
expenditure  of  the  very  life  and  essence  of  the  system  ?
That  this  vast  store  of  high-class  energy  should  be  doing
nothing  but  travelling  outwards  in  space  at  the  rate  of
188,000  miles  per  second  is  hardly  conceivable,  especially
when  the  result  of  it  is  the  inevitable  destruction  of  the
visible  universe.

195.  If,  however,  we  continue  to  dwell  upon  this  astound-
ing phenomenon,  we  begin  to  perceive  that  perhaps  it  may
only  be  an  arrangement  in  virtue  of  which  our  universe  keeps
up  a memory  of  the  past  at  the  expense  of  the  present;  for,
indeed,  all  memory  (Art.  59)  consists  in  an  investiture  of
present  resources  in  order  to  keep  a hold  upon  the  past.  We
have  seen  (Art.  149)  that  this  medium — this  ether — has  the
power  of  transmitting  motion  from  one  part  of  the  universe
to  another.  A picture  of  the  sun  may  be  said  to  be  travel-
ling through  space  with  an  inconceivable  velocity,  and,  in
fact,  continual  photographs  of  all  occurrences  are  thus  pro-
duced and  retained.  A large  portion  of  the  energy  of  the
universe  may  thus  be  said  to  be  invested  in  such  pictures.
But  we  may  go  even  further  than  luminiferous  vibrations
and  the  surfaces  of  bodies,  since  the  law  of  gravitation
assures  us  that  any  displacement  which  takes  place  in  the
very  heart  of  the  earth  will  be  felt  throughout  the  universe,
and  we  may  even  imagine  that  the  same  thing  will  hold
true  of  those  molecular  motions  (Art.  56)  which  accom-
pany thought.  For  every  thought  that  we  think  is
accompanied  by  a displacement  and  motion  of  the  particles
of  the  brain,  and  somehow — in  all  probability  by  means  of
the  medium — we  may  imagine  that  these  motions  are  pro-
pagated throughout  the  universe.  Views  of  this  nature


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


157


were  long  ago  entertained  by  Babbage,  and  they  have  since
commended  themselves  to  several  men  of  science,  and
amongst  others  to  Jevons.  ‘‘Mr.  Babbage,”  says  this  author,^
“ has  pointed  011 1^  that  if  we  had  power  to  follow  and  detect
the  minutest  effects  of  any  disturbance,  each  particle  of
existing  matter  must  be  a register  of  all  that  has  happened.”

196.  We  ourselves  believe  that  the  explanation  of  nature^s
apparent  prodigality  is  to  be  sought  for  in  such  a mode  of
viewing  things,  but  the  thought  requires  to  be  carried  even
further  than  this.  For,  after  all,  it  may  be  said.  What  is
the  use  of  this  enormous  sacrifice  of  present  energy  in  order
to  keep  up  a communication  with  the  past  ? If  this  visible
universe  were  intended  to  last  for  ever  and  to  afford  an
eternal  existence  to  intelligent  beings,  the  theory  would  be
conceivable,  for  the  opportunity  of  realising  the  past  of  the
universe  would  be  an  endless  source  of  gratification  to  such
beings.  But,  far  from  lasting  for  ever,  the  visible  universe
dies  from  the  very  efforts  which  it  constantly  puts  forward
in  this  direction.  How  then  can  it  be  said  that  this  effort
is  made  in  behalf  of  intelligent  beings  when  the  conse-
quence of  the  effort  is  the  destruction  of  life  ? We  must
evidently  go  further  than  this.

197.  Here  let  us  remind  our  readers  of  the  argument  (Art.
84)  by  which  we  were  led  to  conclude  that  the  visible  system
is  not  the  whole  universe,  but  only,  it  may  be,  a very
small  part  of  it ; and  that  there  must  be  an  invisible  order
of  things,  which  will  remain  and  possess  energy  when  the
present  system  has  passed  away.  Furthermore,  we  have
seen  that  an  argument  derived  from  the  beginning  rather
than  the  end  of  things  (Art.  85)  assures  us  that  the  invisible

^ Principles  of  Science,  vol.  ii.  p.  455.

* So-called  Ninth  Bridgewater  Treatise.


158


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


universe  existed  before  the  visible  one.  From  this  we
conclude  that  the  invisible  universe  exists  now,  and  this
conclusion  will  be  strengthened  when  (Art.  215)  we  come  to
discuss  the  nature  of  the  invisible  universe,  and  to  see  that
it  cannot  possibly  have  been  changed  into  the  present,  but
must  exist  independently  now.  It  is,  moreover,  very
closely  connected  with  the  present  system,  inasmuch  as
this  may  be  looked  upon  as  having  come  into  being
through  its  means  (Art.  215).

Thus  we  are  led  to  believe  that  there  exists  now  an
invisible  order  of  things  intimately  connected  with  the
present,  and  capable  of  acting  energetically  upon  it — for,
in  truth,  the  energy  of  the  present  system  is  to  be  looked
upon  as  originally  derived  from  the  invisible  universe.

198.  Now,  is  it  not  natural  to  imagine  that  a universe  of
this  nature,  which  we  have  reason  to  think  exists,  and  is  con-
nected  by  bonds  of  energy  with  the  visible  universe,  is  also
capalde  of  receiving  energy  from  it  ? ^Yhether  is  it  more
likely  that  by  far  the  larger  portion  of  the  high-class  energy
of  the  present  universe  is  travelling  outwards  into  space
with  an  immense  velocity,  or  that  it  is  gradually  transferred
into  an  invisible  order  of  things  1 May  we  not  regard
ether  or  the  medium  as  not  merely  a bridge  between  one
.portion  of  the  visible  universe  and  another,  but  also  as  a
bridge  between  one  order  of  things  and  another,  forming  as
it  were  a species  of  cement,  in  virtue  of  which  the  various
orders  of  the  universe  are  welded  together  and  made  into
one  ? In  fine,  what  we  generally  call  ether  may  be  not  a
mere  medium,  but  a medium  the  invisible  order  of

things,  so  that  when  the  motions  of  the  visible  universe  are
transferred  into  ether,  part  of  them  are  conveyed  as  by  a
bridge  into  the  invisible  universe,  and  are  there  made  use


>

/


THE  UNSEEN  UNI  FEES  E.  159

of  or  stored  up.  Nay,  is  it  even  necessary  to  retain  the
conception  of  a bridge  ? May  we  not  at  once  say  that
when  energy  is  carried  from  matter  into  ether  it  is  carried
from  the  visible  into  the  invisible;  and  that  when  it  is
carried  from  ether  to  matter  it  is  carried  from  the  invisible
into  the  visible  ?

199.  If  we  now  turn  to  thought,  we  find  (Art.  59)  that,
inasmuch  as  it  affects  the  substance  of  the  present  visible
universe,  it  produces  a material  organ  of  memory.  But
the  motions  which  accompany  thought  will  also  affect  the
invisible  order  of  things,  and  thus  it  follows,  that  ‘‘  Thought
conceived  to  affect  the  matter  of  another  universe  simid-
taneously  ivith  this  may  explain  a future  state’’  (see
Anagram,  Nature,  October  15,  1874).

200.  This  idea,  however,  requires  further  development  and
explanation.  Let  us  therefore  begin  by  supposing  that  we
possess  a frame,  or  the  rudiments  of  a frame,  connecting  us
with  the  invisible  universe,  which  we  may  call  the  spiritual
body.

Now  each  thought  that  we  think,  is  accompanied  by
certain  molecular  motions  and  displacements  in  the  brain,
and  part  of  these,  let  us  allow,  are  in  some  way  stored  up
in  that  organ,  so  as  to  produce  what  may  be  termed  our
material  or  physical  memory.  Other  parts  of  these  motions
are,  however,  communicated  to  the  spiritual  or  invisible
body,  and  are  there  stored  up,  forming  a memory  which
may  be  made  use  of  when  that  body  is  free  to  exercise
its  functions.

201.  Again,  one  of  the  arguments  (Art.  84)  which  proves
the  existence  of  the  invisible  universe  demands  that  it  shall
be  full  of  energy  when  the  present  universe  is  defunct.  W e
can  therefore  very  well  imagine  that  after  death,  when  the


i6o


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


spiritual  body  is  free  to  exercise  its  functions,  it  may  be
replete  with  energy,  and  have  eminently  the  power  of
action  in  the  present,  retaining  also,  as  we  have  shown
above,  a hold  upon  the  past,  inasmuch  as  the  memory  of
past  events  has  been  stored  up  in  it,  and  thus  preserving
the  two  essential  requisites  (Art.  6l)  of  a continuous  in-
telligent existence.

202.  The  conception  of  an  unseen  universe  is  not  a new
one,  even  among  men  of  science.  The  deservedly  famous
Dr.  Thomas  Young  has  the  following  passage  in  his
lectures  on  Natural  Philosophy  : — Besides  this  porosity,
there  is  still  room  for  the  supposition,  that  even  the
ultimate  particles  of  matter  may  be  permeable  to  the
causes  of  attractions  of  various  kinds,  especially  if  those
causes  are  immaterial : nor  is  there  anything  in  the  unpre-
judiced study  of  physical  philosophy  that  can  induce  us  to
doubt  the  existence  of  immaterial  substances  ; on  the  con-
trary, we  see  analogies  that  lead  us  almost  directly  to  such
an  opinion.  The  electrical  fluid  is  supposed  to  be  essentially
different  from  common  matter;  the  general  medium  of
light  and  heat,  according  to  some,  or  the  principle  of
caloric,  according  to  others,  is  equally  distinct  from  it.
We  see  forms  of  matter,  differing  in  subtility  and  mobility,
under  the  names  of  solids,  liquids,  and  gases ; above  these
are  the  semi-material  existences,  which  produce  the  pheno-
mena of  electricity  and  magnetism,  and  either  caloric  or  a
universal  ether.  Higher  still,  perhaps,  are  the  causes  of
gravitation,  and  the  immediate  agents  in  attractions  of  all
kinds,  which  exhibit  some  phenomena  apparently  still  more
remote  from  all  that  is  compatible  with  material  bodies.
And  of  these  different  orders  of  beings,  the  more  refined
and  immaterial  appear  to  pervade  freely  the  grosser.  It


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


i6i


seems  therefore  natural  to  believe  that  the  analogy  may  be
continued  still  further,  until  it  rises  into  existences  abso-
lutely immaterial  and  spiritual.  . We  know  not  but  that
thousands  of  spiritual  worlds  may  exist  unseen  for  ever  by
human  eyes ; nor  have  we  any  reason  to  suppose  that  even
the  presence  of  matter,  in  a given  spot,  necessarily  excludes
these  existences  from  it.  Those  who  maintain  that  nature
always  teems  with  life,  wherever  living  beings  can  be  placed,
may  therefore  speculate  with  freedom  on  the  possibility  of
independent  worlds ; some  existing  in  different  parts  of
space,  others  pervading  each  other  unseen  and  unknown,  in
the  same  space,  and  others  again  to  which  space  may  not  be
a necessary  mode  of  existence."'

203.  The  only  remark  that  we  would  make  upon  this  most
beautiful  and  comprehensive  passage,  with  the  spirit  of
which  we  entirely  agree,  is,  that  the  author  does  not  use
the  words  material  and  immaterial  precisely  in  our  sense
of  these  terms.  He  is  inclined  to  imagine  the  possibility
of  an  immaterial  existence  being  yet  trammelled  with  re-
gard to  space  ; whereas  to  our  mind  such  trammels  (Art.
54)  necessarily  constitute  matter.  If  we  substitute  for
matter  the  words  gross  matter,  and  for  immaterial  the
words  not  grossly  material,  we  shall  be  very  nearly  at
one.

204.  It  may  now  be  desirable  to  reply  by  anticipation  to
certain  objections  which  are  likely  to  be  made  to  the  theory
we  have  proposed.  Let  us  divide  these  into  three  cate-
gories— religious,  theological,  and  scientific.

Objection  First  (Religious). — It  may  be  said  to  us,  “ Who
are  you  who  are  wise  beyond  what  is  written  ? Are  ye
of  them  to  whom  it  was  said  of  old,  ‘ Eritis  sicut  Deus
scientes  bonum  et  malum"  ? Beware  of  the  words  of  the

L


i62


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles : — ^daKovre^;  elvai  aocpol,

€fi(i)pdv6r](Tav”

Reply. — As  we  have  already  said  (Art.  50),  we  do  not
write  for  those  who  are  so  assured  of  the  truth  of  their
religion  that  they  are  unable  to  entertain  the  smallest
objection  to  it.  We  write  for  honest  inquirers — for  honest
doubters,  it  may  be,  who  desire  to  know  what  science,  when
allowed  perfect  liberty  of  thought  and  loyally  followed,  has
to  say  upon  those  points  which  so  much  concern  us  all.
We  are  content  to  view  the  universe  from  the  physical
standpoint;  you  may  therefore  perchance  esteem  us  of  the
earth  earthy  ; nevertheless  we  think  that  our  strength  lies
in  keeping  up  a communication  with  those  verities  which
we  all  acknowledge.

205.  Objection  Second  [Theological). — Your  idea  of  the
spiritual  universe  is  analogous  to  that  of  Swedenborg,  and
we  must  therefore  dismiss  it  as  untrue,  inasmuch  as  we  can
only  recognise  the  assumption  of  the  spiritual  body  after
the  resurrection.

Reply. — All  that  we  have  done  is  to  remove  the  scientific
objection  to  a future  state,  supposed  to  be  furnished  by  the
principle  of  Continuity.  We  know  nothing  about  the  laws
of  this  state,  and  conceive  it  quite  possible,  if  otherwise
likely,  that  the  spiritual  body  may  remain  veiled  or  in
abeyance  until  the  resurrection.  We  only  maintain  that
we  are  logically  constrained  to  admit  the  existence  of  some
frame  or  organ  not  of  this  earth,  which  survives  dissolution
— if  we  regard  the  principle  of  continuity  and  the  doctrine
of  immortality  as  both  true.

206.  Objection  Third  [Theological). — Your  argument  will
apply  to  the  brute  creation  as  well  as  to  man ; now  we  can-
not recognise  the  immortality  of  the  brutes.


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


163


Reply. — As  before  stated,  we  know  nothing  about  the
laws  of  the  invisible  universe,  except  that  it  is  related  by
bonds,  probably  of  energy,  to  the  present.  All  we  have
attempted  has  been  to  remove  an  objection  to  the  doctrine
of  immortality  which  has  been  wrongly  put  forth  as  scien-
tific, or  at  least  as  consistent  with  scientific  knowledge.

207.  Objection  Fourth  {Scientific). — If  there  be,  as  you
say,  this  duality  in  the  present  human  frame,  how  can  the
spiritual  part  remain  latent  so  long  as  it  does  ? Even  if
trammelled  by  the  grosser  substance,  we  might  expect  that
at  least  on  rare  occasions  it  should  somehow  manifest  itself.

Reply. — As  a matter  of  fact  we  know  that  ordinary  con-
sciousness can  remain  latent  or  inactive  for  hours,  if  not  for
days,  and  then  return  to  us  again.  There  would  be  force
in  this  objection  if  it  were  not  true  that  consciousness  is
capable  of  entering  into  the  dormant  or  quiescent  state.

Again,  it  is  possible  that  there  have  been  and  that  there
are  occasional  manifestations  of  this  spiritual  nature.

For,  in  the  Christian  records  visible  manifestations  of
the  spiritual  element,  even  in  this  life,  are  asserted  to
have  taken  place  on  rare  occasions.  But  if  you  have
dismissed  these  manifestations  as  inconceivable,  you  cannot
now  bring  their  absence  forward  as  an  objection.

208.  Objection  Fifth  {Scientific). — Your  doctrine  of  immor-
tality does  violence  to  that  great  principle,  the  conservation
of  energy.  For  it  is  manifest  that  if  energy  is  transferred
from  the  visible  into  the  invisible  universe,  its  constancy  in
the  present  universe  can  no  longer  be  maintained.

Reply. — In  reply  to  this  objection  we  assert  the  conser-
vation of  energy  as  a principle  applicable  to  the  whole
universe,  and  not  to  one  portion  of  it,  except  under  special
limitations.  It  is  only  by  assuming  the  continual  passage


i64


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


tlirongli  ether  of  a large  portion  of  the  energy  of  the  visible
universe  tliat  the  doctrine  as  at  present  held  can  be  main-
tained Now  the  only  addition  that  our  theory  demands
is  the  gradual  absorption  of  some  part  at  least  of  this  energy
into  the  invisible  universe  ; and  we  have  said  (Art.  147)  that
it  has  been  supposed  that  there  is  evidence  of  an  absorption
of  this  nature.  It  may  safely  be  said  that  our  hypothesis
is  not  upset,  and  never  can  be  upset,  by  any  experimental
conclusion  with  regard  to  energy.

209.  Objection  Sixth  (Scientific). — We  cannot  understand
how  individuality  is  to  be  preserved  in  the  spiritual  world.

Rei:)ly. — This  is  no  new  difficulty.  We  are  as  much
puzzled  by  what  takes  place  in  our  present  body  as  we  can
be  with  respect  to  the  spiritual.  Thus,  let  us  allow  that
impressions  are  stored  up  in  our  brains,  which  thus  form  an
organ  connecting  us  with  the  past  of  the  visible  universe.
Now  thousands,  perhaps  even  millions,  of  such  impressions
pass  into  the  same  organ,  and  yet,  by  the  operation  of  our
will,  we  can  concentrate  our  recollection  upon  a certain
event,  and  rummage  out  its  details,  along  with  all  its  col-
lateral circumstances,  to  the  exclusion  of  everything  else.
But  if  the  brain  or  something  else  plays  such  a wonderful
part  in  the  present  economy,  is  it  impossible  to  imagine
that’  the  universe  of  the  future  may  have  even  greater
individualising  powers  ? Is  it  not  very  hazardous  to  assert
this  or  that  mode  of  existence  to  be  impossible  in  such  a
wonderful  whole  as  we  feel  sure  the  universe  must  be  ?

210.  Objection  Seventh  (Scientific). — Even  if  it  be  allowed
that  the  invisible  universe  receives  energy  from  the  present,
so  that  the  conservation  of  energy  holds  true  as  a principle,
yet  the  dissipation  of  energy  must  hold  true  also,  and
although  the  process  of  decay  may  be  delayed  by  the


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


165

storing  up  of  energy  in  the  invisible  universe,  it  cannot  be
permanently  arrested.  Ultimately  we  must  believe  that
every  part  of  the  whole  universe  will  be  equally  supplied
with  energy,  and  in  consequence  all  abrupt  living  motion
will  come  to  an  end.

Reply. — Perhaps  the  best  reply  to  this  objection  is,  to
regard  the  universe  as  an  infinite  whole — a thought  which
will  be  developed  in  what  follows  of  this  book.  For
it  is  clear  that  if  the  universe  be  infinite,  and  contain
within  itself  an  infinite  supply  of  energy,  we  may  imagine
it  to  go  on  from  eternity  to  eternity  without  the*  possi-
bility of  becoming  efiete.  Besides,  what  is  to  prove  dissi-
pation in  the  universe  of  the  future  1 We  have  seen  (Art.
112)  how  Clerk-Maxweirs  demons  (though  essentially  finite
intelligences)  could  be  made  to  restore  energy  in  the  pre-
sent universe  without  spending  work.  Much  more  may  be
expected  in  a universe  free  from  gross  matter.

211.  Having  replied  to  these  objections,  let  us  now  en-
deavour to  realise  our  present  position.  It  is  briefly  as
follows  : — What  we  have  done  is  to  show  that  immortality
is  possible,  and  to  demolish  any  so-called  scientific  objection
that  might  be  raised  against  it.  The  evidence  in  favour
of  the  doctrine  is  not  derived  from  us.  It  comes  to  us
from  two  sources  : in  the  first  place,  from  the  statements
made  concerning  Christ ; and,  in  the  second  place,  from
that  intense  longiug  for  immortality  which  civilised  man
has  invariably  possessed.  The  case  stands  thus  : certain
evidence  from  these  two  sources  in  favour  of  our  doctrine
has  been  adduced,  but  scientific  objections  have  been
raised  against  the  possibility  of  the  doctrine  itself,  and
these  we  have  attempted  to  overcome.  But  while  we  may
suppose  the  objections  to  the  doctrine  itself  surmounted,


i66


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


there  yet  remains  an  equally  strong  scientific  objection  to
that  portion  of  the  evidence  in  favour  of  the  doctrine  which
is  derived  from  the  Christian  records.  Granting,  it  may  be
said  to  us,  that  immortality  is  possible,  what  reason  have
V e,  beyond  certain  vague  yearnings,  for  believing  it  likely  ?
No  doubt,  if  Christ  rose  from  the  dead,  the  probability  in
favoui'  of  it  Avould  be  very  strong ; but  we  have  an  objec-
tion to  the  resurrection  of  Christ  no  less  formidable  than
that  which  you  have  overcome  vdth  regard  to  the  doctrine
itself.

212.  It  will  now  be  our  duty  to  examine  the  validity  of
this  objection,  and  in  so  doing  we  must  approach  the  pro-
blem of  the  universe  not  from  the  side  of  the  future  but
from  that  of  the  past.

We  have  already  (Art.  85)  defined  the  principle  of  Con-
tinuity, in  virtue  of  which  we  believe  ourselves  entitled  to
discuss  every  event  that  occurs  in  the  universe,  without  one
single  exception,  and  to  deduce  from  it,  if  we  can,  the  com
dition  of  things  that  preceded  the  event — this  being  also
in  the  universe.  Now,  we  learn  by  means  of  that  great
physical  principle,  the  dissipation  of  energy,  that  the  visible
universe  cannot  have  lasted  for  ever,  but  must  have  made
its  appearance  in  time ; and  applying  to  this  stupendous
event,  not  irreverently,  but  in  hoj)eful  trust,  the  principle
of  Continuity,  we  ask  ourselves  the  question.  What  state  of
things,  also  in  the  universe,  what  conceivable  antecedent
can  have  given  rise  to  this  unparalleled  phenomenon — an
antecedent,  we  need  hardly  say,  that  must  have  operated
from  the  invisible  universe  1 It  is  a great  and  awful  pheno-
menon, but  we  must  not  shrink  before  size  ; we  must  not
be  terrified  by  the  magnitude  of  the  event  out  of  reliance
upon  our  principles  of  discussion.


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


167


Now,  if  we  regard  the  appearance  of  the  visible  universe
and  approach  it  as  we  would  any  other  phenomenon,  we  have
only  two  alternatives  before  us.  Creation  is  not  one  of  these,
inasmuch  as  we  are  carried  by  such  an  act  out  of  the  universe
altogether.  We  are,  therefore,  driven  to  look  to  some  kind
of  development  as  the  cause  of  the  appearance  of  the  visible
universe.  This  development  may  eith(?r  have  been  through
the  living  or  through  the  dead  ; either  it  was  the  result  of
a natural  operation  of  the  invisible  universe,  or  it  was
brought  about  by  means  of  intelligence  residing  in  that
universe  and  working  through  its  laws.  To  determine
which  of  these  two  alternatives  is  most  admissible,  we  must
bear  in  mind  the  nature  of  the  production,  and  argue  about
it  just  as  we  should  argue  about  anything  else.

213.  Now,  this  production  was,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  a
sporadic  or  abrupt  act,  and  the  substance  produced,  that  is
to  say  the  atoms  which  form  the  material  substratum  of  the
present  universe  bear  (as  Herschel  and  Clerk-Maxwell  have
well  said)  from  their  uniformity  of  constitution  all  the
marks  of  being  manufactured  articles.

Whether  we  regard  the  various  elementary  atoms  as
separate  productions,  or  (according  to  Front  and  Lockyer)
view  them  as  produced  by  the  coming  together  of  some
smaller  kind  of  primordial  atom — in  either  case,  and  even
specially  so  in  the  latter  case,  we  think  that  they  look  like
manufactured  articles.  Indeed,  we  have  already  shown  (Art.
164)  that  development  without  life,  that  is  to  say,  dead
development,  does  not  tend  to  produce  uniformity  of  struc-
ture in  the  products  which  it  gives  rise  to.

214.  Thus  the  argument  is  in  favour  of  the  production
of  the  visible  universe  by  means  of  an  intelligent  agency
residing  in  the  invisible  universe.


i68


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


But  again  let  us  realise  the  position  in  which  we  are
placed  by  the  principle  of  Continuity — we  are  led  by
it  not  only  to  regard  the  invisible  universe  as  having
existed  before  the  present  one,  but  the  same  principle
drives  us  to  acknowledge  its  existence  in  some  form
as  a universe  from  all  eternity.  Now  we  can  readily
conceive  a universe  containing  conditioned  intelligent
beings  to  have  existed  before  the  present ; nay,  to  have
existed  for  a time  greater  than  any  assignable  time,  which
is  the  only  way  in  which  our  thoughts  can  approach  the
eternal.  But  is  it  equally  easy  to  conceive  a dead  universe
to  have  existed  in  the  same  way  during  immeasurable
ages  ? Is  a dead  universe  a fully  conditioned  universe  ?
For,  regarding  the  laws  of  the  universe  as  those  laws
according  to  which  the  intelligences  of  the  universe  are  con-
ditioned by  the  Governor  thereof,  can  we  conceive  a dead
universe  to  exist  permanently  without  some  being  to  be
conditioned  ? Is  not  this  something  without  meaning,  ah
unreality — a make-believe  ? And  if  it  be  said  that  under
these  circumstances  the  conception  in  any  form  of  immeasur  -
able ages  of  time  is  unreal,  we  may  reply  by  granting  it,
and  asserting  that  in  such  a case  we  are  driven  not  merely
from  the  fully  conditioned  to  the  partially  conditioned,  but
even  to  the  unconditioned  ; in  other  words,  the  hypothesis
of  a permanently  dead  universe  would  hardly  appear  to
satisfy  the  principle  of  Continuity,  which  prefers  to  proceed
from  one  form  of  the  fully  conditioned  to  another.

215.  For  the  benefit  of  our  readers  we  shall  now  endea-
vour to  review  as  clearly  as  we  can  the  point  at  which  we
have  arrived,  and  the  steps  which  have  brought  us  to  it.

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  our  definition  (Art.  54)  we
agreed  to  look  upon  the  Creator — the  Absolute  One,  as


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE,


169


conditioning  the  universe,  confining  the  term  universe
to  that  which  is  conditioned.  Thus  we  conceive  a stone
to  be  in  the  universe,  we  conceive  a man  to  be  in  the
universe,  and  to  work  in  it,  but  we  conceive  Absolute
Deity  to  be  above  the  universe  rather  than  to  work  in
it  in  any  way  analogous  to  that  in  which  a man  works  in
it.  Would  there  not  be  a confusion  of  thought  if  we  re-
garded the  same  Person  as  conditioning  and  yet  conditioned  1
Now,  what  the  principle  of  Continuity  demands  is  an  end-
less development  of  the  conditioned*  We  claim  it  as  the
heritage  of  intelligence  that  there  shall  be  an  endless  vista,
reaching  from  eternity  to*eternity,  in  each  link  oP  which  we
shall  be  led  only  from  one  form  of  the  conditioned  to
another,  never  from  the  conditioned  to  the  unconditioned
or  absolute,  which  would  be  to  us  no  better  than  an  im-
penetrable intellectual  barrier.  It  has  also  been  seen  that
in  this  endless  chain  of  conditioned  existence  we  cannot  be
satisfied  with  a make-believe  universe,  or  one  consisting
only  of  dead  matter,  but  prefer  a living  intelligent  universe,
in  other  words,  one  fully  conditioned.  Finally,  our  argu-
ment has  led  us  to  regard  the  production  of  the  visible
universe  as  brought  about  by  an  intelligent  agency  residing
in  the  unseen.

216.  We  have  arrived  at  this  result  from  general  principles,
and  without  any  definite  theory  as  to  the  modus  O'perandi  of
the  intelligent  developing  agency  which  resides  in  the  unseen
universe.  When  we  keep  to  well-ascertained  principles  we
are  on  solid  ground,  but  when  we  speculate  on  the  method
by  which  the  development  is  accomplished  we  enter  a very
different  region,  where  the  chances  are  greatly  against  our
particular  hypothesis  representing  the  truth.  Nevertheless,
for  the  sake  of  bringing  our  ideas  in  a concrete  form  before


170


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


the  reader,  and  for  this  purpose  only,  we  will  now  adopt  a
definite  hypothesis.  Let  us  begin  by  supposing  an  intelli-
gent agent  in  the  present  visible  universe, — that  is  to  say  a
man — to  be  developing  vortex  rings — smoke-rings,  let  us
imagine.  Now,  these  smoke-rings  are  found  to  act  upon
one  another,  just  as  if  they  were  things  or  existences;
nevertheless  their  existence  is  ephemeral,  they  only  last  a few
seconds.  But  we  may  imagine  them  to  constitute  the  grossest
possible  form  of  material  existence.  Now,  each  smoke-
ring has  in  it  a multitude  of  smaller  particles  of  air  and
smoke,  each  of  these  particles  being  the  molecules  of  which
the  present  visible  universe  is  composed.  These  molecules
are  of  a vastly  more  refined  and  delicate  organisation  than
the  large  smoke-ring;  they  have  lasted  many  millions  of
years,  and  will  perhaps  last  many  millions  more.  Never-
theless, let  us  imagine  that  they  had  a beginning,  and  that
they  will  also  come  to  an  end  similar  to  that  of  the  smoke-
ring. In  fact,  just  as  the  smoke-ring  was  developed  out  of
ordinary  molecules,  so  we  may  imagine  ordinary  molecules
to  be  developed  as  vortex  rings  out  of  something  much
finer  and  more  subtle  than  themselves,  which  we  have
agreed  to  call  the  invisible  universe.  But  we  may  pursue
the  same  train  of  thought  still  further  back,  and  imagine
the  entities  which  constitute  the  invisible  universe  immedi-
ately preceding  ours  to  be  in  themselves  ephemeral,  although
not  nearly  to  the  same  extent  as  the  atoms  of  our  universe,
and  to  have  been  formed  in  their  turn  as  vortex  rings  out
of  some  still  subtler  and  more  enduring  substance.  In  fine,
there  is  no  end  to  such  a process,  but  we  are  led  on  from
rank  to  rank  of  the  order  imagined  by  Dr.  Thomas  Young,
or  by  Professor  Jevons,  when  he  says,  “ That  the  smallest
particle  of  solid  substance  may  consist  of  a vast  number


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


171

of  systems  united  in  regular  order,  each  bounded  by  the
other,  communicating  with  it  in  some  manner  yet  wholly
incomprehensible/'  Our  meaning  will  be  made  clear  by  the
following  diagram.

Here  (O)  denotes  the  evanescent  smoke-ring,  (l)  the
visible  universe,  (2)  the  invisible  universe  immediately  an-
terior to  the  present,  (3)  that  of  the  next  order,  and  so  on.

Again,  (O)  is  developed  out  of  (l) ; (l)  is  developed  out
of  (2)  ; (2)  out  of  (3) ; (3)  out  of  (4),  and  so  on.  Further,


(1)  both  precedes  and  follows  (O)  in  point  of  duration,
while  (2)'  bears  a similar  relation  to  (l),  (3)  to  (2),  and
so  on.

Again,  the  material  substance  of  (O)  is  a phenomenon  of
that  of  (1),  that  of  (l)  a phenomenon  of  that  of  (2),  and  so
on.  Go  back  as  far  as  we  choose,  we  are  only  led  from  one
phenomenon  to  another ; so  that,  as  far  as  their  essential
nature  is  concerned,  all  are  equally  phenomenal,  and  the
mind  cannot  repose  in  any  order  as  its  ultimate  haven


172


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


of  thought,  but  is  driven  inexorably  forward  to  look  for
something  different.

We  see  too,  that,  as  far  as  energy  is  concerned,  that  of
(l)  is  greater  than  that  of  (O),  inasmuch  as  (l)  develops
(O),  that  of  (5)  greater  than  that  of  (l),  inasmuch  as  (2)
develops  (l),  and  so  on.  Therefore,  if  we  go  infinitely  far
back,  we  shall  be  led  to  a universe  possessing  infinite
energy,  and  of  which  the  intelligent  developing  agency  pos-
sesses infinite  energy.

It  will  also  be  seen  that,  inasmuch  as  aU  these  various
orders  exist  together  at  the  present  moment,  the  energy  of
their  sum  must  be  infinite,  and  this  energy  will  never  come
to  an  end.  In  other  words,  the  Great  Whole  is  infinite  in
energy,  and  will  last  from  eternity  to  eternity.

217.  Now,  what  means  this  mysterious,  infinitely  ener-
getic, intelligent  developing  agency  residing  in  the  universe,
and  therefore  in  some  sense  conditioned  ? In  endeavouring
to  reply  to  this  question,  we  cannot  do  better  than  consult
the  Christian  records.

These  records,  as  they  are  interpreted  by  the  majority  of
the  disciples  of  Christ,  are  believed  to  lead  to  a conception
of  the  Godhead,  in  which  there  is  a plurality  of  persons  but
a unity  of  substance.  It  ought,  however,  to  be  remembered
that  here  the  word  person  does  not  mean  the  same  thing
as  it  does  when  applied  to  ourselves,  but  only  denotes
some  distinction  that  may  be  regarded  as  best  expressed
by  this  word.  Our  idea  of  person  or  individual  is  derived
solely  from  our  experience  in  that  position  which  we  occupy
in  the  universe.

218.  The  first  Person  in  this  Trinity,  God  the  Father,  is
represented  as  the  unapproachable  Creator — the  Being  in
virtue  of  whom  all  things  exist.


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


173


Thus  it  is  said  (John  i.  18),  “No  man  hath  seen  God  at
any  time ; the  only  begotten  Son  which  is  in  the  bosom  of
the  Father,  he  hath  declared  him.”

Again,  Paul  tells  us  (Eom.  xi.  36),  “For  of  him  and
through  him  and  to  him  are  all  things.”  Also  (l  Cor.  viii.
6),  “But  to  us  there  is  but  one  God,  the  Father,  of  whom
are  all  things,  and  we  to  him  (et?  avrov) ; and  one  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  by  him.”

Also  (Eph.  iv.  6),  “ One  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  is
above  all,  and  through  all,  and  in  all.”  Also  (l  Timothy
vi.  16),  “AVho  only  hath  immortality,  dwelling  in  the
light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto  ; whom  no  man
hath  seen,  nor  can  see.”  .

219.  Again,  of  the  second  Person  of  the  Trinity  we  are
told,  in  addition  to  what  we  gather  from  the  expressions  just
quoted  (John  i.  l),  “In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and
the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God.  The
same  was  in  the  beo^inninof  with  God.  All  things  were
made  by  him,  and  without  him  was  not  any  thing  made
that  was  made.”

Again  (2  Cor.  v.  10)  : “For  we  must  all  appear  before
the  judgment- seat  of  Christ.”

Again  (Col.  i.  15)  : “Who  is  the  image  of  the  invisible
God,  the  first-born  of  every  creature  : for  in  him  were  all
things  created  that  are  in  heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth,
visible  and  invisible,  whether  they  be  thrones,  or  dominions,
or  principalities,  or  powers.”

Again  (Heb.  i.  l)  : “ God,  who  at  sundry  times,  and  in
divers  manners,  spoke  in  time  past  unto  the  fathers  by  the
prophets,  hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by  his  Son,
whom  he  hath  appointed  heir  of  all  things,  by  whom  also
he  made  the  worlds.”


174


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


220.  It  is,  we  believe,  a prevalent  idea  among  theologians
that  these  passages  indicate,  in  the  first  place,  the  existence
of  an  unapproachable  Creator — the  unconditioned  One  who
is  spoken  of  as  God  the  Father  ; and  that  they  also  indicate
the  existence  of  another  Being  of  the  same  substance  as  the
Father,  but  different  in  person,  and  who  has  agreed  to
develop  the  will  of  the  Father,  and  thus  in  some  mysterious
sense  to  submit  to  conditions  and  to  enter  into  the  uni-
verse. The  relation  of  this  Being  to  the  Father  is  expressed
in  Hebrews^  in  the  words  of  the  Psalmist,  ‘‘  Then  said
I,  Lo,  I come : in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written
of  me,  I delight  to  do  thy  will,  0 my  God  : yea,  thy
law  is  within  my  heart.”  In  fine,  such  a Being  would
represent  that  conditioned,  yet  infinitely  powerful  de-
veloping agent,  which  the  universe,  objectively  considered,
appears  to  lead  up  to.  His  work  is  twofold,  for,  in
the  first  place,  he  develops  the  various  universes  or
orders  of  being ; and  secondly,  in  some  mysterious
way  He  becomes  Himself  the  type  and  pattern  of  each
order,  the  representative  of  Deity,  as  far  as  the  beings  of
that  order  can  comprehend,  especially  manifesting  such
divine  qualities  as  could  not  otherwise  be  brought  to
light.

Such  a being  is  therefore,  in  virtue  of  His  office,  the  Bang
of  angels  and  ruler  of  the  invisible  universe,  and  to  him  the
words  in  the  poem  of  Job  are  supposed  to  apply  (Job  i.  6)  :
‘‘Now  there  was  a day  when  the  Sons  of  God  came  to
present  themselves  before  the  Lord,  and  Satan  came  also
among  them.”

221.  It  would  thus  appear  that  what  may  be  termed  the
Christian  theory  of  development  has  a twofold  aspect,  a de-

1 Heb.  X.  7.


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


I7S

scent  and  an  ascent ; the  descent  of  the  Son  of  God  through
the  various  grades  of  existence,  and  the  consequent  ascent  of
the  intelligences  of  each  led  up  by  him  to  a higher  level, —
a stooping  on  the  part  of  the  developing  Being,  in  order
that  there  may  be  a mounting  up  on  the  part  of  the  de-
veloped. Thus  it  is  said  (John  iii.  16),  ‘‘And  no  man
hath  ascended  up  to  heaven,  but  he  that  came  down  from
heaven,  even  the  Son  of  man  which  is  in  heaven.’’  Again
(Eph.  iv.  9)  : “ Now  that  he  ascended,  what  is  it  but  that
he  also  descended  first  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  ?
He  that  descended  is  the  same  also  that  ascended  up  far
above  all  heavens,  that  he  might  fill  all  things.”

222.  It  is  naturally  in  accordance  with  these  views  that
the  Angelic  Host  should  be  represented  as  taking  an  intelli-
gent interest,  even  if  they  did  not,  as  the  Gnostics  thought,
take  an  active  part,  in  the  creation  of  the  visible  universe.
Thus  the  Lord  is  represented  as  asking  J ob  (J ob  xxxviii.  4),
“ Where  wast  thou  when  I laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth  ?
declare,  if  thou  hast  understanding.  Who  hath  laid  the
measures  thereof,  if  thou  knowest  ? or  who  hath  stretched
the  line  upon  it  ? Whereupon  are  the  foundations  thereof
fastened  ? or  who  laid  the  corner-stone  thereof,  when  the
morning-stars  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God
shouted  for  joy.”

223.  It  is  also  in  accordance  with  these  views  that  the  same
hierarchy  should  take  an  intelligent  interest  in  the  life  of
Christ.  Thus  we  read  (Luke  ii.  13),  “And  suddenly  there
was  with  the  angel  a multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  prais-
ing God,  and  saying.  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on
earth  peace,  good-will  toward  men.”  And  again  (l  Timothy
iii.  16)  : “And  without  controversy  great  is  the  mystery
of  godliness  : God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh,  justified  in


176


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


tlie  Spirit,  seen  of  angels,  preached  unto  the  Gentiles,
believed  on  in  the  world,  received  up  into  glory/'

224.  It  will  be  remarked  that  the  views  which  we  have  now
put  before  our  readers  have  been  developed  more  especially
from  the  objective  point  of  view,  and  that  our  reasoning
has  been  founded  on  the  principle  of  Continuity  as  applied
to  the  outward  universe.  In  truth  we  seem  to  get  a much
firmer  and  more  tangible  hold  on  the  objective  element  of
the  universe,  that  is  to  say,  on  energy  (Art.  103),  than  we
can  on  intelligence  and  life.  For  if  we  approach  our  indivi-
dual consciousness  it  is  very  manifest  that  we  have  no  well-
founded  principle  wherewith  to  guide  our  speculations  similar
to  the  principle  of  Continuity ; for  this,  if  we  had  it,  would
at  once  inform  us  whether  the  doctrine  of  immortality  was
true  or  false.

We  know  very  well  that  the  universe  will  remain  after
we  are  laid  in  the  grave,  but  some  of  us  are  not  equally
certain  whether  we  ourselves  shall  then  continue  to  exist.

Thus  there  appears  to  be  a difficulty  which  we  see  at
present  no  means  of  surmounting  in  dealing  with  individual
consciousness.  But  while  the  continuance  of  individual
life  is  enveloped  in  mystery,  it  is  believed  that  we  have
obtained  hold  of  a general  principle  regarding  the  distribu-
tion of  life  not  greatly  inferior  in  breadth  and  generality  to
the  law  of  Continuity.  We  mean  the  principle  that  life
proceeds  from  life,  or  to  speak  more  accurately,  that  a con-
ditioned living  thing  proceeds  only  from  a conditioned
living  thing.  That  dead  matter  cannot  produce  a living
organism  is  the  universal  experience  of  the  most  eminent
physiologists.  In  ’ fact,  the  law  of  Biogenesis  is  justly
regarded  by  Professor  Huxley  and  others  as  the  great  prin-
ciple underlying-  all  the  phenomena  of  organised  existence.


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


177


Professor  Eoscoe,  again,  approaching  the  subject  from  the
chemical  point  of  view,  says,  speaking  of  red  blood  corpuscles,
‘‘We  have  not  been  able,  and  the  evidence  at  present  rather
goes  to  show  that  there  is  not  much  hope  of  our  being  able,
to  construct  these  granules  artificially ; and  the  question  is  in
this  position,  that  so  far  as  science  has  progressed  at  present
we  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  any  organism  without  the
intervention  of  some  sort  of  previously  existing  germ.”

225.  If  we  assume  the  truth  of  this  principle  it  appears  to
lead  us  directly  to  infer  that  life  is  not  merely  a species  of
energy,  or  a phenomenon  of  matter.  For  we  have  seen  (Art.
103)  that  the  great  characteristic  of  all  energy  is  its  trans-
mutability— its  Protean  power  of  passing  from  one  form
to  another.  We  may  no  doubt  produce  large  quantities  of
electricity  by  means  of  an  electric  nucleus,  but  we  can  do
the  same  without  any  such  nucleus — we  may  produce  fire
from  a spark,  but  we  can  obtain  it  without  a spark.

Life,  however,  can  only  be  produced  from  life,  and  this
law  would  seem  to  be  an  indication  that  the  solution  of  the
mystery  is  not  to  be  found  by  making  life  merely  a species
of  energy.  It  is  some  time  since  we  gave  up  the  idea  that
life  could  generate  energy ; it  now  seems  that  we  must  give
up  the  idea  that  energy  can  generate  life.

226.  In  the  preceding  chapters  we  have  given  our  readers
a sketch  of  the  method  according  to  which  men  of  science
imagine  that  evolution  has  been  carried  out  both  in  the
universe  of  energy  and  in  that  of  life.  In  both  worlds  the
principle  of  Continuity  demands  that  in  endeavouring  to
account  for  the  origin  of  phenomena  we  do  not  resort  to  the
hypothesis  of  separate  creations,  that  we  do  not  pass  over
from  the  conditioned  to  the  unconditioned ; and  Darwin,
W^allace,  and  their  followers  have,  as  we  have  shown,  en-

M


178


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


deavoiired  to  prove  that  processes  at  present  pursued  by
nature  are  sufficient  in  a great  measure,  if  not  entirely,  to
account  for  the  present  development  of  organised  existence
without  the  necessity  of  resorting  to  separate  creations.
Darwin  especially  imagines  that  all  the  present  organisms,
including  man,  may  have  been  derived  by  the  process  of
natural  selection  from  a single  primordial  germ.  When,
however,  the  backward  process  has  reached  this  germ,  an
insuperable  difficulty  presents  itself.  How  was  this  germ
produced  % All  experience  tells  us  that  life  can  only  be  pro-
duced from  a living  antecedent ; now  what  was  the  antece-
dent of  this  germ  ? Hypotheses  have  no  doubt  been  started,
but  we  cannot  regard  them  in  any  other  light  than  as  an
acknowledgment  of  a difficulty  that  cannot  be  overcome.
We  appear  to  have  reached  an  impenetrable  barrier  similar
to  that  which  stood  in  our  way  when  we  contemplated  the
production  of  the  visible  universe.  And  we  must  likewise
assert  for  ourselves  with  becoming  reverence  a similar  free-
dom of  action  in  dealing  with  this  second  barrier.  There-
fore, if  life  be  one  of  the  things  of  the  universe,  if  a creation
of  life  in  time  be  intidmissible,  and  if  it  be  contrary  to  all
experience  to  suppose  the  production  of  life  without  an
antecedent  possessing  life,  we  are  entitled  to  make  use  of
this  conclusion  derived  from  experience  even  in  such  a case
as  the  present,  and  contemplate  an  antecedent  possessing  life
and  giving  life  to  this  primordial  germ, — an  antecedent  in
the  universe,  not  out  of  it, — conditioned,  not  unconditioned.
Now,  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  conclusion  ? In  the
first  place,  it  does  not  mean  that  the  antecedent  to  the
primordial  germ  must  be  a like  germ,  for  we  know  from
experience  that  while  life  is  always  produced  from  life,  like
is  not  always  produced  from  like.  In  this  case  more  especi-


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


179


ally  the  living  antecedent  must  be  in  the  invisible  universe,
and  therefore  very  different  from  the  germ.

227.  If  we  now  turn  once  more  to  the  Christian  system,  we
shall  find  that  it  recognises  such  an  antecedent  as  an  agent
in  the  universe.  He  is  styled  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  Life.
The  third  Person  of  the  Trinity  is  regarded  in  this  system
as  working  in  the  universe,  and  therefore  in  some  sense  as
conditioned,  and  as  distributing  and  developing  this  prin-
ciple of  life,  which  we  are  forced  to  regard  as  one  of  the
things  of  the  universe,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  second
Person  of  the  Trinity  is  regarded  as  developing  that  other
phenomenon,  the  energy  of  the  universe..  The  one  has
entered  from  everlasting  into  the  universe,  in  order  to
develop  its  objective  element,  energy  ; the  other  has  also
entered  from  everlasting  into  the  universe,  in  order  to
develop  its  subjective  element,  life.

Thus  we  read  (Gen.  i.  2),  ‘‘And  the  earth  was  without
form  and  void  ; and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the
deep  : and  the  spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the
waters  implying,  we  may  imagine,  a peculiar  operation
of  this  Spirit  preceding  the  advent  of  life  into  the  world.
Agam,  when  in  the  fulness  of  time  Christ,  the  developing
agent,  made  his  appearance  here,  and  submitted  to  the
trammels  of  a human  nature,  this  appearance  was  preceded
by  an  operation  of  the  same  Spirit.

228.  It  may  here  be  desirable  to  discuss  somewhat  fully
the  position  of  life  in  the  universe.

If  then  the  matter  of  this  present  visible  universe  be  not
capable  of  itself,  that  is  to  say,  in  virtue  of  the  forces  and
qualities  with  which  it  has  been  endowed,  of  generating
life ; but  if  we  must  look  to  the  unseen  universe  for  the
origin  of  life,  this  would  appear  to  imply  that  the  peculiar


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


I So

collocation  of  matter  which  accompanies  the  operations  of
life  is  not  a mere  grouping  of  particles  of  the  visible  universe,
but  implies  likewise  some  peculiarity  in  the  connection  of
these  with  the  unseen  universe.  May  it  not  denote  in  fact
some  peculiarity  of  structure  extending  to  the  unseen  ?

In  fine,  to  go  a step  further,  may  not  life  denote  a pecu-
liarity of  structure  which  is  handed  over  not  merely  from
one  stage  to  another — from  the  invisible  to  the  visible —
but  which  rises  upward  from  the  very  lowest  structural
depths  of  the  material  of  the  universe,  looking  upon  this
material  as  possessed  of  an  infinitely  complex  structure
such  as  we  have  pictured  to  our  readers  in  a previous
part  of  this  chapter  (Art.  216).

If  we  suppose  any  such  peculiarity  to  accompany  life  we
shall  at  once  see  the  impossibility  of  its  originating  in  the
visible  universe  alone.

229.  Again,  it  is  well  known  to  many  of  our  readers  that
discussions  have  frequently  arisen  regarding  the  peculiar
place  and  function  of  life  in  the  universe.  What  is  its
relation  to  energy  ? it  certainly  does  not  create  energy —
what  then  does  it  do  ?

One  way  of  replying  to  this  question  is  indicated  in  the
following  passage,  which  we  have  quoted  at  length  from  an
article  upon  “ The  Atomic  Theory  of  Lucretius,'’  in  the
North  British  Review  for  March  1868  : —

“ It  is  a principle  of  mechanics  that  a force  acting  at  right
angles  to  the  direction  in  which  a body  is  moving  does  no  work,
although  it  may  continually  and  continuously  alter  the  direction
in  which  the  body  moves.  No  power,  no  energy,  is  required  to
deflect  a bullet  from  its  path,  provided  the  deflecting  force  acts
always  at  right  angles  to  that  path.  . . .

“ If  you  believe  in  free-will  and  in  atoms,  you  have  two  courses
open  to  you.  The  first  alternative  may  be  put  as  follows : Some-


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


8i


thing  which  is  not  atoms  must  he  allowed  an  existence,  and  must
he  supposed  capable  of  acting  on  the  atoms.  The  atoms  may,  as
Democritus  believed,  build  up  a huge  mechanical  structure,  each
wheel  of  which  drives  its  neighbour  in  one  long  inevitable  sequence
of  causation ; but  you  may  assume  that  beyond  this  ever-giinding
wheel  work  tliere  exists  a power  not  subject  to  but  partly  master
of  the  machine ; you  may  believe  that  man  possesses  such  a
power,  and  if  so,  no  better  conception  of  the  manner  of  its  action
could  be  devised  than  the  idea  of  its  deflecting  the  atoms  in  their
onward  path  to  the  right  or  left  of  that  line  in  which  they  would
naturally  move.  The  will,  if  it  so  acted,  would  add  nothing
sensible  to  nor  take  anything  sensible  from  the  energy  of  the
universe.  The  modern  believer  in  free-will  will  probably  adopt
this  view,  wliich  is  certainly  consistent  with  observation,  although
not  proved  by  it.  Such  a power  of  moulding  circumstances,  of
turning  the  torrent  to  the  right,  where  it  shall  fertilise,  or  to  the
left,  where  it  shall  overwhelm,  but  in  nowise  of  arresting  the
torrent,  adding  nothing  to  it,  taking  nothing  from  it, — such  is  pre-
cisely the  apparent  action  of  man’s  will;  and  though  we  must
allow  that  possibly  the  deflecting  action  does  but  result  from  some
smaller  subtler  stream  of  circumstance,  yet  if  we  may  trust  to  our
direct  perception  of  free-will,  the  above  theory,  involving  a power
in  man  beyond  that  of  atoms,  would  probably  be  our  choice.  . . .

“ We  cannot  hope  that  natural  science  will  ever  lend  the  least
assistance  towards  answering  the  Free-will  and  Necessity  question.
The  doctrines  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter  and  of  the  conserva-
tion of  energy  seem  at  first  sight  to  help  the  Necessitarians,  for
they  might  argue  that  if  free-will  acts  it  must  add  something  to  or
take  something  from  the  physical  universe,  and  if  experiment
shows  that  nothing  of  the  kind  occurs,  away  goes  free-will ; but
this  argument  is  worthless,  for  if  mind  or  will  simply  deflects
matter  as  it  moves,  it  may  produce  all  the  consequences  claimed
by  the  Wilful  school,  and  yet  it  will  neither  add  energy  nor  matter
to  the  universe  ”

230.  Now  there  appears  to  ns  to  be  a very  serious  objection
to  this  method  of  regarding  the  position  of  life,  unless  it  be
somewhat  modified.  Let  us  take  one  of  the  visible  masses
of  this  present  universe,  such  as  a planet.  Instead  of  being


82


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


attracted  to  a fixed  and  visible  centre  of  force  such  as  the
sun,  suppose  for  a moment  that  it  is  bound  to  an  invisible
and  vagrant  centre,  of  which  the  only  condition  imposed
upon  its  irregularities  is  that  it  shall  always  move  in  such  a
manner  that  there  shall  be  no  creation  nor  destruction  of
energy.

We  have  only  to  imagine  for  a moment  such  a universe
in  order  to  realise  the  inextricable  confusion  into  which  its
intelligent  inhabitants  would  be  plunged  by  the  operation
of  a viewless  and  unaccountable  agency  of  this  nature.  No
doubt  the  hypothesis  regarding  life,  which  we  have  quoted
above,  limits  this  mode  of  action  to  the  molecular  motions
of  matter,  but  if  our  line  of  argument  has  been  followed
throughout,  the  reader  will  probably  acknowledg<S  that  the
superior  intelligences  of  the  universe  may  have  the  same
appreciation  of  molecular  motions  that  we  have  of  those  of
large  masses.  Now  they  would  in  turn  be  put  to  inextric-
able confusion  by  the  advent  of  an  unperceivable,  and,  from
the  nature  of  the  case,  irresponsible  force  entitled  will
operating  towards  the  deflection  of  these  molecular  motions,
even  although  the  energy  of  the  universe  should  remain  the
same.  We  think  that  Professor  Huxley  and  those  who
have  opposed  this  mode  of  regarding  the  position  of  life
have  been  somewhat  unjustly  blamed.  They  have  driven
the  operation  of  that  mystery  called  life  or  will  out  of  the
objective  universe,  or  that  portion  of  things  which  is  capable
of  being  scientifically  studied  by  intelligence,  and  in  so
doing  they  have  most  assuredly  done  right.  The  mistake
made  (whether  by  this  party  or  their  adversaries)  lies  in
imagining  that  by  this  process  they  completely  get  rid  of  a
thing  so  driven  before  them,  and  that  it  disappears  from  the
universe  altogether.  It  does  no  such  thing.  It  only  dis-


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.  "*183

appears  from  that  small  circle  of  light  which  we  may  call
the  universe  of  scientific  perception.

But  the  greater  the  circle  of  light  (to  adopt  the  words  of
Dr.  Chalmers),  the  greater  the  circumference  of  darkness,
and  the  mystery  which  has  been  driven  before  us  looms  in
the  darkness  that  surrounds  this  circle,  growing  more
mysterious  and  more  tremendous  as  the  circumference  is
increased.  In  fine,  we  have  already  remarked  that  the  posi-
'tion  of  the  scientific  man  is  to  clear  a space  before  him
from  which  all  mystery  shall  be  driven  away,  and  in  which
there  shall  be  nothing  but  matter  and  certain  definite  laws
which  he  can  comprehend.  There  are  however  three  great
mysteries  (a  trinity  of  mysteries)  which  elude,  and  will  for
ever  elude  his  grasp,  and  these  will  persistently  hover
around  the  border  of  this  cleared  and  illuminated  circle, —
they  are  the  mystery  of  matter ; the  mystery  of  life ; and
the  mystery  of  God, — and  these  three  are  one.

231.  But  in  this  latter  statement  we  have  transgressed
the  limits  of  our  inquiry,  and  are  content  to  be  driven  back.
Suffice  it  to  say  that  these  three  gigantic  mysteries  will  per-
sistently hover  around  the  illuminated  circle,  or  to  speak
more  properly,  the  illuminated  sphere  of  scientific  thought,
of  which  duration,  extension,  and  structural  complexity
may  be  regarded  as  the  three  rectangular  axes  in  each  of
which  the  process  of  development  goes  on  simultaneously  as
the  boundary  of  the  sphere  is  enlarged.

Within  this  sphere  we  have  only  that  which  can  be
grasped  by  Physical  Science,  but  we  are  not  therefore  to
infer  that  matter  and  the  laws  of  matter  have  a reality
and  a permanence  denied  to  intelligence.

It  is  rather  because  they  are  at  the  bottom  of  the  list —
are  in  fact  the  simplest  and  lowest  of  the  three — that  they


i84


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


are  capable  of  being  most  readily  grasped  by  the  finite
intellio'ences  of  the  universe.  The  followinor  words  of  Pro-

O O

fessor  Stokes,  in  Ids  presidential  address  to  the  British  Asso-
ciation at  Exeter,  occur  to  us  as  very  clearly  embodying
this  thought : —

“ Admitting  to  the  full  as  highly  probable,  though  not  com-
pletely demonstrated,  the  applicability  to  living  beings  of  the  laws
which  have  been  ascertained  with  reference  to  dead  matter,  I feel
constrained  at  the  same  time  to  admit  the  existence  of  a mysterious
something  lying  beyond,  a something  sui  generis,  which  I regard,
not  as  balancing  and  suspending  the  ordinary  physical  laws,  but  as
working  with  them  and  through  them  to  the  attainment  of  a
designed  end.  What  this  something  which  we  call  life  may  be  is  a
profound  mystery.  . . . When  from  the  phenomena  of  life  we  pass
on  to  those  of  mind,  we  enter  a region  still  more  profoundly
mysterious.  We  can  readily  imagine  that  we  may  here  be  dealing
with  phenomena  altogether  transcending  those  of  mere  life,  in
some  such  way  as  those  of  life  transcend,  as  I have  endeavoured
to  infer,  those  of  chemistry  and  molecular  attractions,  or  as  the
laws  of  chemical  affinity  in  their  turn  transcend  those  of  mere
mechanics.  Science  can  be  expected  to  do  but  little  to  aid  us
here,  since  the  instrument  of  research  is  itself  the  object  of  investi-
gation. It  can  but  enlighten  us  as  to  the  depths  of  our  ignorance,
and  lead  us  to  look  to  a higher  aid  for  that  which  most  nearly
concerns  our  well-being.”

232.  In  fine,  the  Physical  properties  of  matter  form  the
alphabet  which  is  put  into  our  hands  by  God,  the  study  of
which  will,  if  properly  conducted,  enable  us  more  perfectly
to  read  that  Great  Book  which  we  call  the  Universe.

We  have  beo;un  to  recognise  some  of  the  chief  letters  of
this  alphabet,  and  even  to  put  two  and  two  together ; and,
like  an  intelligent  but  somewhat  conceited  child,  we  are  very
proud  of  our  achievement.  Like  such  a child  we  have  not
yet,  however,  completely  grasped  the  fact  that  these  letters
are  only  symbols,  but  look  upon  them  with  intense  awe  as


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


185

the  great  thing  in  the  world,  meaning  of  course  our  world.
We  look  with  a sort  of  adoration  towards  those  pages  in
which  there  are  words  of  two  syllables,  and  are  ready  to  fall
down  at  the  feet  of  that  older  and  wiser  child  who  has
penetrated  into  the  depths  of  such  profound  mysteries.
Our  belief  is  that  all  knowledge  is  made  for  the  alphabet
just  as  the  little  musician  believes  that  all  music  is  made
for  the  piano.

233.  Life,  then,  whatever  be  its  nature,  may  be  supposed
to' penetrate  into  the  structural  depths  of  the  universe.  Its
seat  is  in  a region  inaccessible  to  human  inquiry  and
equally  inaccessible,  we  may  well  suppose,  to  the  inquiries
of  the  higher  created  intelligences.  Intimations  of  its  pre-
sence are  no  doubt  constantly  emerging  from  this  region  of
thick  darkness  into  the  objective  universe,  but  when  they  have
reached  it  they  obey  the  ordinary  laws  of  phenomena,  accord-
ing to  which  a material  effect  implies  a material  antecedent.

Notwithstanding  all  this,  life  exists  just  as  surely  as  the
Deity  exists.  For  we  have  subjected  both  these  mysteries
to  the  same  process,  and  have  found  it  as  difficult  to  rid  our-
selves of  the  one  as  of  the  other.

We  have  driven  the  creative  operation  of  the  Great  First
Cause  into  the  durational  depths  of  the  universe, — into  the
eternity  of  the  past, — but  for  all  that  we  have  not  got  rid  of
God.  In  like  manner  we  have  driven  the  mystery  of  life
into  the  structural  depths  of  the  universe, — that  region  of
thick  darkness  which  no  created  eye  is  able  to  pierce, — but
we  have  not  got  rid  of  life,  nor  are  we  likely  to  do  so.
Before  concluding  this  digression  upon  the  place  of  life,  let
us  briefly  review  the  attempts  made  to  account  for  the
origin  of  life  by  those  who  have  yet  fallen  short  of  the
scientific  conception  of  an  Unseen  Universe.


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


1 86

234.  Sir  ^Y.  Thomson  has  gone  further  than  any  one  else  in
such  inquiries.  We  have  already  alluded  to  his  attempt  to
explain  the  origin  of  the  material  universe  by  the  vortex
ring  hypothesis,  and  also  to  his  other  attempt  to  explain
gravitation  by  the  modification  of  the  hypothesis  of  ultra-
mundane corpuscles.  If  we  add  to  these  his  attempt  to
explain  the  origin  of  life  as  consistently  as  possible  with  the
principle  of  Continuity,  we  think  it  must  be  acknowledged
that  he  is  a true  pioneer  in  such  inquiries  as  those  of  this
volume  as  well  as  in  the  more  ordinary  branches  of  Physical
Science.

The  explanation  of  the  origin  of  life  proposed  by  Sir  W.
Thomson  had  also  occurred  independently  to  Professor
Helmholtz.  This  latter  physicist,  in  an  article  on  the  use
and  abuse  of  the  deductive  method  in  Physical  Science,^
tells  us  very  clearly  what  led  himself,  and  no  doubt  Sir  W.
Thomson  likewise,  to  suggest  the  meteoric  hypothesis  as  a
possible  way  of  accounting  for  the  origin  of  life  : — “ If
failure  attends  all  our  efforts  to  obtain  a generation  of
organisms  from  lifeless  matter,  it  seems  to  me  (says  Pro-
fessor Helmholtz)  a thoroughly  correct  procedure  to  inquire
whether  there  has  ever  been  an  origination  of  life,  or
whether  it  is  not  as  old  as  matter,  and  whether  its  germs,
borne  from  one  world  to  another,  have  not  been  developed
wherever  they  have  found  a favourable  soil.’'

235.  We  have  already  sufficiently  pointed  out  that  the
man  of  science  objects  to  separate  creations,  and  that,  in
consequence,  he  tries  to  explain  the  present  terrestrial  life  by
means  of  a single  primordial  germ.  But  the  difficulty  still
remains  regarding  the  original  appearance  of  this  germ.

Now,  according  to  the  meteoric  hypothesis  this  germ  may

1 Nature,  January  14,  1875.


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


187


have  been  wafted  to  us  from  some  other  world,  or  its  frag-
ments, and  thus  an  act  of  creation  of  life  might  possibly
serve  for  many  worlds.  If  therefore  this  hypothesis  were
otherwise  tenable  it  would  diminish  the  difficulty  implied
by  separate  creations,  but  'would  it  entirely  remove  it  ?
We  doubt  this  very  much.

For,  in  the  first  place,  as  far  as  we  can  judge  (Art.  163)
the  visible  universe — the  universe  of  worlds — is  not  eternal,
while  however  the  invisible  universe,  or  that  which  we
associate  with  the  ethereal  medium,  is  necessarily  eternal.
The  visible  universe  must  have  had  its  origin  in  time
(ALrt.  116),  no  doubt  from  a nebulous  condition.  But
in  this  condition  it  can  hardly  have  been  fit  for  the
reception  of  life.  Life  must  therefore  have  been  created
afterwards.  We  have  thus  at  least  two  separate  creations,
both  taking  place  in  time — the  one  of  matter  and  the  other
of  life.  And  even  if  it  were  possible,  which  it  is  not,  to
get  over  one  of  the  difficulties  attending  this  hypothesis,
that  of  creation  in  time,  by  regarding  the  visible  universe
as  eternal ; yet  even  then  we  must  regard  matter  and
life  as  implying  two  separate  creative  acts  if  we  assume
^ the  nebulous  hypothesis  to  be  true.  For  if  x denote  the
date  of  the  advent  of  life,  and  x-\-a  that  of  the  advent  of
matter,  a being  a constant  quantity,  the  two  operations
cannot  be  made  simultaneous  by  merely  increasing  the
value  of  X without  limit.  Now  this  is  what  we  mean
by  eternity,  and  therefore  we  cannot  help  thinking  that  this
want  of  simultaneity  implies  a defect  in  this  mode  of  view-
ing the  origin  of  things.

In  fine,  our  hypothesis,  in  which  the  material  as  well  as
the  life  of  the  visible  universe  are  regarded  as  having  been
developed  from  the  Unseen,  in  which  they  had  existed  from


iS8


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


Eternity,  appears  to  us  to  present  the  only  available  inethocl
of  avoiding  a break  of  continuity,  if  at  the  same  time  vve
are  to  accept  loyally  the  indications  given  by  observation
and  experiment.  It  may  be  said  (just  as  anything  else
may  be  said)  that  the  visible  universe  is  eternal,  and  that
it  has  the  power  of  originating  life ; but  both  statements
are  surely  opposed  to  the  results  of  observation  and  experi-
ment. Now  we  must  be  content  in  such  matters  as  these
to  be  guided  by  probabilities,  and  it  certainly  appears  most
probable  that  the  visible  universe  is  not  eternal,  and  that  it
has  not  the  power  of  originating  life.  In  fine,  life  as  well
as  matter  comes  to  us  from  the  Unseen  Universe.

236.  Let  us  here  again  pause  for  a moment  and  review
the  position  which  we  have  reached.  By  taking  the  universe
as  we  find  it,  and  regarding  each  occurrence  in  it,  without
exception,  as  something  upon  which  it  was  meant  that  we
should  exercise  our  intellects,  we  are  led  at  once  to  the
principle  of  Continuity,  which  asserts  that  we  shall  never
be  carried  from  the  conditioned  to  the  unconditioned,  but
only  from  one  order  of  the  fully  conditioned  to  another.
Two  great  laws  or  principles  come  before  us : the  one  of
which  is  the  Conservation  of  Energy  ; that  is  to  say,  con-
servation of  the  objective  element  of  the  universe ; while
the  other  is  the  law  of  Biogenesis,  in  virtue  of  which  the
appearance  of  a living  Being  in  the  universe  denotes  the
existence  of  an  antecedent  possessing  life.  We  are  led
from  these  two  great  principles  to  regard,  as  at  least  the
most  probable  solution,  that  there  is  an  intelligent  Agent
operating  in  the  universe,  whose  function  it  is  to  develop
energy ; and  also  that  there  is  a similar  Agent  whose
function  it  is  to  develop  life.  Perhaps  we  ought  rather  to
say  that,  if  we  are  not  driven  to  this  very  conclusion,  it


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


189


appears  at  least  to  be  the  one  which  most  simply  and  natur-
ally satisfies  the  principle  of  Continuity.

But  this  conclusion  hardly  difiers  from  the  Christian
doctrine  ; or,  to  speak  properly,  the  conclusion,  as  far  as  it
goes,  appears  to  agree  with  the  Christian  doctrine.

In  fine,  we  are  led  to  regard  it  as  one  of  the  great
merits  of  the  Christian  system,  that  its  doctrine  is  pre-
eminently one  of  intellectual  liberty,  and  that  while  theo-
logians on  the  one  hand,  and  men  of  science  on  the  other,
have  each  erected  their  barriers  to  inquiry,  the  early  Christian
records  acknowledge  no  such  barrier,  but  on  the  contrary
assert  the  most  perfect  freedom  for  all  the  powers  of  man.

237.  We  have  now  reached  a stage  from  which  we  can  very
easily  dispose  of  any  scientific  difiiculty  regarding  miracles.
For  if  the  invisible  was  able  to  produce-  the  present  visible
universe  with  all  its  energy,  it  could  of  course,  a fortiori,
very  easily  produce  such  transmutations  of  energy  from  the
one  universe  into  the  other  as  would  account  for  the  events
which  took  place  in  Judea.  Those  events  are  therefore  no
longer  to  be  regarded  as  absolute  breaks  of  continuity,  a
thing  which  we  have  agreed  to  consider  impossible,  but
only  as  the  result  of  a peculiar  action  of  the  invisible  upon
the  visible  universe.  When  we  dig  up  an  ant-hill,  we  per-
form an  operation  which,  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  hill,
is  mysteriously  perplexing,  far  transcending  their  experi-
ence, but  we  know  very  well  that  the  whole  affair  happens
without  any  breach  of  continuity  of  the  laws  of  the  uni-
verse. In  like  manner,  the  scientific  difficulty  with  regard
to  miracles  will,  we  think,  entirely  disappear,  if  our  view
of  the  invisible  universe  be  accepted,  or  indeed  if  any  view
be  accepted  that  implies  the  presence  in  it  of  living  beings
much  more  powerful  than  ourselves.


190


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


238.  We  have  as  yet  only  replied  to  the  scientific  objection,
but  there  are  other  objections  which  might  be  raised.  Thus,
for  instance,  it  might  be  said,  What  occasion  was  there  for
the  interference  implied  in  miracles  % And  again,  Is  the
historical  testimony  in  favour  of  their  occurrence  conclu-
sive % We  must  leave  the  last  objection  to  be  replied  to  by
the  historian ; but  with  respect  to  the  former,  it  appears  to
us  as  almost  self-evident  that  Christ,  if  He  came  to  us
from  the  invisible  world,  could  hardly  (with  reverence  be
it  spoken)  have  done  so  without  some  peculiar  sort  of
communication  being  established  between  the  two  worlds.
No  doubt  we  may  well  imagine  that  the  acts  of  interference
in  virtue  of  this  communication  were  strictly  limited  ; and
in  proof  of  this  conclusion  we  may  cite  the  fact  that  what
did  occur  was  sufficiently  startling  to  have  secured  the  ear
of  humanity  ever  since,  but  not  sufficiently  overwhelming
to  preclude  the  exercise  of  individual  faith.  The  very  fiict
of  there  being  sincere  sceptics  proves,  we  tliiok,  the  limited
extent  of  these  interferences.^

239.  We  have  now  considered  miracles,  or  those  apparent
breaks  of  continuity  which  have  been  furnished  by  history,
but  our  readers  are  already  well  aware  that  equally  formid-
able breaks  are  brought  before  us  by  science.  There  is,  to
begin  with,  that  formidable  phenomenon,  the  production  in
time  of  the  visible  universe.  Secondly,  there  is  that  break,
hardly  less  formidable,  namely,  the  original  production  of
life  ; and  there  is,  thirdly,  that  break  recognised  by  AVallace
and  his  school  of  natural  history,  which  seems  to  have
occurred  at  the  first  production  of  man.  Greatly  as  we
are  indebted  to  Darwin,  Huxley,  and  those  who  have  pro-
minently advocated  the  possibility  of  the  present  system  of

^ See  Sermon  preached  at  Belfast  by  Dr.  Beichel,  August  23,  1874.


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


191

tilings  having  been  developed  by  forces  and  operations  such
as  we  see  before  us,  it  must  be  regarded  by  us,  and  we
think  it  is  regarded  by  them,  as  a defect  in  their  system,
that  these  breaks  remain  unaccounted  for.  Our  readers
will  now,  however,  if  we  mistake  not,  perceive  what  is  the
real  source  of  the  perplexity  felt  by  the  school  of  evolu-
tionists. It  is  that  they  have  been  unable  to  regard  an  in-
terference of  the  invisible  universe  in  any  other  light  than
an  absolute  break  of  continuity  ; and  holding  with  justice
to  the  principle  of  Continuity,  they  have  been  unable  to  do
more  than  acknowledge  these  difficulties  and  allow  them  to
remain.

But  from  our  point  of  view  these  difficulties  are  by  no  ♦
means  impenetrable  barriers,  barring  for  ever  the  progress
of  research.  On  the  contrary,  we  assert  that,  if  approached
with  sufficient  boldness,  and  examined  with  sufficient  care,
they  will  be  found  to  contain  avenues  leading  up  to  the
invisible  universe,  and  directing  our  inquiries  thitherwards.
There  may  be  possibly  other  apparent  breaks  or  barriers,
but  these  appear  to  be  the  best  established  ; and,  with
these  exceptions,  we  may  suppose  that  the  visible  universe,
in  so  far  as  we  are  capable  of  investigating  it,  has  been  left
to  develop  itself  in  accordance  with  those  forces  and  opera-
tions which  we  see  before  us  at  the  present  day.

In  fine,  the  visible  universe  was  plainly  intended  to  be
something  which  we  are  capable  of  investigating,  and  the
few  apparent  breaks  are  in  reality  so  many  partially  con-
cealed avenues  leading  up  to  the  unseen.

240.  Our  readers  must  not  however  infer  from  what  we
have  now  said,  that  we  do  not  recognise  any  present  points  of
contact  between  us  and  the  invisible.  There  may  possibly
be  (but  even  of  this  we  are  not  quite  sure)  no  points  of


192


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


apparent  interference  between  the  two,  so  that  the  man  of
science  cannot  say, — Here  is  a break ; — but  nevertheless
there  may  be  a close  and  vital  union  between  the  two  uni-
verses, in  those  regions  into  which  investigation  cannot  pene-
trate. There  may  be  an  action  of  the  invisible  world  upon
the  individual  mind,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  there  should
not  also  be  an  action  upon  the  visible  universe,  by  means
of  those  processes  of  delicacy  which,  as  we  have  already  seen,
obtain  in  that  quarter  (Art.  184).  Neither  the  one  action
nor  the  other  would  be  detected  by  science,  unless  we  except
certain  providential  occurrences,  which  are  generally,  how-
ever, better  recognised  by  the  individuals  to  whom  they
. refer  than  by  the  world  at  large.  And  just  as  reversibility
(Art.  113)  is  the  stamp  of  perfection  in  the  inanimate  engine,
so  a similar  reversibility  may  be  the  stamp  of  perfection  in
the  living  man.  He  ought  to  live  for  the  unseen — to  carry
into  it  something  which  may  not  be  wholly  unacceptable.
But,  in  order  to  enable  him  to  do  this,  the  unseen  must  also
work  upon  him,  and  its  influences  must  pervade  his  spiritual
nature.  Thus  a life  for  the  unseen  through  the  unseen  is  to
be  regarded  as  the  only  perfect  life.

241.  In  fine,  the  unseen  may  have  a very  wide  field  of
influence,  but  it  is  not  discernible,  or  at  least  easily  dis-
cernible, by  the  eye  of  sense,  and  we  are  therefore  led  to
consult  the  Christian  records  regarding  the  reality  of  a
present  influence  exercised  by  the  invisible  universe  upon
ours.

In  the  first  place,  we  have  the  following  words  of  Christ
himself  (Matt.  xiii.  41)  : '"The  Son  of  man  shall  send  forth
his  angels,  and  they  shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all
things  that  offend,  and  them  which  do  iniquity,  and  shall
cast  them  into  a furnace  of  fire  : there  shall  be  wailing  and


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


193


gnashing  of  teeth.  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as
the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father.''  Again  (Matt.
XXV.  31)  : ‘‘When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory,
and  all  the  holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall  he  sit  upon  the
throne  of  his  glory  : and  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all
nations ; and  he  shall  separate  them  one  from  another,  as
a shepherd  divideth  his  sheep  from  the  goats."  Again
(Matt.  XX vi.  53),  speaking  to  Peter:  “Thinkest  thou  that
I cannot  now  pray  to  my  Father,  and  he  shall  presently
give  me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  angels  Further-
more, we  read  (Heb.  i.  14) : “ Are  they  not  all  ministering
spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs
of  salvation  ?"

These  passages  (and  many  more  might  be  quoted)
would  appear  to  show  that,  according  to  the  Scriptures,
the  angels  take  a very  prominent  part  in  the  administra-
tion of  the  universe  under  the  direction  of  the  Son  of
God.  They  are  his  ministers,  his  messengers,  who  execute
his  decrees  and  perform  his  errands,  whether  of  mercy  or  of
justice.  Therefore  it  is  said  of  Christ,  “ Thou  art  the  King
of  angels  and  of  himself  in  his  glorified  state,  speaking  to
his  disciples,  Christ  says  (Matt,  xxviii.  18)  : “All  power  is
given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Go  ye  therefore,
and  teach  all  nations,  baptising  them  in  the  name  of  the
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  teaching
them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I have  commanded
you ; and,  lo,  I am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of
the  world."

Let  us  close  these  quotations  by  one  from  the  Old  Testa-
ment— 2 Kings  vi.  15-17  : “And  when  the  servant  of  the

man  of  God  was  risen  early,  and  gone  forth,  behold,  an  host
encompassed  the  city  both  with  horses  and  chariots  : and  his

N


194


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


servant  said  unto  him,  Alas,  my  master ! how  shall  we  do  1
And  he  answered,  Fear  not ; for  they  that  be  with  us  are
more  than  they  that  be  with  them.  And  Elisha  prayed,
and  said.  Lord,  I pray  thee,  open  his  eyes,  that  he  may  see.
And  the  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  the  young  man  : and
he  saw  : and,  behold,  the  mountain  was  full  of  horses  and
chariots  of  fire  round  about  Elisha.”

Finally,  it  is  the  belief  of  a large  portion  of  the  Christian
Church  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  and  acts  upon  the
souls  of  believers.  This  action  represents  the  influence
which  reaches  the  soul  of  man  from  the  unseen,  enabling
him  to  live  for  the  unseen.

242.  We  have  in  our  opening  chapter  quoted  a very

remarkable  passage  from  Swedenborg  upon  the  particular
nature  of  Gods  providence.  Let  us  now  hear  what  the
Scriptures  say  upon  the  same  subject.  Christ  tells  us  (Luke
xii.  6)  : Are  not  five  sparrows  sold  for  two  farthings,  and

not  one  of  them  is  forgotten  before  God?  But  even  the
very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.  Fear  not  there-
fore : ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows.”  Again
St.  Paul  tells  us  (Bom.  viii.  28)  : ‘‘And  we  know  that  all
things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  to
them  who  are  called  according  to  his  purpose.”  Also  (Eom.
viii.  3S)  ; “For  I am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor
life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things
present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any
other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of
God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.”

243.  AVe  think  it  may  be  concluded  from  all  these  pass-
ages that  the  doctrine  of  a particular  providence  is  taught  in
the  Scriptures.  -Nevertheless  it  is  one  of  the  hardest  things
to  understand  how  this  doctrine  can  be  made  consistent


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


195


with  the  working  out  of  general  laws  which,  so  far  as  we
can  study  them,  appear  to  have  no  reference  whatever  to
individuals.  This  was  a difficulty  intensely  felt  by  the  late
John  Stuart  Mill.  He  says,  in  a work  published  after  his
death : —

“ For  how  stands  the  fact  ? That,  next  to  the  greatness  of  these
cosmic  forces,  the  quality  which  most  forcibly  strikes  every  one
who  does  not  avert  his  eyes  from  it  is  their  perfect  and  absolute
recklessness.  They  go  straight  to  their  end  without  regarding
what  or  whom  they  crush  on  the  road.  Optimists,  in  their
attempts  to  prove  that ' whatever  is,  is  right,’  are  obliged  to  main-
tain, not  that  Nature  ever  turns  one  step  from  her  path  to  avoid
trampling  us  into  destruction,  but  that  it  would  be  very  unreason-
able in  us  to  expect  that  she  should.  Pope’s  ‘Shall  gravitation
cease  when  you  go  by  ?’  may  be  a just  rebuke  to  any  one  who
should  be  so  silly  as  to  expect  common  human  morality  from
Nature.  But  if  the  question  were  between  two  men,  instead  of
between  a man  and  a natural  phenomenon,  that  triumphant  apo-
strophe would  be  thought  a rare  piece  of  impudence.  A man  who
should  persist  in  hurling  stones  or  firing  cannon  when  another  man
‘goes  by,’  and,  having  killed  him,  should  urge  a similar  plea  in  ex-
culpation, would  very  deservedly  be  found  guilty  of  murder.  In
sober  truth,  nearly  all  the  things  which  men  are  hanged  or
imprisoned  for  doing  to  one  another  are  Nature’s  every-day  per-
formances.”

This  objection  to  belief  in  the  reality  of  the  government
of  God  has  been  clothed  in  very  eloquent  language  in  a
sermon  by  the  Rev.  James  Martineau  : — The  battle  of
existence  (he  tells  us,  putting  himself  for  the  moment  into
the  position  of  Mill  and  his  school)  rages  through  all  time
and  in  every  field ; and  its  rule  is  to  give  no  quarter —
to  despatch  the  maimed,  to  overtake  the  halt,  to  trip  up
the  blind,  and  drive  the  fugitive  host  over  the  precipice  into
the  sea.”


196


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


Ill  very  beautiful  language  the  poet  Tennyson,  after  pro-
posing the  same  riddle,  replies  to  it  thus  : —

“ Are  God  and  Nature  then  at  strife

That  Nature  lends  such  evil  dreams  %

So  careful  of  the  type  she  seems,

So  careless  of  the  single  life ;

‘ So  careful  of  the  type  * 1 but  no.

From  scarped  clilF  and  quarried  stone
She  cries,  a thousand  types  are  gone :

I care  for  nothing : all  shall  go.

0 life  as  futile,  then,  as  frail !

0 for  thy  voice  to  soothe  and  bless  1
What  hope  of  answer  or  redress  1
Behind  the  veil,  behind  the  veil.”

In  another  passage  of  equal  beauty  the  same  poet  ex-
presses his  conviction

“ That  nothing  walks  with  aimless  feet :

That  not  one  life  shall  be  destroy’d
Or  cast  as  rubbish  to  the  void,

When  God  hath  made  the  pile  complete.

That  not  a worm  is  cloven  in  vain ;

That  not  a moth  with  vain  desire
Is  shrivel’d  in  a fruitless  fire.

Or  but  subserves  another’s  gain.”

Professor  Jevons,  again,  in  his  Principles  of  Science  (vol.
ii.  p.  468)  alludes  in  the  following  terms  to  this  difficulty  : —
The  hypothesis,  that  there  is  a Creator,  at  once  all-powerful
and  all-benevolent,  is  surrounded,  as  it  must  seem  to  every
candid  investigator,  with  difficulties  verging  closely  upon
logical  contradiction.  The  existence  of  the  smallest  amount
of  pain  and  evil  would  seem  to  show  that  He  is  either  not


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


197


perfectly  benevolent,  or  not  all-powerful.  No  one  can
have  lived  long  without  experiencing  sorrowful  events  of
which  the  significance  is  inexplicable.  But  if  we  cannot
succeed  in  avoiding  contradiction  in  our  notions  of  elemen-
tary geometry,  can  we  expect  that  the  ultimate  purposes
of  existence  shall  present  themselves  to  us  with  perfect
clearness  ? I can  see  nothino^  to  forbid  the  notion  that  in  a
higher  state  of  intelligence  much  that  is  now  obscure  may
become  clear.  We  perpetually  find  ourselves  in  the  posi-
tion of  finite  minds  attempting  infinite  problems,,  and  can
we  be  sure  that  where  we  see  contradiction  an  infinite
intelligence  might  not  discover  perfect  logical  harmony  ? ”
244.  While  on  this  subject,  there  is  one  consideration
which  ought  not  to  be  forgotten.  It  is  evident  that  the
development  of  the  visible  universe  is  of  such  a nature  that
we  can  understand  it,  and  to  a great  extent  explain  it  by
means  of  laws  and  processes  with  which  we  are  familiar ;
nay,  the  order  of  the  universe  is  something  which  it  be-
comes our  very  duty  to  investigate.  But  the  results  of  our
• inquiries  are,  and  can  only  be,  the  appretiation  of  general
laws  of  action.  The  working  out  of  these  laws  can  have,
from  this  point  of  view,  no  possible  reference  to  individual
interests.  If  gravity  acted  sometimes,  and  at  other  times
refrained  from  acting,  we  could  derive  no  certain  informa-
tion from  our  experience  ; we  could  not  advance  in  art  or
science,  and  should,  in  fine,  be  plunged  into  speedy  con-
fusion. Nevertheless,  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  occur-
rences which  take  place  through  the  action  of  gravity  may,
after  all,  be  so  arranged  as  to  have  reference  to  the  real
welfare  of  individuals,  although  this  reference  is  not  appa-
rent, because  we  are  not  in  a position  to  recognise  it,  and  it
is  not  intended  that  we  should  do  so,  at  least  in  this  life.


198


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


The  ability  to  do  so  would  be  a very  dangerous  gift,  and
would  go  far  to  upset  the  present  economy.  We  know
very  little  about  the  bearings  of  events  on  our  own  best  in-
terests, and  nothing  at  all  about  their  bearings  on  those  of
our  neighbour.  We  may,  however,  believe  with  Jevons,
that  in  a future  state  the  adaptation  between  the  two  may
become  apparent  to  us,  even  if  we  do  not  ourselves  become
instruments  in  bringing  this  adaptation  about.

245.  The  outcome  of  all  these  speculations  would  thus
lead  us  to  regard  the  Christian  system  as  affording  a full  scope
for  development  in  all  respects,  whether  of  the  universe  or
the  individual.  Its  law  is  pre-eminently  that  of  liberty,  and
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  or  something  analogous  to  it,
forms,  as  it  were,  the  avenue  through  which  the  universe
itself  leads  us  up  to  the  conception  of  the  infinite  and
eternal  One.

Nevertheless,  not  a few  of  our  readers  may  be  disin-
clined to  entertain  any  precise  conception  of  the  divine
nature.  Neither  atheists  nor  theists,  they  simply  dismiss
the  Deity  as  being  quite  above  their  comprehension,  and  all
doctrines  founded  upon  certain  conceptions  of  the  Deity,  as
superstructures  without  foundation.

Now,  the  results  regarding  immortality  at  which  we  have
arrived  are,  we  think,  capable  of  being  very  nearly,  if  not
altogether,  detached  from  all  conceptions  regarding  the
Divine  essence.

We  have  merely  to  take  the  universe  as  it  is,  and,  adopt-
ing the  principle  of  Continuity,  insist  upon  an  endless  chain
of  events,  all  fidly  conditioned,  however  far  we  go  either
backwards  or  forwards.  This  leads  us  at  once  to  the  con-
cej^tion  of  an  invisible  universe,  and  to  see  that  immortality
is  possible  without  a break  of  continuity.


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


199


We  have,  however,  no  physical  proof  in  favour  of  it,
unless  we  allow  tJiat  Christ  rose  from  the  dead.  But  it
will  be  admitted  that,  if  Christ  rose  from  the  dead,  immor-
tality becomes  more  than  possible ; it  becomes  probable  ;
and  we  do  not  see  that  this  conclusion  is  greatly  modified
by  differences  in  our  mode  of  regarding  the  exact  nature  of
Christ.

Again,  the  production  of  the  visible  universe  in  time
leads  us,  by  the  principle  of  Continuity,  to  the  conception
of  a fully  conditioned  intelligent  universe,  existing  prior  to
the  production  of  the  visible.  And  furthermore,  we  are
induced  by  our  argument  (Art.  214)  to  regard  the  produc-
tion of  the  visible  universe  as  brought  to  pass  by  an  in-
telligent agency  resident  in  the  invisible.  If,  then,  such  an
agency  could  produce  the  visible  universe,  it  could  certainly
accomplish  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  without  any  break  of
continuity,  as  far  as  the  whole  universe  is  concerned.

24G.  The  joys  of  the  Christian  Heaven  are  celebrated  in
Hymns  which  are  frequently  very  beautiful,  even  if  they
do  not  mount  to  the  sublimity  of  the  ancient  Hebrew  ode.
One  of  the  finest  of  these  is  the  free  translation  by  Pope
of  the  Latin  (not  originally  Christian)  ode  standing  at  the
commencement  of  this  volume.  It  runs  thus — ’

“ Vital  spark  of  heavenly  flame  !

Quit,  oh,  quit  this  mortal  frame !

Trembling,  hoping,  ling’ring,  flying ;

Oh,  the  pain,  the  bliss  of  dying !

Cease,  fond  Nature,  cease  thy  strife.

And  let  me  languish  into  life !

“ Hark ! they  whisper — angels  say,

‘ Sister  spirit,  come  away ! ’

What  is  this  absorbs  me  quite ;

Steals  my  senses,  shuts  my  sight ;


200


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


Drowns  my  spirits,  draws  my  breatli  7
Tell  me,  my  soul,  can  this  be — death

“ The  world  recedes ! it  disappears  !

Heaven  opens  to  my  eyes  ! — my  ears
With  sounds  seraphic  ring :

Lend,  lend  your  wings  ! I mount ! I fly!

0 Grave  ! where  is  thy  victory  1
0 Death!  where  is  thy  sting

Again,  there  are  some  beautiful  Hymns  on  the  same
subject  by  James  Montgomery,  of  which  the  following  is  a
specimen : —

" Friend  after  friend  departs  ;

Who  hath  not  lost  a friend  1
There  is  no  union  here  of  hearts.

That  finds  not  here  an  end  :

Were  this  frail  world  our  only  rest
Living  or  dying,  none  were  blest.

“ Beyond  the  flight  of  time.

Beyond  the  vale  of  death.

There  surely  is  some  blessed  clime.

Where  life  is  not  a breath,

Kor  life’s  affections  transient  fire,

AVhose  sparks  fly  upward  and  expire.

“ There  is  a world  above.

Where  parting  is  unknown ; '

A whole  eternity  of  love.

Form’d  for  the  good  alone ;

And  faith  beholds  the  dying  here
Translated  to  that  happier  sphere.”

Lastly,  we  give  our  readers  two  verses  from  a hymn  by  a
more  recent  writer  (Sir  Henry  Baker) : —

“ There  is  a blessed  home
Beyond  this  land  of  woe.

Where  trials  never  come.

Nor  tears  of  sorrow  flow;


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE.


201


Where  faith  is  lost  in  sight,

And  patient  hope  is  crown’d,

And  everlasting  light
Its  glory  throws  around.

**  There  is  a land  of  peace,

Good  angels  know  it  well;

Glad  songs  that  never  cease
Within  its  portals  swell ;

Around  its  glorious  throne
Ten  thousand  saints  adore
Christ,  with  the  Father  one,

And  Spirit,  evermore.”

Many  such  specimens  might  be  given  if  our  object  were
to  collect  together  the  Christian  Hymns  relating  to  Heaven.
Sometimes,  too,  we  have  beautiful  descriptions  not  in
verse,  and  Bunyan  s account  of  the  reception  of  Christian
and  Hopeful  at  the  Celestial  City  will  at  once  occur  to
the  reader  as  not  inferior  in  the  claims  of  true  poetry  to
anything  that  we  have  given.

247.  Now,  if  we  analyse  these  hymns  of  joy,  there  are  in
them  two  prominent  chords,  one  or  other  of  which  is  always
struck.  The  first  expresses  the  Christian’s  sense  of  relief
from  sorrow  and  death,  and  the  second  his  joy  in  the  an-
ticipated presence  of  Christ — his  intense  desire  to  behold
the  King  in  his  beauty.

Both  of  these  are  struck  together  by  St.  John,  when  he
says  (Bev.  xxi.  3,  4),  “And  I heard  a great  voice  out  of
heaven,  saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,
and  he  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  his  people,
and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God.
And  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes  ; and
there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying,
neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain : for  the  former  things


202


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


are  passed  away.”  In  other  respects  the  descriptions  of  the
Christian  heaven  are  no  doubt  figurative.  They  are  in-
tended for  Christians  of  all  asres  of  the  world,  and  have
hardly  any  reference  to  the  material  conditions  of  life  in  a
future  state.  These  could  not  be  apprehended  by  believers
1800  years  ago,  inasmuch  as  we  can  hardly  be  said  to
grasp  them  now.  Nevertheless  there  is  one  direction  in
which  we  do  think  we  are  able  to  obtain  a glimpse  into  the
conditions  of  this  future  life.

248.  One  of  the  most  prominent  characteristics  of  the
human  mind  is  its  insatiable  curiosity.  How  intensely
anxious  we  all  are  to  realise  the  conditions  of  the  life  of  our
forefathers  in  the  ruder  and  earlier  times ; how  interested
in  every  scrap  of  intelligence  which  reaches  us  from  the
old  dead  world.  How  interested  too  in  any  light  thrown
upon  the  civilisation  which  preceded  these  old  times.  What
would  not  any  man  give  for  half  an  hour  with  Socrates  or
Plato ; what  would  he  not  give,  be  he  Christian  or  unbe-
liever, to  have  pictured  out  vividly  and  truly  before  him
some  episode  in  the  life  of  Christ  ? In  a tedious,  toilsome,
roundabout  way  we  do  indeed  get  some  passing  glimpses
into  these  ancient  historical  ages.

The  earth  is  not  unlike  the  human  brain,  in  that  it  con-
tains in  itself  certain  memories  of  the  past,  and  just  as  we
rummage  out  and  hunt  up  in  our  brains  old  memories,  so  do
the  historian  and  the  antiquary  search  about  in  the  earth  for
that  memory  which  it  retains  of  those  distant  but  glorious
ages.  But  the  universe,  no  less  than  the  individual,  has
another  memory  besides  the  material  one,  and  we  have
endeavoured  (Art.  196)  to  convince  our  readers  that  nothing
is  really  lost,  the  past  being  always  present  in  the  universe.
If  this  be  the  case,  it  may  readily  be  conceived  that  this


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


203


universal  memory  may  by  some  process  of  exaltation  and
intensification,  or  as  it  were  by  some  relay  battery  of  the
universe,  be  occasionally  quickened  into  such  a life  that  the
individual  in  the  future  and  glorified  state  may  be  enabled
(through  the  power  of  the  Lord)  to  realise  scenes  that  hap-
pened in  the  far  distant  past.  For  if  so  much  can  be
accomplished  with  a thing  so  little  plastic  as  the  material
memory  of  the  earth,  what  may  be  done  with  that  infinitely
more  plastic  form  of  existence  which  we  term  the  world  to
come  ?

249.  Again,  if  in  this  present  world  we  have  great  diffi-
culty in  realising,  our  own  past,  we  have  even  greater  diffi-
culty in  realising  what  is  at  this  very  moment  taking  place  in
remote  parts  of  the  present  visible  universe.  Astronomers
and  Physicists  agree  that  life  is  possible  in  the  planet  Mars,
and  it  is  quite  likely  that  intelligent  beings  analogous  to
ourselves  exist  at  the  present  moment  on  the  surface  of
that  planet,  but  we  shall  never  in  this  life  know  for  certain
anything  about  them.  There  is.  an  insurmountable  barrier
to  physical  inquiry  as  great  as  if  Mars  belonged  to  the
unseen  universe,  instead  of  being,  what  he  is  in  reality,  our
next-door  neighbour  in  the  present.

Now,  may  not  this  barrier  be  removed  in  the  future
state  1 This  has  been  a favourite  topic  with  scientific
theologians,  and  we  believe  that  all  who  have  speculated
on  the  conditions  of  a future  life  have  unanimously  agreed
that  we  shall  have  much  greater  freedom  of  motion  in  the
world  to  come.  In  fine,  our  relations  to  time  and  space
will  then  be  greatly  altered  and  enlarged.  Men  shall  run
to  and  fro  in  the  universe,  and  knowledge  shall  be  in-
creased.

250.  But  yet  the  picture  is  not  altogether  one  of  intellec-


204


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


tual  brightness  and  beauty.  It  wears  also  a moral  aspect,
and  upon  this  almost  exclusively  the  Christian  records  dwell.
We  are  told  in  these  records  that  nothing  is  forgotten.
Christ  teUs  us  (St.  Luke  viii.  17),  “Nothing  is  secret,  that
shall  not  be  made  manifest ; neither  anything  hid,  that
shall  not  be  known  and  come  abroad.'^  And  again  St.  John
teUs  us  (Rev.  xx.  12),  “I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,
stand  before  God : and  the  books  were  opened ; and
another  book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life  : and
the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  were
written  in  the  books,  according  to  their  works.”  This
thought  has  been  developed  by  the  Rev.  Alexander  Macleod,
D.D.,  in  a work  entitled  The  Books  of  Judgment.  This
author  points  out  that  in  many  cases  it  may  not  be  even
necessary  to  appeal  to  the  universe  for  the  record  that  is
therein  written,  for  this  is  sufficiently  stamped  upon  the  body
itself,  and  he  then  draws  a vivid  and  lurid  picture  of  the
sensual  man  in  whom  the  mortal  body  is  like  a parchment
written  within  and  without — a truly  mournful  and  terrible
record  of  the  deeds  done  in  the  body.

But  if  aU  this  is  possible  with  an  organism  possessing  so
little  plasticity  as  the  natural  body,  and  where  the  wish  of
the  individual  is  to  preserve  a respectable  exterior,  what
must  be  the  case  in  the  spiritual  body^  of  such  a man  '? —
“ If  they  do  these  things  in  a green  tree  what  shall  be  done
in  the  dry  ? ” What  a hideous  and  horrible  likeness  must
not  that  foul  thing  have  that  issues  forth  from  the  “ grave

^ [Those  who  believe  that  the  New  Testament  asserts  the  annihilation  of  the
wicked  in  Gehenna,  of  course  hold  th'at  only  the  just  obtain  the  spiritual  body.
But  we  have  no  definite  term  for  the  body  as  it  shall  be  (in  the  Hades  of  the  New
Testament)  between  death  and  the  resurrection.  It  is  probable  that  the  want  of
such  a term  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  authors  of  our  recognised  version  have
unfortunately  rendered  both  Hades  and  Gehenna  indifferently  by  the  word  Hell,
itself  a term  from  Scandinavian  mythology.]


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


205


and  gate  of  Death  into  the  presence  of  the  Unseen  and
Eternal  ?

251.  It  is  extremely  striking  to  read  in  this  connection
the  following  extract  from  Plato's  Gorgias.  We  quote  from
Jowett's  translation.  Socrates  is  the  speaker  : —

“ This  is  a tale,  Callicles,  which  I have  heard  and  believe,  and
from  which  I draw  the  following  inferences  : Death,  if  I am  right,
is  in  the  first  place  the  separation  from  one  another  of  two  things,
soul  and  body; — this,  and  nothing  else.  And  after  they  are
separated  they  retain  their  several  characteristics,  which  are  much
the  same  as  in  life ; the  body  has  the  same  nature  and  ways  and
affections,  all  clearly  discernible ; for  example,  he  who  by  nature
or  training,  or  both,  was  a tall  man  while  he^was  alive,  will  remain
as  he  was  after  he  is  dead ; and  the  fat  man  will  remain  fat ; and
so  on  : and  the  dead  man,  who  in  life  had  a fancy  to  have  flowing
hair,  will  have  flowing  hair. ''And  if  he  was  marked  with  the
whip  and  had  the  prints  of  the  scourge,  or  of  wounds  in  him  while
he  was  alive,  you  might  see  the  same  in  the  dead  body ; and  if  his
limbs  were  broken  or  misshapen  while  he  was  alive,  the  same
appearance  would  be  visible  in  the  dead.  And,  in  a word,  what-
ever was  the  habit  of  the  body  during  life  would  be  distinguishable
after  death,  either  perfectly  or  in  a great  measure  and  for  a time.
And  I should  infer  that  this  is  equally  true  of  the  soul,  Callicles  ;
when  the  man  is  stripped  of  the  body  aU  the  natural  or  acquired
affections  of  the  soul  are  laid  open  to  view.  And  when  they  come
to  the  judge,  as  those  from  Asia  came  to  Ehadamanthus,  he  places
them  near  him  and  inspects  them  quite  impartially,  not  knowing
whose  the  soul  is : perhaps  he  may  lay  hands  on  the  soul  of
the  great  king,  or  of  some  other  king  or  potentate,  who  has  no
soundness  in  him,  but  his  soul  is  marked  with  the  whip,  and  is
full  of  the  prints  and  scars  of  perjuries,  and  of  wrongs  which  have
been  plastered  into  him  by  each  action,  and  he  is  all  crooked  with
falsehood  and  imposture,  because  he  has  lived  without  truth.  Him
Ehadamanthus  beholds,  full  of  all  deformity  and  disproportion,
which  is  caused  by  licence  and  luxury  and  insolence  and  inconti-
nence, and  despatches  him  ignominiously  to  his  prison,  and  there
he  undergoes  the  punishment  w^hich  he  deserves.”

252.  As,  in  Eastern  monarchies,  a veil  was  sometimes  cast


206


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


over  the  face  of  the  guilty  so  in  the  New  Testament  the  veil
of  darkness  is  dra^vn  over  the  fate  of  the  lost  soul  who  falls
into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.  And  when  the  king
came  in  to  see  the  guests,  he  saw  there  a man  which  had
not  on  a wedding-garment : and  he  saith  unto  him,  Friend,
how  earnest  thou  in  hither,  not  having  a wedding-garment  ?
And  he  was  speechless.  Then  said  the  king  to  the  servants,
Bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and  take  him  away,  and  cast  him
into  outer  darkness ; there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing
of  teeth.” ^

253.  But  this  graphic  and  powerful  picture  of  the  fate  of
the  lost  given  us  in  the  New  Testament  fared  as  badly  as
other  conceptions  when  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  mate-
rialists of  the  middle  ages.  Its  true  meaning  was  entirely
obliterated,  and  the  Christian  Hell,  instead  of  being  the
Gehenna  of  the  Universe,  the  place  where  all  its  garbage
and  filth  is  consumed,  was  changed  into  a region  shut  in
by  adamantine  walls  and  full  of  impossible  physical  fires
— the  Devil  being  the  chief  stoker.

The  one  idea  is  awful,  while  the  other  is  simply  grotesque.
An  ancient  Jew  who  had  occasion  to  pass  by  the  valley  of
Hinnom,  and  whose  senses  were  invaded  by  the  sights  and
smells  of  that  doleful  region,  must  have  entertained  a con-
ception of  the  Hell  described  by  Christ  as  different  as  pos-
sible from  that  which  has  reached  us  from  the  middle  ages,

^ “ As  the  word  went  out  of  the  king’s  mouth,  they  covered  Haman’s  face.” —
Esther  vii.  8.

2 St.  Matthew,  xxii.  11-13.  [See,  however,  also  Luke  xiii.  28,  where  the  true
meaning  obviously  is  “ while  ye  are  being  cast  ouV^  There  are  other  obvious  mis-
translations in  our  version  ; such  as  for  instance  that  of  Mark  ix.  43,  where  for
“ the  fire  that  cannot  be  put  out”  we  have  “ the  fire  that  never  shall  be  quenched.”
It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  revised  version  will  be  such  as  to  give  readers  ignorant
of  Greek  a thoroughly  correct  idea  of  the  meaning  of  the  original,  most  especially
on  points  of  such  awful  importance  as  this.]


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE,


207


and  to  whicli  some  even  of  the  readers  of  this  book  may
have  been  accustomed  in  their  earlier  years.

To  some  extent  no  doubt  Christ’s  description  of  the
Universal  Gehenna  must  be  regarded  as  figurative,  but  yet
we  do  not  think  that  the  sayings  of  Christ  with  regard  to
the  unseen  world  ought  to  be  looked  upon  as  nothing  more .
than  pure  figures  of  speech.  We  feel  assured  that  the  prin-
ciple of  Continuity  cries  out  against  such  an  interpretation
— may  they  not  rather  be  descriptions  of  what  takes  place
in  the  unseen  universe  brought  home  to  our  minds  by
means  of  perfectly  true  comparisons  with  the  processes  and
things  of  this  present  universe  which  they  most  resemble  ?

254.  Thus  the  Christian  Gehenna  bears  to  the  Unseen
Universe  precisely  the  same  relation  as  the  Gehenna  of  the
Jews  did  to  the  city  of  Jerusalem ; and  just  as  the 'fire  was
always  kept  up  and  the  worm  ever  active  in  the  one,  so  are
we  forced  to  contemplate  an  enduring  process  in  the
other.

For  we  cannot  easily  agree  with  those  who  would  limit
the  existence  of  evil  to  the  present  world.  We  know  now
that  the  matter  of  the  whole  of  the  visible  universe  is
of  a piece  with  that  which  we  recognise  here,  and  the
beings  of  other  worlds  must  be  subject  to  accidental  occur-
rences from  their  relation  with  the  outer  universe  in  the
same  way  as  we  are.  But  if  there  be  accident,  must  there
not  be  pain  and  death  ? Now  these  are  naturally  associated
in  our  minds  with  the  presence  of  moral  evil.

We  are  thus  drawn,  if  not  absolutely  forced,  to  surmise
that  the  dark  thread  known  as  evil  is  one  which  is  very
deeply  woven  into  that  garment  of  God  which  is  called  the
Universe.

In  fine,  just  as  the  arguments  of  this  chapter  lead  us  to


2o8


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


regard  the  whole  Universe^  as  eternal,  so  in  like  manner
are  we  led  to  regard  evil  as  eternal,  and  therefore  we  can-
not easily  imagine  the  Universe  without  its  Gehenna,  where
the  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched.  The
jyrocess  at  all  events  would  seem  to  be  most  probably  an
-enduring  one.  [Many  passages  of  the  New  Testament,
however,  seem  to  point  to  a continuity  of  moral  develop-
ment in  the  unseen  universe,  a development  whose  climax
is  to  he  reached  when  the  last  enemy,  death,  is  destroyed
in  Gehenna.]

255.  But  it  is  fruitless  to  expect  that  Science  should  throw
any  light  upon  that  greatest  of  all  mysteries— the  origin  of
evil.  We  have  now  come  to  a region  where  we  must  suffer
ourselves  to  be  led  solely  by  the  light  which  is  given  us  in
the  Christian  Kecords.  And  while  on  this  subject  we  would
quote  from  a very  remarkable  work  on  the  Lord’s  Prayer^
by  the  Eev.  Charles  Parsons  Keichel,  B.D.,  which  exhibits
in  a singularly  clear  light  the  testimony  given  by  Scripture,
as  well  as  the  fruitlessness  of  all  attempts  to  obtain  infor-
mation from  any  other  quarter.  Our  first  extract  relates
to  the  personality  of  The  Evil  One  ” : —

refutation’'  (says  the  writer)  “of  the  objections  that  have
been  urged  against  the  personal  existence  of  the  Adversary,  this
one  observation  is  quite  enough : that  of  the  world  of  spirits  we
cannot  possibly  know  anything  save  by  direct  revelation.  It  is
beyond  the  domain  of  the  senses ; it  is  beyond  the  cognisance  of
reason.  A man  born  blind  might  therefore  as  rationally  attempt
to  disprove  by  a process  of  reasoning  the  existence  of  a sense  of
which  he  can  know  nothing  except  by  testimony,  as  we  attempt
by  a process  of  reasoning  to  disprove  the  existence  of  a spirit  of

^ Including  in  it  a state  of  things  like  the  present  physical  universe  ; not,  how-
ever, the  very  things  that  now  exist,  these  being  evanescent  in  energy  at  least,
if  not  also  in  material.

2 Cambridge^  Macmillan,  1855.


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


209


whose  existence  we  can  know  nothing  save  by  testimony.  The
only  point  to  be  ascertained  in  either  case  is  whether  the  testimony
be  sufficient.  If  the  testimony  of  Scripture  be  deemed  sufficient,
then  I cannot  see  that  it  is  possible  to  deny  the  Personal  existence
of  Satan  any  more  than  that  of  God.  How  Satan  exists,  or  where
at  the  present  time,  or  how  his  power  avails,  as  we  are  told  it
does,  to  contrive  and  suggest  temptations  to  the  mind  of  man ; and
to  what  extent  he  is  awa.re  of  what  is  passing  in  men’s  minds,  so
as  to  adapt  his  suggestions  to  their  weakness,  we  are  not  told,  and
do  not  therefore  know.  But  our  not  being  told  the  manner  in
which  his  power  is  exercised  and  brought  to  bear,  is  no  proof  of
the  unreality  of  that  fearful  Being  who  is  everywhere  in  the  New
Testament  exhibited  as  the  adversary  of  God  and  goodness,  whether
in  the  individual,  or  in  the  development  of  the  human  race.”

The  next  passage  is  one  which  all  of  us  may  study  with
much  advantage.  It  refers  to  temptation  : —

“Every  risk  incurred  unnecessarily  for  the  sake  of  exhibiting
our  trust  in  God,  every  unusual  or  unnecessary  act  done  merely  or
chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  displaying  our  privileges  or  our  convic-
tion, or  of  attracting  attention  and  admiration,  every  stepping  out
of  the  plain,  unadorned,  and  unadmired  path  of  simple  duty  is  a
phase  of  it.”

“ Why  God  should  permit  any  of  his  creatures  to  be  tempted  is
a question  we  can  no  more  answer  than  we  can  that  question  of
which  indeed  it  is  but  a case,  why  God  should  permit  evil  to  exist
at  all.  But  we  know  that  evil  does  exist ; and  we  know  too  that
temptation  does  exist.  That  evil  was  first  introduced  into  the
world  by  a Being  who  goes  under  the  name  of  Satan  or  the  Adver-
sary (2  Cor.  xi.  3)  we  are  told  : that  this  Being  endeavoured  first
to  seduce,  and  afterwards  to  menace  our  Saviour  into  evil ; and  that
he  is  constantly  engaged  in  tempting  us  as  he  tempted  Christ,  we
are  also  told.”

“ And  the  true  rendering  of  the  last  clause  in  Christ’s  own
prayer  would  seem  to  intimate  that,  the  same  Being  is  also  busy  in
suggesting  temptations  to  every  follower  of  Christ — ‘ Lead  us  not
into  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  the  Evil  One.’  ”


o


210


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


256.  But  we  must  now  draw  to  a close;  first  of  all,  how-
ever, let  us  briefly  sum  up  the  results  of  our  discussion.

The  great  scientific  principle  which  we  have  made  use  of
has  been  the  Law  of  Continuity.  This  simply  means  that
the  whole  universe  is  of  a piece;  that  it  is  something
which  an  intelligent  being  is  capable  of  understanding,  not
completely  nor  all  at  once,  but  better,  and  better  the  more
he  studies  it.

In  fine,  in  this  great  whole  which  we  call  the  Universe
there  is  no  impenetrable  barrier  to  the  intellectual  develop-
ment of  the  individual.  Death  is  not  such  a barrier,
Avhether  we  contemplate  it  in  others,  or  whether  we  experi-
ence it  ourselves.  And  the  same  continuity  which  has
l;een  insisted  on  with  reference  to  our  intellectual  concep-
tjons  of  the  universe  applies,  we  have  little  doubt,  to  the
other  faculties  of  man,  and  to  other  regions  of  thought.

If  then  we  regard  the  universe  from  this  point  of  view
we  are  led  to  a scientific  conception  of  it  which  is,  we  have
seen,  strikingly  analogous  to  that  system  with  which  we
are  presented  in  the  Christian  religion.  For  not  only  are
the  nebulous  beginning  and  fiery  termination  of  the  present
visible  universe  indicated  in  the  Christian  records,  but  a
constitution  and  power  are  assigned  to  the  Unseen  Universe
strikingly  analogous  to  those  at  which  we  may  arrive  by  a
legitimate  scientific  process.

257.  Our  readers  are  now  in  a position  to  perceive  the
result  of  questioning  science  in  this  manner,  and  of  aban-
doning ourselves  without  mistrust  or  hesitation  to  the
guidance  of  legitimate  principles.  It  is  that  science  so
developed,  instead  of  appearing  antagonistic  to  the  claims
of  Christianity,  is  in  reality  its  most  efficient  supporter ;
and  the  burden  of  showing  how  the  early  Christians  got


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


211


hold  of  a constitution  of  the  unseen  universe,  similar  to  that
which  science  proclaims,  is  transferred  to  the  shoulders  of
the  opponents  of  Christianity.

258.  For  the  present  we  would  only  add  that  the  prin-
ciple of  the  aid  of  which  we  have  availed  ourselves  is
not  a mere  theological  weapon,  but  will,  we  believe,  ulti-
mately prove  a most  powerful  scientific  auxiliary.  Already
we  have  used  it  in  our  endeavour  to  modify  the  most
probable  hypothesis  that  has  been  formed  concerning  the
ultimate  constitution  of  matter.

The  truth  is,  that  science  and  religion  neither  are  nor
can  be  two  fields  of  knowledge'  with  no  possible  communi-
cation between  them.  Such  an  hypothesis  is  simply  absurd.

There  is  undoubtedly  an  avenue  leading  from  the  one  to
the  other,  but  this  avenue  is  through  the  unseen  universe,
and  unfortunately  it  has  been  walled  up  and  ticketed  with
No  road  this  professedly  alike  in  the  name  of

science  at  the  one  end,  and  in  the  name  of  religion  at  the
other.

We  are  in  hopes  that  when  this  region  of  thought  comes
to  be  further  examined  it  may  lead  to  some  common  ground
on  which  followers  of  science  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  re-
vealed religion  on  the  other,  may  meet  together  and  recog-
nise each  other  s claims  without  any  sacrifice  of  the  spirit
of  independence,  or  any  diminution  of  self-respect.  Enter-
taining these  views  we  shall  welcome  with  sincere  pleasure
any  remarks  or  criticism  on  these  speculations  of  ours,
whether  by  the  leaders  of  scientific  thought  or  by  those  of
religious  inquiry.

It  must  never  be  forgotten  that,  whether  we  take  the
scientific  or  the  religious  point  of  view,  one  great  object  of
our  life  in  the  visible  universe  is  obviously  to  learn;  and


212


THE  UNSEEN  UNIVERSE.


that  (as  human  beings  are  constituted)  advance  in  learning
necessarily  implies  a high  purpose  kept  steadily  before  us,
and  a continuous  and  arduous  pursuit.  For,  as  we  are  told
in  the  First  Epistle  of  John,  This  is  the  victory  which
overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith.’^


Tw  VLKiovTi  StofTO)  avT(^  <f>ayeiv  Ik  tov
^v\ov  . . .


Boston  Public  Library

Central  Library,  Copley  Square

Division  of

Reference  and  Research  Services


The  Date  Due  Card  in  the  pocket  indi-
cates the  date  on  or  before  which  this
book  should  be  returned  to  the  Library.

Please  do  not  remove,  cards  from  this
pocket.


BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY


3 9999  08546  063  0


n

a ' "


V


