Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States, Vol. I (Joseph Story, 1833)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1833 first edition, vol. I (https://archive.org/details/commentariesonco01stor).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

COMMENTARIES


CONSTITUTION  OF THE  UNITED  STATES;


A PRELIMINARY REVIEW


THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES  AND  STATES,
BEFORE  THE  ADOPTION  OF  THE CONSTITUTION.


By JOSEPH STORY, LL.  D.,

DANE PROFESSOR OF LAW IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY.


IN THREE VOLUMES.


Magistratibus  igitur  opus  est ;  sino  quorum  prudentii  ;ie  diJigentift  esse  civitas  non  potest
quorumque  descriptione  omnia  Rcipublicte  moderatio  continetur."

Cicero  de  Leg.  lib.  3.  cap.  2.

"Government  is  a  contrivance  of  human  wisdom  to  provide  for  human  wants."

• >  .  . H'JRKE.


VOLUME'.!.:-


•  •  '•< *•  • *

BOSTON:

H  I  L  L  I  A  R  D,  GRAY,  AND  COMPANY.

CAMBRIDGE:

BROWN,  SHATTUCK,  AND  CO.

1833.


1


i
PUBi  HlkKt


Enterod  according  to  the  net  of  Congress  in  the  year  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  thirty-three,

by  Joseph  Stort,

in  the  Clerk's  office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  District  of  Massachusetts.


C  A  m  ii  u  i  d  i;  i:  :

c.  v* .  ml  r  c  a  l,  f  a  iv;d:  C

Printers  to  the  University.


To  I'll  E


HONORABLE  JOHN  MARSHALL,  LL.  D.,

CHIEF  JUSTICE  OK  THE  UNITED STATES  OF  AMERICA.

Sir,
I  ask  the  favour  of  dedicating  this  work  to  you.  I  know
not,  to  whom  it  could  with  so  much  propriety  be  dedicated,  as
to  one,  whose  youth  was  engaged  in  the  arduous  enterprises  of
the  Revolution  ;  whose  manhood  assisted  in  framing  and  sup-
porting the  national  Constitution  ;  and  whose  maturer  years
have  been  devoted  to  the  task  of  unfolding  its  powers,  and
illustrating  its  principles.  When,  indeed,  I  look  back  upon
your  judicial  labours  during  a  period  of  thirty-two  years,  it  is
difficult  to  suppress  astonishment  at  their  extent  and  variety,
and  at  the  exact  learning,  the  profound  reasoning,  and  the  solid
principles,  which  they  every  where  display.  Other  Judges
have  attained  an  elevated  reputation  by  similar  labours  in  a  single
department  of  jurisprudence.  But  in  one  department,  (it
needs  scarcely  be  said,  that  I  allude  to  that  of  constitutional
law,)  the  common  consent  of  your  countrymen  has  admitted
you  to  stand  without  a  rival.  Posterity  will  assuredly  confirm
by  its  deliberate  award,  what  the  present  age  has  approved,  as
an  act  of  undisputed  justice.  Your  expositions  of  constitutional
law  enjoy  a  rare  and  extraordinary  Authority.  They  constitute
a  monument  of  fame  far  beyond  .he-  nidinary  memorials  of
political  and  military  glory.  They'are  (testmcd*  to  enlighten,
instruct,  and  convince  future  genpraftfe  :"  :il1('  ":">  scarcely
perisli  but  with  the  memory  of  the' coi.'sti  tilt  ion'  kself.  They
are  the  victories  of  a  mind  accustomed  to  grapple  with  difficul-
ties, capable  of  unfolding  the  most  comprehensive  truths  with
masculine  simplicity,  and  severe  logic,  and  prompt  to  dissipate
the  illusions  of  ingenious  doubt,  and  subtle  argument,  and  impas-
sioned eloquence.  They  remind  us  of  some  mighty  river  of  our


IV  DEDICATION.

own  country,  which,  gathering  in  its  course  the  contributions  of
many  tributary  streams,  pours  at  last  its  own  current  into  the
ocean,  deep,  clear,  and  irresistible.

But  I  confess,  that  I  dwell  with  even  more  pleasure  upon
the  entirety  of  a  life  adorned  by  consistent  principles,  and
filled  up  in  the  discharge  of  virtuous  duty  ;  where  there  is
nothing  to  regret,  and  nothing  to  conceal ;  no  friendships  brok-
en ;  no  confidence  betrayed  ;  no  timid  surrenders  to  popular
clamour  ;  no  eager  reaches  for  popular  favour.  Who  does
not  listen  with  conscious  pride  to  the  truth,  that  the  disciple,
the  friend,  the  biographer  of  Washington,  still  lives,  the  un-
compromising advocate  of  his  principles?

I  am  but  too  sensible,  that  to  some  minds  the  time  may  not
seem  yet  to  have  arrived,  when  language,  like  this,  however
true,  should  meet  the  eyes  of  the  public.  May  the  period  be
yet  far  distant,  when  praise  shall  speak  out  with  that  fulness  of
utterance,  which  belongs  to  the  sanctity  of  the  grave.

But  I  know  not,  that  in  the  course  of  providence  the  privi-
lege will  be  allowed  me  hereafter,  to  declare,  in  any  suitable
form,  my  deep  sense  of  the  obligations,  which  the  jurispru-
dence of  my  country  owes  to  your  labours,  of  which  I  have
been  for  twenty-one  years  a  witness,  and  in  some  humble  mea-
sure a  companion.  And  if  any  apology  should  be  requir-
ed for  my  present  freedom,  may  I  not  say,  that  at  your  age
all  reserve  may  well  be  spared,  since  all  your  labours  must
soon  belong  exclusively  to  history  ?

Allow  me  to  add,  that  I  have  a  desire  (will  it  be  deemed
presumptuous;;  to  ri  acdrd  itpfen  these  pages  the  memory  of  a
friendship,  winch  has  For  so  many  years  been  to  mc  a  source
of  inexpressible  ?aY.i(aetio,i  :  and  which,  1  indulge  the  hope,
may  continue,  .to. accompany,  and  cheer  me  to  the  close  of  life.
i  ri.i  v  ,il.  :lu'  \n-:\t  s1  respect,

affectionately  your  servant,

JOSEPH  STORY,

Cambridge,  January,  [833.


P  11 E  F  ACE


I  now  offer  to  the  public  another  portion  of  the  labours  de-
volved on  me  in  the  execution  of  the  duties  of  the  Dane  Pro-
fessorship of  Law  in  Harvard  University.  The  importance  of
the  subject  will  hardly  be  doubted  by  any  persons,  who  have
been  accustomed  to  deep  reflection  upon  the  nature  and  value
of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States.  I  can  only  regret,
that  it  has  not  fallen  into  abler  hands,  with  more  leisure  to  pre-
pare, and  more  various  knowledge  to  bring  to  such  a  task.

Imperfect,  however,  as  these  Commentaries  may  seem  to
those,  who  are  accustomed  to  demand  a  perfect  finish  in  all
elementary  works,  they  have  been  attended  with  a  degree
of  uninviting  labour,  and  dry  research,  of  which  it  is  scarcely
possible  for  the  general  reader  to  form  any  adequate  estimate.
Many  of  the  materials  lay  loose  and  scattered  ;  and  were  to
be  gathered  up  among  pamphlets  and  discussions  of  a  tempo-
rary character ;  among  obscure  private  and  public  documents  ;
and  from  collections,  which  required  an  exhausting  diligence
to  master  their  contents,  or  to  select  from  unimportant  masses,
a  few  facts,  or  a  solitary  argument.  Indeed,  it  required  no
small  labour,  even  after  these  sources  were  explored,  to  bring
together  the  irregular  fragments,  and  to  form  them  into  groups,
in  which  they  might  illustrate  and  support  each  other.

From  two  great  sources,  however,  I  have  drawn  by  far  the
greatest  part  of  my  most  valuable  materials.  These  are,  The
Federalist,  an  incomparable  commentary  of  three  of  the  great-
est statesmen  of  their  age  ;  and  the  extraordinary  Judgments
of  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Marshall  upon  constitutional  law.  The
former  have  discussed  the  structure  and  organization  of  the
national  government,  in  all  its  departments,  with  admirable  ful-
ness and  force. The  latter  has  expounded  the  application  and


VI  PREFACE.

limits  of  its  powers  and  functions  with  unrivalled  profoundness
and  felicity.  The  Federalist  could  do  little  more,  than  state
the  objects  and  general  bearing  of  these  powers  and  functions.
The  masterly  reasoning  of  the  Chief  Justice  has  followed  them
out  to  their  ultimate  results  and  boundaries,  with  a  precision
and  clearness,  approaching,  as  near  as  may  be,  to  mathematical
demonstration.  The  Federalist,  being  written  to  meet  the
most  prevalent  popular  objections  at  the  time  of  the  adoption
of  the  Constitution,  has  not  attempted  to  pursue  any  very  ex-
act order  in  its  reasonings  ;  but  has  taken  up  subjects  in  such
a  manner,  as  was  best  adapted  at  the  time  to  overcome  preju-
dices, and  win  favour.  Topics,  therefore,  having  a  natural
connexion,  are  sometimes  separated  ;  and  illustrations  appro-
priate to  several  important  points,  are  sometimes  presented  in
an  incidental  discussion.  1  have  transferred  into  my  own
pages  all,  which  seemed  to  be  of  permanent  importance  in  that
great  work  ;  and  have  thereby  endeavoured  to  make  its  merits
more  generally  known.

The  reader  must  not  expect  to  find  in  these  pages  any
novel  views,  and  novel  constructions  of  the  Constitution.  I
have  not  the  ambition  to  be  the  author  of  any  new  plan  of  in-
terpreting the  theory  of  the  Constitution,  or  of  enlarging  or  nar-
rowing its  powers  by  ingenious  subtleties  and  learned  doubts.
My  object  will  be  sufficiently  attained,  if  I  shall  have  succeeded
in  bringing  before  the  reader  the  true  view  of  its  powers  main-
tained by  its  founders  and  friends,  and  confirmed  and  illustrated
by  the  actual  practice  of  the  government.  The  expositions  to
be  found  in  the  work  are  less  to  be  regarded,  as  my  own  opin-
ions, than  as  those  of  the  great  minds,  which  framed  the  Con-
stitution, or  which  have  been  from  time  to  time  called  upon  to
administer  it.  Upon  subjects  of  government  it  has  always  ap-
peared to  me,  that  metaphysical  refinements  are  out  of  place.
A  constitution  of  government  is  addressed  to  the  common  ji
of  the  people;  ami  never  was  designed  for  trials  of  bgical
skill,  or  visionary  speculation.

The  reader  will  sometimes  find  the  same  train  of  reasoning
brought  before  him  in  differenl parts  of  these  Commentaries.


PREFACE.  Ml

It  was  indispensable  to  do  so,  unless  the  discus-ion  was  left
imperfect,  or  the  reader  was  referred  back  toother  pages,  to
gather  up  and  combine  disjointed  portions  of  reasoning.  In
cases,  which  have  undergone  judicial  investigation,  or  which

concern  the  judicial  department,  I  have  felt  myself  restricted
to  more  narrow  discussions,  than  in  the  rest  of  the  work;  and
have  sometimes  contented  myself  with  a  mere  transcript  from
the  judgments  of  the  court.  It  may  readily  be  understood,  that
this  course  has  been  adopted  from  a  solicitude,  not  to  go  inci-
dentally beyond  the  line  pointed  out  by  the  authorities.

In  dismissing  the  work,  I  cannot  but  solicit  the  indulgence
of  the  public  for  its  omissions  and  deficiencies.  With  more
copious  materials  it  might  have  been  made  more  exact,  as  well
as  more  satisfactory.  With  more  leisure  and  more  learning  it
might  have  been  wrought  up  more  in  the  spirit  of  political
philosophy.  Such  as  it  is,  it  may  not  be  wholly  useless,  as  a
means  of  stimulating  abler  minds  to  a  more  thorough  review
of  the  whole  subject  ;  and  of  impressing  upon  Americans  a
reverential  attachment  to  the  Constitution,  as  in  the  highest
sense  the  palladium  of  American  liberty.

January,  1833.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


VOLUME  I


Pago

The  Constitution  ....... xvii


Preliminary  Chapter


BOOK I.

HISTORY OF THE COLONIES.

CHAPTER  I.

Origin  and  Title  to  the  Territory  of  the  Colonies .  3-21

CHAPTER  II.
Origin  and  Settlement  of  Virginia . . . .21-33

CHAPTER  III.

Origin  and  Settlement  of  New-England,  and Plymouth

Colony 34-43

CHAPTER  IV.

Massachusetts 44-03

VOL. I.  B


X  CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  V.
New-Hampshire G4-6S

CHAPTER  VI.

Maine . . ^**  , p , t  G9-71

CHAPTER  VII.

Connecticut . . 72-80

CHAPTER  VIII.
Rhode-Island 81-91

CHAPTER  IX.

Maryland  . . . . . . . .92-97

CHAPTER  X.
New- York 98-103

CHAPTER  XL
New- Jersey 104-108

CHAPTER  XII.
Pennsylvania  109-114

CHAPTER  XIII.
Delaware 115-116

CHAPTER  XIV.
North  and  South-Carolina 117-127

CHAPTER  XV.
Georgia 128-131

CHAPTER  XVI.

General  Review  of  the  Colonies  132-  J  83


CONTENTS.  XJ

BOOK II.

HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  AND  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.

Page

CHAPTER  I.

The  History  of  the  Revolution  . . .  1S4  -  208

CHAPTER  II.

Origin  of  the  Confederation 209-21G

CHAPTER  III.
Analysis  of  the  Articles  of  the  Confederation . . 217-21-1

CHAPTER  IV.
Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Confederation  . 221-251


BOOK III.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES.

CHAPTER  I.

Origin  and  Adoption  of  the  Constitution  . . 252-258

CHAPTER  II.  %

Objections  to  the  Constitution  .... 259  -  278

CHAPTER  III.

Nature  of  the  Constitution  —  whether  a  Compact . 279  -  '34: J

CHAPTER  IV.

Who  is  the  final  Judge  or  Interpreter  in  Constitutional

Controversies . . . ... . . 344-381  V#

CHAPTER  V.

Rulea  of  Interpretation  of  the  Constitution . . 3S2-44^


All

^un  iii.ii  x  n.

CHAPTER  VI.

Page

The  Preamble

443-494

VOLUME  II.


CHAPTER  VII.
Distribution  of  Powers 1-25

CHAPTER  VIII.

The  Legislature 2G- 45

CHAPTER  IX.
The  House  of  Representatives  .... 4G-172

CHAPTER  X.

The  Senate 173-279

CHAPTER  XI.

Elections  and  Meetings  of  Congress  ... 280-297

CHAPTER  XII.
Privileges  and  Powers  of  both  Houses  of  Congress . 29S-  337

CHAPTER  XIII.
Mode  of  Passing  Laws  —  President's  Negative  . 338 -  i  )<  5

CHAPTER  XIV.
Powers  of  Congress  — Taxes  .... 3GG-502

CHAPTER  XV.
Power  to  Borrow  Money  and  Regulate  Commerce  503-543


CONTENTS.  XU1


VOLUME  III


Pagi

CHAPTER  XVI.

Power  over  Naturalization  and  Bankruptcy . . . 1-15
CHAPTER  XVII.

Power  to  Coin  Money  and  Fix  the  Standard  of  Weights

and  Measures 16-21

CHAPTER  XVIII.

Power  to  Establish  Post-Offices  and  Post-Roads  . 22  -  47

CHAPTER  XIX.
Power  to  Promote  Science  and  Useful  Arts  . . 48-51

CHAPTER  XX. •
Power  to  Punish  Piracies  and  Felonies  on  the  High  Seas 52-58

CHAPTER  XXL

Power  to  Declare  War  and  Make  Captures  —  Army  —

Navy 59-SO

CHAPTER  XXII.

Power  over  the  Militia 81-95

CHAPTER  XXIII.
Power  over  Seat  of  Government  and  other  ceded  Places 9G  -  10S

CHAPTER  XXIV.
Powers  of  Congress  —  Incidental .... 109-126

CHAPTER  XXV.
Powers  of  Congress  —  National  Bank . .  127-148

CHAPTER  XXVI.
Powers  of  Congress  —  Internal  Improvements  . 149  -  155


XIV  CONTENTS.

Page

CHAPTER  XXVII.

Powers  of  Congress  —  Purchases  of  Foreign  Territory  — -

Embargoes  ....... 15G  -  1G9

CHAPTER  XXVIII.

Power  of  Congress  to  Punish  Treason . . . 170-173

CHAPTER  XXIX.

Power  of  Congress  as  to  Proof  of  State  Records  and

Proceedings. 174-183

CHAPTER  XXX.

Powers  of  Congress  —  Admission  of  new  States,  and

Acquisition  of  Territory 184-192

CHAPTER  XXXI.

Powers  of  Congress  —  Territorial  Governments . 193  -  202

CHAPTER  XXXII.
Prohibitions  on  the  United  States .... 203-2IG

CHAPTER  XXXIII.
Prohibitions  on  the  States 217  -  240

CHAPTER  XXXIV.

Prohibitions  on  the  States  —  Impairing  Contracts . 241-2(19

CHAPTER  XXXV.

Prohibitions  on  the  States  —  Tonnage  Duties  —  Mak-
ing War 270-276

CHAPTER  XXXVI.

Executive  Department — Organization  of  .  277-339

CHAPTER  XXXVII.

Executive  —  Powers  and  Duties .... 310-424

CHAPTER  XXXVIII.
The  Judiciary  —  Importance  and  Powers  of  425  —  666


CONTENTS.  XV

CHAPTER  XXXIX.

Definition  and  Evidence  of  Treason . .  667-  6*3  2

CHAPTER  XL.
Privileges  of  Citizens  —  Fugitives  —  Slaves . . 673-678

CHAPTER  XLI.

Guaranty  of  Republican  Government  —  Mode  of  Making

Amendments ....... (379-GOO

CHAPTER  XLII.

Public  Debts —  Supremacy  of  Constitution  and  Laws 091-701
CHAPTER  XLIII.

Oaths  of  Office  —  Religious  Test  —  Ratification  of  the

Constitution 702-712

CHAPTER  XLIV.

Amendments  to  the  Constitution .... 713-  7;>>

CHAPTER  XLV.
Concluding  Remarks 756-700


ERRATA.


VOLUME


line 4,  for  1703,  read  3713.

"  3,  " Edward  read  Edmund.

"  2, " has,  read  liave.

"  22,  " it,  itself,  read  they,  themselves.

"  25  fy  26,  for  its,  read  their.

"  25,  for  compact,  read  rule.

"  17,  read  by  its  being.

VOLUME II.

line  12,  for  habit,  read  habits.
" 22, " which,  read  while.
u 30, " use,  read  repeat.
" 24, " his,  read  the.
" 20, " does  read  avows.

VOLUME III.

Page  159,  line  8,  read  may  still  be.

" 202,  " 3,  for  imitations,  read  limitations.

" 205,  «  22,  " would,  read  will.

" 346,  "  19,  read  no  more.

" 497,  "  19,  (Note,)/6»r  examination,  read  organization.

" 574,  "  23,  for  distinction,  (in  some  copies,)  read  dis-
tribution.


Page  15,

ii

87,

u

299,

a

u

a

317,

it

354,

Pag

e  20,

tt

36,

«

56,

u

95,

a

330,

CONSTITUTION


OF  THE


UNITED STATES  OF  AMERICA.


We,  the  people  of  the  United  States,  in  order  to  form  a
more  perfect  union,  establish  justice,  ensure  domestic  tranquil-
lity, provide  for  the  common  defence,  promote  the  general  wel-
fare, and  secure  the  blessings  of  liberty  to  ourselves  and  our
posterity,  do  ordain  and  establish  this  Constitution  for  the
United  States  of  America.

ARTICLE  I.

Section  1.
1.  All  legislative  powers  herein  granted,  shall be  vested  in
a  congress  of  the  United  States,  which  shall  consist  of  a  senate
and  house  of  representatives.

Section  2.

1.  The  house  of  representatives  shall  be  composed  of  mem-
bers chosen  every  second  year  by  the  people  of  the  several
states,  and  the  electors  in  each  state  shall  have  the  qualifica-
tions requisite  for  electors  of  the  most  numerous  branch  of  the
state  legislature.

2.  No  person  shall  be  a  representative  who  shall  not  have
attained  to  the  age  of  twenty-five  years,  and  been  seven
years  a  citizen  of  the  United  States,  and  who  shall  not,  when
elected,  be  an  inhabitant  of  that  state  in  which  he  shall  be
chosen.

c


XV111  THE  CONSTITUTION.

3.  Representatives  and  direct  taxes  shall  be  apportioned
among  the  several  states  which  may  be  included  within  this
Union,  according  to  their  respective  numbers,  which  shall  be
determined  by  adding  to  the  whole  number  of  free  persons,
including  those  bound  to  service  for  a  term  of  years,  and
excluding  Indians  not  taxed,  three-fifths  of  all  other  persons.
The  actual  enumeration  shall  be  made  within  three  years  after
the  first  meeting  of  the  congress  of  the  United  States,  and
within  every  subsequent  term  of  ten  years,  in  such  manner  as
they  shall  by  law  direct.  The  number  of  representatives  shall
not  exceed  one  for  every  thirty  thousand,  but  each  state  shall
have  at  least  one  representative  ;  and  until  such  enumeration
shall  be  made,  the  state  of  New  Hampshire  shall  be  entitled
to  choose  three,  Massachusetts  eight,  Rhode  Island  and  Provi-
dence Plantations  one,  Connecticut  five,  New  York  six,  New
Jersey  four,  Pennsylvania  eight,  Delaware  one,  Maryland  six,
Virginia  ten,  North  Carolina  five,  South  Carolina  five,  and
Georgia  three.

4.  When  vacancies  happen  in  the  representation  from  any
state,  the  executive  authority  thereof  shall  issue  writs  of  elec-
tion to  fill  such  vacancies.

5.  The  house  of  representatives  shall  choose  their  speaker
and  other  officers  ;  and  shall  have  the  sole  power  of  impeach-
ment.

Section  3.

1.  The  senate  of  the  United  States  shall  be  composed  of
two  senators  from  each  state,  chosen  by  the  legislature  thereof,
for  six  years  ;  and  each  senator  shall  have  one  vote.

2.  Immediately  after  they  shall  be  assembled  in  consequence
of  the  first  election,  they  shall  be  divided  as  equally  us  may  be
into  three  classes.  The  seats  of  the  senators  of  the  first  class
shall  be  vacated  at  the  expiration  of  the  second  year,  of  the
second  class,  at  the  expiration  of  the  fourth  year,  and  of  the
third  class,  at  the  expiration  of  the  sixth  year,  so  that  one-third
may  be  chosen  every  second  year  ;  and  if  vacancies  happen  by
resignation,  or  otherwise,  during the  recess  of  the  legislature


THE  CONSTITUTION.  xix

of  any  state,  the  executive  thereof  may  make  temporary  ap-
pointments until  the  nexl  meeting  of  the  legislature,  which
shall  then  fill  such  vacancies.

3.  No  person  shall  he  a  senator  who  shall  not  have  attained
to  the  age  of  thirty  years,  and  been  nine  years  a  citizen  of  the
United  States,  and  who  shall  not,  when  elected,  be  an  inhabit-
ant of  that  state  for  which  lie  shall  be  chosen.

4.  The  vice-president  of  the  United  States  shall  be  presi-
dent of  the  senate,  but  shall  have  no  vote,  unless  they  be
equally  divided.

5.  The  senate  shall  choose  their  other  officers,  and  also  a
president  pro  tempore,  in  the  absence  of  the  vice  president,  or
when  he  shall  exercise  the  office  of  president  of  the  United
States.

6.  The  senate  shall  have  the  sole  power  to  try  all  impeach-
ments. When  sitting  for  that  purpose,  they  shall  be  on  oath
or  affirmation.  When  the  president  of  the  United  States  is
tried,  the  chief  justice  shall  preside  ;  and  no  person  shall  be
convicted  without  the  concurrence  of  two-thirds  of  the  members
present.

7.  Judgment  in  cases  of  impeachment  shall  not  extend  fur-
ther than  to  removal  from  office,  and  disqualification  to  hold
and  enjoy  any  office  of  honour,  trust,  or  profit,  under  the  United
States  ;  but  the  party  convicted  shall  nevertheless  be  liable
and  subject  to  indictment,  trial,  judgment,  and  punishment,  ac-
cording to  law.

Section  4.

1.  The  times,  places,  and  manner  of  holding  elections  for
senators  and  representatives,  shall  be  prescribed  in  each  state
by  the  legislature  thereof:  but  the  congress  may  at  any  time
by  law,  make  or  alter  such  regulations,  except  as  to  the  places
of  choosing  senators.

2.  The  congress  shall  assemble  at  least  once  in  every  year,
and  such  meeting  shall  be  on  the  first  Monday  in  December,
unless  they  shall  by  law  appoint  a  different  day.


XX  THE  CONSTITUTION.

Section  5.

1.  Each  house  shall  be  the  judge  of  the  elections,  returns,
and  qualifications  of  its  own  members,  and  a  majority  of  each
shall  constitute  a  quorum  to  do  business  ;  but  a  smaller  number
may  adjourn  from  day  to  day,  and  may  be  authorized  to  com-
pel the  attendance  of  absent  members,  in  such  manner,  and
under  such  penalties  as  each  house  may  provide.

2.  Each  house  may  determine  the  rules  of  its  proceedings,
punish  its  members  for  disorderly  behaviour,  and,  with  the
concurrence  of  two-thirds,  expel  a  member.

3.  Each  house  shall  keep  a  journal  of  its  proceedings,  and
from  time  to  time  publish  the  same,  excepting  such  parts  as
may,  in  their  judgment,  require  secrecy  ;  and  the  yeas  and
nays  of  the  members  of  either  house  on  any  question,  shall,
at  the  desire  of  one-fifth  of  those  present,  be  entered  on  the
journal.

4.  Neither  house,  during  the  session  of  congress,  shall,  with-
out the  consent  of  the  other,  adjourn  for  more  than  three  days,
nor  to  any  other  place  than  that  in  which  the  two  houses  shall
be  sitting.

Section  6.

1.  The  senators  and  representatives  shall  receive  a  compen-
sation for  their  services,  to  be  ascertained  by  law,  and  paid
out  of  the  treasury  of  the  United  States.  They  shall,  in  all
cases,  except  treason,  felony,  and  breach  of  the  peace,  be  priv-
ileged from  arrest  during  their  attendance  at  the  session  of
their  respective  houses,  and  in  going  to,  and  returning  from,  the
same  ;  and  for  any  speed)  or  debate  in  either  house, thej  shall
not  be  questioned  in  any  other  place.

2.  No  senator  or  representative  shall,  during  the  time  for
which  he  was  elected,  bo  appointed  to  any  civil  office  under
the  authority  of  the  United  States,  which  shall  have  been  cre-
ated, or  the  emoluments  whereof  shall  have  been  increased
during  such  time  ;  and  no  person  holding  any  oilice  under  the
United  Stale-,  shall  In-  ;i  member  of  cither  house  during  his
continuance  in  office.


THE  CONSTITUTION.  \\l

Section  7.

1.  All  bills  for  raisin--  revenue  shall  originate  in  the  house
oi  representatives  ;  bul  the  senate  may  propose  or  concur  with
amendments  as  on  other  bills.

•2.  Kvery  bill  w  hieh  shall  have  passed  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives and  the  senate,  shall, before  it  become  a  law,  be  pre-
sented to  the  president  of  the  United  States;  if  he  approve  he
shall  sign  it,  but  if  not  he  shall  return  it,  with  his  objections,  to
that  house  in  which  it  shall  have  originated,  who  shall  enter
the  objections  at  large  on  their  journal,  and  proceed  to  recon-
sider it.  If  after  such  reconsideration  two-thirds  of  that  house
shall  agree  to  pass  the  bill,  it  shall  be  sent,  together  with  the
objections,  to  the  other  house,  by  which  it  shall  likewise  be
reconsidered,  and  if  approved  by  two-thirds  of  that  house,  it
shall  become  a  law.  But  in  all  such  cases  the  votes  of  both
houses  shall  be  determined  by  yeas  and  nays,  and  the  names
of  the  persons  voting  for  and  against  the  bill  shall  be  entered
on  the  journal  of  each  house  respectively.  If  any  bill  shall  not
be  returned  by  the  president  within  ten  clays,  (Sundays  ex-
cepted,) after  it  shall  have  been  presented  to  him,  the  same
shall  be  a  law,  in  like  manner  as  if  he  had  signed  it,  unless
the  congress  by  their  adjournment  prevent  its  return,  in  which
case  it  shall  not  be  a  law.

3.  Every  order,  resolution,  or  vote,  to  which  the  concurrence
of  the  senate  and  house  of  representatives  may  be  necessary,
(except  on  a  question  of  adjournment,)  shall  be  presented  to
the  president  of  the  United  States  ;  and  before  the  same  shall
take  effect,  shall  be  approved  by  him,  or  being  disapproved  by
him,  shall  be  re-passed  by  two-thirds  of  the  senate  and  house
of  representatives,  according  to  the  rules  and  limitations  pre-
scribed in  the  case  of  a  bill.  r

Section  8.

The  congress  shall  have  power

1.  To  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  to
pay the  debts  and provide  for the  common  defence  and gen-


Xxii  THE  CONSTITUTION.

eral  welfare  of  the United  States ;  but  all  duties,  imposts,  and
excises,  shall  be  uniform  throughout  the  United  States  :

2.  To  borrow  money  on  the  credit  of  the  United  States :

3.  To  regulate  commerce  with  foreign  nations,  and  among
the  several  states,  and  with  the  Indian  tribes:

4.  To  establish  an  uniform  rule  of  naturalization,  and  uni-
form laws  on  the  subject  of  bankruptcies  throughout  the  United
States :

5.  To  coin  money,  regulate  the  value  thereof,  and  of  foreign
coin,  and  fix  the  standard  of  weights  and  measures  :

6.  To  provide  for  the  punishment  of  counterfeiting  the  secu-
rities and  current  coin  of  the  United  States  :

7.  To  establish  post-offices  and  post-roads  :

8.  To  promote  the  progress  of  science  and  useful  arts,  by
securing,  for  limited  times,  to  authors  and  inventors  the  exclu-
sive right  to  their  respective  writings  and  discoveries :

9.  To  constitute  tribunals  inferior  to  the  Supreme  Court  :

10.  To  define  and  punish  piracies,  and  felonies,  committed
on  the  high  seas,  and  offences  against  the  law  of  nations  :

11.  To  declare  war,  grant  letters  of  marque  and  reprisal,
and  make  rules  concerning  captures  on  land  and  water :

12.  To  raise  and  support  armies,  but  no  appropriation  of
money  to  that  use  shall  be  for  a  longer  term  than  two  years  :

13^  To  provide  and  maintain  a  navy  :

14.  To  make  rules  for  the  government  and  regulation  of  the
land  and  naval  forces  :

15.  To  provide  for  calling  forth  the  militia  to  execute  the
laws  of  the  Union,  suppress  insurrections,  and  repel  invasions:

16.  To  provide  for  organizing,  arming,  and  disciplining  the
militia,  and  for  governing  such  part  of  them  as  may  be  em-
ployed in  the  service  of  the  United  States,  reserving  to  the
states  respectively,  the  appointment  of  the  officers,  and  the
authority  of  training  the  militia  according  to  the  discipline  pre-
scribed by  congress  :

17.  To  exercise  exclusive  legislation  in  all  cases  whatsoever,
over  such  district,  (not  exceeding  ten  miles  square,)  as  may,
by  cession  of  particular  states,  and the  acceptance  of  congress,


THE  CONSTITUTION.  XX1I1

become  the  seat  of  the  government  of  tin-  United  States,  and
to  exercise  like  authority  over  all  places  purchased  by  the  con-
sent of  the  legislature  of  the  state  in  which  the  same  shall  be,
for  the  erection of  forts,  magazines,  arsenals,  dock-yards,  and

other  needful  buildings:  —  And

18.  To  make  all  laws  which  shall  be  necessary  and  proper
for  carrying  into  execution  the  foregoing  powers,  and  all  other
powers  vested  by  this  Constitution  in  the  government  of  the
United  States,  or  in  any  department  or  officer  thereof.

Section  9.

1.  The  migration  or  importation  of  such  persons,  as  any  of
the  states  now  existing  shall  think  proper  to  admit,  shall  not
be  prohibited  by  the  congress  prior  to  the  year  one  thousand
eight  hundred  and  eight,  but  a  tax  or  duty  may  be  imposed  on
such  importation,  not  exceeding  ten  dollars  for  each  person.

2.  The  privilege  of  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  shall  not  be
suspended,  unless  when  in  cases  of  rebellion  or  invasion  the
public  safety  may  require  it.

3.  No  bill  of  attainder  or  ex  post  facto  law  shall  be  passed.

4.  No  capitation,  or  other  direct  tax  shall  be  laid,  unless  in
proportion  to  the  census  or  enumeration  herein  before  directed
to  be  taken.

5.  No  tax  or  duty  shall  be  laid  on  articles  exported  from
any  state.  No  preference  shall  be  given  by  any  regulation  of
commerce  or  revenue  to  the  ports  of  one  state  over  those  of
another ;  nor  shall  vessels  bound  to,  or  from,  one  state,  be
obliged  to  enter,  clear,  or  pay  duties,  in  another.

6.  No  money  shall  be  drawn  from  the  treasury,  but  in  con-
sequence of  appropriations  made  by  law  ;  and  a  regular  state-
ment and  account  of  the  receipts  and  expenditures  of  all  public
money  shall  be  published  from  time  to  time.

7.  No  title  of  nobility  shall  be  granted  by  the  United  States  :
And  no  person  holding  any  office  of  profit  or  trust  under  them,
shall,  without  the  consent  of  the  congress,  accept  of  anv  pres-
ent, emolument,  office,  or  title  of  any  kind  whatever,  from  any
king,  prince,  or  foreign  state.


XXIV  THE  CONSTITUTION.

Section  10.

1.  No  state  shall  enter  into  any  treaty,  alliance,  or  confed-
eration ;  grant  letters  of  marque  and  reprisal ;  coin  money  ;  emit
bills  of  credit ;  make  any  thing  but  gold  and  silver  coin  a  ten-
der in  payment  of  debts  ;  pass  any  bill  of  attainder,  ex  post  facto
law,  or  law  impairing  the  obligation  of  contracts,  or  grant  any
title  of  nobility.

2.  No  state  shall,  without  the  consent  of  the  congress,  lay
any  imposts  or  duties  on  imports  or  exports,  except  what  may
be  absolutely  necessary  for  executing  its  inspection  laws ;  and
the  net  produce  of  all  duties  and  imposts,  laid  by  any  state  on
imports  or  exports,  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  treasury  of  the
United  States ;  and  all  such  laws  shall  be  subject  to  the  revis-
ion and  control  of  the  congress.  No  state  shall,  without  the
consent  of  congress,  lay  any  duty  of  tonnage,  keep  troops,  or
ships  of  war,  in  time  of  peace,  enter  into  any  agreement  or
compact  with  another  state,  or  with  a  foreign  power,  or  engage
in  war,  unless  actually  invaded,  or  in  such  imminent  danger  as
will  not  admit  of  delay.

ARTICLE  II.

Section  1.

1.  The  executive  power  shall  be  vested  in  a  president  of
the  United  States  of  America.  He  shall  hold  his  office  during
the  term  of  four  years,  and  together  with  the  vice-president,
chosen  for  the  same  term,  be  elected  as  follows  :

2.  Each  state  shall  appoint,  in  such  manner  as  the  legisla-
ture thereof  may  direct,  a  number  of  electors  equal  to  the  whole
number  of  senators  and  representatives  to  which  the  state  may
be  entitled  in  tin-  congress:  but  no  senator  or  representative,
or  person  holding  an  office  of  trust  or  profit  under  the  United
States,  shall  be  appointed  an  elector.

:$.  The  electors  shall  meet  in  their  respective  states,  and
vote  by  ballot  for  two  persons,  of  whom  one  at  least  shall  not
be  an  inhabitant  of  the  same  state  with  themselves.  And
they  shall  make  a  list  of  all  the  persons  voted  for,  and  of  the
number  of  votes  for  each  ;  which  list  they  shall  sign  and  certify,


THE  CONSTITUTION.  XXV

and  transmit,  sealed,  to  the  seat  of  the  government  oi'  the
United  States,  directed  to  the  president  of  the  senate.  The
president  of  tin-  senate  shall,  in  the  presence  of  the  senate  and
house  of  representatives,  open  all  the  certificates,  and  the  votes
shall  then  be  counted.  The  person  having  the  greatest  num-
ber of  votes  shall  be  the  president,  if  such  number  be  a  major-
ity of  the  whole  number  of  electors  appointed;  and  if  there
be  more  than  one  who  have  such  majority,  and  have  an  equal
number  of  votes,  then  the  house  of  representatives  shall  im-
mediately choose  by  ballot  one  of  them  for  president ;  and
if  no  person  have  a  majority,  then,  from  the  five  highest  on
the  list  the  said  house  shall  in  like  manner  choose  the  presi-
dent. But  in  choosing  the  president  the  votes  shall  be  taken
by  states,  the  representation  from  each  state  having  one  vote ;
a  quorum  for  this  purpose  g&all  consist  of  a  member  or  mem-
bers from  two-thirds  of  the  states,  and  a  majority  of  all  the
states  shall  be  necessary  to  a  choice.  In  every  case,  after  the
choice  of  the  president,  the  person  having  the  greatest  num-
ber of  votes  of  the  electors  shall  be  the  vice-president.  But  if
there  should  remain  two  or  more  who  have  equal  votes,  the
senate  shall  choose  from  them  by  ballot  the  vice-president.

4.  The  congress  may  determine  the  time  of  choosing  the
electors,  and  the  day  on  which  they  shall  give  their  votes  ;
which  day  shall  be  the  same  throughout  the  United  States.

5.  No  person  except  a  natural  born  citizen,  or  a  citizen  of
the  United  States,  at  the  time  of  the  adoption  of  this  Constitu-
tion, shall  be  eligible  to  the  office  of  president;  neither  shall
any  person  be  eligible  to  that  office  who  shall  not  have  attain-
ed to  the  age  of  thirty-five  years,  and  been  fourteen  years  a
resident  within  the  United  States.

6.  In  case  of  the  removal  of  the  president  from  office,  or  of
his  death,  resignation,  or  inability  to  discharge  the  powers  and
duties  of  the  said  office,  the  same  shall  devolve  on  the  vice-
president,  and  the  congress  may  by  law  provide  for  the  case  of
removal,  death,  resignation,  or  inability,  both  of  the  president
and  vice-president,  declaring  what  officer  shall  then  act  as  pres-

vol.  i.  n


XXVI  THE  CONSTITUTION.

ident,  and  such  officer  shall  act  accordingly,  until  the  disability-
be  removed,  or  a  president  shall  be  elected.

7.  The  president  shall,  at  stated  times,  receive  for  his  ser-
vices, a  compensation,  which  shall  neither  be  increased  nor
diminished  during  the  period  for  which  lie  shall  have  been
elected,  and  he  shall  not  receive  within  that  period  any  other
emolument  from  the  United  States  or  any  of  them.

8.  Before  he  enter  on  the  execution  of  his  office,  he  shall
take  the  following-  oath  or  affirmation  :

o

9.  "  I  do  solemnly  swear,  (or  affirm,)  that  I  will  faithfully
"  execute  the  office  of  president  of  the  United  States,  and  will,
"  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  preserve,  protect,  and  defend  the
"  Constitution  of  the  United  States."

Section 2.

1.  The  president  shall  be  commander-in-chief  of  the  army
and  navy  of  the  United  States,  and  of  the  militia  of  the  several
states,  when  called  into  the  actual  service  of  the  United  States ;
he  may  require  the  opinion,  in  writing,  of  the  principal  officer
in  each  of  the  executive  departments,  upon  any  subject  relat-
ing to  the  duties  of  their  respective  offices,  and  he  shall  have
power  to  grant  reprieves  and  pardons  for  offences  against  the
United  States,  except  in  cases  of  impeachment.

2.  He  shall  have  power,  by  and  with  the  advice  and  consent
of  the  senate,  to  make  treaties,  provided  two-thirds  of  the
senators  present  concur  ;  and  he  shall  nominate,  and  by  and
with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  senate,  shall  appoint  ambas-
sadors, other  public  ministers  and  consuls,  judges  of  the  su-
preme court,  and  all  other  officers  of  the  United  States,  whose
appointments  are  not  herein  otherwise  provided  for,  and  which
shall  be  established  by  law :  but  the  congress  may  by  law  vest
the  appointment  of  such  inferior  officers,  as  they  think  proper,
in  the  president  alone,  in  the  courts  of  law,  or  in  the  head<  of
departments.

3.  The  president  shall  have  power  to  fill  up  all  vacancies
that  may  happen  during  the  recess  of  the  senate,  by  granting
commissions  which  shall  expire  at  the  end  of  their  next  session.


THE  CONSTITUTION,  \\\  11


Section  -l.


1.  He  shall  from  time  to  time  give  to  i lie  congress  informa-
tion of  the  state  of  the  Union,  ami  recommend  to  their  consid-
eration such  measures  as  he  shall  judge  necessary  and  expedi-
ent; he  may,  on  extraordinary  occasions,  convene  both  houses,
or  either  of  them,  and  in  case  of  disagreement  between  them
with  respect  to  the  time  of  adjournment,  he  may  adjourn  them
to  such  time  as  he  shall  think  proper;  he  shall  receive  ambas-
sadors and  other  public  ministers  ;  he  shall  take  care  that  the
laws  lie  faithfully  executed,  and  shall  commission  all  the  officers
of  the  United  States.

Section  4.

1 .  The  president,  vice-president,  and  all  civil  officers  of  the
United  States  shall  be  removed  from  office  on  impeachment  for,
and  conviction  of,  treason,  bribery,  or  other  high  crimes  and
misdemeanors.

ARTICLE  III.
Section  1.

1.  The  judicial  power  of  the  United  States,  shall  be  vested
in  one  Supreme  Court,  and  in  such  inlerior  courts  as  the  con-
gress may  from  time  to  time  ordain  and  establish.  The  judges,
both  of  the  supreme  and  inferior  courts,  shall  hold  their  offices
during  good  behaviour,  and  shall,  at  stated  times,  receive  for
their  services,  a  compensation,  which  shall  not  be  diminished
during  their  continuance  in  office.

Section  2.

1.  The  judicial  power  shall  extend  to  all  cases,  in  law  and
equity,  arising  under  this  Constitution,  the  laws  of  the  United
States,  and  treaties  made,  or  which  shall  be  made,  under  their
authority  ;  to  all  cases  affecting  ambassadors,  other  public  min-
isters and  consuls  ;  to  all  cases  of  admiralty  and  maritime  juris-
diction ;  to  controversies  to  which  the  United  States  shall  be
a  party  :  to  controversies  between  two  or  more  states,  between


XXV111  THE  CONSTITUTION.

a  state  and  citizens  of  another  state,  between  citizens  of  differ-
ent states,  between  citizens  of  the  same  state  claiming  lands
under  grants  of  different  states*,  and  between  a  state,  or  the
citizens  thereof,  and  foreign  states,  citizens,  or  subjects.

2.  In  all  cases  affecting  ambassadors,  other  public  ministers
and  consuls,  and  those  in  which  a  state  shall  be  a  party,  the
supreme  court  shall  have  original  jurisdiction.  In  all  the  other
cases  before  mentioned,  the  supreme  court  shall  have  appellate
jurisdiction,  both  as  to  law  and  fact,  with  such  exceptions,  and
under  such  regulations  as  the  congress  shall  make.

3.  The  trial  of  all  crimes,  except  in  cases  of  impeachment,
shall  be  by  jury  ;  and  such  trial  shall  be  held  in  the  state  where
the  said  crimes  shall  have  been  committed  ;  but  when  not
committed  within  any  state,  the  trial  shall  be  at  such  place  or
places  as  the  congress  may  by  law  have  directed.

Section  3.

1.  Treason  against  the  United  States,  shall  consist  only  in
levying  war  against  them,  or  in  adhering  to  their  enemies,  giv-
ing them  aid  and  comfort.  No  person  shall  be  convicted  of
treason  unless  on  the  testimony  of  two  witnesses  to  the  same
overt  act,  or  on  confession  in  onen  court.

2.  The  congress  shall  have  power  to  declare  the  punishment
of  treason,  but  no  attainder  of  treason  shall  work  corruption
of  blood,  or  forfeiture,  except  during  the  life  of  the  person
attainted.

ARTICLE  IV.

Section  1 .

1.  Full  faith  and  credit  shall  be  given  in  each  state  to  the
public  acts,  records,  and  judicial  proceedings  of  every  other
state.  And  the  congress  may  by  general  laws  prescribe  the
manner  in  which  such  acts,  records,  and  proceedings  shall  be
proved,  ;md  the  effect  thereof.

Section  2.

1.  The- citizens  of  each  state  shall  he  entitled  to  all  priv-

ileges  and  immunities  of  citizens  in  the  several  states.


Tin:  CONSTITUTION,  KX1X

2.  A  person  charged  in any  state  with treason, felony,  or

other  crime,  who  shall  flee  from  justice,  and  be  found  in  an-
other state,  shall,  on  demand  of  the  executive  authority  of  the
state  from  which he  fled,  be  delivered up,  to  be  removed to

the  state  having  jurisdiction  of  the  crime.

3.  No  person  held  to  service  or  labour  in  one  state,  under
the  laws  thereof,  escaping  into  another,  shall,  in  consequence  of
any  law  or  regulation  therein,  he  discharged  from  such  service
or  labour,  but  shall  be  delivered  up  on  claim  of  the  party  to
whom  such  service  or  labour  may  be  due.

Section  3. *

1.  New  states  may  be  admitted  by  the  congress  into  this
Union  ;  but  no  new  state  shall  be  formed  or  erected  within
the  jurisdiction  of  any  other  state  ;  nor  any  state  be  formed  by
the  junction  of  two  or  more  states,  or  parts  of  states,  without
the  consent  of  the  legislatures  of  the  states  concerned,  as  well
as  of  the  congress.

2.  The  congress  shall  have  power  to  dispose  of  and  make
all  needful  rules  and  regulations  respecting  the  territory  or
other  property  belonging  to  the  United  States  ;  and  nothing  in
this  Constitution  shall  be  so  construed  as  to  prejudice  any
claims  of  the  United  States,  or  of^iny  particular  state.

Section  4.

1.  The  United  States  shall  guarantee  to  every  state  in  this
Union  a  republican  form  of  government,  and  shall  protect  each
of  them  against  invasion  ;  and  on  application  of  the  legislature,
or  of  the  executive,  (when  the  legislature  cannot  be  convened,)
against  domestic  violence.

ARTICLE  V.

1.  The  congress,  whenever  two-thirds  of  both  houses  shall
deem  it  necessary,  shall  propose  amendments  to  this  Constitu-
tion, or,  on  the  application  of  the  legislatures  of  two-thirds  of
the  several  states,  shall  call  a  convention  for  proposing  amend-
ments, which,  in  either  case,  shall be  valid to  all  intents  and


XXX  THE  CONSTITUTION.

purposes,  as  part  of  this  Constitution,  when  ratified  by  the
legislatures  of  three-fourths  of  the  several  states  or  by  conven-
tions in  three-fourth?  thereof,  as  the  one  or  the  other  mode  of
ratification  may  be  proposed  by  the  congress  :  Provided,  that
no  amendment,  which  may  be  made  prior  to  the  year  one
thousand  eight  hundred  and  eight,  shall  in  any  manner  affect
the  first  and  fourth  clauses  in  the  ninth  section  of  the  first
article  ;  and  that  no  state,  without  its  consent,  shall  be  depriv-
ed of  its  equal  suffrage  in  the  senate.

ARTICLE  VI.

1.  All  debts  contracted  and  engagements  entered  into,  be-
fore the  adoption  of  this  Constitution,  shall  be  as  valid  against
the  United  States  under  this  Constitution,  as  under  the  con-
federation.

2.  This  Constitution,  and  the  laws  of  the  United  States
which  shall  be  made  in  pursuance  thereof;  and  all  treaties
made,  or  which  shall  be  made,  under  the  authority  of  the
United  States,  shall  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land  ;  and
the  judges  in  every  state  shall  be  bound  thereby,  any  thing
in  the  constitution  or  laws  of  any  state  to  the  contrary  not-
withstanding.

3.  The  senators  and  representatives  before  mentioned,  and
the  members  of  the  several  state  legislatures,  and  all  executive
and  judicial  officers,  both  of  the  United  States  and  of  the
several  states  shall  be  bound,  by  oath  or  affirmation,  to  support
this  Constitution  ;  but  no  religious  test  shall  ever  be  required
as  a  qualification  to  any  office  or  public  trust  under  the  United
States.

ARTICLE  VII.

] .  The  ratification  of  the  conventions  of  nine  states,  shall
be  sufficient  for  the  establishment  of  this  Constitution  between

the  states  so  ratifying  the  same.


THE C0NST1TUTJ0N.  XXXI

AMENDMENTS  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION.

ARTICLE  I.

Congress  shall  make  no  law  respecting  an  establishment  of
religion,  or  prohibiting  the  free  exercise  thereof;  or  abridging
the  freedom  of  speech,  or  of  the  press  ;  or  the  right  of  the  peo-
ple peaceably  to  assemble,  and  to  petition  the  government  for
a  redress  of  grievances.

ARTICLE  II.

A  well  regulated  militia  being  necessary  to  the  security  of
a  free  state,  the  right  of  the  people  to  keep  and  bear  arms  shall
not  be  infringed.


ARTICLE  III.

No  soldier  shall,  in  time  of  peace,  be  quartered  in  any
house  without  the  consent  of  the  owner  ;  nor  in  time  of  war,
but  in  a  manner  to  be  prescribed  by  law.

ARTICLE  IV.

The  right  of  the  people  to  be  secure  in  their  persons,  houses,
papers,  and  effects,  against  unreasonable  searches  and  seizures,
shall  not  be  violated ;  and  no  warrants  shall  issue,  but  upon
probable  cause,  supported  by  oath  or  affirmation,  and  particu-
larly describing  the  place  to  be  searched,  and  the  persons  or
things  to  be  seized.

ARTICLE  V.

No  person  shall  be  held  to  answer  for  a  capital  or  otherwise
infamous  crime,  unless  on  a  presentment  or  indictment  of  a
grand  jury,  except  in  cases  arising  in  the  land  or  naval  forces,
or  in  the  militia,  when  in  actual  service,  in  time  of  war  or
public  danger ;  nor  shall  any  person  be  subject  for  the  same
offence  to  be  twice  put  in  jeopardy  of  life  or  limb ;  nor  shall


XXXil  THE  CONSTITUTION.

be  compelled,  in  any  criminal  case,  to  be  a  witness  against
himself,  nor  be  deprived  of  life,  liberty,  or  property,  without
due  process  of  law  ;  nor  shall  private  property  be  taken  for
public  use  without  just  compensation.

ARTICLE  VI.

In  all  criminal  prosecutions,  the  accused  shall  enjoy  the  right
to  a  speedy  and  public  trial,  by  an  impartial  jury  of  the  state
and  district  wherein  the  crime  shall  have  been  committed,
which  district  shall  have  been  previously  ascertained  by  law  ;
and  to  be  informed  of  the  nature  and  cause  of  the  accusation  ;
to  be  confronted  with  the  witnesses  against  him  ;  to  have  com-
pulsory process  for  obtaining  witnesses  in  his  favour ;  and  to
have  the  assistance  of  counsel  for  his  defence.

ARTICLE  VII.

In  suits  at  common  law,  where  the  value  in  controversy
shall  exceed  twenty  dollars,  the  right  of  trial  by  jury  shall  be
preserved  ;  and  no  fact  tried  by  a  jury  shall  be  otherwise  re-
examined in  any  court  of  the  United  States,  than  according  to
the  rules  of  the  common  law.

ARTICLE  VIII.

Excessive  bail  shall  not  be  required,  nor  excessive  fines  im-
posed, nor  cruel  and  unusual  punishments  inflicted.

ARTICLE  IX.

The  enumeration  in  the  Constitution  of  certain  rights,  shall
not  be  construed  to  deny  or  disparage  others  retained  by  the
people.

ARTICLE  X.

The  powers  not  delegated  to  the  United  States  by  the  Con-
stitution, nor  prohibited  by  it  to  the  states,  are  reserved  to  the
states  respectively,  or  to  the  people.


THE  CONSTITUTION.  XXX11I

ARTICLE  XL

The  judicial  power  o J  the  United  States  shall  not  be  con-
strued to  extend  to  any  suit  in  law  or  equity,  commenced  or
prosecuted  against  one  of  the  United  States  by  citizens  of  an-
other state,  or  by  citizens  or  subjects  of  any  foreign  state.

ARTICLE  XII.

1.  The  electors  shall  meet  in  their  respective  states,  and
vote  by  ballot  for  president  and  vice-president,  one  of  whom,
at  least,  shall  not  be  an  inhabitant  of  the  same  state  with  them-
selves ;  they  shall  name  in  their  ballots  the  person  voted  for
as  president,  and  in  distinct  ballots  the  person  voted  for  as
vice-president ;  and  they  shall  make  distinct  lists  of  all  persons
voted  for  as  president,  and  of  all  persons  voted  for  as  vice-
president,  and  of  the  number  of  votes  for  each,  which  lists  they
shall  sign  and  certify,  and  transmit  sealed  to  the  seat  of  the
government  of  the  United  States,  directed  to  the  president  of
the  senate ;  the  president  of  the  senate  shall,  in  the  presence
of  the  senate  and  house  of  representatives,  open  all  the  certifi-
cates, and  the  votes  shall  then  be  counted :  the  person  having
the  greatest  number  of  votes  for  president,  shall  be  the  presi-
dent, if  such  number  be  a  majority  of  the  whole  number  of
electors  appointed  ;  and  if  no  person  have  such  majority,  then
from  the  persons  having  the  highest  numbers,  not  exceeding
three,  on  the  list  of  those  voted  for  as  president,  the  house  of
representatives  shall  choose  immediately,  by  ballot,  the  presi-
dent. But  in  choosing  the  president,  the  votes  shall  be  taken
by  states,  the  representation  from  each  state  having  one  vote ;
a  quorum  for  this  purpose  shall  consist  of  a  member  or  mem-
bers from  two-thirds  of  the  states,  and  a  majority  of  all  the
states  shall  be  necessary  to  a  choice.  And  if  the  house  of  rep-
resentatives shall  not  choose  a  president  whenever  the  right  of
choice  shall  devolve  upon  them,  belbre  the  fourth  day  of
March  next  following,  then  the  vice-president  shall  act  as  presi-
dent, as  in  the  case  of  the  death  or  other  constitutional  disa-
bility of  the  president.

VOL. I.  E


XXXiv  THE  CONSTITUTION.

2.  The  person  having  the  greatest  number  of  votes  as  vice-
president,  shall  be  the  vice-president,  if  such  number  be  a
majority  of  the  whole  number  of  electors  appointed  ;  and  if
no  person  have  a  majority,  then  from  the  two  highest  num-
bers on  the  list,  the  senate  shall  choose  the  vice-president  :  a
quorum  for  the  purpose  shall  consist  of  two-thirds  of  the  whole
number  of  senators,  a  majority  of  the  whole  number  shall  be
necessary  to  a  choice.

3.  But  no  person  constitutionally  ineligible  to  the  office  of
president,  shall  be  eligible  to  that  of  vice-president  of  the
United  States.


COMMENTARIES


on


THE CONSTITUTION.


COMMENTARIES


PRELIMINARY  CHAPTER.

PLAN  OF  THE  WORK.

The  principal  object  of  these  Commentaries  is
to  present  a  full  analysis  and  exposition  of  the  Con-
stitution of  Government  of  the  United  States  of
America.  In  order  to  do  this  with  clearness  and  accu-
racy, it  is  necessary  to  understand,  what  was  the  polit-
ical position  of  the  several  States,  composing  the  Union,
in  relation  to  each  other  at  the  time  of  its  adoption.
This  will  naturally  conduct  us  back  to  the  American
Revolution.;  and  to  the  formation  of  the  Confederation
consequent  thereon.  But  if  we  stop  here,  we  shall  still
be  surrounded  with  many  difficulties  in  regard  to  our
domestic  institutions  and  policy,  which  have  grown  out
of  transactions  of  a  much  earlier  date,  connected  on  one
side  with  the  common  dependance  of  all  the  Colonies
upon  the  British  Empire,  and  on  the  other  with  the  par-
ticular charters  of  government  and  internal  legislation,
which  belonged  to  each  Colony,  as  a  distinct  sove-
reignty, and  which  have  impressed  upon  each  peculiar
habits,  opinions,  attachments,  and  even  prejudices.
Traces  of  these  peculiarities  are  every  where  discern-
ible in  the  actual  jurisprudence  of  each  State  ;  and
are  silently  or  openly  referred  to  in  several  of  the  pro-

VOL.  I.  1


2  CONSTITUTIONAL LAW.

visions  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States.  In
short,  without  a  careful  review  of  the  origin  and  consti-
tutional and  juridical  history  of  all  the  colonies,  of  the
principles  common  to  all,  and  of  the  diversities,  which
were  no  less  remarkable  in  all,  it  would  be  impossible
fully  to  understand  the  nature  and  objects  of  the  Con-
stitution ;  the  reasons  on  which  several  of  its  most  im-
portant provisions  are  founded  ;  and  the'  necessity  of
those  concessions  and  compromises,  which  a  desire  to
form  a  solid  and  perpetual  Union  has  incorporated  into
its  leading  features.

The  plan  of  the  work  will,  therefore,  naturally  com-
prehend three  great  divisions.  The  first  will  embrace  a
sketch  of  the  charters,  constitutional  history,  and  ante-
revolutionary  jurisprudence  of  the  Colonies.  The  sec-
ond will  embrace  a  sketch  of  the  constitutional  histo-
ry of  the  States  during  the  Revolution,  and  the  rise,
progress,  decline,  and  fall  of  the  Confederation.  The
third  will  embrace  the  history  of  the  rise  and  adoption
of  the  Constitution  ;  and  a  full  exposition  of  all  its  pro-
visions, with  the  reasons,  on  which  they  were  respec-
tively founded,  the  objections,  by  which  they  were
respectively  assailed,  and  such  illustrations  drawn  from
contemporaneous  documents,  and  the  subsequent  op-
erations of  the  government,  as  may  best  enable  the
reader  to  estimate  for  himself  the  true  value  of  each.
In  this  way  (as  it  is  hoped)  his  judgment  as  well  as  his
affections  will  be  enlisted  on  the  side  of  the  Constitution,
as  the  truest  security  of  the  Union,  and  the  only  solid
basis,  on  which  to  rest  the  private  rights,  the  public  lib-
erties, and  the  substantial  prosperity  of  the  people  com-
posing the  American  Republic.


BOOK I.

HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.


CHAPTER  I.


ORIGIN  OF  THE  TITLE  TO  TERRITORY  OF  THE
COLONIES.

^  1.  The  discovery  of  the  Continent  of  America  by
Columbus  in  the  fifteenth  century  awakened  the  atten-
tion of  all  the  maritime  States  of  Europe.  Stimulated
by  the  love  of  glory,  and  still  more  by  the  hope  of  gain
and  dominion,  many  of  them  early  embarked  in  adven-
turous enterprises,  the  object  of  which  was  to  found
colonies,  or  to  search  for  the  precious  metals,  or  to  ex-
change the  products  and  manufactures  of  the  old  world
for  whatever  was  most  valuable  and  attractive  in  the
new.1  England  was  not  behind  her  continental  neigh-
bours in  seeking  her  own  aggrandizement,  and  nour-
ishing her  then  infant  commerce.2  The  ambition  of
Henry  the  Seventh  was  roused  by  the  communications
of  Columbus,  and  in  1495  he  granted  a  commission  to
John  Cabot,  an  enterprising  Venitian,  then  settled  in
England,  to  proceed  on  a  voyage  of  discovery,  and  to
subdue  and  take  possession  of  any  lands  unoccupied

1  Marshall's  Amer.  Colonies, 12,  13;  1  Haz.  Collec.  51,  72,  62,  103,
105  ;  Robertson's  Hist,  of  America,  B.  9.

2  Robertson's  America,  B.  J).


4  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

by  any  Christian  Power,  in  the  name  and  for  the  ben-
efit of  the  British  Crown.1  In  the  succeeding  year
Cabot  sailed  on  his  voyage,  and  having  first  discovered
the  Islands  of  Newfoundland  and  St.  Johns,  he  after-
wards sailed  along  the  coast  of  the  continent  from  the
56th  to  the  38th  degree  of  north  latitude,  and  claimed
for  his  sovereign  the  vast  region,  which  stretches  from
the  Gulf  of  Mexico  to  the  most  northern  regions.2

§  2.  Such  is  the  origin  of  the  British  title  to  the  ter-
ritory composing  these  United  States.  That  title  was
founded  on  the  right  of  discovery,  a  right,  which  was
held  among  the  European  nations  a  just  and  sufficient
foundation,  on  which  to  rest  their  respective  claims  to
the  American  continent.  Whatever  controversies  ex-
isted among  them  (and  they  were  numerous)  respect-
ing the  extent  of  their  own  acquisitions  abroad,  they
appealed  to  this  as  the  ultimate  fact,  by  which  their
various  and  conflicting  claims  were  to  be  adjusted.  It
may  not  be  easy  upon  general  reasoning  to  establish
the  doctrine,  that  priority  of  discovery  confers  any  ex-
clusive right  to  territory.  It  was  probably  adopted  by
the  European  nations  as  a  convenient  and  flexible  rule,
by  which  to  regulate  their  respective  claims.  For  it
was  obvious,  that  in  the  mutual  contests  for  dominion
in  newly  discovered  lands,  there  would  soon  arise  vio-
lent and  sanguinary  struggles  for  exclusive  possession,
unless  some  common  principle  should  be  recognised
by  all  maritime  nations  for  the  benefit  of  all.  None
more  readily  suggested  itself  than  the  one  now  under
consideration  ;  and  as  it  was  a  principle  of  peace  and
repose,  of  perfect  equality  of  benefit  in  proportion  to

i  1  Ilaz.  Coli.  9  ;  Robertson's  Hist,  of  America,  B.  9.

2  Marshall,  Am.  Colon 12,  13  ;  Robertson's  America,  B.  9.


CH.  I.] ORIGIN  AND  TITLE  TO  TERRITOIIV.  5

the  actual  or  supposed  expenditures  and  hazards  at-
tendant upon  such  enterprises,  ii  received  a  universal
acquiescence,  if  not  a  ready  approbation.  Ii  became
the  basis  ot  European  polity,  and  regulated  the  exer-
cise of  the  rights  of  sovereignty  and  settlement  in  all
the  cis- Atlantic  Plantations.1  In  respect  to  desert  and
uninhabited  lands,  there  do'es  not  seem  any  important
objection,  which  can  be  urged  against  it.  But  in  re-
spect to  countries,  then  inhabited  by  the  natives,  it  is
not  easy  to  perceive,  how,  in  point  of  justice,  or  human-
ity, or  general  conformity  to  the  law  of  nature,  it  can  be
successfully  vindicated.  As  a  conventional  rule  it  might
properly  govern  all  the  nations,  which  recognised  its
obligation  ;  but  it  could  have  no  authority  over  the  ab-
origines of  America,  whether  gathered  into  civilized
communities,  or  scattered  in  hunting  tribes  over  the
wilderness.  Their  right,  whatever  it  was,  of  occupa-
tion or  use,  stood  upon  original  principles  deducible
from  the  law  of  nature,  and  could  not  be  justly  narrow-
ed or  extinguished  without  their  own  free  consent.

§  3.  There  is  no  doubt,  that  the  Indian  tribes,  in-
habiting this  continent  at  the  time  of  its  discovery,  main-
tained a  claim  to  the  exclusive  possession  and  occu-
pancy of  the  territory  within  their  respective  limits,  as
sovereigns  and  absolute  proprietors  of  the  soil.  They
acknowledged  no  obedience,  or  allegiance,  or  subordi-
nation to  any  foreign  sovereign  whatsoever ;  and  as  far
as  they  have  possessed  the  means,  they  have  ever  since
asserted  this  plenary  right  of  dominion,  and  yielded  it
up  only  when  lost  by  the  superior  force  of  conquest,  or
transferred  by  a  voluntary  cession.


1  Johnson  v.  M'Intosk, 8  Wheat. R.  543,  572,  573  ; 1  Dou«\  Summ.
110.


6  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

§  4.  This  is  not  the  place  to  enter  upon  the  discussion
of  the  question  of  the  actual  merits  of  the  titles  claimed
by  the  respective  parties  upon  principles  of  natural  law.
That  would  involve  the  consideration  of  many  nice  and
delicate  topics,  as  to  the  nature  and  origin  of  property
in  the  soil,  and  the  extent,  to  which  civilized  man  may
demand  it  from  the  savage*  for  uses  or  cultivation  differ-
ent from,  and  perhaps  more  beneficial  to  society  than
the  uses,  to  which  the  latter  may  choose  to  appropriate
it.  Such  topics  belong  more  properly  to  a  treatise  on
natural  law,  than  to  lectures  professing  to  treat  upon
the  law  of  a  single  nation.

^  5.  The  European  nations  found  little  difficulty  in
reconciling  themselves  to  the  adoption  of  any  principle,
which  gave  ample  scope  to  their  ambition,  and  employ-
ed little  reasoning  to  support  it.  They  were  content
to  take  counsel  of  their  interests,  their  prejudices,  and
their  passions,  and  felt  no  necessity  of  vindicating  their
conduct  before  cabinets,  which  were  already  eager  to
recognise  its  justice  and  its  policy.  The  Indians  were
a  savage  race,  sunk  in  the  depths  of  ignorance  and
heathenism.  If  they  might  not  be  extirpated  for  their
want  of  religion  and  just  morals,  they  might  be  reclaim-
ed from  their  errors.  They  were  bound  to  yield  to  the
superior  genius  of  Europe,  and  in  exchanging  their
wild  and  debasing  habits  for  civilization  and  Christiani-
ty they  were  deemed  to  gain  more  than  an  equivalent
for  every  sacrifice  and  suffering.1  The  Papal  authority,
too,  was  brought  in  aid  of  these  great  designs ;  and  for
the  purpose  of  overthrowing  heathenism,  and  propagat-


i  8  Wheat.  R.  543,  573; 1  Haz.  Coll.  50,  51,  72,  82,  103,  105;  Vat-
tel,  B.  1,  ch.  18,  §  207,  208, 209,  and  note.


CH.  I.] ORIGIN  AND  TITLE  TO  TERRITORY.  7

ing  the  Catholic  religion,1  Alexander  the  Sixth,  by  a
Bull  issued  in  1493,  granted  to  the  crown  of  Castile  the
whole  of  the  immense  territory  then  discovered,  or  to
be  discovered,  between  the  poles,  so  far  as  it  was  not
then  possessed  by  any  Christian  prince.2

^  6.  The  principle,  then,  that  discovery  gave  title
to  the  government,  by  whose  subjects  or  by  whose  au-
thority it  was  made,  against  all  other  European  govern-
ments, being  once  established,  it  followed  almost  as  a
matter  of  course,  that  every  government  within  the  lim-
its of  its  discoveries  excluded  all  other  persons  from
any  right  to  acquire  the  soil  by  any  grant  whatsoever
from  the  natives.  No  nation  would  suffer  either  its
own  subjects  or  those  of  any  other  nation  to  set  up  or
vindicate  any  such  title.3  It  was  deemed  a  right  exclu-
sively belonging  to  the  government  in  its  sovereign  ca-
pacity to  extinguish  the  Indian  title,  and  to  perfect  its
own  dominion  over  the  soil,  and  dispose  of  it  according
to  its  own  good  pleasure.

§  7.  It  may  be  asked,  what  was  the  effect  of  this
principle  of  discovery  in  respect  to  the  rights  of  the  na-
tives themselves.  In  the  view  of  the  Europeans  it  cre-
ated a  peculiar  relation  between  themselves  and  the
aboriginal  inhabitants.  The  latter  were  admitted  to
possess  a  present  right  of  occupancy,  or  use  in  the  soil,
which  was  subordinate  to  the  ultimate  dominion  of  the
discoverer.  They  were  admitted  to  be  the  rightful
occupants  of  the  soil,  with  a  legal  as  well  as  just,  claim


1  "  Ut  fides  Catholica,  et  Christiana  Religio  nostris  prsesertim  tempori-
bus  exaltetur,  &,<•.,  ac  barbarae  nationes  deprimantur,  et  ad  fidem  ipsam
reducantur,"  is  the  language  of  the  Bull. 1  Haz.  Coll.  3.

2  1  Haz.  Collect. ; 3  Marshall,  JJist.  Col.  13,  14.

3  Chalmers,  Annals,  C7G,  G77  ;  i  Doug.  Summ.  213;  Chalmers,  An-
nals, 677.


8  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

to  retain  possession  of  it,  and  to  use  it  according  to
their  own  discretion.  In  a  certain  sense  they  were
permitted  to  exercise  rights  of  sovereignty  over  it.
They  might  sell  or  transfer  it  to  the  sovereign,  who  dis-
covered it ;  but  they  were  denied  the  authority  to  dis-
pose of  it  to  any  other  persons;  and  until  such  a  sale
or  transfer,  they  were  generally  permitted  to  occupy  it
as  sovereigns  tie  facto.  But  notwithstanding  this
occupancy,  the  European  discoverers  claimed  and
exercised  the  right  to  grant  the  soil,  while  yet  in
possession  of  the  natives,  subject  however  to  their
right  of  occupancy  ;  and  the  title  so  granted  was  uni-
versally admitted  to  convey  a  sufficient  title  in  the  soil
to  the  grantees  in  perfect  dominion,  or,  as  it  is  some-
times expressed  in  treatises  of  public  law,  it  was  a
transfer  of  plenum  et  utile  dominium.

\  8.  This  subject  was  discussed  at  great  length  in
the  celebrated  case  of  Johnson  v.  M'Intosh  (8  Wheat.
543) ;  and  one  cannot  do  better  than  transcribe  from
the  pages  of  that  report  a  summary  of  the  historical
confirmations  adduced  in  support  of  these  principles,
which  is  more  clear  and  exact  than  has  ever  been  be-
fore in  print.

^  9.  "  The  history  of  America,  (says  Mr.  Chief  Jus-
tice Marshall,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  Court,)1
from  its  discovery  to  the  present  day,  proves,  we  think,
the  universal  recognition  of  these  principles.

"  Spain  did  not  rest  her  title  solely  on  the  grant  of
die  Pope.  Her  discussions  respecting  boundary,  with
France,  with  Great  Britain,  and  with  the  United  States,


i  Sec  also  Worcester  v Georgia,*}  Peters'B  Et.  515. : 4  Jefferson's
resp.  478; Mackintosh's  History  of  Ethical  Philosophy,  (Phila.  1832,)
50 :  Johnson  v.  M'Intosh,  8  Wheat.  R.  574—588.


CH.  I.] ORIGIN  AND  TITLE  TO  TERRITORY.  9

all  stow,  that  she  placed  it  on  the  rights  given  by  dis-
covery. Portugal  sustained  her  claim  to  the  Brazils

by  the  same  title.

§  10.  "  France,  also,  founded  her  title  to  the  vast  ter-
ritories she  claimed  in  America  on  discovery.  However
conciliatory  her  conduct  to  the  natives  may  have  been,
she  still  asserted  her  right  of  dominion  over  a  great  ex-
tent of  country  not  actually  settled  by  Frenchmen,  and
her  exclusive  right  to  acquire  and  dispose  of  the  soil,
which  remained  in  the  occupation  of  Indians.  Her
monarch  claimed  all  Canada  and  Acadie,  as  colonies  of
France,  at  a  time  when  the  French  population  was  very
inconsiderable,  and  the  Indians  occupied  almost  the
whole  country.  He  also  claimed  Louisiana,  compre-
hending the  immense  territories  watered  by  the  Missis-
sippi, and  the  rivers,  which  empty  into  it,  by  the  title
of  discovery.  The  letters  patent  granted  to  the  Sieur
Demonts,  in  1603,  constitute  him  Lieutenant  General,
and  the  representative  of  the  King  in  Acadie,  which  is
described  as  stretching  from  the  40th  to  the  46th  de-
gree of  north  latitude,  with  authority  to  extend  the
power  of  the  French  over  that  country,  and  its  inhabi-
tants, to  give  laws  to  the  people,  to  treat  with  the  na-
tives, and  enforce  the  observance  of  treaties,  and  to  par-
cel out,  and  give  title  to  lands,  according  to  his  own
judgment.

^11.  "The  States  of  Holland  also  made  acquisitions
in  America,  and  sustained  their  right  on  the  common
principle  adopted  by  all  Europe.  They  allege,  as  we
are  told  by  Smith,  in  his  History  of  New- York,  that  Hen-
ry Hudson,  who  sailed,  as  they  say,  under  the  orders  of
their  East  India  Company,  discovered  the  country  from
the  Delaware  to  the  Hudson,  up  which  he  sailed  to  the
43d  degree  of  north  latitude ; and  this  country they

VOL.  I.  2


10  HISTORY OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

claimed  under  the  title  acquired  by  this  voyage.  Their
first  object  was  commercial,  as  appears  by  a  grant
made  to  a  company  of  merchants  in  1614  ;  but  in  1621,
the  States  General  made,  as  we  are  told  by  Mr.  Smith,
a  grant  of  the  country  to  the  West  India  Company,  by
the  name  of  New  Netherlands.  The  claim  of  the
Dutch  was  always  contested  by  the  English ;  not,  be-
cause they  questioned  the  title  given  by  discovery,  but
because  they  insisted  on  being  themselves  the  rightful
claimants  under  that  title.  Their  pretensions  were
finally  decided  by  the  sword.

^  12.  "  No  one  of  the  powers  of  Europe  gave  its  full
assent  to  this  principle,  more  unequivocally  than  England.
The  documents  upon  this  subject  are  ample  and  com-
plete. So  early  as  the  year  1496,  her  monarch  grant-
ed a  commission  to  the  Cabots,  to  discover  countries
then  unknown  to Christian  people,  and  to  take  posses-
sion of  them  in  the  name  of  the  king  of  England. Two
years  afterwards,  Cabot  proceeded  on  this  voyage,  and
discovered  the  continent  of  North  America,  along  which
he  sailed  as  far  south  as  Virginia. To  this  discovery
the  English  trace  their  title. In  this  first  effort  made
by  the  English  government  to  acquire  territory  on  this
continent,  we  perceive  a  complete  recognition  of  the
principle,  which  has  been  mentioned. The  right  of
discovery  given by this commission  is confined  to
countries  '  then  unknown  to  all  Christian  people  ; '  and
of these countries Cabot was  empowered to take
possession  in  the  name  of  the  king  of  England. Thus
asserting  a  right  to take  possession,  notwithstanding
the  occupancy  of  the  natives,  who  were  heathens,  and,
at  the same  time,  admitting the  prior  title  of any
Christian  people,  who  may  have  made  a  previous  dis-
covery.


CH.  I.] ORIGIN  AND  TITLE  TO  TERKITOIIV.  11

^  13.  "The  same  principle  continued  to  be  recog-
nised.  The  charter  granted  to  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert,  in
1578,  authorizes  him  to  discover  and  take  possession  of
such  remote,  heathen,  and  batbarous  lands,  as  were  not
actually  possessed  by  any  Christian  prince  or  people.
This  charter  was  afterwards  renewed  to  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  in  nearly  the  same  terms.

^  14.  "By  the  charter  of  1606,  under  which  the
first  permanent  English  settlement  on  this  continent  was
made,  James  the  First  granted  to  Sir  Thomas  Gates  and
others,  those  territories  in  America  lying  on  the  sea-
coast  between  the  34th  and  45th  degrees  of  north  lati-
tude, and  which  either  belonged  to  that  monarch,  or  were
not  then  possessed  by  any  other  Christian  prince  or
people.  The  grantees  were  divided  into  two  compa-
nies at  their  own  request.  The  first,  or  southern  colo-
ny, wras  directed  to  settle  between  the  34th  and  41st
degrees  of  north  latitude  ;  and  the  second,  or  northern
eclony,  betwreen  the  38th  and  45th  degrees.

^  15.  "In  1609,  after  some  expensive  and  not  very
successful  attempts  at  settlement  had  been  made,  a  new
and  more  enlarged  charter  v/as  given  by  the  crown  to
the  first  colony,  in  which  the  king  granted  to  the
'  Treasurer  and  Company  of  Adventurers  of  the  city  of
London  for  the  first  colony  in  Virginia,'  in  absolute
property,  the  lands  extending  along  die  sea-coast  four
hundred  miles,  and  into  the  land  throughout  from  sea
to  sea.  This  charter,  which  is  a  part  of  the  special  ver-
dict in  this  caui-e,  was  annulled,  so  far  as  respected  the
rights  of  the  company,  by  the  judgment  of  the  Court
of  King's  Bench  on  a  writ  of  quo  icarranto  :  but  the
wThole  effect  allowed  to  this  judgment  was,  to  revest  in
the  crown  the  powers  of  government,  and  the  title  to
the,  lands  within  its  limits.


12  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK I.

§  16.  "  At  the  association  of  those  who  held  under  the
grant  to  the  second  or  northern  colony,  a  new  and  more
enlarged  charter  was  granted  to  the  Duke  of  Lenox
and  others,  in  16*20,  who  were  denominated  the  Ply-
mouth Company,  conveying  to  them  in  absolute  prop-
erty all  the  lands  between  the  40th  and  48th  degrees
of  north  latitude.  Under  this  patent,  New-England
has  been  in  a  great  measure  settled.  The  company
conveyed  to  Henry  Rosewell  and  others,  in  1627,
that  territory  which  is  now  Massachusetts  ;  and,  in
1628,  a  charter  of  incorporation,  comprehending  the
powers  of  government,  was  granted  to  the  purchasers.
A  great  part  of  New-England  was  granted  by  this  com-
pany, which,  at  length,  divided  their  remaining  lands
among  themselves;  and,  in  1635,  surrendered  their
charter  to  the  crown.  A  patent  was  granted  to
Gorges  for  Maine,  which  was  allotted  to  him  in  the  di-
vision of  property.  All  the  grants  made  by  the  Ply-
mouth Company,  so  far  as  we  can  learn,  have  been  re-
spected.

§  17.  "In  pursuance  of  the  same  principle,  the  king,
in  1664,  granted  to  the  Duke  of  York  the  country  (A'
New-England  as  far  south  as  the  Delaware  bay.  His
royal  highness  transferred  Aew-Jersey  to  Lord  Berke-
ley and  Sir  George  Carteret.

§  18.  "In  1663,  the  crown  granted  to  Lord  Clarendon
and  others,  the  country  lying  between  the  36th  degree
of  north  latitude  and  the  river  St.  Matties  ;  and,  in  1666,
the  propri<  tors  obtained  from  the  crown  a  new  charter,
granting  to  them  that  province  in  the  king's  dominions
in  North  America,  which  lies  from  36  degrees  30  min-
utes north  latitude  to  the  29th  degree,  and  from  the
Atlantic  ocean  to  the  South  sen.


€H.  I.] ORIGIN  AND  TITLE  TO  TERRITORY,  13

&  19.  "  Thus  has  our  whole  country  boon  granted  by
the  crown  while  in  the  occupation  of  the  fndians. These
-rants  purport  to  convey  the  soil,  as  weU  as  the  right  of
dominion  to  the  grantees, [n  those  governments,  which
were  denominated  royal,  where  the  righl  to  the  soil  was
not  vested  in  individuals,  but  remained  in  the  crown, or
was  vested  in  the  colonial  government,  the  king  claim-
ed and  exercised  the  right  of  granting  lands, and  of
dismembering  the  government  at  his  will. The  grants
made  out  of  the  two  original  colonies,  alter  the  resump-
tion of  their  charters  by  the  crown,  are  examples  of
this. The  governments  of  New-England,  New-York,
New -Jersey, Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  a  part  of
Carolina,  were  thus  created. In  all  of  them,  the  soil,
at  the  time  the  grants  were  made,  was  occupied  by  the
Indians. Yet  almost  every  title  within  those  govern-
ments is dependent  on  these  grants. In  some  in-
stances, the  soil  was  conveyed  by  the  crown  unaccom-
panied by  the  powers  of  government,  as  in  the  case  of
the  northern  neck  of  Virginia. It  has  never  been
objected  to  this,  or  to  any  other  similar  grant,  that  the
title  as  well  as  possession  was  in  the  Indians,  when  it
Jlwas  made,  and  that  it  passed  nothing  on  that  account.  -»
§  20.  "These  various  patents  cannot  be  considered
as  nullities ;  nor  can  they  be  limited  to  a  mere  grant  of
the  powers  of  government. A  charter,  intended  to  con-
vey political  power  only,  would  never  contain  words
expressly  granting  the  land,  the  soil,  and the  waters.
Some  of  them  purport  to  convey  the  soil  alone  ;  and  in
those  cases,  in  which  the  powers  of  government,  as  well
as  the  soil,  are  conveyed  to  individuals,  the  crown  has
always  acknowledged  itself  to  be  bound  by  the  grant.
Though  the  power  to dismember  regal  governments
was  asserted  and  exercised,  the  power  to  dismember


14  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

proprietary  governments  was  not  claimed.  And,  in  some
instances,  even  after  the  powers  of  government  were

revested  in  the  crown,  the  title  of  the  proprietors  to  the
soil  was  respected.

^  21.  "  Charles  the  Second  was  extremely  anxious
to  acquire  the  property  of  Maine,  but  the  grantees  sold
it  to  Massachusetts,  and  he  did  not  venture  to  contest
the  right  of  the  colony  to  the  soil.  The  Carolinas  were
originally  proprietary  governments.  In  1721  a  revolu-
tion was  effected  by  the  people,  who  shook  off  their
obedience  to  the  proprietors,  and  declared  their  depen-
dence immediately  on  the  crown.  The  king,  however,
purchased  the  title  of  those,  who  were  disposed  to  sell.
One  of  them,  Lord  Carteret,  surrendered  his  interest  in
the  government,  but  retained  his  tide  to  the  soil.  That
title  was  respected  till  the  revolution,  when  it  was  for-
feited by  the  laws  of  war.

^  22.  "  Further  proofs  of  the  extent,  to  which  this
principle  has  been  recognised,  will  be  found  in  the  his-
tory of  the  wars,  negotiations,  and  treaties,  which  the
different  nations,  claiming  territory  in  America,  have
carried  on,  and  held  with  each  other.  The  contests
between  the  cabinets  of  Versailles  and  Madrid,  re-
specting the  territory  on  the  northern  coast  of  the  gulf
of  Mexico,  were  fierce  and  bloody  ;  and  continued,  until
the  establishment  of  a  Bourbon  on  the  throne  of  Spain,
produced  such  amicable  dispositions  in  the  two  crowns,
as  to  suspend  or  terminate  them.  Between  France
and  Great  Britain,  whose  discoveries,  as  well  as  settle-
ments, were  nearly  contemporaneous,  contests  for  the
country,  actually  covered  by  the  Indians,  began  as  soon
as  their  settlements  approached  each  other,  and  were
continued  until  finally  settled  in  the  year  1763,  by  the
treaty  of  Paris.


CH.  I.] ORIGIN  AND  TITLE  TO  TERRITORY.  15

^23.  "  Each  nation  had  granted  and  partially  settled
the  country,  denominated  by  the  French,  Acadie,  and
l>\  the  English,  Nova  Scotia.  By  the  1 2th  article  of  the
treaty  of  Utrecht,  made  in  17#3,yJiis  most  Christian
Majesty  ceded  to  the  Queen  of  Greal  Britain,  'all  No-
va Scotia  or  Acadie,  with  its  ancient  boundaries.'  A
great  part  of  the  ceded  territory  was  in  the  possession
of  the  Indians,  and  the  extent  of  the  cession  could  not
be  adjusted  by  the  commissioners,  to  whom  it  was  to  be
referred.  The  treaty  of  Aix  la  Chapelle,  which  was
made  on  the  principle  of  the  status  ante  bellmn,  did  not
remove  this  subject  of  controversy.  Commissioners  for
its  adjustment  were  appointed,  whose  very  able  and
elaborate,  though  unsuccessful  arguments,  in  favour  of
the  title  of  their  respective  sovereigns,  show  howr  en-
tirely each  relied  on  the  title  given  by  discovery  to
lands  remaining  in  the  possession  of  Indians.

§  24.  "  After  the  termination  of  this  fruitless  discus-
sion, the  subject  was  transferred  to  Europe,  and  taken
up  by  the  cabinets  of  Versailles  and  London.  This  con-
troversy embraced  not  only  the  boundaries  of  New-Eng-
land, Nova  Scotia,  and  that  part  of  Canada,  which  ad-
joined those  colonies, but  embraced  our  whole  western
country  also.  France  contended  not  only,  that  the  St.
Lawrence  was  to  be  considered  as  the  centre  of  Canada,
but  that  the  Ohio  was  within  that  colony.  She  founded
this  claim  on  discovery,  and  on  having  used  that  river  for
the  transportation  of  troops  in  a  war  with  some  southern
Indians.  This  river  was  comprehended  in  the  chartered
limits  of  Virginia;  but,  though  the  right  of  England  to  a
reasonable  extent  of  country,  in  virtue  of  her  discovery
of  the  seacoast,  and  of  the  settlements  she  made  on  it,
was  not  to  be  questioned ;  her  claim  of  all  the  lands  to
the  Pacilic  ocean,  because she  had discovered  the


16  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

country  washed  by  the  Atlantic,  might,  without  dero-
gating from  the  principle,  recognised  by  all,  be  deemed
extravagant.  It  interfered,  too,  with  the  claims  of
France,  founded  on  the  same  principle.  She  therefore
sought  to  strengthen  her  original  title  to  the  lands  in
controversy,  by  insisting,  that  it  had  been  acknowledg-
ed by  France  in  the  15th  article  of  the  treaty  of  Utrecht.
The  dispute  respecting  the  construction  of  that  article
has  no  tendency  to  impair  the  principle,  that  discove-
ry gave  a  title  to  lands  still  remaining  in  the  possession
of  the  Indians.  Whichever  title  prevailed,  it  was  still
a  title  to  lands  occupied  by  the  Indians,  whose  right  of
occupancy  neither  controverted,  and  neither  had  then
extinguished.

§  25.  "  These  conflicting  claims  produced  a  long  and
bloody  war,  which  was  terminated  by  the  conquest  of
the  whole  country  east  of  the  Mississippi.  In  the  treaty
of  1763,  France  ceded  and  guarantied  to  Great  Britain
all  Nova  Scotia,  or  Acadie,  and  Canada,  with  their  de-
pendencies ;  and  it  was  agreed,  that  the  boundaries  be-
tween the  territories  of  the  two  nations  in  America
should  be  irrecoverably  fixed  by  a  line  drawn  from  the
source  of  the  Mississippi,  through  the  middle  of  that
river  and  the  lakes  Maurepas  and  Poncharirain,  to  the
sea.  This  treaty  expressly  cedes,  and  has  always  been
understood  to  cede,  the  whole  country  on  the  Eng-
lish side  of  the  dividing  line  between  the  two  nations,
although  a  great  and  valuable  part  of  it  was  occupied
by  the  Indians.  Great  Britain,  on  her  part,  surrendered
to  France  all  her  pretensions  to  the  country  west  of
Mississippi.  It  has  never  been  supposed,  that  >lui
surrendered  nothing,  although  she  was  not  in  actual
possession  of  a  foot  of  land.  She  surrendered  all  right
to  acquire  the  country  ;  and  any  alter  attempt  to  pur-


CH.  I.] ORIGIN  AND  TtTLE  TO  TERRITORY.  I?

chase  it  from  the  Indians  would  have  been  considered
and  treated  as  an  invasion  of  the  territories  of  Fiance
§  26.. "By  the  20th  article  of  the  same  treaty,  Spain

ceded  Florida,  with  its  dependencies,  and  all  the.  coun-
try she  claimed  cast  or  southeast  of  the  Mississippi,  to
Great  Britain.  Great  part  of  this  territory  also  was  in
possession  of  the  Indians.

^  27.  "  By  a  secret  treaty,  which  was  executed  about
the  same  time,  France  ceded  Louisiana  to  Spain  ;  and
Spain  has  since  retroceded  the  same  country  to  France.
At  the  time  both  of  its  cession  and  retrocession,  it  was
occupied,  chiefly,  by  the  Indians.

§  28.  "  Thus,  all  the  nations  of  Europe,  who  have
acquired  territory  on  this  continent,  have  asserted  in
themselves,  and  have  recognised  in  others,  the  exclu-
sive right,  of  the  discoverer  to  appropriate  the  lands  oc-
cupied by  the  Indians.  Have  the  American  States  re-
jected or  adopted  this  principle  ?

§  29.  "  By  the  treaty,  which  concluded  the  war  of
our  revolution,  Great  Britain  relinquished  all  claim,  not
only  to  the  government,  but  to  the  '  propriety  and  ter-
ritorial rights  of  the  United  States,'  whose  boundaries
were  fixed  in  the  second  article.  By  this  treaty,  the
powers  of  government,  and  the  right  to  soil,  which  had
previously  been  in  Great  Britain,  passed  definitively  to
these  States.  We  had  before  taken  possession  of  them,
by  declaring  independence ;  but  neither  the  declaration
of  independence,  nor  the  treaty  confirming  it,  could
give  its  more  than  that,  which  we  before  possessed,  or
to  which  Great  Britain  was  before  entitled.  It  has  nev-
er been  doubted,  that  either  the  United  States,  or  the
several  States,  had  a  clear  title  to  all  the  lands  within
the  boundary  lines  described  in  the  treaty,  subject  only
to  the  Indian  right  of  occupancy,  and  that  the  exclu-

VOL.  I.  3


18  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

sive  power  to  extinguish  that  right  was  vested  in  that
government,  which  might  constitutionally  exercise  it.

^  30.  "  Virginia,  particularly,  within  whose  chartered
limits  the  land  in  controversy  lay,  passed  an  act,  in  the
year  1779,  declaring  her  <  exclusive  right  of  pre-emption
from  the  Indians  of  all  the  lands  within  the  limits  of  her
own  chartered  territory,  and  that  no  persons  whatsoev-
er have,  or  ever  had,  a  right  to  purchase  any  lands
within  the  same  from  any  Indian  nation,  except  only
persons  duly  authorized  to  make  such  purchase,  form-
erly for  the  use  and  benefit  of  the  colony,  and  lately  for
the  Commonwealth.'  The  act  then  proceeds  to  annul
all  deeds  made  by  Indians  to  individuals  for  the  private
use  of  the  purchasers.

^31.  "  Without  ascribing  to  this  act  the  power  of
annulling  vested  rights,  or  admitting  it  to  countervail
the  testimony  furnished  by  the  marginal  note  opposite
to  the  title  of  the  law  forbidding  purchases  from  the  In-
dians, in  the  revisals  of  the  Virginia  statutes,  stating  that
law  to  be  repealed,  it  may  safely  be  considered  as  an
unequivocal  affirmance,  on  the  part  of  Virginia,  of  the
broad  principle,  which  had  always  been  maintained,  that
the  exclusive  right  to  purchase  from  the  Indians  resided
in  the  government.

^  32.  "  In  pursuance  of  the  same  idea,  Virginia  pro-
ceeded, at  the  same  session,  to  open  her  land-office  for
the  sale  of  that  country,  which  now  constitutes  Ken-
tucky, a  country,  every  acre  of  which  was  then  claimed
and  possessed  by  Indians,  who  maintained  their  title
with  as  much  persevering  courage,  as  was  ever  mani-
fested by  any  people.

^  33.  "  The  States  having  within  their  chartered  lim-
its different  portions  of  territory  covered  by  Indians,
ceded  that  territory,  generally,  to  the  United  States,  on


CH.  I.] ORIGIN  AND  TITLE  TO  TERRITORY.  19

conditions  expressed  in  their  deeds  of  cession,  which
demonstrate  the  opinion,  that  they  ceded  the  soil  as  well
as  jurisdiction,  and  that  in  doing  so,  they  granted  a  pro-
ductive fund  to  the  government  of  the  Union.  The
lands  in  controversy  lay  within  the  chartered  limits  of
Virginia,  and  were  ceded  with  the  whole  country  north-
west of  the  river  Ohio.  This  grant  contained  reserva-
tions and  stipulations,  which  could  only  be  made  by  the
owners  of  the  soil  ;  and  concluded  with  a  stipulation,
that  '  all  the  lands  in  the  ceded  territory,  not  reserved,
should  be  considered  as  a  common  fund,  for  the  use
and  benefit  of  such  of  the  United  States  as  have  be-
come, or  shall  become,  members  of  the  confederation,'
&c.  '  according  to  their  usual  respective  proportions  in
the  general  charge  and  expenditure,  and  shall  be  faith-
fully and  bona  fide  disposed  of  for  that  purpose,  and  for
no  other  use  or  purpose  whatsoever.'  The  ceded  ter-
ritory was  occupied  by  numerous  and  warlike  tribes  of
Indians  ;  but  the  exclusive  right  of  the  United  States
to  extinguish  their  title,  and  to  grant  the  soil,  has  never,
we  believe,  been  doubted.

^  34.  "After  these  States  became  independent,  a
controversy  subsisted  between  them  and  Spain  respect-
ing boundary.  By  the  treaty  of  1795,  this  controversy
was  adjusted,  and  Spain  ceded  to  the  United  States
ihe  territory  in  question.  This  territory,  though  claim-
ed by  both  nations,  was  chiefly  in  the  actual  occupation
of  Indians.

^  35.  "  The  magnificent  purchase  of  Louisiana  was
the  purchase  from  France  of  a  country  almost  entirely
occupied  by  numerous  tribes  of  Indians,  who  are  in  fact
independent.  Yet,  any  attempt  of  others  to  intrude
into  that  country  would  be  considered  as  an  aggression,
which  would  justify  war.


20  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

§36.  "  Our  late  acquisitions  from  Spain  are  of  the
same  character ;  and  the  negotiations,  which  preceded
those  acquisitions,  recognise  and  elucidate  the  principle,
which  has  been  received  as  the  foundation  of  all  Euro-
pean title  in  America.

§  37.  "  The  United  States,  then,  have  unequivocally'
acceded  to  that  great  and  broad  rule,  by  which  its  civil-
ized inhabitants  now  hold  this  country.  They  hold,  and
assert  in  themselves,  the  title,  by  which  it  was  acquired.
They  maintain,  as  all  others  have  maintained,  that  dis-
covery gave  an  exclusive  right  to  extinguish  the  Indian
title  of  occupancy,  either  by  purchase  or  by  conquest  ;
and  gave  also  a  right  to  such  a  degree  of  sovereignty,
as  the  circumstances  of  the  people  would  allow  them  to
exercise.

§  38.  "  The  power  now  possessed  by  the  government
of  the  United  States  to  grant  lands,  resided,  while  we
were  colonies,  in  the  crown,  or  its  grantees. The  va-
lidity of  the  titles  given  by  either  has  never  been  ques-
tioned in  our  courts. It  has  been  exercised  uniformly
over  territory  in  possession  of  the  Indians. The  exist-
ence of  this  power  must  negative  the  existence  of  any
right,  which  may  conflict  with  and  control  it. An  ab-
solute title  to  lands  cannot  exist,  at  the  same  time,  in
different  persons,  or  in  different  governments.  An  abso-
lute, must  be  an  exclusive  title,  or  at  least  a  title,  which
excludes  all  others  not  compatible  with  it. All  our  in-
stitutions recognise  the  absolute  title  of  the  crown,  sub-
ject  only  to  the  Indian  right  of  occupancy,  and  recog-
nise the  absolute  title  of  the  crown  to  extinguish  that
right This  is  incompatible  with  an  absolute  and  com-
plete title  in  the  Indians."


CH.  II.] ORIGIN  AND  SETTLEMENT  OF  VIRGINIA. *21

CHAPTER  II.

ORIGIN  AND  SETTLEMENT  OF  VIRGINIA.

^  39.  Having  thus  traced  out  the  origin  of  the  title
to  the  soil  of  America  asserted  by  the  European  na-
tions, we  may  now  enter  upon  a  consideration  of  the
manner,  in  which  the  settlements  were  made,  and  the
political  constitutions,  by  which  the  various  Colonies
were  organized  and  governed.

^  40.  For  a  long  time  after  the  discoveries  of  Cabot
were  made,  England  from  various  causes  remained  in  a
state  of  indifference  or  inactivity  in  respect  to  the  terri-
tory thus  subjected  to  her  sway.1 Nearly  a  century
elapsed  before  any  effectual  plan  for  planting  any  colo-
ny was  put  into  operation ;  and  indeed  the  ill  success,
not  to  say  entire  failure,  of  the  first  expedition  was  well
calculated  to  abate  any  undue  confidence  in  the  value
of  such  enterprises. In  1578  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert,
having  obtained  letters  patent  from  Queen  Elizabeth,2
granting  him  and  his  heirs  any  lands  discovered  by  him,
attempted  a  settlement  on  the  cold  and  barren  shores
of  Cape  Breton  and  the  adjacent  regions,  and  exhaust-
ed his  fortune,  and  lost  his  life  in  the  fruitless  labour.8
The  brilliant  genius  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  was  capti-
vated by  the  allurements  of  any  scheme,  which  gave
play  to  his  romantic  temper ;  and  unmindful  of  the  dis-
astrous fate  of  his half  brother,  or gathering  fresh
courage  from  the  consciousnes  of  difficulties,  eagearly


i  Robertson's  America,  B.  9  ;  Doug.  Summ.  110,  &c.

2  1  Haz.  Coll.  24.

3  Marshall's  Colon.  15,  16  ;  Robertson's  America,  B.  9.


22  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

followed  up  the  original  plan  under  a  new  patent  from
the  crown.1  To  him  we  are  indebted  for  the  first  plan-
tations in  the  South ; 2  and  such  was  the  splendor  of  the
description  of  the  soil  and  climate  and  productions  of
that  region  given  by  the  first  adventurers,  that  Elizabeth
was  proud  to  bestow  upon  it  the  name  of  Virginia,  and
thus  to  connect  it  with  the  reign  of  a  virgin  Queen.3
But  notwithstanding  the  bright  prospects  thus  held  out,
three  successive  attempts  under  the  auspices  of  Raleigh
ended  in  ruinous  disaster,  and  seemed  but  a  presage  of
the  hard  fate  and  darkened  fortunes  of  that  gallant,  but
unfortunate  gentleman.4

^41.  The  first  permanent  settlement  made  in  Amer-
ica under  the  auspices  of  England  was  under  a  charter
granted  to  Sir  Thomas  Gates  and  his  associates  by
James  the  First,  in  the  fourth  year  after  his  accession  to
the  throne  of  England  5  (in  1606.)  That  charter  grant-
ed to  them  the  territories  in  America,  then  commonly
called  Virginia,  lying  on  the  sea-coast  between  the  34th
and  the  45th  degrees  of  north  latitude  and  the  islands
adjacent  within  100  miles,  which  were  not  belonging
to  or  possessed  by  any  Christian  prince  or  people.
The  associates  were  divided  into  two  companies,  one
of  which  was  required  to  settle  between  the  34th  and
41st  degrees  of  north  latitude,  and  the  other  between
the  38th  and  45th  degrees  of  north  latitude,  but  not
within  100  miles  of  the  prior  colony.  By  degrees,  the
name  of  Virginia  was  confined  to  the  first  or  south  col-
ony.6 The  second  assumed  the  name  of  the  Plymouth

1  1  Haz.  Coll.  :*:j  ;  Robertson's  America,  B.  9.

2  1  Ha/..  Coll.  38  — 40  ;  2  Doug.  Summ.  385.

3  Marsh.  Colon.  17  ;  Robertson's  America,  B.  9.

4  Robertson's  America,  I?.  !».

5  Marsh.  Colon.  25  ;  1  Haz.  Coll.  50  ;  Robertson's  America,  B.  9.

6  1  Haz.  Coll.  99  ;  Robertson's  America,  B.  9.


CH.  II.] ORIGIN  AND SETTLEMENT  OF VIRGINIA. 23

Company,  from  the  residence  of  the  original  grants
and  New-England  was founded  under  their  auspices.1
Each  colony  had  exclusive  propriety  in  all  the  territorj
within  fifty  miles  from  the  first  scat  of  their  plantation.2

^  42.  Some  of  the  provisions  o(  this  charter  deserve
a  particular  consideration  from  the  light  they  throw  up-
on the  political  and  civil  condition  of  the  persons,  who
should  become  inhabitants  of  the  colonies.  The  com-
panies were  authorized  to  engage  as  conjonists  any  of
the  subjects  of  England,  who  should  be  disposed  to
emigrate.  All  persons,  being  English  subjects  and  in-
habiting in  the  colonies,  and  every  of  their  children  born
therein,  were  declared  to  have  and  possess  all  liberties,
franchises,  and  immunities,  within  any  other  of  the  do-
minions of  the  crown,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  as  if
they  had  been  abiding  and  born  within  the  realm  of
England,  or  any  other  dominions  of  the  crown.  The
patentees  were  to  hold  the  lands,  Slc.  in  the  colony,  of
the  king,  his  heirs  and  successors,  as  of  the  manor  of
East  Greenwich  in  the  county  of  Kent,  in  free  and
common  soccage  only,  and  not  in  capite  ;  and  were  au-
thorized to  grant  the  same  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
colonies  in  such  mariner  and  form  and  for  such  estates,
as  the  council  of  the  colony  should  direct.3

§  43.  In  respect  to  political  government,  each  colony
was  to  be  governed  by  a  local  council,  appointed  and
removable  at  the  pleasure  of  the  crown,  according  to
the  royal  instructions  and  ordinances  from  time  to  time
promulgated.  These  councils  were  to  be  under  the  su-
perior management  and  direction  of  another  council  sit-
ting in  England. A  power  was  given  to  expel  all  in-

1  Robertson's  America,  B.  9.

2  1  Haz.  Coll.  50.

3  1  Haz.  Coll.  50  ;  Marsh.  Colon.  25,  2(3 :  Robertson's  Amer.  B.  9.


24  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

traders,  and  to  lay  a  limited  duty  upon  all  persons  traf-
ficking Avith  the  colony  ;  and  a  prohibition  was  impos-
ed upon  all  the  colonists  against  trafficking  with  foreign
countries  under  the  pretence  of  a  trade  from  the  moth-
er country  to  the  colonies.1

^  44.  The  royal  authority  soon  found  a  gratifying
employment  in  drawing  up  and  establishing  a  code  of
fundamental  regulations  for  these  colonies,  in  pursuance
of  the  power  reserved  in  the  charter.  A  superintend-
ing council  was  created  in  England.  The  legislative
and  executive  powers  were  vested  in  the  president  and
councils  of  the  colonies  ;  but  their  ordinances  were  not
to  touch  life  nor  limb,  and  were  in  substance  to  conform
to  the  laws  of  England,  and  were  to  continue  in  force
only  until  made  void  by  the  crown,  or  the  council  in
England.  Persons  committing  high  offences  were  to
be  sent  to  England  for  punishment  ;  and  subordinate
offences  were  to  be  punished  at  the  discretion  of  the
president  and  council.  Allegiance  to  the  crown  was
strictly  insisted  on  ;  and  the  Church  of  England  estab-
lished.2 The  royal  authority  was  in  all  respects  made
paramount ;  and  the  value  of  political  liberty  was  total-
ly overlooked,  or  deliberately  disregarded.

^  45.  The  charter  of  the  first  or  Virginia  colony  was
successively  altered  in  1609  and  1612,3  without  any
important  change  in  its  substantial  provisions,  as  to  the
civil  or  political  rights  of  the  colonists.  It  is  surprising,
indeed,  that  charters  securing  such  vast  powers  to  the
crown,  and  such  entire  dependence  on  the  part  of  the
emigrants,  should  have  found  any  favour  in  the  eyes

i  1  Haz.  Coll.  50  ;  Marsh.  Colon.  2<J.

2  Marsh.  Colon.  27,  28.

3  1  Haz.  Coll.  58,  72;  Marsh.  Colon.  44,  -13,47;  Robertson's  Amer-
ica, B.  !».


CH.  I.] ORIGIN  AND  SETTLEMENT  OF  VIRGINIA.  25

either  of  the  proprietors,  or  of  the  people.  By  placing
the  whole  legislative  and  executive  powers  in  a  council
nominated  by  the  crown,  and  guided  by  its  instructions,
every  person  settling  in  America  seems  to  have  been
bereaved  of  the  noblest  privileges  of  a  free  man.  But
without  hesitation  or  reluctance,  the  proprietors  of
both  colonies  prepared  to  execute  their  respective
plans  ;  and  under  the  authority  of  a  charter,  which
would  now  be  rejected  with  disdain  as  a  violent  inva-
sion of  the  sacred  and  inalienable  rights  of  liberty,  the
first  permanent  settlements  of  the  English  in  America
were  established.  From  this  period  the  progress  of
the  two  provinces  of  Virginia  and  New-England  form  a
regular  and  connected  story.  The  former  in  the  South,
and  the  latter  in  the  North  may  be  considered  as  the
original  and  parent  colonies,  in  imitation  of  which,  and
under  whose  shelter  all  the  others  have  been  succes-
sively planted  and  reared.1

§  46.  The  settlements  in  Virginia  were  earliest  in
point  of  date,  and  were  fast  advancing  under  a  policy,
which  subdivided  the  property  among  the  settlers,  in-
stead of  retaining  it  in  common,  and  thus  gave  vigour
to  private  enterprise.  As  the  colony  increased,  the  spir-
it of  its  members  assumed  more  and  more  the  tone  of
independence  ;  and  they  grew  restless  and  impatient  for
the  privileges  enjoyed  under  the  government  of  their
native  country.  To  quiet  this  uneasiness,  Sir  George
Yeardley,  then  the  governor  of  the  colony,  in  1619,
called  a  general  assembly,  composed  of  representa-
tives from  the  various  plantations  in  the  colony,  and
permitted  them  to  assume  and  exercise  the  high  iunc-

1  I  quote  the  very  words  of  Dr.  Robertson  throughout  this  passage  for
its  spirit  and  general  truth. Robert.  Hist,  of  America,  B.  9.

VOL.  I.  4


26  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  U

tions  of  legislation.1  Thus  was  formed  and  established
the  first  representative  legislature,  that  ever  sat  in
America.  And  this  example  of  a  domestic  parliament  to
regulate  all  the  internal  concerns  of  the  country  was
never  lost  sight  of,  but  was  ever  afterwards  cherished
throughout  America,  as  the  dearest  birth-right  of  free-
men. So  acceptable  was  it  to  the  people,  and  so  in-
dispensable to  the  real  prosperity  of  the  colony,  that  the
council  in  England  were  compelled,  in  1621,  to  issue  an
ordinance,  which  gave  it  a  complete  and  permanent  sanc-
tion.2 In  imitation  of  the  constitution  of  the  British  par-
liament, the  legislative  power  was  lodged  partly  in  the
governor,  who  held  the  place  of  the  sovereign;  partly  in
a  council  of  state  named  by  the  company  ;  and  partly  in
an  assembly  composed  of  representatives  freely  chos-
en by  the  people.  Each  branch  of  the  legislature  might
decide  by  a  majority  of  voices,  and  a  negative  was  re-
served to  the  governor.  But  no  law  was  to  be  in  force,
though  approved  by  all  three  of  the  branches  of  the
legislature,  until  it  was  ratified  by  a  general  court  of  the
company,  and  returned  under  its  seal  to  the  colony.3
The  ordinance  further  required  the  general  assembly,
as  also  the  council  of  state,  "  to  imitate  and  follow  the
policy  of  the  form  of  government,  laws,  customs,  and
manner  of  trial  and  other  administration  of  justice  used  in
the  realm  of  England,  as  near  as  may  be."  The  conduct
of  the  colonists,  as  well  as  the  company,  soon  afterwards
gave  offence  to  King  James ;  and  the  disasters,  which
accomplished  an  almost  total  destruction  of  the  colony


1  Robertson's  America,  B.  9  ;  Marsh.  Colon.  Ch.  2,  p.  54.

2  1  Henning,  Stat.  Ill; Stith's  Virg.  App.  No,  4,  p.  32; 1  Chalm.
Annals,  54.

3  Robertson's  America,  B.  9  ; Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  2,  p.  56  ;  1  Haz.  Coll.
131.


CH.  II.] ORIGIN  AND  SETTLEMENT  OF  VIRGINIA. 27

by  the  successful  inroads  of  the  Indians,  created  much
discontent  and  disappointment  among  the  proprietors
at  home.  The  king  found  it  no  difficult  matter  to  sat-
isfy the  nation,  that  an  inquiry  into  their  conduct  was
necessary.  It  was  accordingly  ordered;  and  the
result  of  that  inquiry,  by  commissioners  appointed  by
himself,  was  a  demand  on  the  part  of  the  crown  of  a
surrender  of  the  charters.1  The  demand  was  resisted
by  the  company  ;  a  quo  warranto  was  instituted  against
them,  and  it  terminated,  as  in  that  age  it  might  well  be
supposed  it  would,  in  a  judgment,  pronounced  in  1624
by  judges  holding  their  offices  during  his  pleasure,
that  the  franchises  were  forfeited  and  the  corporation
should  be  dissolved.2

§  47.  It  does  not  appear  that  these  proceedings,
-although  they  have  met  with  severe  rebuke  in  later
times,  attracted  any  indignation  or  sympathy  for  the
sufferers  on  this  occasion.  The  royal  prerogative  was
then  viewed  without  jealousy,  if  not  with  favour  ;  and
the  rights  of  Englishmen  were  ill  defined  and  ill  pro-
tected under  a  reign  remarkable  for  no  great  or  noble
objects.  Dr.  Robertson  has  observed,  that  the  compa-
ny, like  all  unprosperous  societies,  fell  unpiticd;3  and
the  nation  were  content  to  forget:  the  prostration  of
private  rights,  under  the  false  encouragements  held  out
of  aid  to  the  colony  from  the  benignant  efforts  and
future  counsels  of  the  crown.

^  48.  With  the  fall  of  (lie  charter  the  colony  came
under  the  immediate  government  and  control  of  the
crown  itself;  and  the  king  issued  a  special  commission


1  In  J623. Sec  1  Haz.  Coll.  155.

2  Robertson's  America,  B.  !>  ; 1  Haz.  ('..11.  ls:{;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  2,
p.  60,  62 ;  Chalmers's  Annals.

3  Robertson's  America,  B.  9.


28  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONY.  [BOOK  I.

appointing  a  governor  and  twelve  counsellors,  to  whom
the  entire  direction  of  its  affairs  was  committed.1  In
this  commission  no  representative  assembly  was  men-
tioned ;  and  there  is  little  reason  to  suppose  that  James,
who,  besides  his  arbitrary  notions  of  government,  im-
puted the  recent  disasters  to  the  existence  of  such  an
assembly,  ever  intended  to  revive  it.  While  he  was
yet  meditating  upon  a  plan  or  code  of  government,  his
death  put  an  end  to  his  projects,  which  were  better  cal-
culated to  nourish  his  own  pride  and  conceit,  than  to
subserve  the  permanent  interests  of  the  province.2
Henceforth,  however,  Virginia  continued  to  be  a  royal
province  until  the  period  of  the  American  Revolution.3
§  58.  Charles  the  First  adopted  the  notions  and  fol-
lowed out  in  its  full  extent  the  colonial  system  of  his
father.4  He  declared  the  colony  to  be  a  part  of  the
empire  annexed  to  the  crown,  and  immediately  subor-
dinate to  its  jurisdiction.  During  the  greater  part  of  his
reign,  Virginia  knew  no  other  law,  than  the  will  of  the
sovereign,  or  his  delegated  agents ;  and  statutes  were
passed  and  taxes  imposed  without  the  slightest  effort
to  convene  a  colonial  assembly.  It  was  not  until  the
murmurs  and  complaints,  which  such  a  course  of  con-
duct was  calculated  to  produce,  hail  betrayed  the  in-
habitants into  acts  of  open  resistance  to  the  governor,
and  into  a  firm  demand  of  redress  from  tin4  crown
against  his  oppressions,  that  the  kin-  was  brought  to
more  considerate  measures. He  did  not  at once  yield


l  1  Haz.  Coll.  189.

a  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  2,  p.  63,  34;  I  Haz.  Coll.  189.

3  1  Haz.  Coll.  220,225.

4  [t  seems  that  a  charter  was  subsequently  granted  by  Charles  the
Second  on  the  10th  of  October,  L676,  but  it  contained  little  more  than  an
acknowledgment  of  the  colonj  a  san  immediate  dependency  ofthe crown.
2Henning,Si 11,532,


CH.  I.]  LAWS  OF  VIRGINIA.  29

to  their  discontents  ;  but  pressed,  as  he  was,  by  severe

embarrassments  at  home,  lie  was  content  to  miopia
policy,  which  would  conciliate  the  colon)  and  remove
some  of  its  just  complaints.  He  accordingly  soon  af-
terwards appointed  Sir  William  Berkeley  governor,
with  powers  and  instructions,  which  breathed  a  far  more
benign  spirit.  He  was  authorized  Lo  proclaim,  thai  in
all  its  concerns,  civil  as  well  as  ecclesiastical,  the  colony
should  be  governed  according  to  the  laws  of  England.
He  was  directed  to  issue  writs  for  electing  representa-
tives of  the  people,  who  with  the  governor  and  council
should  form  a  general  assembly  clothed  with  supreme
legislative  authority  ;  and  to  establish  courts  of  justice,
whose  proceedings  should  be  guided  by  the  forms  of
the  parent  country.  The  rights  of  Englishmen  were
thus  in  a  great  measure  secured  to  the  colonists  ;  and
under  the  government  of  this  excellent  magistrate,  with
some  short  intervals  of  interruption,  the  colony  flouii  ^li-
ed with  a  vigorous  growth  for  almost  forty  years.1  The
revolution  of  1688  found  it,  if  not  in  the  practical  pos-
session of  liberty,  at  least  with  forms  of  government
well  calculated  silently  to  cherish  its  spirit.

^50.  The  laws  of  Virginia,  during  its  colonial  state,
do  not  exhibit  as  many  marked  deviations,  in  the  gener-
al structure  of  its  institutions  and  civil  polity,  from
those  of  the  parent  country,  as  those  in  the  northern
colonies.  The  common  law  was  recognised  as  the  gen-
eral basis  of  its  jurisprudence ;  and  the  legislature,  with
some  appearance  of  boast,  stated,  soon  after  the  resto-
ration of  Charles  the  Second,  that  they  had  "  endeav-

3  Robertson's  America,  B.  9;  Marsh.  Amer.  Col.  ch.  2,  p.  65,  66,  note.
I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  advert  particularly  to  the  state  of
things  during  the  disturbed  period  of  the  commonwealth.  Hcnning,
Virg.  Stat. Introduction,  p.  13, 14.


30  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

oured,  in  all  things  ,  as  near  as  the  capacity  and  consti-
tution of  this  country  would  admit,  to  adhere  to  those
excellent  and  often  refined  laws  of  England,  to  which
we  profess  and  acknowledge  all  due  obedience  and
reverence."1  The  prevalence  of  the  common  law  was
also  expressly  provided  for  in  all  the  charters  succes-
sively granted,  as  well  as  by  the  royal  declaration,  when
the  colony  was  annexed  as  a  dependency  to  the  crown.
Indeed,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose,  that  the  common
law  was  not  in  its  leading  features  very  acceptable  to
the  colonists  ;  and  in  its  general  policy  the  colony
closely  followed  in  the  steps  of  the  mother  country.
Among  the  earliest  acts  of  the  legislature  we  find
the  Church  of  England  established  as  the  only  true
church ;  and  its  doctrines  and  discipline  were  strict-
ly enforced.  All  nonconformists  were  at  first  compel-
led to  leave  the  colony  ;  and  a  spirit  of  persecution  was
exemplified  not  far  behind  the  rigour  of  the  most  zeal-
ous of  the  Puritans.  The  clergy  of  the  established
church  were  amply  provided  for  by  glebes  and  tithes,
and  other  aids.  Non-residence  was  prohibited,  and  a
due  performance  of  parochial  duties  peremptorily  re-
quired. The  laws,  indeed,  respecting  the  church,
made  a  very  prominent  figure  during  the  first  fifty  years
of  the  colonial  legislation.  The  first  law  allowing
toleration  to  protestant  dissenters  was  in  the  year  1 699,
and  merely  adopts  that  of  the  statute  of  the  1st  of
William  and  Mary.  Subject  to  this,  the  church  of
England  seems  to  have  maintained  an  exclusive  su-

i  2  Henning,  Stat  43. Sir  William  Berkeley,  in  his  answer  to  the

questions  of  the  Lords  commissioners  in  J<!71.  "Contrary  to  the  laws
of  England  we  never  did,  nor  dare  to  make  any  [law]  only  this,  that  no
sale  of  land  is  good  and  legal,  unless  within  three  months  after  the  con-
veyance it  be  recorded."


CH.  II.]  LAWS  OF  VIRGINIA.  31

prcmacy  down  to  the  period  of  the  American  Revolu-
tion. Marriages,  except  in  special  cases,  were  requir-
ed to  be  celebrated  in  the  parish  church,  and  according
to  the  rubric  in  the  common  prayer  book. The  law  <>!

inheritance  of  the  parent  country  was  silently  maintain-
ed down  to  the  period  of  the  American  Revolution ;
and  the  distribution  of  intestate  estates  was  closely
fashioned  upon  the  same  general  model.  Devises  also
were  regulated  by  the  law  of  England  ; 1  and  no  colonial
statute  appears  to  have  been  made  on  that  subject
until  1748,  when  one  was  enacted,  which  contains  a  leu
deviations  from  it,  probably  arising  from  local  circum-
stances.2 One  of  the  most  remarkable  facts  in  the  ju-
ridical history  of  the  colony,  is  the  steady  attachment
of  the  colony  to  entails.  By  an  act  passed  in  1705,  it
was  provided,  that  estates  tail  should  no  longer  be  dock-
ed by  fines  or  recoveries,  but  only  by  an  act  of  the  leg-
islature in  each  particular  case.  And  though  this  was  af-
terwards modified,  so  as  to  allow  entails  to  be  destroyed
in  another  manner,  where  the  estate  did  not  exceed  £200
sterling  in  value,3  yet  the  general  policy  continued  down
to  the  American  Revolution.  In  this  respect  the  zeal  of
the  colony  to  secure  entjals  and  perpetuate  inheritances
in  the  same  family  outstripped  that  of  the  parent  country.
§  51.  At  a  very  early  period  the  acknowledgment
and  registry  of  deeds  and  mortgages  of  real  estate
were  provided  for  ;  and  the  non-registry  was  deemed
a  badge  of  fraud.'1 The  trial  by  jury,  although  a  privi-

1 1  refer  upon  these  subjects  to  Henning,  Stat.  122,  123, 144,  14! »,  155,
180,  240,  268,  277,  434  ;  2  Hen.  Stat.  48,  50  ;  3  Hen.  Stat.  150,  17U,  360,
441.

2  5  Henning,  Stat.  456.

3  3  Henning,  Stat.  320,  516;  4  Henning,  Stat.  400;  5  Henning,  Stat.
414;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.

4  1  Henning,  Stat.  248 ;  2  Henning,  Stat.  98  ;  3  Henning,  Stat.  321.


32  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

lege  resulting  from  their  general  rights,  was  guarded
by  special  legislation.  There  was  also  an  early  declara-
tion, that  no  taxes  could  be  levied  by  the  Governor
without  the  consent  of  the  General  Assembly  ;  and
when  raised,  they  were  to  be  applied  according  to  the
appointment  of  the  Legislature.  The  burgesses  also
during  their  attendance  upon  the  assembly  wrere  free
from  arrest.  In  respect  to  domestic  trade,  a  general
freedom  was  guarantied  to  all  the  inhabitants  to  buy
and  sell  to  the  greatest  advantage,  and  all  engrossing
was  prohibited.1  The  culture  of  tobacco  seems  to  have
been  a  constant  object  of  solicitude  ;  and  it  was  en-
couraged by  a  long  succession  of  Acts  sufficiently  evinc-
ing the  public  feeling,  and  the  vast  importance  of  it
to  the  prosperity  of  the  colony.2  We  learn  from  Sir
William  Berkeley's  answers  to  the  Lords  Commission-
ers in  1671,  that  the  population  of  the  colony  was  at
that  time  about  40,000  ;  that  the  restrictions  of  the
navigation  act,  cutting  off  all  trade  with  foreign  coun-
tries, were  very  injurious  to  them,  as  they  were  obedi-
ent to  the  laws.  And  "  this  (says  he)  is  the  cause,  why
no  small  or  great  vessels  are  built  here  ;  for  we  are  most
obedient  to  all  laws,  whilst  the  New-England  men
break  through,  and  men  trade  to  any  place,  that  their
in i crest  leads  them."  This  language  is  sufficiently  sig-
nificant of  the  restlessness  of  New-England  under
these  restraints  upon  its  commerce.  But  his  answer  to
the  question  respecting  religious  and  other  instruction
in  the  colony  would  in  our  times  create  universal  as-
tonishment,—  "I  thank  God  (says  he)  there  are  no


i  1  Henning,  Stat.  290.

2  See  I  Hen.  Stat.  126,  and  Index,  tit.  Tobacco,  in  that  and  the  sub-
sequent volumes ;  2  Henning,  Stat.  514.


CH.  II.]  LAWS OF  VIRGINIA.  33

free  schools  nor  printing ;  and  !  hope  we  shall  not  have
these  hundred  years;  for  learning  has  brought  disobe-
dience and  heresy  and  sects  into  the  world ;  and  print-
ing has  divulged  them,  and  libels  against  the  best
government  God  keep  us  from  both."1  \n  1680a  re-
markable change  was  made  in  the  colonial  jurispru-
dence, by  taking-  all  judicial  power  from  the  assembly,
and  allowing  an  appeal  from  die  judgments  of  the  Gen-
eral Court  to  the  King  in  Council.2

i  2  Hen.  Stat.  511,  512,  514,  51?  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  328  ;  3  Hutch.
Collect.  49G.
2  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  5,  p.  1G3  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  325.


VOL.  I.


34  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

CHAPTER  III.

ORIGIN  AND  SETTLEMENT  OF  NEW-ENGLAND.

§  52.  We  may  now  advert  in  a  brief  manner  to  the
history  of  the  Northern,  or  Plymouth  Company.  That
company  possessed  fewer  resources  and  less  enterprise
than  the  Southern  ;  and  though  aided  by  men  of  high
distinction,  and  among  others  by  the  public  spirit  and
zeal  of  Lord  Chief  Justice  "Popham,  its  first  efforts
for  colonization  were  feeble  and  discouraging.  Capt.
John  Smith,  so  well  known  in  the  History  of  Virginia
by  his  successful  adventures  under  their  authority,  lent
a  transient  lustre  to  their  attempts  ;  and  his  warm  de-
scriptions of  the  beauty  and  fertility  of  the  country  pro-
cured for  it  from  the  excited  imagination  of  the  Prince,
alter  King  Charles  the  First,  the  flattering  name  of
New- England,  a  name,  which  effaced  from  it  that  of
Virginia,  and  which  has  since  become  dear  beyond  ex-
pression to  the  inhabitants  of  its  harsh  but  salubrious
climate.1

^  53.  While  the  company  was  yet  languishing,  an
event  occurred,  which  gave  a  new  and  unexpected
aspect  to  its  prospects.  It  is  well  known,  that  the  relig-
ious dissensions  consequent  upon  the  reformation,  while
they  led  to  a  more  bold  and  free  spirit  of  discussion,
failed  at  the  same  time  of  introducing  a  correspondent
charity  for  differences  of  religious  opinion.  Each  suc-
sive  seel entertained  not  the  slightest  doubt  of  its

i  Robertson's  America, 15.  It);  Marsh.  Amcr.  Col.  ch.  3, p.  77,78;
1  Haz.Coil.  103,  1  !7.  104  ;  1  Belknap's  New-Hampshire,  eh.  1.


CH.  III.] SETTLEMENT  OF  NEW-ENGLAND.  35

own  infallibility  in  doctrine  and  worship,  and  was  eager
to  obtain  proselytes,  and  denounce  the  errors  of  its
opponents.  I! 'it  had  slopped  here,  we  might  have  forgot-
ten, in  admiration  of  the  sincere  zeal  for  Christian  truth,
the  desire  of  power,  and  the  pride  of  mind,  \\  hich  lurk-
ed within  the  inner  folds  of  their  devotion.  Bui  unfor-
tunately the  spirit  of  intolerance  was  abroad  in  all  its
stern  and  unrelenting  severity.  To  tolerate  errors  was
to  sacrifice  Christianity  to  mere  temporal  interests.
Truth,  and  truth  alone,  was  to  be  followed  at  the  hazard
of  all  consequences  ;  and  religion  allowed  no'  com-
promises between  conscience  and  worldly  comforts.
Heresy  was  itself  a  sin  of  a  deadly  nature,  and  to  extir-
pate it  was  a  primary  duty  of  all,  who  were  believers  in
sincerity  and  truth.  Persecution,  therefore,  even  when  it
seemed  most  to  violate  the  feelings  of  humanity  and
the  rights  of  private  judgment,  never  wanted  apologists
among  those  of  the  purest  and  most  devout  lives.  It
was  too  often  received  with  acclamations  by  the  crowd,
and  found  an  ample  vindication  from  the  learned  and
the  dogmatists  ;  from  the  policy  of  the  civil  magistrate,
and  the  blind  zeal  of  the  ecclesiastic.  Each  sect,  as  it
attained  power,  exhibited  the  same  unrelenting  firmness
in  putting  down  its  adversaries.1 The  papist  and  the

1  Dr.  Robertson  has  justly  observed,  that  not  only  the  idea  of  tol-
eration, but  even  the  word  itself  in  the  sense  now  affixed  to  it,  was  then
unknown.*  Sir  James  Mackintosh,  a  name  equally  glorious  injudicial
and  ethical  philosophy, has  remarked,  that  this  giant  evil  (the  suppression
of  the  right  of  private  judgment  in  matters  of  religion)  had  received  a
mortal  wound  from  Luther,  who  in  his  warfare  with  Rome  had  struck  a
blow  against,  all  human  authority,  and  unconsciously  disclosed  to  man-
kind, that  they  were  entitled,  or  rather  hound  to  form  and  utter  their
own  opinions,  and  most  of  all  on  the  most  deeply  interesting  subjects.!

*  The  whole  passage  deserves  commendation for  its  catholic  spirit. Robertson's  America
B.  10.
t  Mackintosh's  Dessertation  on  the  Progress  of  Ethical  Philisophy,  (Phila.  18%,)  p.36.


36  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

prelate,  the  puritan  and  the  presbyterian,  felt  no  com-
punctions in  the  destruction  of  dissentients  from  their
own  faith.  They  uttered,  indeed,  loud  complaints  of
the  injustice  of  their  enemies,  when  they  were  them-
selves oppressed  ;  but  it  was  not  from  any  abhorrence  of
persecution  itself,  but  of  the  infamous  errors  of  the  per-
secutors. There  are  not  wanting  on  the  records  of  the
history  of  these  times  abundant  proofs,  how  easily  sects,
which  had  borne  every  human  calamity  with  unshrink-
ing fortitude  for  conscience'  sake,  could  turn  upon
their  inoffensive,  but,  in  their  judgment,  erring  neigh-
bours, with  a  like  infliction  of  suffering.1  Even  adver-
sity sometimes  fails  of  producing  its  usual  salutary
effects  of  moderation  and  compassion,  when  a  blind  but
honest  zeal  has  usurped  dominion  over  the  mind.  If
such  a  picture  of  human  infirmity  may  justly  add  to  our
humility,  it  may  also  serve  to  admonish  us  of  the  Chris-
tian duty  of  forbearance.  And  he,  who  can  look  with  an
eye  of  exclusive  censure  on  such  scenes,  must  have  for-
gotten, how  many  bright  examples  they  have  afforded
of  the  liveliest  virtue,  the  most  persuasive  fidelity,  and
the  most  exalted  piety.

^  54.  Among  others,  who  suffered  persecutions  from
the  haughty  zeal  of  Elizabeth,  was  a  small  sect,  called
from  the  name  of  their  leader,  Brow  nisi s,  to  whom  we
owe  the  foundation  of  the  now  wide  spread  sect  of  Con-
gregationalists  or  Independents.  After  sufferings  of  an
aggravated  nature,  they  were  compelled  to  take  refuge  in
Holland  under  the  care  of  their  pastor,  Mr.  John  Rob-
inson, a  man  distinguished  for  his  piety,  his  bene\<>-
lence,  and his  intrepid spirit.2 After  remaining  there

Robertson's  America,  B.  !<>: 1  Belknap's  New-Hampshire,  ch.3;
IChalm.  Annals, p.  143,  I  15,  169,  189,  190,  !!>!  ;3Hutch.  Hist. Coll. 42.
2  Belkimp's  New-Hampshire,  cli.  8  ;  1  Doug.  Suium.  369.


CH.  III.] SETTLEMENT  OF NEW-ENGLAND.  M

some  years,  the}  concluded  to  emigrate  to  America  in
the  hope,  that  theymighl  thus  perpetuate  their  religious
discipline,  and  preserve  the  purity  of  an  apostolical
church.1  In  conjunction  with  other  friends  in  England
they  embarked  on  the  voyage  with  a  design  of  settle-
ment on  Hudson's  river  in  New-York.  But  against
their  intention  they  were  compelled  to  land  on  the
shores  of  Cape  Cod  in  the  depth  of  winter,  and  the
place  of  their  landing  was  called  Plymouth,  which  has
since  become  so  celebrated  as  the  first  permanent  set-
tlement in  New-England.2  Not  having  contemplated
any  plantation  at  this  place,  they  had  not  taken  the  pre-
caution to  obtain  any  charter  from  the  Plymouth  Com-
pany. The  original  plan  of  their  colony,  however,  is
still  preserved  ;3  and  it  was  founded  upon  the  basi>  of
a  community  of  property,  at  least  for  a  given  space  of
time,  a  scheme,  as  the  event  showed,  utterly  incompat-
ible with  the  existence  of  any  large  and  flourishing  col-
ony. Before  their  landing  they  drew  up  and  signed  a
voluntary  compact  of  government,  forming,  if  not  the  first,
at  least  the  best  authenticated  case  of  an  original  social
contract  for  the  establishment  of  a  nation,  which  is  to  be
found  in  the  annals  of  the  world.  Philosophers  and
jurists  have  perpetually  resorted  to  the  theory  of  su<  h  a
compact,  by  which  to  measure  the  rights  and  duties  of
governments  and  subjects  ;  but  for  the  most  part  it  has
been  treated  as  an  effort  o\'  imagination^  unsustained
by  the  history  or  practice  of  nations,  and  furaishing  lit-
tle of  solid  instruction  for  the  actual  concerns  oflife.  It
was  little  dreamed  of,  that  America  should  furnish  an

i  Morton's  Mem.  1  to  30.

2  Robertson's  America,  B.  10  ; Marsh.  Amer.  Col.  ch.  3, p.  7!».  80  ;
Morton's  Mem.  31  to  :;.">.

3  1  Haz.  Coll.  87,  SS  :  Morton's  Mem.  A  pp.  373.


38  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

example  of  it  in  primitive  and  almost  patriarchal  sim-
plicity.

^  55.  On  the  11th  of  November,  1(520,  these  hum-
ble hut  fearless  adventurers,  before  their  landing,  drew
up  and  signed  an  original  compact,  in  which,  after
acknowledging  themselves  subjects  of  the  crown  of  Eng-
land, they  proceed  to  declare  :  "Having  undertaken
for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  advancement  of  the  Chris-
tian faith  and  the  honor  of  our  king  and  country,  a
voyage  to  plant  the  first  colony  in  the  northern  parts  of
Virginia,  we  do  by  these  presents  solemnly  and  mutual-
ly, in  the  presence  of  God  and  of  one  another,  covenant
and  combine  ourselves  together  into  a  civil  body  politic,
for  our  better  ordering  and  preservation  and  furtherance
of  the  ends  aforesaid.  And  by  virtue  hereof  do  enact,
constitute,  and  frame  such  just  and  equal  laws,  ordinan-
ces, acts,  constitutions,  and  officers  from  time  to  time  as
shall  be  thought  most  meet  and  convenient  for  the  gen-
eral good  of  the  colony  ;  unto  which  we  promise  all
due  submission  and  obedience."  This  is  the  whole
of  the  compact,  and  it  was  signed  by  forty -one  per-
sons.1 It  is  in  its  very  essence  a  pure  democracy  ;
and  in  pursuance  of  it  the  colonists  proceeded  soon
afterwards  to  organize  the  colonial  government,  un-
der the  name  of  the  Colony  of  New  Plymouth,  to
appoint  a  governor  and  other  officers,  and  to  enact
laws.  The  governor  was  chosen  annually  by  the
fre'emen,  and  had  at  first  one  assistant  to  aid  him  in
the  discharge  of  his  trust.2  Four  others  were  soon
afterwards added, and finally the number was iu-

1  1  Haz.Coll.  119;  Morton's  Mem.  37  ;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  3,  p.  80;
Robertson's  America,  I>.  10;  2  Hutch.  Hist. 455.

2  Plymouth  Laws,  (1685)  ;  1  I  In/.  I  108.


CH.  III.] SETTLEMENT  OF  NEW-ENGLAND.  39

creased to  seven.1 The  supreme legislative  power

resided  in,  and  was  exercised  by  the  whole  bod}  of
the  male  inhabitants,  every  freeman,  who  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  church,  being  admitted  to  yote  in  all  public
affairs.3  The  number  of  settlements  having  increased,
and  being  ai  a  considerable  distance  from  each  other,
a  house  of  representatives  was  established  in  1639  ;3
the  members  of  which,  as  well  as  all  otherofficers,  were
annually  chosen.  They  adopted  the  common  law  of
England  as  the  general  basis  of  their  jurisprudence,  va-
rying it  however  from  time  to  time  by  municipal  regu-
lations better  adapted  to  their  situation,  or  conforming
more  exactly  to  their  stern  notions  of  the  absolute  au-
thority and  universal  obligation  of  the  Mosaic  Institu-
tions.4

§  56.  The  Plymouth  Colonists  acted,  at  first,  alto-
gether under  the  voluntary  compact  and  association
already  mentioned.  But  they  daily  felt  embarrassments
from  the  want  of  some  general  authority,  derived  direct-
ly or  indirectly  from  the  crown,  which  should  recognise
their  settlement  and  confirm  their  legislation.  After
several  ineffectual  attempts  made  for  this  purpose,  they
at  length  succeeded  in  obtaining,  in  January,  1629,  a
patent  from  the  council  established  at  Plymouth,  in
England,  under  the  charter  of  King  James  of  1620.5
This  patent,  besides  a  grant  of  the  territory  upon
the  terms  and  tenure  of  the  original  patent  of  1620,

i  Morton'sMem.  110;  Prince's  Annals,  225 ;  2  Hutch.Hist  163,465;
1  Haz.  Coll.  404,  408,  ill.  U2.

2  Robertson's  America,  13.  10;  2  Hutch.  Hist  4G7  ;  1  Haz.  Coll.  108,
411,412,  114.  3  o  in.tH,.  Hist  463.

4  Robertson's  America,  B.  10  ;  2 Hutch.  Hist  162,  463,464  ;  Hubbard's
Hist.  ch.  10,  p.  62  ;  Chalmers's  Annals,  p.  88.

5  2  Hutch.  Hist.  464,  479;  1  Haz.  Collec.  298,  101,  468  ;  1  Chalm.  An-
nals, [)7,  98  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  201.


40  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

included  an  authority  to  the  patentee  (William  Brad-
ford) and  his  associates,  "  to  incorporate  by  some  usual
or  fit  name  and  title  him  or  themselves,  or  the  people
there  inhabiting  under  him  or  them,  and  their  succes-
sors, from  time  to  time,  to  frame  and  make  orders,  ordi-
nances, and  constitutions,  as  well  for  the  better  govern-
ment of  their  affairs  here,  and  the  receiving  or  admitting
any  into  his  or  their  society,  as  also  for  the  better  govern-
ment of  his  or  their  people,  or  his  or  their  people  at  sea
in  going  thither  or  returning  from  thence  ; and  the
same  to  put  or  cause  to  be  put  in  execution,  by  such
officers  and  ministers,  as  he  or  they  shall  authorize  and
depute ;  provided,  that  the  said  laws  and  orders  be  not
repugnant  to  the  laws  of  England  or  the  frame  of  gov-
ernment by  the  said  president  and  council  [of  Plymouth
Company]  hereafter  to  be  established." 1

§  57.  This  patent  or  charter  seems  never  to  have  been
confirmed  by  the  crown  f  and  the  colonists  were  nev-
er, by  any  act  of  the  crown,  created  a  body  politic  and
corporate  with  any  legislative  powers.  They,  there-
fore, remained  in  legal  contemplation  a  mere  voluntary
association,  exercising  the  highest  powers  and  preroga-
tives of  sovereignty,  and  yielding  obedience  to  the  laws
and  magistrates  chosen  by  themselves.3

^  58.  The  charter  of  1629  furnished  them,  how-
ever, with  the  colour  of  delegated  sovereignty,  of  which
they  did  not  fail  to  avail  themselves.  They  assumed
under  it  the  exercise  of  the  most  plenary  executive,
legislative,  and  judicial  powers  with  but  a  momentary

i  1  Haz.  Coll.  298,  404.

2  Chalmers  says,  (I  Chalm.  Annals,  97,)  that  "this  patent  was  not
confirmed  by  the  crown,  though  the  contrary  has  been  affirmed  by  the
colonial  historians." Sec  also  Marsh.  Hist,  of  the  Colonies,  ch.  3. 82,  83.

3  Marsh.  Hist.  Colon.  ch.3,p.  82;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  87,  88,  97.


CH.  III.]  PLYMOUTH  COLONY  LAWS.  41

scruple  as  to  their  right  to  inflict  capital  punishments.1
They  were  not  disturbed  in  the  free  exercise  of  these
powers,  either  through  the  ignorance  or  the  connivance
of  the  crown,  until  after  the  restoration  of  Charles  the

Second.  Their  authority  under  their  charter  was  then
questioned;  and  several  unsuccessful  attempts  were
made  to  procure  a  confirmation  from  the  crown.  They
continued  to  cling  to  it,  until,  in  the  general  shipwreck
of  charters  in  1684,  theirs  was  overturned.  An  arbi-
trary government  wTas  then  established  over  them  in
common  with  the  other  New-England  colonies  ;  and
they  were  finally  incorporated  into  a  province  with
Massachusetts  under  the  charter  granted  to  the  latter
by  William  and  Mary  in  1691.2

^  59.  It  may  not  be  without  use  to  notice  a  few  of
the  laws,  which  formed,  what  may  properly  be  deemed,
the  fundamentals  of  their  jurisprudence.  After  provid-
ing for  the  manner  of  choosing  their  governor  and  legis-
lature, as  above  stated,  their  first  attention  seems  to  have
been  directed  to  the  establishment  of  "  the  free  liberties
of  the  free-born  people  of  England."  It  was  therefore
declared,3  almost  in  the  language  of  Magna  Charta,  that
justice  should  be  impartially  administered  unto  all,  not
sold,  or  denied  ;  that  no  person  should  suffer  "  in  re-
spect to  life,  limb,  liberty,  good  name,  or  estate,  but  by
virtue  or  equity  of  some  express  law  of  the  General
Court,  or  the  good  and  equitable  laws  of  our  nation  suita-
ble for  us,  in  matters  which  are  of  a  civil  nature,  (as  by
the  court  here  hath  been  accustomed,)  wherein  we  have
no  particular  law  of  our  own  ;  "  and  none  should  suffer

i  2  Hutch  Hist. 464,  465,  467;  ("halm.  Annals,

2  Hutch.  Hist.  479,  180;  Cfaalm.  Annals, 97,  98.

3  In  ](!.%. SeelHaz.  Coll.  404,406: Ed. I7S,  Plymouth Colony
Laws,  (edit.  1665;)  1  Haz.  Coll.  411,  414,  419.

VOL.  I.  6


42  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

without  being  brought  to  answer  by  due  course  and
process  of  law  ;  that  in  criminal  and  civil  cases  there
should  be  a  trial  by  jury  at  all  events  upon  a  final  trial
on  appeal ;  with  the  right  to  challenge  for  just  cause  ;
and  in  capital  cases  a  peremptory  right  to  challenge
twenty  jurors  as  in  England  ;  that  no  party  should  be
cast  or  condemned,  unless  upon  the  testimony  of  two
sufficient  witnesses,  or  other  sufficient  evidence  or  cir-
cumstances, unless  otherwise  specially  provided  by  law ;
that  all  persons  of  the  age  of  twenty-one  years,  and  of
sound  memory,  should  have  power  to  make  wills  and
other  lawful  alienations  of  their  estate,  whether  they
were  condemned,  or  excommunicated  or  other ;  except
that  in  treason  their  personal  estate  should  be  forfeited;
but  their  real  estate  was  still  to  be  at  their  disposal.
All  processes  were  directed  to  be  in  the  king's  name.1
All  trials  in  respect  to  land  were  to  be  in  the  county,
where  it  lay  ;  and  all  personal  actions,  where  one  of
the  parties  lived  ;  and  lands  and  goods  were  liable  to
attachment  to  answer  the  judgment  rendered  in  any
action.  All  lands  were  to  descend  according  to  the
free  tenure  of  lands  of  East  Greenwich,  in  the  county  of
Kent ;  and  all  entailed  lands  according  to  the  law  of
England.  All  the  sons  were  to  inherit  equally,  except
the  eldest,  who  was  to  have  a  double  share.  If  there
were  no  sons,  all  the  daughters  were  to  inherit  alike.
Brothers  of  the  whole  blood  were  to  inherit ;  and  if
none,  then  sisters  of  the  whole  blood.  All  conveyances
of  land  were  to  be  by  deed  only,  acknowledged  before
some  magistrate,  and  recorded  in  the  public  records.
Among  capital  offences  were  enumerated,  without  any
discrimination,  idolatry,  blasphemy, treason,  murder,

i  1  Haz.  Coll.  473  ;  Plymouth  Col.  Laws,  (1688,)  p.  10.


CH.  III.]  PLYMOUTH  COLONY  LAWS.  43

witchcraft,  bestiality,  sodomy,  false  witness,  man-steal-
ing, cursing  or  smiting  father  or  mother,  rape,  wilful
burning  of  houses  and  ships,  and  pirac)  ;  while  certain
other  offences  of  a  nature  quite  as  immoral  and  injurious
to  society  received  a  far  more  moderate  punishment.
Undoubtedly  a  reverential  regard  for  the  Scriptures
placed  the  crimes  of  idolatry,  blasphemy,  and  false
witness,  and  cursing  and  smiting  father  and  mother,
among  the  capital  offences.  And,  as  might  well  be
presumed  from  the  religious  sentiments  of  the  people,
ample  protection  was  given  to  the  church  ;  and  the
maintenance  of  a  public  orthodox  ministry  and  of  pub-
lic schools  were  carefully  provided  for.1

^  60.  Compared  wTith  the  legislation  of  some  of  the  col-
onies during  an  equal  period,  the  laws  of  the  Plymouth
colony  will  be  found  few  and  brief.  This  resulted  in
some  measure  from  the  narrow  limits  of  the  population
and  business  of  the  colony  ;  but  in  a  greater  measure
from  their  reliance  in  their  simple  proceedings  upon
the  general  principles  of  the  common  law.

i  More  ample  information  upon  all  these  subjects  will  be  furnished  by
an  examination  of  the  Plymouth  Colony  Laws,  first  printed  in  1685,


44  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK I.


CHAPTER  IV.

MASSACHUSETTS.

§  61.  About  the  period  when  the  Plymouth  colo-
nists completed  their  voyage,  James  the  First,  with  a
view  to  promote  more"  effectually  the  interests  of  the
second  or  northern  company,  granted 1  to  the  Duke  of
Lenox  and  others  of  the  company  a  new  charter,  by
which  its  territories  were  extended  in  breadth  from  the
40th  to  the  48th  degree  of  north  latitude ;  and  in  length
by  all  the  breadth  aforesaid  throughout  the  main  land
from  sea  to  sea,  excluding  however  all  possession  of
any  other  Christian  prince,  and  all  lands  within  the
bounds  of  the  southern  colony.2  To  the  territory  thus
bounded  he  affixed  the  name  of  New-England,  and  to
the  corporation  itself  so  created,  the  name  of  "  The
Council  established  at  Plymouth  in  the  county  of
Devon,  for  the  planting,  ruling,  ordering,  and  govern-
ing of  New-England  in  America." 3  The  charter  con-
tains the  names  of  the  persons,  who  were  to  constitute
the  first  council,  with  power  to  fill  vacancies,  and  keep
up  a  perpetual  succession  of  counsellors  to  the  number
of  forty.  The  power  to  purchase,  hold,  and  sell  lands,
and  other  usual  powers  of  corporations  are  then  confer-
red on  them,  and  special  authority  to  make  laws  and
ordinances,  to  regulate  the  admission  and  trade  of  all
persons  with  the  plantation  ;  to  dispose  of  their  lands  ;
to  appoint  and  remove  governors  and  other  officers  of
the  plantation  ;  to  establish  all  manner  of  orders,  laws

i  Nov.  3, 1620;  1  Doug.  Summ.  400,  &c.

2  1  Huz.  Coll.  103,  105,  fyc.

3  1  Haz.Coll.  99,  103,  10G,  110, 1 J 1.


CH.  IV.]  MASSACHUSETTS.  10

and  directions,  instructions,  forms  and  ceremonies  of
government  and  magistracy,  so  thai  the  same  be  not
contrary  to  the  laws  and  statutes  of  England  ;  to  cor-
rect, punish,  pardon,  govern,  and  rule  all  inhabitants  of
the  colony  by  such  laws  and  ordinances,  and  in  defect
thereof,  in  cases  of  necessity,  according  to  Um  good  dis-
cretions of  their  governors  and  officers  respectively,  as
well  in  cases  capital  and  criminal  as  civil,  both  marine
and  others,  so  always  that  the  same  ordinances  and
proceedings  be,  as  near  as  conveniently  maybe,  agree-
able to  the  laws,  statutes,  government,  and  policy  of
England ;  and  finally  to  regulate  trade  and  traffic  to
and  from  the  colony,  prohibiting  the  same  to  all  persons
not  licensed  by  the  corporation.1  The  charter  further
contains  some  extraordinary  powers  in  cases  of  rebel-
lion, mutiny,  misconduct,  illicit  trade,  and  hostile  inva-
sions, which  it  is  not  necessary  to  particularize.  The
charter  also  declares,  that  all  the  territory  shall  be  hold-
en  of  the  crown,  as  of  the  royal  manor  of  East  Green-
wich, in  Kent  county,  in  free  and  common  soccage,  and
not  in  capite,  nor  by  knight  service ; 2  and  that  all  sub-
jects, inhabitants  of  the  plantation,  and  their  children
and  posterrity  born  within  the  limits  thereof,  shall  have
and  enjoy  all  liberties  and  franchises  and  immunities
of  free  denizens  and  natural  subjects  within  any  other
of  the  dominions  of  the  crown,  to  all  intents  and  pur-
poses, as  if  they  had  been  abiding  and  born  within  the
kingdom  of  England,  or  any  other  dominions  of  the
crown.3

^  62.  Some  of  the  powers  granted  by  this  charter
were  alarming  to  many  persons,  and  especially  those,

i  1  Haz.  Coll.  109,  110,  112,  113,  114.

2  1  Haz.  Coll.  111.

3  1  Haz.  Coll.  117.


46  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

which  granted  a  monopoly  of  trade.1  The  efforts  to
settle  a  colony  within  the  territory  were  again  renewed
and  again  were  unsuccessful.2  The  spirit  of  religion,
however,  soon  effected,  what  the  spirit  of  commerce  had
failed  to  accomplish.  The  Puritans,  persecuted  at
home,  and  groaning  under  the  weight  of  spiritual  bon-
dage, cast  a  longing  eye  towards  America,  as  an  ulti-
mate retreat  for  themselves  and  their  children.  They
were  encouraged  by  the  information,  that  the  colonists
at  Plymouth  were  allowed  to  worship  their  Creator
according  to  the  dictates  of  their  consciences,  without
molestation.  They  opened  a  negotiation,  through  the
instrumentality  of  a  Mr.  White,  a  distinguished  non-
conforming minister,  with  the  council  established  at
Plymouth;  and  in  March,  1627,  procured  from  them  a
grant  to  Sir  Henry  Rosewell  and  others  of  all  that  part
of  New-England  lying  three  miles  south  of  Charles
river  and  three  miles  north  of  Merrimack  river,  and  ex-
tending from  the  Atlantic  to  the  South  Sea.3

^  63.  Other  persons  were  soon  induced  to  unite
with  them,  if  a  charter  could  be  procured  from  the
crown,  which  should  secure  to  the  adventurers  the  usual
powers  of  government.  Application  was  made  for  this
purpose  to  King  Charles,  who,  accordingly,  in  March
1628,  granted  to  the  grantees  and  their  associates  the
most  ample  powers  of  government.  The  charter  con-
firmed to  them  the  territory  already  granted  by  the  coun-
cil established  at  Plymouth,  to  be  holden  of  the  crown,

i  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  3,  p.  83;  Chalm.  Annals,  p.  81,  83.

2  Robertson's  America,  B.  10;  Chalm.  Annals,  !»0.

3  These  are  not  the  descriptive  words  of  the  grant,  but  a  statement  of
the  substance  of  it.  The  grant  is  recited  in  the  charter  in  Hutchinson's
Collection,  p.  1,  &c.  and  in  the  Colonial  and  Province  laws  of  Massachu-
setts, printed  in  1814.


(  H.  iv.]  MASSACHUSETTS.  17

as  of  tin4  royal  manor  of  Easl  Greenwich,  "in  free  and
common  soccage, and  not  in  capite,  nor  by  knight's  si  i-
rice,"  yielding  to  the  crown  one  fifth  pari  of  all  ore  of
gold  and  silver,  &c.  with  the  exception,  however,  of  anj
pari  of  the  territory  actually  possessed  oi  inhabited  by
any  other  Christian  prince  or  state,  or  of  any  pari  of  it
within  the  bounds  of  the  southern  colony  [of  Virginia  ]
granted  by  King  James.  It  also  created  the  asso-
ciates abody  politic  by  the  name  of  "  The  Governor  and
Company  of  the  .Massachusetts  Bay  in  New-England,"
with  the  usual  powers  of  corporations.  It  provided,
that  the  government  should  be  administered  by  a  gov-
ernor, a  deputy  governor,  and  eighteen  assistants,  from
time  to  time  elected  out  of  the  freemen  of  the  company,
which  officers  should  have  the  care  of  the  general
business  and  affairs  of  the  lands  and  plantations,  and  the
government  of  the  people  there  ;  and  it  appointed  the
first  governor,  deputy  governor,  and  assistants  by  name.
It  further  provided,  that  a  court  or  quorum  for  the
transaction  of  business  should  consist  of  the  governor,  or
the  deputy  governor,  and  seven  or  more  assistants,  which
should  assemble  as  often  as  once  a  month  for  that  pur-
pose, and  also,  that  four  great  general  assemblies  of  the
company  should  be  held  in  every  year.  In  these  great
and  general  assemblies,  (which  were  composed  of  the
governor,  deputy,  assistants,  and  freemen  present,)  free-
men were  to  be  admitted  free  of  the  company,  offii
were  to  be  elected,  and  laws  and  ordinances  for  the  <j;ood
and  welfare  of  the  colony  made  ;  "so  as  such  laws  and
ordinances  be  not  contrary  or  repugnant  to  the  laws
and  statutes  of  this  our  realm  of  England."  At  one  of
these  great  and  general  assemblies  held  in  Easter  Term,
the  governor,  deputy,  and  assistants,  and  other  officers
were  to  be  annually  chosen  by  the  company  present.


48  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

The  company  were  further  authorized  to  transport  any
subjects  or  strangers  willing  to  become  subjects  of  the
crown  to  the  colony,  and  to  carry  on  trade  to  and  from
it,  without  custom  or  subsidy  for  seven  years,  and
were  to  be  free  of  all  taxation  of  imports  or  exports  to
and  from  the  English  dominion  for  the  space  of  twenty-
one  years,  with  the  exception  of  a  five  per  cent  duty.
The  charter  further  provided,  that  all  subjects  of  the
crown,  who  should  become  inhabitants,  and  their  chil-
dren born  there,  or  on  the  seas  going  or  returning,
should  enjoy  all  liberties  and  immunities  of  free  and  nat-
ural subjects,  as  if  they  and  every  of  them  wrere  born
within  the  realm  of  England.  Full  legislative  authority
was  also  given,  subject  to  the  restriction  of  not  being
contrary  to  the  laws  of  England,  as  also  for  the  imposi-
tion of  fines  and  mulcts  "  according  to  the  course  of
other  corporations  in  England."  *  Many  other  provis-
ions were  added,  similar  in  substance  to  those  found  in
the  antecedent  colonial  charters  of  the  crown.

§  64.  Such  were  the  original  limits  of  the  colony  of
Massachusetts  Bay,  and  such  were  the  powers  and  priv-
ileges conferred  on  it.  It  is  observable,  thai  the  whole
structure  of  the  charter  presupposes  the  residence  of
the  company  in  England,  and  the  transaction  of  all  its
business  there.  The  experience  of  the  past  had  not
sufficiently  instructed  the  adventurers,  that  settlements
in  America  could  not  be  well  governed  by  corporations
resident  abroad  ; 2  or  if  any  of  them  had  arrived  at  such
a  conclusion,  there  were  many  reasons  for  presuming,
that  the  crown  would  be  jealous  of  granting  powers  of
so  large  a  nature,  which  were  to  be  exercised  at  such

i  Hutch.  Collection,  page  1  to  23  ; 1  Haz.  Coll. 239  ; I  Chalmers's
Annals,  p.  137.

2  Chalmers's  Annals,  81  ;  Robertson's  Hist.  Amer.  B.  10.


CH.  IV.]  MASSACHUSETTS.  49

a  distance,  as  would  render  any  control  or  responsibility
over  them  wholly  visionary.  They  were  content  there-
fore to  get  what  they  could,  hoping,  that  the  future
might  furnish  more  ample  opportunities  for  success  ;  that
their  usurpations  of  authority  would  not  be  closely
watched  ;  or  that  there  might  be  a  silent  indulgence,  un-
til the  policy  of  the  crown  might  feel  it  a  duty  to  yield,
what  it  was  now  useless  to  contend  for,  as  a  dictate  of
wisdom  and  justice.1  The  charter  did  not  include  any
clause  providing  for  the  free  exercise  of  religion  or  the
rights  of  conscience,  (as  has  been  often  erroneously
supposed ;)  and  the  monarch  insisted  upon  an  adminis-
tration of  the  oath  of  supremacy  to  every  person,  who
should  inhabit  in  the  colony ;  thus  exhibiting  a  fixed  de-
termination to  adhere  to  the  severe  maxims  of  conform-
ity so  characteristic  of  his  reign.2  The  first  emigrants,
however,  paid  no  attention  to  this  circumstance  ;  and
the  very  first  church  planted  by  them  was  independent
in  all  its  forms,  and  repudiated  every  connexion  with
Episcopacy,  or  a  liturgy.3

§  65.  But  a  bolder  step  was  soon  afterwards  taken
by  the  company  itself.  It  was  ascertained,  that  little
success  would  attend  the  plantation,  so  long  as  its  af-
fairs were  under  the  control  of  a  distant  government,
knowing  little  of  its  wants  and  insensible  to  its  difficul-
ties.4 Many  persons,  indeed,  possessed  of  fortune  and
character,  warmed  with  religious  zeal,  or  suffering  un-
der religious  intolerance,  were  ready  to  embark  in  the
enterprise,  if  the  corporation  should  be  removed,  so  that
the  powers  of  government  might  be  exercised  by  the

1  Robertson's  America,  B.  10  ;  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  141.

2  Robertson's  America,  B.  10,  and  note.

3  Robertson's  America,  B.  10  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  201.

4  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  94,  95.
VOL.  I.  7


50  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

actual  settlers.1  The  company  had  already  become
alarmed  at  the  extent  of  their  own  expenditures,  and
there  were  but  faint  hopes  of  any  speedy  reimburse-
ment. They  entertained  some  doubts  of  the  legality  of  the
course  of  transferring  the  charter.  But  at  length  it  was
determined  in  August,  1 629,  "  by  the  general  consent
of  the  company,  that  the  government  and  patent  should
be  settled  in  New-England."  2  This  resolution  infused
new  life  into  the  association ;  and  the  next  election  of
officers  was  made  from  among  those  proprietors,  who
had  signified  an  intention  to  remove  to  America.  The
government  and  charter  were  accordingly  removed  ;
and  henceforth  the  whole  management  of  all  the  affairs
of  the  colony  was  confided  to  persons  and  magistrates
resident  within  its  own  bosom.  The  fate  of  the  colony
was  thus  decided ;  and  it  grew  with  a  rapidity  and
strength,  that  soon  gave  it  a  great  ascendancy  among  the
New-England  settlements,  and  awakened  the  jealousy,
distrust,  and  vigilance  of  the  parent  country.

5}  66.  It  has  been  justly  remarked,  that  this  transac-
tion stands  alone  in  the  history  of  English  colonization.3
The  power  of  the  corporation  to  make  the  transfer  has
been  seriously  doubted,  and  even  denied.4  But  the
boldness  of  the  step  is  not  more  striking,  than  the  silent
acquiescence  of  the  king  in  permitting  it  to  take  place.
The  proceedings  of  the  royal  authority  a  fewr  years  after
sufficiently  prove,  that  the  royal  acquiescence  was  not
intended  as  any  admission  of  right.  The  subsequent
struggles  between  the  crown  and  the  colony,  down  to

i  1  Hutch.  Hist.  12,  13  ;  1  Chalm.  Ann.  150,  151.

2  1  Hutch.  Hist.  13  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  25,  26  ;  Robertson's  America,
B.  10;  Marsh.  Colonies,  ch.  3,  p.  89;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  197;  1  Chalm.
Annals,  150.  3  Robertson's  America,  B.  10.

4  See  1  Hutch.  Hist.  410,  415  ;  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  139,  141,  142,
148, 151,  173.


CH.  IV.]  MASSACHUSETTS.  51

the  overthrow  of  the  charter,  under  the  famous  quo  war-
ranto proceedings  in  1684,  manifest  a  disposition  on  the
part  of  the  colonists  to  yield  nothing,  which  could  be  re-
tained ;  and  on  the  part  of  the  crown  to  force  them  into
absolute  subjection.

§  67.  The  government  of  the  colony  immediately  af-
ter the  removal  of  the  charter  was  changed  in  many  im-
portant features  ;  but  its  fundamental  grants  of  territory,
powers,  and  privileges  were  eagerly  maintained  in  their
original  validity.1  It  is  true,  as  Dr.  Robertson  has  ob-
served,2 that  as  soon  as  the  Massachusetts  emigrants
had  landed  on  these  shores,  they  considered  themselves
for  many  purposes  as  a  voluntary  association,  possess-
ing the  natural  rights  of  men  to  adopt  that  mode  of  gov-
ernment, which  was  most  agreeable  to  themselves,  and
to  enact  such  laws,  as  were  conducive  to  their  own  wel-
fare. They  did  not,  indeed,  surrender  up  their  charter,
or  cease  to  recognise  its  obligatory  force.3  But  they
extended  their  acts  far  beyond  its  expression  of  pow-
ers ;  and  while  they  boldly  claimed  protection  from  it
against  the  royal  demands  and  prerogatives,  they  nev-
ertheless did  not  feel,  that  it  furnished  any  limit  upon
the  freest  exercise  of  legislative,  executive,  or  judicial
functions.  They  did  not  view  it,  as  creating  an  English
corporation  under  the  narrow  construction  of  the  com-
mon law  ;  but  as  affording  the  means  of  founding  a  broad
political  government,  subject  to  the  crown  of  England,
but  yet  enjoying  many  exclusive  privileges.4

i  1  Hutch.  Hist.  25  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  199,  200,  203,  205,  207.

2  Robertson's  America,  B.  10.

3  3  Hutch.  Coll.  199,203.

4  1  Hutch.  Hist.  35,  3G,  37,  410,  507,  529;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  196,  199,
200,  203, 205,  207, 329,  330,  417,  418,  420,  477  ;  1  Hutch.  Hist.  410,  415;
1  Chalmers's  Annals,  151,  153,  157,  161  :  Robertson's  America,  B.  10  ;
Marsh.  Hist.  Colon,  cb.  5.  139.


52  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

§  68.  The  General  Court  in  their  address  to  Parlia-
ment in  1646,  in  answer  to  the  remonstrance  of  certain
mal -contents,  used  the  following  language : 1  "  For  our
government  itself,  it  is  framed  according  to  our  charter,
and  the  fundamental  and  common  laws  of  England,  and
carried  on  according  to  the  same  (taking  the  words  of
eternal  truth  and  righteousness  along  with  them,  as  that
rule,  by  which  all  kingdoms  and  jurisdictions  must  ren-
der account  of  every  act  and  administration  in  the  last
day)  with  as  bare  allowance  for  the  disproportion  be-
tween such  an  ancient,  populous,  wealthy  kingdom,  and
so  poor  an  infant,  thin  colony,  as  common  reason  can
afford."  And  they  then  proceeded  to  show  the  truth  of
their  statement,  by  drawing  a  parallel,  setting  down  in
one  column  the  fundamental  and  common  laws  and
customs  of  England,  beginning  with  Magna  Charta,
and  in  a  corresponding  column  their  own  fundamental
laws  and  customs.  Among  other  parallels,  after  stating,
that  the  supreme  authority  in  England  is  in  the  high
court  of  Parliament,  they  stated :  "  The  highest  author-
ity here  is  in  the  general  court  both  by  our  charter  and
by  our  own  positive  laws."

§  69.  For  three  or  four  years  after  the  removal  of  the
charter,  the  governor  and  assistants  were  chosen  and
all  the  business  of  the  government  was  transacted  by
the  freemen  assembled  at  large  in  a  general  court.  But
the  members  having  increased,  so  as  to  make  a  general
assembly  inconvenient,  an  alteration  took  place,  and  in
1634,  the  towns  sent  representatives  to  the  general
court.  They  drew  up  a  general  declaration,  that  the  gen-
eral court  alone  had  power  to  make  and  establish  laws,
and  to  elect  officers,  to  raise  monies  and  taxes,  and  to

1  1  Hutch,  Hist.  145, 14G  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  199,  &c.


(H.  IV.]  MASSACHUSETTS.  T)3

sell  lands  ;  and  thai  therefore  every  town  might  chi
persons  as  representatives,  not  exceeding  two,  who
should  have  the  full  power  and  voices  of  nil  the  freemen,
except  in  the  choice  of  officers  and  magistrates,  where-
in every  freeman  was  to  give  his  own  vote.1  The  sys-
tem, thus  proposed,  was  immediately  established  by
common  consent,2  although  it  is  nowhere  provided  for
in  the  charter.  And  thus  was  formed  the  second  house
of  representatives  (the  first  being  in  Virginia)  in  any  of
the  colonies.3  At  first,  the  whole  of  the  magistrates  (or
assistants)  and  the  representatives  sat  together,  and  act-
ed as  one  body,  in  enacting  all  laws  and  orders.  But  at
legth  in  1644  they  separated  into  two  distinct  and  in-
dependent bodies,  each  of  which  possessed  a  negative
upon  the  acts  of  the  other.4  This  course  of  proceeding
continued  until  the  final  dissolution  of  the  charter.

^  70.  It  may  be  well  to  state  in  this  connexion,  that
the  council  established  at  Plymouth  in  a  very  short  pe-
riod after  the  grant  of  the  Massachusetts  charter  (in
1635)  finally  surrendered  their  own  patent  back  to  the
crown.  They  had  made  other  grants  of  territory,  which
we  shall  hereafter  have  occasion  to  notice,  which  had
greatly  diminished  the  value,  as  well  as  importance  of
their  charter.  But  the  immediate  cause  of  the  surren-
der was  the  odious  extent  of  the  monopolies  granted
to  them,  which  roused  the  attention  of  Parliament,  and


i  Robertson's  America,  B. 10  ;  1  Hutch.  Hist  35,36,  203;  1  Haz.

Coll.  320.
2  Col.  and  Province  Laws,  (1814,)  ch.  35,  p.  97  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  203.  &  c.  ;
1  Hutch.  449.

3  1  Hutch.  Hist.  35,  30,  37,  94,  note,  449;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  222  ;
1  Haz.  Coll.  320,  321  ;  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  157.

4  1  Hutch.  Hist.  449  ; 1  Chalmers's  Annals,  106  ;  Col.  and  Province
Laws,  (1814,)  ch.  31,  p.  88  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  205  ;  1  Doug.  Summ.  431.


54  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

of  the  nation  at  large,  and  compelled  them  to  resign,
what  they  could  scarcely  maintain  against  the  strong
current  of  public  opinion.  The  surrender,  so  far  from
working  any  evil,  rather  infused  new  life  into  the  colo-
nies, which  sprung  from  it,  by  freeing  them  from  all
restraint  and  supervision  by  a  superior  power,  to  which
they  might  perhaps  have  been  held  accountable.1  Im-
mediately after  this  surrender  legal  proceedings  were
instituted  against  the  proprietors  of  the  Massachusetts
charter.  Those  who  appeared  were  deprived  of  their
franchises.  But  fortunately  the  measure  was  not  carried
into  complete  execution  against  the  absent  proprietors
acting  under  the  charter  in  America.2

§  71.  After  the  fall  of  the  first  colonial  charter  in
16S4,3  Massachusetts  remained  for  some  years  in  a  very
disturbed  state  under  the  arbitrary  power  of  the  crown.
At  length  a  new  charter  was  in  1691  granted  to  the
colony  by  William  and  Mary  ;  and  it  henceforth  became
known  as  a  province,  and  continued  to  act  under  this  last
charter  until  after  the  Revolution.  The  charter  compre-
hended within  its  territorial  limits  all  the  old  colony  of
the  Massachusetts  Bay,  the  colony  of  New  Plymouth,
the  Province  of  Maine,  the  territory  called  Acadia,
or  Nova  Scotia,  and  all  the  lands  lying  between  Nova
Scotia  and  Maine  ;  and  incorporated  the  whole  into  one
Province  by  the  name  of  the  Province  of  the  Massachu-
setts Bay  in  New-England,  to  be  holden  as  of  the  royal
manor  of  East  Greenwich,  in  the  county  of  Kent.  It
confirmed  all  prior  grants  made  of  lands  to  all  persons,


i  1  Holmes's  Annals,  227  ;  1  Haz.  Coll.  390,  393  ;  1  Chalmers's  An-
nals, 94,9."),  99.

2  1  Holmes's  Annals,  227  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  101,  104  ;  1  Haz.  Coll.  423,
425;  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  16J.

3  1  Holmes's  Annals,  412.


CH.  IV.]  MASS  \<l!l SKITS.  55

corporations,  colleges,  towns,  villages,  and  schools,  it
reserved  to  the  crown  the  appointment  of  the  Governor,
and  Lieut.  Governor,  and  Secretar}  of  the  province,
and  all  the  officers  of  the  Court  of  Admiralty.  Ii  provid-
ed for  the  appointment  annually  of  twenty-eight  Coun-
sellors, who  were  to  ho  chosen  by  the  Genera]  Conn,
and  nominated  the  first  hoard.  The  Governor  and
Counsellors  were  to  hold  a  council  fo]  the  ordering  and
directing  of  the  affairs  of  the  Province.  The  Governor
was  invested  with  the  right  of  nominating  and  with  the
advice  of  the  council  of  appointing  all  military  officers,
and  all  sheriffs,  provosts,  marshals,  and  justices  of  the
peace,  and  other  officers  of  courts  of  justice.  He  had
also  the  power  of  calling  the  General  Court,  and  of  ad-
journing, proroguing,  and  dissolving  it.  He  had  also  a
negative  upon  all  laws  passed  by  the  General  Court.
The  General  Court  was  to  assemble  annually  on  the
last  Wednesday  of  May,  and  was  to  consist  of  the  Gov-
ernor and  Council  for  the  time  being,  and  of  such  rep-
resentatives being  freeholders  as  should  be  annually
elected  by  the  freeholders  in  each  town,  who  possessed
a  freehold  of  forty  shillings  annual  value,  or  other  estate
to  the  value  of  forty  pounds.  Each  town  was  entitled
to  two  representatives  ;  but  the  General  Court  was
from  time  to  time  to  decide  on  the  number,  which  each
town  should  send.  The  General  Court  was  invested
with  full  authority  to  erect  courts,  to  levy  taxes,  and
make  all  wholesome  laws  and  ordinances,  "so  as
the  same  be  not  repugnant  or  contrary  to  the  laws  of
England;"  and  to  settle  annually  all  civil  officers,
whose  appointment  was  not  otherwise  provided  for.
All  laws,  however,  were  to  be  sent  to  England  for
approbation  or  disallowance  ;  and  if  disallowed,  and  so
signified  under  the  sign  manual  and  signet,  within  three


56  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

years,  the  same  thenceforth  to  cease  and  become  void  ;
otherwise  to  continue  in  force  according  to  the  terms
of  their  original  enactment.  The  General  Court  was
also  invested  with  authority  to  grant  any  lands  in  the
colonies  of  Massachusetts,  New  Plymouth,  and  Prov-
ince of  Maine,  with  certain  exceptions.  The  Govern-
or and  Council  were  invested  with  full  jurisdiction  as
to  the  probate  of  wills  and  granting  administrations.  The
Governor  wTas  also  made  commander  in  chief  of  the
militia,  with  the  usual  martial  powers  ;  but  was  not  to
exercise  martial  law  without  the  advice  of  the  Council.
In  case  of  his  death,  removal,  or  absence,  his  authority
wras  to  devolve  on  the  Lieut.  Governor,  or,  if  his  office
was  vacant,  then  on  the  Council.  With  a  view  also  to
advance  the  growth  of  the  Province  by  encouraging
new  settlements,  it  was  expressly  provided,  that  there
should  be  "  a  liberty  of  conscience  allowed  in  the  wor-
ship of  God  to  all  Christians,  except.  Papists ; "  and
that  all  subjects  inhabiting  in  the  Province  and  their
children  born  there,  or  on  the  seas  going  or  returning,
should  have  all  the  liberties  and  immunities  of  free  and
natural  subjects,  as  if  they  were  born  within  the  realm
of  England.  And  in  all  cases  an  appeal  was  allowed
from  the  judgments  of  any  courts  of  the  Province  to  the
King  in  the  Privy  Council  in  England,  where  the  mat-
ter in  difference  exceeded  three  hundred  pounds  ster-
ling. And  finally  there  was  a  reservation  of  the  whole
admiralty  jurisdiction  to  the  crown  ;  and  of  a  right  to
all  subjects  to  fish  on  the  coasts.1 Considering  the


l  The  Charter  will  be  found  at  large  in  the  Colony  and  Province  Laws
of  Massachusetts,  printed  in  1814.  Its  substance  is  well  summed  up  in
1  Holmes's  Annals,  436.

Under  the  first  charter  the  admiralty  jurisdiction  was  exercised  by
the  Colonial  Common  Law  Courts,  even  in  capital  cases. 1  Hutch.  451.


CH.  IV.]  MASSACHUSETTS.  57

spirit  of  the  times,  it  must  be  ackimw  ledged,  that,  on  the
whole,  this  charter  contains  a  liberal  grant  of  authority
to  the  Province;  and  a  reasonable  reservation  of  the
royal  prerogative.  It  was  hailed  with  sincere  satisfac-
tion by  the  colony  after  the  dangers,  which  had  for  so
long  a  time  menaced  its  liberties  and  its  peace.1

5)  72.  In  reviewing  the  laws  passed  by  the  Legisla-
ture of  Massachusetts  during  its  colonial  state,  the  first
and  most  important  consideration  is  the  early  care,  with
which  the  public  rights  of  the  inhabitants  were  declar-
ed and  established.  No  man's  life,  person,  honor,  or
good  name  was  to  be  affected  ;  no  man  was  to  be  de-
prived of  his  wife  or  children,  or  estate,  unless  by  vir-
tue or  equity  of  some  express  law  of  the  General  Court,
"  or  in  case  of  a  defect  of  a  law  in  any  particular  case,
by  the  word  of  God ;  and  in  capital  cases,  or  in  cases
of  dismembering  or  banishment  according  to  that  word,
to  be  judged  of  by  the  General  Court." 2  No  persons  but
church  members  were  allowed  to  become  freemen  ;  and
all  persons  o  twenty-one  years  of  age  were  allowed  to
dispose  of  their  estate  by  will  or  any  proper  conveyance.3
All  conveyances  were  to  be  by  deed  acknowledged  and
recorded  in  the  public  records.4  All  lands  and  heredita-
ments were  declared  free  from  all  fines  and  forfeitures.
Courts  of  law  were  established,  and  local  processes  pro-
vided for.5  The  trial  by  jury  in  civil  and  criminal  cases
was  secured.6 Wa^er  at  law  was  not  allowred  but  ac-


i  1  Hutch.  Hist.  415,  416.
a  3  Hutch.  Coll.  201.

3  Ant.  Col.  and  Prov.  Laws,  ch.  4,  p.  44;  ch.  104,  p.  204.

4  Ant.  Col.  and  Prov.  Laws.  ch.  1,  p.  41 ;  ch.  28,  p.  85  ;  1  Hutch.  Coll.
455.

s  3  Hutch.  Coll.  203, 205.

6  1  Hutch.  450  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  203,  205.

VOL.  I.  8


58  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

cording  to  law,  and  according  to  the  precept  in  Exodus
[xxii.  8.].  Difficult  cases  of  law  were  finally  deter-
minable in  the  Court  of  Assistants  or  in  the  General
Court,  by  appeal  or  petition.  In  criminal  cases  where
the  law  prescribed  no  penalty,  the  judges  had  power
to  inflict  penalties  "  according  to  the  rule  of  God's
word."  1  Treason,  murder,  poisoning,  arson,  witchcraft,
sodomy,  idolatry,  blasphemy,  manstealing,  adultery,
false  witness,  conspiracy  and  rebellion,  cursing,  smiting
of  parents  by  children,  being  a  stubborn  or  rebellious
son,  burglary,  and  rape  (in  particular  circumstances)
were  offences  punishable  with  death.2  For  the  severity
of  some  of  these  punishments  the  General  Court  ex-
pressly justified  themselves  by  the  language  of  the
Scriptures.  But  theft  was  not  punished  with  death,
because,  as  they  said,  "  we  read  otherwise  in  the  Scrip-
tures ;  "  3  and  many  other  crimes  of  a  heinous  nature
were  suffered  to  pass  with  a  moderate  punishment.4
Hutchinson  has  well  observed,  that  "  in  punishing  offen-
ces they  professed  to  be  governed  by  the  judicial  laws
of  Moses,  but  no  further  than  those  laws  were  of  a
moral  nature."  5  Marriages  were  celebrated  exclusively
by  magistrates  during  the  first  charter ;  though  after-
wards there  was  a  concurrent  power  given  to  the  cler-
gy.6 Divorces  a  mensa  et  thoro  seem  not  to  have  been
in  use  during  the  period  of  the  first  charter ;  but  for
the  same  causes,  for  which  such  a  divorce  might  be
granted  by  the  spiritual  courts,  a  divorce  a  vinculo  was

i  3  Hutch.  Coll.  205.

2  Ant.  Col.  and  Prov.  Laws,  ch.  18,  p.  58,  59,  60  ;  1  Hutch.  Hist.  440,
441,  442  ;  1  Belk.  New-Hampshire,  ch.  4,  p.  66.

3  3  Hutch.  Coll.  205.

4  1  Hutch.  Hist.  442,  443, 444  ;  Ant.  Col.  and  Prov.  Laws,  ch.  17,  p.  56.

5  1  Hutch.  Hist.  435,  439.  6  1  Hutch.  Hist.  444.


CH. IV.]  MASSACHUSETTS.  59

granted.  Female  adultery  was  a  sufficient  chum-  ;  but
male  adultery  not.1 In  tenderness  to  the  marriage  state,

a  man,  who  struck  his  wile,  or  a  woman  her  husband,
was  liable  to  a  line.2

^  73.  In  the  beginning  the  county  courts  had  jurisdic-
tion of  the  testamentary  matters  ;  and  real  estate  was
at  first  treated  as  mere  bona  in  the  civil  law.  When  a
positive  rule  was  made,  all  the  estate  was  (apparently
with  some  reference  to  the  Mosaic  Law)  made  subject
to  distribution  ;  the  widow  had  such  part  of  the  estate,
as  the  court  held  just  and  equal ;  and  the  rest  was
divided  among  the  children  or  other  heirs,  the  eldest
son  having  a  double  portion,3  and  the  daughters,  where
there  were  no  sons,  inheriting  as  coparceners,  unless
the  court  otherwise  should  determine.4  If  the  party
died  insolvent,  his  estate  was  distributed  among  all  his
creditors,  there  not  being  any  preference  of  any  debts
by  judgment  or  specialty.5

The  law  of  inheritance  was  thus,  as  we  see,  altered
from  that  of  England  from  the  beginning  ;  and  yet,
strangely  enough,  the  General  Court,  in  their  answer  in
1646,  considered  their  canon  of  descent  as  parallel  to
the  English  law,  and  expounded  it  by  the  same  terms,
"  the  eldest  son  is  preferred  before  the  younger  in  the
ancestor's  inheritance," 6  when  in  reality  he  had  only  a
double  portion,  and  the  estate  was  partible  among -all
the  children.  Their  lands  being  by  the  charter  held,  as
of  the  manor  of  East  Greenwich,  in  live  and  common
soccage,  they  attributed  to  it  the  gavelkind  quality  of

i  1  Hutch.  Hist.  445.  •  2  1  Hutch.  Hist.  445.

3  1  Hutch.  Hist.  41i ;.

4  Ant.  Col.  and  Prov.  Laws,  ch.  104,  p.  205.

5  1  Hutch.  Hist.  44( I.

6  3  Hutch.  Coll.  207  ;  1  Hutch.  Coll.  447  ;  Ant.  Col.  and  Prov.  Laws,
ch.  104,  p.  205.


60  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

not  being  forfeited  for  felony  or  treason  ;  and  the  con-
vict might  therefore,  even  after  sentence,  dispose  of  it
by  will.1  Estates  tail  were  recognised,  and  in  such  cases
the  heir  took  per  formam  doni,  according  to  the  com-
mon law,  and  not  all  the  children  as  one  heir.2

§  74.  In  respect  to  ecclesiastical  concerns  they  made
ample  provision  for their  own  church,  (meaning  the
Congregational  Church,)  exclusive  of  all  others. In
their parallel in 1646, they  quote the  provision  of
Magna  Charta,  that  "  the  church  shall  enjoy  all  her  lib-
'erties,"  and  dropping  all  suggestion  of  the  real  differ-
ences of  their  own  church  establishment  from  that  of
England,  they  quote  their  own  provision,  that  "  all  per-
sons orthodox  in  judgment,  and  not  scandalous  in  life,
may  gather  into  a  church  state  according  to  the  rules
of  the  gospel,"  as  of  similar  import.3  They  gave  to  their
own  churches,  when  organized,  full  power  and  authority
to inflict ecclesiastical  censures, and  even  to  expel
members. But  they  reserved  to  the  civil  authority  the
further  power  to  punish  offences,  and  "  the  liberty  to  see
the  peace,  ordinances,  and  rules  of  Christ  observed."  4
Every  church  had  liberty  to  elect  its  own  officers,  and
"  no  injunction  was  to  be  put  upon  any  church,  church
officer,  or  member  in  point  of  doctrine,  worship,  or  dis-
cipline, whether  for  substance  or  circumstance,  besides
the  institution  of  the  Lord."  5  But  the  general  court,  with
the  assistance  of  the  clergy,  were  in  the  habit  of  judging
of  all  such  matters  with  supreme  authority,  and  of  con-

1  1  Hutch.  Hist.  447.

2  1  Hutch.  Hist.  447.

3  3  Hutch.  Collect.  201 ;  Ant.  Colon,  and  Prov.  Laws,  ch.  39,  p.  100  ;
]  Haz.  Coll.  488.

4  Ant.  Col.  and  Prov.  Laws,  ch.  39,  p.  100,  101.

5  1  Hutch.  Hist.  420,  421,  422,  423,  424,  434  ; 1  £elk.  New-IIamp.
ch.4,  p.  70,  71.


CH.  IV.]  MASSACHUSETTS.  61

demning  errors  with  do  sparing  hand. They  had  not
the  slightest scruple  of  punishing  heresies  with  fines
and banishment, and even,  in obstinate  cases, with
death.1 Ministers  were  maintained,  and public  wor-
ship provided  for  by  taxes  assessed  upon  the  inhabi-
tants of  each  parochial  district  ;  and  an  attendance  upon
public  worship  was  required  of  all  persons  under  penal-
ties, as  a  solemn  duty.2  So  effectual  were  the  colonial  laws
in  respect  to  conformity,  and  so  powerful  the  influence
of  the  magistrates  and  the  clergy,  that Hutchinson  in-
forms us,  that  there  was  not  "  any  Episcopal  church  in
any  part  of  the  colony  until  the  charter  was  vacated." 3
^  75.  But  the  most  striking  as  well  as  the  most  im-
portant part  of  their  legislation  is  in  respect  to  education.
As  early  as  1647,  the  General  Court,  "  to  the  end,"  as
the  preamble  of  the  act  declares,4  "  that  learning  may
not  be  buried  in  the  graves  of  our  forefathers  in  church
and  commonwealth,"  provided,  under  a  penalty,  thai
every  township  of  fifty  householders  "  shall  appoint  a
public  school  for  the  instruction  of  children  in  writing
and reading, and  that every  town  of  one  hundred
householders  "  shall  set  up  a  grammar  school,  the  mas-
ter thereof  being  able  to  instruct  youth  so  far  as  may  be
fitted  for  the  university." This  law  has,  in  substance,
continued  down  to  the  present  times  ; and  it  has  con-
tributed more  than  any  other  circumstance  to  give  that
peculiar  character  to  the  inhabitants  and  institutions  of
.Massachusetts, for  which she, in common  with the

i  Robertson's  America,  B.  JU;  1  B<4k.  New-IIamp.  oh.  4,  p.  70  to  77  ;
Ant.  Col.  and  Prov.  Laws,  Hi.  ;,7,  p.  120,  &c.  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  215,  216  :
1  Hutch.  Hist.  431  ;  3  Hutch.  Hist.  42  ;  1  Haz.  Coll.  538  ;  1  Chalmers's
Annals,  163,  Kit,  165,  167,  169, 189,  190, 191,  194.

2  1  Hutch.  Hist.  427  ;  Ant.  Col.  and  Prov.  Laws,  ch.  39,  p.  103,  104.

3  1  Hutch.  Hist.  431.

4  Ant.  Col.  and  Prov.  Laws,  ch.  88,  p.  J8G.


62  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

other  New-England  states,  indulges  an  honest,  and  not
unreasonable  pride.

^  76.  After  the  grant  of  the  provincial  charter,  in
1691,  the  legislation  of  the  colony  took  a  wider  scope,
and  became  more  liberal,  as  well  as  more  exact.  At
the  very  first  session  an  act  passed,  declaring  the  gen-
eral rights  and  liberties  of  the  people,  and  embracing
the  principal  provisions  of  Magna  Charta  on  this  sub-
ject. Among  other  things,  it  was  declared,  that  no  tax
could  be  levied  but  by  the  General  Court ;  that  the  trial
by  jury  should  be  secured  to  all  the  inhabitants ;  and
that  all  lands  shall  be  free  from  escheats  and  forfeitures,
except  in  cases  of  high  treason.1  A  habeas  corpus  act
was  also  passed  at  the  same  session ;  but  it  seems  to  have
been  disallowed  by  the  crown.2  Chalmers  asserts,
that  there  is  no  circumstance  in  the  history  of  colonial
jurisprudence  better  established  than  the  fact,  that  the
habeas  corpus  act  was  not  extended  to  the  plantations
until  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne.3

^  77.  It  does  not  seem  necessary  to  go  into  any  mi-
nute examination  of  the  subsequent  provincial  legislation.
In  its  general  character  it  did  not  materially  vary  from
that  antecedently  adopted,  except  so  far  as  the  charter
required,  or  a  progressive  spirit  of  improvement  invited  a
change.  Lands  were  made  liable  to  the  payment  of
debts ;  the  right  of  choosing  their  ministers  was,  after
some  struggles,  secured  in  effect  to  the  concurrent  vote
of  the  church  and  congregation  in  each  parish ;  and  the
spirit  of  religious  intolerance  was  in  some  measure  check-
ed, if  not  entirely  subdued. Among  the  earliest  acts  of


1  2  Hutch.  Hist  64;  Ant.  Col.  and  Prov.  Laws,  ch.  2,  p.  214.

2  2  Hutch.  Hist.  04.

3  1  Chalm.  Annals,  56,  74.


CH.  IV.]  MASSACHUSETTS  63

the  provincial  legislature,  which  were  approved,  were  an
act  for  the  prevention  of  frauds  and  perjuries,  conforma-
ble to  that  of  Charles  the  Second  ;  an  act  for  the  observ-
ance of  the  Lord's  day  ;  an  act  for  solemnizing  mar-
riages by  a  minister  or  a  justice  of  the  peace  ;  an  act  for
the  support  of  ministers  and  schoolmasters  ;  an  act  for
regulating  towns  and  counties  ;  and  an  act  for  the  set-
tlement and  distribution  of  the  estates  of  persons  dying
intestate.1  These  and  many  other  acts  of  general  utility
have  continued  substantially  in  force  down  to  our  day.
Under  the  act  for  the  distribution  of  estates  the  half-
blood  were  permitted  to  inherit  equally  with  the  whole
blood.2  Entails  were  preserved  and  passed  accord-
ing to  the  course  of  descents  of  the  common  law  ;  but
the  general  policy  of  the  state  silently  reduced  the  ac-
tual creation  of  such  estates  to  comparatively  narrow
limits.

i  2  Hutch.  Hist.  65,  66.
2  2  Hutch.  Hist.  66.


64  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.


CHAPTER  V.

NEW-HAMPSHIRE.

§  78.  Having  gone  into  a  full  consideration  of  the
origin  and  political  organization  of  the  primitive  colonies
in  the  South  and  North,  it  remains  only  to  take  a  rapid
view  of  those,  which  were  subsequently  established  in
both  regions.  An  historical  order  will  probably  be
found  as  convenient  for  this  purpose,  as  any,  which
could  be  devised,

§  79.  In  November,  1629,  Capt.  John  Mason  obtain-
ed a  grant  from  the  council  of  Plymouth  of  all  that  part
of  the  main  land  in  New-England  "lying  upon  the  sea-
coast,  beginning  from  the  middle  part  of  Merrimack  riv-
er, and  from  thence  to  proceed  northwards  along  the
sea-coast  to  Piscataqua  river,  and  so  forwards  up  with-
in the  said  river  and  to  the  furthest  head  thereof;  and
from  thence  northwestwards  until  three  score  miles  be
finished  from  the  first  entrance  of  Piscataqua  river ;  and
also  from  Merrimack  through  the  said  river  and  to  the
furthest  head  thereof,  and  so  forwards  up  into  the  lands
westwards,  until  three  score  miles  be  finished ;  and  from
thence  to  cross  over  land  to  the  three  score  miles  and
accounted  from  Piscataqua  river,  together  with  all
islands  and  islets  within  five  leagues  distance  of  the
premises."  1  This  territory  was  afterwards  called  New-
Hampshire.  The  land  so  granted  was  expressly  sub-
jected to  the  conditions and  limitations  in  the  original

i  1  Haz.  Coll.  289  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals  190  ;  1  Belk.  N.  J  lamp.  ch.  J,
p.  18.


CH.  IV.]  NEW-HAMPSHIRE.  66

patent ;  and  there  was  a  covenant  on  the  part  of  Mason,
that  he  would  establish  such  government  therein,  and
continue  the  same,  "  as  shall  be  agreeable,  as  near  as
may  be,  to  the  laws  and  customs  of  the  realm  of  Eng-
land ; "  and  that  if  charged  with  neglect,  he  would
reform  the  same  according  to  the  discretion  of  the  presi-
dent and  council ;  or  in  default  thereof,  that  the
aggrieved  inhabitants,  or  planters,  tenants  of  the  lands,
might  appeal  to  the  chief  court  of  justice  of  the  presi-
dent and  council.  A  further  grant  was  made  to  Mason
by  the  council  of  Plymouth  about  the  time  of  the  sur-
render of  their  charter,  (22  April,  1635,)  "beginning
from  the  middle  part  of  Naumkeag  river  [Salem],  and
from  thence  to  proceed  eastwards  along  the  sea- coast
to  Cape  Ann  and  round  about  the  same  to  Piscataqua
harbour  ;  and  then  covering  much  of  the  land  in  the
prior  grant,  and  giving  to  the  whole  the  name  of  New-
Hampshire."  *  This  grant  included  a  power  of  ju-
dicature in  all  cases,  civil  and  criminal,  "  to  be  exercis-
ed and  executed  according  to  the  laws  of  England  as
near  as  may  be,"  reserving  an  appeal  to  the  council.
No  patent  of  confirmation  of  this  grant  appears  to  have
been  made  by  the  crown  after  the  surrender  of  the  Ply-
mouth patent.2

§  80.  Various  detached  settlements  were  made
within  this  territory ;  and  so  ill  defined  were  the  bounda-
ries, that  a  controversy  soon  arose  between  Massachu-
setts and  Mason  in  respect  to  the  right  of  sovereignty
over  it.3 In  the  exposition  of  its  own  charter  Massa-


i  1  Ilaz.  Coll.  383,  384,385;  1  Chalra.  Annals, 472,  473,  477;  1  Belk.
N.  Hamp.  ch.  1,  p.  '27.

2  1  Hutch.  Hist.  313,  314 ;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  3,  p.  97.

3  1  Hutch.  Hist.  101, 108, 109, 311,  312,  to  318.
VOL.  I.  9


66  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

chusetts  contended,  that  its  limits  included  the  whole
territory  of  New-Hampshire  ;  and  being  at  that  time
comparatively  strong  and  active,  she  succeeded  in
establishing  her  jurisdiction  over  it,  and  maintained  it
with  unabated  vigilance  for  forty  years.1  The  contro-
versy was  finally  brought  before  the  king  in  council ;
and  in  1679  it  was  solemnly  adjudged  against  the  claim
of  Massachusetts.  And  it  being  admitted,  that  Mason,
under  his  grant,  had  no  right  to  exercise  any  powers  of
government,  a  commission  was,  in  the  same  year,  issued
by  the  crown  for  the  government  of  New -Hampshire.2
By  the  form  of  government,  described  in  this  commis-
sion, the  whole  executive  power  was  vested  in  a  presi-
dent and  council  appointed  by  the  crown,  to  whom  also
was  confided  the  judiciary  power  with  an  appeal  to
England.  In  the  administration  of  justice  it  was  direct-
ed, that  "  the  form  of  proceedings  in  such  cases,  and
the  judgment  thereon  to  be  given,  be  as  consonant  and
agreeable  to  the  laws  and  statutes  of  this  our  realm  of
England,  as  the  present  state  and  condition  of  our  sub-
jects inhabiting  within  the  limits  aforesaid,  and  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  place  will  admit."  3  The  legislative
power  was  entrusted  to  the  president,  council,  and  bur-
gesses, or  representatives  chosen  by  the  towns  ;  and
they  were  authorized  to  levy  taxes  and  to  make  laws
for  the  interest  of  the  province ;  which  laws  being
approved  by  the  president  and  council  were  to  stand
and  be  in  force,  until  the  pleasure  of  the  king  should

i  1  Chalra.  Annals,  477, 484,  485,  504,  505  ;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  4,  p.  109,
ch.  6,  p.  1G7,  168  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  422  ;  1  Belk.  N.  Hamp.  ch.  2,  p.  49,  50.

2  1  Chalm.  Annals,  489,  490  ;  1  Hutch.  Hist.  319 ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,
395;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  6,  p.  108;  Robert.  America,  B.  10;  1  Belk.  N.
Hamp.  ch.  6,  p.  137,  138;  1  Doug.  Summ.  28;  N.  Hamp.  Prov.  Laws,
Edit.  1771,  p.  1,  &c.

3  N.  Hamp.  Prov.  Laws,  (Edit.  1771,)  p.  1,  3.


Cir.  IV.]  NEW-HAMPSHIRE.  67

be  known,  whether  the  same  laws  and  ordinances
should  receive  any  change  or  confirmation,  or  be  to-
tally disallowed  and  discharged.  And  the  president
and  council  were  required  to  transmit  and  send  over
thesameby  the  first  ship,  that  should  depart  thenc<  for
England  after  their  making.  Liberty  of  conscience  was
allowed  to  all  protestants,  those  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land to  be  particularly  encouraged.  And  a  pledge  was
given  in  tne  commission  to  continue  the  privilege  of  an
assembly  in  the  same  manner  and  form;  unless  by
inconvenience  arising  therefrom  the  crown  should  see
cause  to  alter  the  same.1  A  body  of  laws  was  enacted
in  the  first  year  of  their  legislation,  which,  upon  being
sent  to  England,  was  disallowed  by  the  crown.2  New-
Hampshire  continued  down  to  the  period  of  the  Revo-
lution to  be  governed  by  commission  as  a  royal  prov-
ince ;  and  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  enacting  her  own
laws  through  the  instrumentality  of  a  general  assembly,
in  the  manner  provided  by  the  first  commission.3  Some
alterations  were  made  in  the  successive  commissions  ;
but  none  of  them  made  any  substantive  change  in  tin4
organization  of  the  Province.  The  judicial  power  of
the  governor  and  council  was  subsequently,  by  law,  con-
fined to  the  exercise  of  appellate  jurisdiction  from  the
inferior  courts  ;  and  in  the  later  commissions  a  clause
was  inserted,  that  the  colonial  statutes  should  "not  be
repugnant  to,  but  as  near  as may be  i  to  the

laws  and  statutes  of  th  England."  '

§  81.  The  laws  of  New-Hampshire,  during  its  pro-


i  1  Clmlm.  Annals, 189, 190; !  Holm  I  Belk X.

Hamp.  ch.  6,  p.  138,  139;  2  Belk.  N.  Harap.  Preface;  N.  Hamp.  Pro*
Laws,  (Edit.  1771,)  p.  5.

2  ibid.  3  1  Chalm.  Annals,  491,  492,  193,  508.

4  N.  I  lamp.  Prov.  Laws,  (Edit  177  J,)  p.  61,  and  Id.


68  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONY.  [BOOK  I

vincial  state,  partook  very  much  of  the  character  of
those  of  the  neighbouring  Province  of  Massachusetts.
Those  regulating  the  descent  and  distribution  of  estates,
the  registration  of  conveyances,  the  taking  of  deposi-
tions to  be  used  in  the  civil  courts,  for  the  maintenance
of  the  ministry,  for  making  lands  and  tenements  liable
for  the  payment  of  debts,  for  the  settlement  and  sup-
port of  public  grammar  schools,  for  the  suppression  of
frauds  and  perjuries,  and  for  the  qualification  of  voters,
involve  no  important  differences,  and  were  evidently
framed  upon  a  common  model.  New-Hampshire  seems
also  to  have  had  more  facility,  than  some  other  colonies,
in  introducing  into  her  domestic  code  some  of  the  most
beneficial  clauses  of  the  acts  of  parliament  of  a  general
nature,  and  applicable  to  its  local  jurisprudence.2  We
also  find  upon  its  statute  book,  without  comment  or
objection,  the  celebrated  plantation  act  of  7  &  8  William
3,  ch.  22,  as  well  as  the  acts  respecting  inland  bills  of
exchange,  (9  &,  10  William  3,  ch.  17,)  and  promissory
notes,  (4  Ann,  ch.  9,)  and  others  of  a  less  prominent
character.


1  N.  Hamp.  Prov.  Laws,  (Edit.  1771,)  19,  22,  55,  90,  104,  105,  143,
157,  163,  137,  166.

2  N.  Hamp,  Prov.  Laws,  (Edit.  1771,)  p.  209;  Gov.  Wentworth's  Com-
mission in  1766.


CH.  VI.]  MAINE.  69


CHAPTER  VI.

MAINE.

^  82.  In  August,  1622,  the  council  of  Plymouth
(which  seems  to  have  been  extremely  profuse  and
inconsiderate  in  its  grants  *)  granted  to  Sir  Ferdinando
Gorges  and  Capt.  John  Mason  all  the  land  lying  be-
tween the  rivers  Merrimack  and  Sagadahock,  extend-
ing back  to  the  great  lakes  and  rivers  of  Canada  ;  which
was  called  Laconia.3  In  April,  1639,  Sir  Ferdinando
obtained  from  the  crown  a  confirmatory  grant  of  all  the
land  from  Piscataqua  to  Sagadahock  and  the  Kenne-
beck  river,  and  from  the  coast  into  the  northern  interior
one  hundred  and  twenty  miles ;  and  it  was  styled  "  The
Province  of  Maine."  3  Of  this  province  he  was  made
Lord  Palatine,  with  all  the  powers,  jurisdiction,  and
royalties  belonging  to  the  bishop  of  the  county  Palatine
of  Durham  ;  and  the  lands  were  to  be  holden,  as  of  the
manor  of  East  Greenwich.  The  charter  contains  a
reservation  of  faith  and  allegiance  to  the  crown,  as  hav-
ing the  supreme  dominion  ;  and  the  will  and  pleasure  of
the  crown  is  signified,  that  the  religion  of  the  Church  of
England  be  professed,  and  its  ecclesiastical  government
established  in  the  province.  It  also  authorizes  the
Palatine,  with  the  assent  of  the  greater  part  of  the  free-
holders of  the  province,  to  make  laws  not  repugnant  or


1  1  Hutch.  Hist.  6,  104  ;  Robert.  America,  B.  10  ;  1  Doug.  Summ.  366,
380,  386.

2  1  Hutch.  Hist.  316 ; 1  Holmes's  Annals,  180  ;  1  Belk.  N.  Hamp.

ch.  I,p.l4.

3  1  Holmes's  Annals,  254  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  472,  473,  474  ;  1  Doug.
Summ.  386,  &c.


70  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

contrary,  but  as  near  as  conveniently  may  be  to  the  laws
of  England,  for  the  public  good  of  the  province ;  and  to
erect  courts  of  judicature  for  the  determination  of  all
civil  and  criminal  causes,  with  an  appeal  to  the  Palatine.
But  all  the  powers  of  government,  so  granted,  were  to
be  subordinate  to  the  "power  and  regement"  of  the
lords  commissioners  for  foreign  plantations  for  the  time
being.  The  Palatine  also  had  authority  to  make  ordi-
nances for  the  government  of  the  province,  under  ce rtain
restrictions  ;  and  a  grant  of  full  admiralty  powers,  sub-
ject to  that  of  the  Lord  High  Admiral  of  England.  And
the  inhabitants,  being  subjects  of  the  crown,  were  to
enjoy  all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  natural  born  sub-
jects in  England.1

^  83.  Under  these  ample  provisions  Gorges  soon
established  a  civil  government  in  the  province,  and
made  ordinances.  The  government,  such  as  it  was,
was  solely  confided  to  the  executive,  without  any  pow- '
ers  of  legislation.  The  province  languished  in  imbecil-
ity under  his  care  ;  and  began  to  acquire  vigour  only
when  he  ceased  to  act  as  proprietary  and  lawgiver.2
Massachusetts  soon  afterwards  set  up  an  exclusive  right
and  jurisdiction  over  the  territory,  as  within  its  char-
tered limits  ;  and  was  able  to  enforce  obedience  and
submission  to  its  power.3  It  continued  under  the  juris-
diction of  Massachusetts  until  1665,  when  the  com-
missioners of  the  crown  separated  it  for  a  short  period ;
but  the  authority  of  Massachusetts  was  soon  afterwards
re-established.4 The  controversy  between  Massachu-

i  Haz.  Coll.  442  to  445.

2  1  Chalm.  Annals,  474,  479  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  254,  258,  296.

3  1  Chalm.  Annals,  480,  481,  483  ;  1  Hutch.  History,  176,  177.  256  :
1  Holmes's  Annals,  296  ;  2  Winthrop's  Journ.  38,  42.

4  1  Chalm.  Annals,  483,  484  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  343,  348  ;  3  Hutch.
Coll.  422.


CH.  VI.]  MAINE.  71

setts  and  the  Palatine,  as  to  jurisdiction  over  the  prov-
ince, was  brought  before  the  privy  council  at  the  same
time  with  that  of  Mason  respecting  New-Hampshire,
and  the  claim  of  Massachusetts  was  adjudged  void.1
Before  a  final  adjudication  was  had,  Massachusetts  had
the  prudence  and  sagacity,  in  1677,  to  purchase  the
title  of  Gorges  lor  a  trilling  sum  ;  and  thus  to  the  great
disappointment  of  the  crown,  (then  in  treaty  for  the
same  object,)  succeeded  to  it,  and  held  it,  and  govern-
ed it  as  a  provincial  dependency,  until  the  fall  of  its  own
charter ;  and  it  afterwards,  as  we  have  seen,  was  incor-
porated with  Massachusetts  in  the  provincial  charter  of
1691.2


i  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  485,  504,  505  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  388.

2  1  Chalm.  Ann.  486,  487  ;  1  Holmes's  Ann.  388 ;  1  Hutch.  Hist.  326.


72  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.


CHAPTER  VII.

CONNECTICUT.

§  84.  Connecticut  was  originally  settled  under
the  protection  of  Massachusetts  ;  but  the  inhabitants  in
a  few  years  afterwards  (1638)  felt  at  liberty  (after  the
example  of  Massachusetts)  to  frame  a  constitution  of
government  and  laws  for  themselves.1  In  1630  the
Earl  of  Warwick  obtained  from  the  council  of  Plymouth
a  patent  of  the  land  upon  a  straight  line  near  the  sea-
shore towards  the  southwest,  west  and  by  south,  or
west  from  Narraganset  river  forty  leagues,  as  the  coast
lies,  towards  Virginia,  and  all  within  that  breadth  to  the
South  sea.  In  March,  1631,  the  Earl  of  Warwick  con-
veyed the  same  to  Lord  Say  and  Scale  and  others.
In  April,  1 635,2  the  same  council  granted  the  same  ter-
ritory to  the  Marquis  of  Hamilton.  Possession  under
the  title  of  Lord  Say  and  Seale  and  others  was  taken
of  the  mouth  of  the  Connecticut  in  1635.3  The  settlers
there  were  not,  however,  disturbed  ;  and  finally,  in
1644,  they  extinguished  the  title  of  the  proprietaries,  or
Lords,  and  continued  to  act  under  the  constitution  of


i  1  Hutch.  Hist.  98,  99  ;  2  Hutch.  Hist.  202  ;  1  Haz.  Coll.  321  ;
1  Holmes's  Annals,  2G9,  220,  228,  231,  232,  251  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  286,
287,  289  ;  2  Doug.  Summ.  158,  &<•. ;  1  Hutch.  Hist.  100.

The  substance  of  this  frame  of  government  is  given  in  1  Holmes's  Ann.
251  ;  and  a  full  copy  in  1  Haz.  Collec.  437,  441.

2  2  Hutch.  History,  203;  1  Haz.  Coll.  318  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  208;
1  Chalm.  Annals,  29! >.

3  1  Chalm.  Ann.  288, 289,  290,  300 ;  2  Hutch.  Hist.  203  ;  1  Haz.  Coll.
395,  396  ;  1  Holmes's  Ann.  229  ;  1  Hutch.  Hist.  47  ;  1  Winthrop's  Journ.
170,  397  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  412,  413.


CH.  VII.]  CONNECTICUT.  11

government,  which  they  had  framed  in  1638.  B)  that
constitution,  which  was  framed  by  the  inhabitants  of
the  three  towns  of  Windsor,  Hartford,  and  Weathers-
field,  it  was  provided,  that  there  should  be  two  general
assemblies  annually  ;  that  there  should  be  annually
elected,  by  the  freemen,  at  the  court  in  April,  a  gov-
ernor and  six  assistants,  who  should  "  have  power  to
administer  justice  according  to  the  law  here  establish-
ed, and  for  want  thereof  according  to  the  rule  of  the
word  of  God."  And  that  as  many  other  officers  should
be  chosen,  as  might  be  found  requisite.1  To  the  gen-
eral court  each  of  the  above  named  towns  was  entitled
to  send  four  deputies  ;  and  other  towns,  which  should
be  afterwards  formed,  were  to  send  so  many  deputies,
as  the  general  court  should  judge  meet,  according  to
the  apportionment  of  the  freemen  in  the  town.  All
persons,  who  were  inhabitants  and  freemen,  and  who
took  the  oath  of  fidelity,  were  entitled  to  vote  in  the
elections.  Church-membership  was  not,  as  in  Massa-
chusetts, an  indispensable  qualification.  The  supreme
power,  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial,  was  vested
in  the  general  court.2

^  85.  The  colony  of  New-Haven  had  a  separate  ori-
gin, and  was  settled  by  emigrants  immediately  from
England,  without  any  title  derived  from  the  patentees.
They  began  their  settlement  in  1638,  purchasing  their
lands  of  the  natives  ;  and  entered  into  a  solemn  compact
of  government.3  By  it  no  person  was  admitted  to  any
office,  or  to  have  any  voice  at  any  election,  unless  he
was  a  member  of  one  of  the  churches  allowed  in  the


1  1  Haz.  Coll.  437  ;  1  Holmes's  Ann.  251.

2  Ibid.

3  1  Hutch.  Hist.  82,  83  : 1  Holmes's  Ann.  244,  245  ; 1  Chalm.  Ann
290  ;  Robertson's  America,  B.  10  ;  3  American  Museum,  523.

VOL.  I.  10


74  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

dominion. There  was  an  annual  election  of  the  gov-
ernor, the  deputy,  magistrates,  and  other  officers,  by
the  freemen. The  general  court  consisted  of  the  gov-
ernor, deputy,  magistrates,  and  two  deputies  from  each
plantation  ; 1 and  was  declared  to  be  "  the  supreme
power,  under  God,  of  this  independent  dominion,"  and
had  authority  "to  declare,  publish,  and  establish  the  laws
of  God,  the  Supreme  Legislator,  and  to  make  and  repeal
orders  for  smaller  matters,  not  particularly  determined
in  Scripture,  according  to  the  general  rules  of  righteous-
ness ;  to  order  all  affairs  of  war  and  peace,  and  all  mat-
ters relative  to  the  defending  or  fortifying  the  country  ;
to  receive  and  determine  all  appeals,  civil  or  criminal,
from  any  inferior  courts,  in  which  they  are  to  proceed
according  to  scripture  light,  and  laws,  and  orders  agree-
ing therewith."2  Other  courts  were  provided  for  ;  and
Hutchinson  observes,  that  their  laws  and  proceedings  va-
ried in  very  few  circumstances  from  Massachusetts,  ex-
cept, that  they  had  no  jury,  either  in  civil  nor  criminal
cases.  All  matters  of  facts  were  determined  by  the  court.3
§  86.  Soon  after  the  restoration  of  Charles  the  Sec-
ond to  the  throne,  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  aware  of
the  doubtful  nature  of  its  title  to  the  exercise  of  sove-
reignty,  solicited  and  in April, 1662,  obtained  from
that  monarch  a  charter  of  government  and  territory.4
The  charter  included  within  its  limits  the  whole  colony
of  New -Haven ;  and  as  this  was  done  without  the  con-
sent of  the  latter,  resistance  was  made  to  the  incorpo-
ration, until  1665,  when  both  were  indissolubly  united,

1  3  American  Museum,  523.

2  1  Hutch.  Hist.  83,  note.

3  1  Hutch.  Hist.  84,  note  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  290.

4  2  Haz.  Coll.  586  ; 1  Chalm.  Ann.  292,  293  ;  1  Holmes's  Ann.  320;
2  Doug.  Sumin.  1G4.


CH.  VII.]  CONNECTICUT.  75

and  have  ever  since  remained  under  one  general  gov-
ernment.1

§  87.  The  charter  of  Connecticut,  which  has  been
objected to by Chalmers as  establishing  "a mere

democracy,  or  rule  of  the  people,"  contained,  indeed,  a
very  ample  grant  of  privileges. It  incorporated  the
inhabitants  by  the  name  of  the  Governor  and  Company
of  the  Colony  of  Connecticut  in  New-England,  in  A
ica. It  ordained,  that  two  general  lies  shall  be

annually  held ;  and  that  the  assembly  shall  consist  of  a
governor,  deputy  governor,  twelve  assistants,  and  two
deputies,  from  every  town  or  city,  to  be  chosen  by  the
freemen,  (the  charter  nominating  the  first  governor  and
assistants.)  The  general  assembly  had  authority  to  ap-
point judicatories,  make  freemen,  elect  officers,  estab-
lish laws,  and  ordinances  "not  contrary  to  the  laws  of
this  realm  of  England,"  to  punish  offences  "  according
to  the  course  of  other  corporations  within  this  our  king-
dom of  England,"  to  assemble  the  inhabitants  in  martial
array  for  the  common  defence,  and  to  exercise  martial
law  in  cases  of  necessity.  The  lands  were  to  be  holden
as  of  the  manor  of  East  Greenwich,  in  free  and  common
soccao-e.  The  inhabitants  and  their  children  born  there
were  to  enjoy  and  possess  all  the  liberties  and  immuni-
ties of  free,  natural-born  subjects,  in  the  same  manner
as  if  born  within  the  realm.  The  right  of  general  fish-
ery on  the  coasts  was  reserved  to  all  subjects  ;  and
finally  the  territory  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  Narra-
ganset  river,  where  it  falls  into  the  sea,  and  on  the
north  by  Massachusetts,  and  on  the  south  by  the  sea,
and  in  longitude,  as  the  line  of  the  Massachusetts  colo-

i  1  Holmes's  Ann.  338  ; 1  Chalm.  Annals,  296  ; Marsh.  Colon.  134  :
1  Chalm.  Ann.  294  ;  2  Doug.  Summ.  1G4,  167.


76  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

ny  running  from  east  to  west,  that  from  Narraganset
bay  to  the  South  sea,  was  granted  and  confirmed  to  the
colony.1  The  charter  is  silent  in  regard  to  religious
rights  and  privileges.

§  88.  In  1685,  a  quo  warranto  was  issued  by  king
James  against  the  colony  for  the  repeal  of  the  charter.
No  judgment  appears  to  have  been  rendered  upon  it ;
but  the  colony  offered  its  submission  to  the  will  of  the
crown  ;  and  Sir  Edmund  Andros,  in  1687,  went  to
Hartford,  and  in  the  name  of  the  crown,  declared  the
the  government  dissolved.2  They  did  not,  however,
surrender  the  charter ;  but  secreted  it  in  an  oak,  which
is  still  venerated  ;  and  immediately  after  the  revolution
of  1688,  they  resumed  the  exercise  of  all  its  powers.
The  successors  of  the  Stuarts  silently  suffered  them
to  retain  it  until  the  American  Revolution,  without  any
struggle  or  resistance.3  The  charter  continued  to  be
maintained  as  a  fundamental  law  of  the  State,  until  the
year  1818,  when  a  new  constitution  of  government  was
framed  and  adopted  by  the  people.

^  89.  The  laws  of  Connecticut  were,  in  many  re-
spects, similar  to  those  of  Massachusetts.4  At  an  early
period  after  the  charter  they  passed  an  act,  which  may
be  deemed  a  bill  of  rights.  By  it,  it  was  declared,  that
"no  man's  life  shall  be  taken  away  ;  no  man's  honour
or  good  name  shall  be  stained  ;  no  man's  person  shall
be  arrested,  restrained,  banished,  dismembered,  nor  any-
ways punished  ;  no  man  shall  be  deprived  of  his  wife

i  2  Haz.  Coll.  597  to  605  ;  1  Holmes's  Ann.  320  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,
293,  294  ;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  5,  p.  134.

2  1  Holmes's  Ann.  415,  421,  429,  442  ;  1  Chalm.  Ann.  297,  29S,  301,
304,  30G  ;  1  Hutch.  Hist.  339,  40(3,  note.

3  Idem.

4  2  Doug.  Summ.  171  to  176,  193  to  202.


CH.  VII.]  CONNECTICUT.  77

or  children  ;  no  man's  goods  or  estate  shall  be  taken
away  from  him,  nor  any  way  endangered  under  colour
of  law,  or  countenance  of  authority,  unless  it  be  by  vir-
tue or  equity  of  some  express  law  of  this  colony,  war-
ranting the  same,  established  by  the  general  court,  and
sufficiently  published;  or  in  case  of  the  defects  of  a  law
in  any  particular  case,  by  some  clear  and  plain  rule  of
the  word  of  God,  in  which  the  whole  court  shall  con-
cur." *  The  trial  by  jury,  in  civil  and  criminal  cases,  was
also  secured;  and  if  the  court  were  dissatisfied  with
the  verdict,  they  might  send  back  the  jury  to  consider
the  same  a  second  and  third  time,  but  not  further.2
The  governor  was  to  be  chosen,  as  the  charter  provid-
ed, by  the freemen. Every  town  was  to  send  one  or
two  deputies  or  representatives  to  the  general  assem-
bly ;  but  every  freeman  was  to  give  his  voice  in  the
election  of  assistants  and  other  public  officers.3 No
person  was  entitled  to  be  made  a  freeman,  unless  he
owned  lands  in  freehold  of  forty  shillings'  value  per  an-
num, or  £40  personal  estate.4

^  90.  In  respect  to  offences,  their  criminal  code  pro-
ceeded upon  the  same  general  foundation,  as  that  of  Mas-
sachusetts, declaring  those  capital,  which  were  so  declar-
ed in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  citing  them  as  authority  for
this  purpose.  Among  the  capital  offences  were  idola-
try, blasphemy  of  Father,  Son,  or  Holy  Ghost,  witch-
craft, murder,  murder  through  guile  by  poisoning  or
other  devilish  practices,  bestiality,  sodomy,  rape,  man-


i  Colony  Laws  of  Connecticut,  edition  by  Greene,  1715-  1718,  folio.
(New- London,)  p.  1.

2  idem.  p.  2.  — This  practice  continued  down  to  the  establishment  of
the  new  constitution  in  1818.

3  Idem.  p.  27,30.  4  idem.  41.


78  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

stealing,  false  witness,  conspiracy  against  the  colony,  ar-
son, children  cursing  or  smiting  father  or  mother,  being
a  stubborn  or  rebellious  son,  and  treason.1

§  91.  In  respect  to  religious  concerns,  their  laws  pro-
vided, that  all  persons  should  attend  public  worship,  and
that  the  towns  should  support  and  pay  the  ministers  of  re-
ligion. And  at  first,  the  choice  of  the  minister  was  confid-
ed to  the  major  part  of  the  house-holders  of  the  town ;
the  church,  as  such,  having  nothing  to  do  with  the  choice.
But  in  1708,  an  act  was  passed,  (doubtless  by  the  influ-}
ence  of  the  clergy,)  by  which  the  choice  of  ministers
was  vested  in  the  inhabitants  of  the  town,  who  were
church  members  ;  and  the  same  year  the  celebrated
platform,  at  Saybrook,  was  approved,  which  has  con-
tinued down  to  our  day  to  regulate,  in  discipline  and  in
doctrine,  the  ecclesiastical  concerns  of  the  State.2

^92.  The  spirit  of  toleration  was  not  more  liberal  here,
than  in  most  of  the  other  colonies.  No  persons  were
allowed  to  embody  themselves  into  church  estate  with-
out the  consent  of  the  general  assembly,  and  the  appro-
bation of  the  neighbouring  churches,  and  no  ministry  or
church  administration  was  entertained  or  authorized
separate  from,  and  in  opposition  to  that  openly  and  pub-
licly observed  and  dispensed  by  the  approved  minister
of  the  place,  except  with  the  approbation  and  consent
aforesaid.3  Quakers,  Ranters,  Adamites,  and  other  noto-
rious heretics  (as  they  were  called)  were  to  be  com-
mitted to  prison  or  sent  out  of  the  colony  by  order  of
the  governor  and  assistants.4  Nor  does  the  zeal  of  per-

i  Colony  Laws  of  Connecticut,  edition  by  Greene,  1715-  1718,  folio.
(New  London,)  p.  12.

2  Id.  p.  29,  84,  85, 110, 141.  —  The  Constitution  of  1818  has  made  a
great  change  in  the  rights  and  powers  of  the  ministers  and  parishes  in
ecclesiastical  aifairs.

3  Id.  p.  29.  4  id.  p.  49.


CH.  VII.]  CONNECTICUT.  79

secution  appear  at  all  to  have  abated  until,  in  pursuance
of  (he  statutes  of  1  William  and  Mary,  dissenters  were
allowed  the  liberty  of  conscience  without  molestation.1

^  93.  In  respect  to  real  estate,  the  descent  and  distri-
bution was  directed  to  be  among  all  the  children,  giving
the  eldest  son  a  double  share  ;  conveyances  in  fraud  of
creditors  were  declared  void  ;  lands  were  made  liable
to  be  set  off  to  creditors  on  executions  by  the  appraise-
ment of  three  appraisers.2

The  process  in  courts  of  justice  was  required  to  be
in  the  name  of  the  reigning  king.3  Persons  having  no
estate  might  be  relieved  from  imprisonment  by  two  as-
sistants ;  but  if  the  creditor  required  it,  he  should  satis-
fy the  debt  by  service.4  Depositions  were  allowed  as
evidence  in  civil  suits.5  No  person  was  permitted  to
plead  in  behalf  of  another  person  on  trial  for  delinquen-
cy, except  directly  to  matter  of  law,6  a  provision  some-
what singular  in  our  annals,  though  in  entire  conformity
to  the  English  law  in  capital*  felonies.  Bills  and  bonds
were  made  assignable,  and  suits  allowed  in  the  name  of
the  assignees.7

Magistrates,  justices  of  the  peace,  and  ministers
were  authorized  to  marry  persons ;  and  divorces  a  vin-
culo allowed  for  adultery,  fraudulent  contract,  or  deser-
tion for  three  years.  Men  and  women,  having  a  hus-
band or  wife  in  foreign  parts,  were  not  allowed  to  abide
in  the  colony  so  separated  above  two  years  without  lib-
erty from  the  general  court.

1  Colony  Laws  of  Conn,  edition  by  Greene,  1715  -  1718,  folio.  (New
London,)  p.  134.

2  Id.  p.  33,61,104.  3  Id.  p.  41.
4  Id.  p.  6. 5  Id.  p.  116.
6  Id.  p.  26. 7  Id.  p.  7.


80  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

Towns  were  required  to  support  public  schools  un-
der regulations  similar,  for  the  most  part,  to  those  of
Massachusetts  ; *  and  an  especial  maritime  code  was
enacted,  regulating  the  rights,  and  duties,  and  authori-
ties of  ship-owners,  seamen,  and  others  concerned  in
navigation.2

Such  are  the  principal  provisions  of  the  colonial  leg-
islation of  Connecticut.


1  Colony  Laws  of  Conn,  edition  by  Greene,  1715  -  1718  folio.  (New
London,)  p.  84.

2  Id.  p.  70. — A  similar  code  existed  in  Massachusetts,  enacted  in  1668.


CH.  VIII.]  RHODE ISLAND.  81

CHAPTER  VIII.


RHODE  ISLAND.


^  94.  Rhode  Island  was  originally  settled  by  emi-
grants from  Massachusetts,  fleeing  thither  to  escape  from
religious  persecution ;  and  it  still  boasts  of  Roger  Wil-
liams as  its  founder,  and  as  the  early  defender  of  relig-
ious freedom  and  the  rights  of  conscience.  One  body  of
them  purchased  the  island,  which  has  given  the  name
to  the  State,  and  another  the  territory  of  the  Providence
Plantations  from  the  Indians,  and  began  their  settle-
ments in  both  places  nearly  at  the  same  period,  viz.  in
1636  and  1638.1  They  entered  into  separate  volunta-
ry associations  of  government.  But  finding  their
associations  not  sufficient  to  protect  them  against
the  encroachments  of  Massachusetts,  and  having  no
title  under  any  of  the  royal  patents,  they  sent  Roger
Williams  to  England  in  1643  to  procure  a  surer  foun-
dation both  of  title  and  government.  He  succeeded  in
obtaining  from  the  Earl  of  Warwick  (in  1643)  a  charter
of  incorporation  of  Providence  Plantations ; 2  and  also,
in  1644,  a  charter  from  the  two  houses  of  parliament
(Charles  the  First  being  then  driven  from  his  capital)
for  the  incorporation  of  the  towns  of  Providence,  New-


i  1  Hutch.  Hist.  72  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  225,  233,  246  ;  1  Chalm.
Annals,  269,270;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  413,  414,  415;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  3,
p.  99,  100;  Robertson's  America,  B.  10;  2  Doug.  Summ.  76,  to  90;
1  Pitkin's  Hist.  4(5 ;  2  Doug.  Suram.  7(i,  77.— Mr.  Chalmers  says,  that
Providence  was  settled  in  the  beginning-  of  1635  ;  and  Dr.  Holmes,  in
1636. (1 Chalm.  Annals,  270;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  233.)

2  1  Hutch.  Hist  39,  note  ;  Walsh's  Appeal,  429  ;  1  Pitk.  Hist.  46,
47,  48  ;  2  Doug.  Summ.  80.

VOL.  I.  11


82  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

port,  and  Portsmouth,  for  the  absolute  government  of
themselves,  but  according  to  the  laws  of  England.1

^  95  Under  this  charter  an  assembly  was  convened
in  1647,  consisting  of  the  collective  freemen  of  the  vari-
ous plantations.2  The  legislative  power  was  vested  in
a  court  of  commissioners  of  six  persons,  chosen  by  each
of  the  four  towns  then  in  existence.  The  whole  execu-
tive power  seems  to  have  been  vested  in  a  president
and  four  assistants,  who  were  chosen  from  the  freemen,
and  formed  the  supreme  court  for  the  administration  of
justice.  Every  township,  forming  within  itself  a  corpo-
ration, elected  a  council  of  six  for  the  management  of
its  peculiar  affairs,  and  for  the  settlement  of  the  smallest
disputes.3  The  council  of  state  of  the  Commonwealth
soon  afterwards  interfered  to  suspend  their  government;
but  the  distractions  at  home  prevented  any  serious
interference  by  parliament  in  the  administration  of
their  affairs ;  and  they  continued  to  act  under  their
former  government  until  the  restoration  of  Charles  the
Second.4  That  event  seems  to  have  given  great  satis-
faction to  these  plantations.  They  immediately  pro-
claimed the  king,  and  sent  an  agent  to  England ;  and
in  July,  1663,  after  some  opposition,  they  succeeded  in
obtaining  a  charter  from  the  crown.5

^96.  That  charter  incorporated  the  inhabitants  by
the  name  of  the  Governor  and  Company  of  the  Eng-
lish Colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations
in  New-England  in  America,  conferring  on  them  the


i  1  Chalm.  271,  272  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  415,  416.

2  1  Chalm.  Annals,  273 ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  283 ;  Walsh's  Appeal,
429  ;  2  Doug.  Summ.  80.

3  1  Chalm.  Annals,  273  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  283.

4  1  Chalm.  Annals,  274  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  297  ;  Marsh.  Colon,  cli.
5,  p.  133.

5  1  Chalm.  Annals,  274  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  329.


CH.  VIII.]  RHODE  ISLAND.  83

usual  powers  of  corporations.  The  executive  power
was  lodged  in  a  governor,  deputy  governor,  and  ten
assistants,  chosen  by  the  freemen.1  The  supreme
legislative  authority  was  vested  in  a  general  assembly,
consisting  of  a  governor,  deputy  governor,  ten  assist-
ants, and  deputies  from  the  respective  towns,  chosen  by
the  freemen,  (six  for  Newport,  four  for  Providence,
Portsmouth,  and  Warwick,  and  two  for  other  towns,)
the  governor  or  deputy  and  six  assistants  being  always
present.  The  general  assembly  were  authorized  to
admit  freemen,  choose  officers,  make  laws  and  ordi-
nances, so  as  that  they  were  "  not  contrary  and  repug-
nant unto,  but  as  near  as  may  be  agreeable  to,  the  laws
of  this  our  realm  of  England,  considering  the  nature  and
constitution  of  the  place  and  people ;  to  create  and  organ-
ize courts  ;  to  punish  offences  according  to  the  course
of  other  corporations  in  England  ;  "  to  array  the  mar-
tial force  of  the  colony  for  the  common  defence,  and
enforce  martial  law;  and  to  exercise  other  important
powers  and  prerogatives.  It  further  provided  for  a  free
fishery  on  the  coasts  ;  and  that  all  the  inhabitants  and
children  born  there  should  enjoy  all  the  liberties  and
immunities  of  free  and  natural  subjects  born  within  the
realm  of  England.  It  then  granted  and  confirmed
unto  them  all  that  part  of  the  king's  dominions  in
New-England  containing  the  Narraganset  bay  and  the
countries  and  parts  adjacent,  bounded  westerly  to  the
middle  of  Pawcatuck  river,  and  so  along  the  river  north-
ward to  the  head  thereof,  thence  by  a  strait  line  due
north,  until  it  meet  the  south  line  of  Massachusetts,  ex-
tending easterly  three  English  miles  to  the  most  east-
ern and  northeastern  parts  of  Narraganset  bay,  as  the


2  Haz.  Coll.  C12  to  623  ;  2  Doug.  Summ.  81


84  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

bay  extendeth  southerly  unto  the  mouth  of  the  river
running  towards  Providence  and  thence  along  the  east-
erly side  or  bank  of  the  said  river  up  to  the  falls,  call-
ed Patucket  Falls,  and  thence  in  a  strait  line  due  north
till  it  meets  the  Massachusetts  line.1  The  territory  was
to  be  holden  as  of  the  manor  of  East  Greenwich  in  free
and  common  soccage.  It  further  secured  a  free  trade
with  all  the  other  colonies.

§  97.  But  the  most  remarkable  circumstance  in  the
charter,  and  that,  which  exhibits  the  strong  feeling  and
spirit  of  the  colony,  is  the  provision  respecting  religious
freedom.  The  charter,  after  reciting  the  petition  of  the
inhabitants,  "  that  it  is  much  in  their  hearts,  (if  they  be
permitted,)  to  hold  forth  a  lively  experiment,  that  a  most
flourishing  civil  state  may  stand,  and  be  best  maintain-
ed, and  that  among  our  English  subjects,  with  a  full
liberty  in  religious  concernments,  and  that  true  piety,
rightly  grounded  upon  gospel  principles,  will  give  the
best  and  greatest  security  to  sovereignty,"  proceeds  to
to  declare : 2  "  We  being  willing  to  encourage  the  hopeful
undertaking  of  our  said  loyal  and  loving  subjects,  and
to  secure  them  in  the  free  exercise  and  enjoyment  of
all  their  civil  and  religious  rights  appertaining  to  them
as  our  loving  subjects,  and  to  preserve  to  them  that  lib-
erty in  the  true  Christian  faith  and  worship  of  God,
which  they  have  sought  with  so  much  travel,  and  with
peaceful  minds  and  loyal  subjection  to  our  royal  pro-
genitors and  ourselves  to  enjoy ;  and  because  some  of
the  people  and  inhabitants  of  the  same  colony  cannot,
in  their  private  opinion,  conform  to  the  public  exercise  of

i  This  is  the  substance  but  not  the  exact  words  of  the  boundaries  in
the  charter,  which  is  given  at  large  in  2  Haz.  Coll.  G12  to  623,  and  in
Rhode  Island  Laws,  editions  of  1789  and  1822.

a  2  Haz.  Coll.  G13.


OH.  VIII.]  RHODE  island.  88

religion  according  to  the  liturgy,  form,  and  ceremonies
of  the  Church of England,  or  take  or  subscribe  the
oaths  and  articles  made  and  established  in  that  behalf;
and  for  thai  the  same,  by  reason  of  the  remote  distances
of  these  places,  will,  as  we  hope,  be  no  breach  of  tin-
unity  and  uniformity established in this nation,  have
therefore  thought fit and do hereby  publish,  grant,
ordain,  and  declare,  that  our  royal  will  and  pleasure  is,
that  no  person  within  the  said  colony,  at  any  time  here-
after, shall  be  any  wise  molested,  punished,  disquieted,  or
called  in  question  for  any  differences  in  opinion  in  mut-
ters of  religion ;  but,  that  all  and  every  person  and  per-
sons may,  from  time  to  time  and  at  all  time  hereafter,
freely  and  fully  have  and  enjoy  his  and  their  own  judg-
ment and  consciences  in  matters  of  religious  concern-
ment throughout  the  tract  of  land  hereafter  mentioned,
they  behaving  themselves  peaceably  and  quietly,  and
not  using  this  liberty  to  licentiousness  and  profaneness,
nor  to  the  civil  injury  or  outward  disturbance  of  oth-
ers." 1 This  is  a  noble  declaration  and  worthy  of  any
prince,  who  rules  over  a  free  people. It  is  lamentable
to  reflect,  how  little  it  comports  with  the  domestic  per-
secutions authorized  by  the  same  monarch  during  his
profligate  reign. It  is still  more  lamentable  to  reflect,
how  little  a  similar  spirit  o£  toleration  was encouraged
either  by  the  precepts  or  example  of  any  other  of  the
New-England  colonies.

^  98.  Rhode  Island  enjoys  the  honour  of  having  been
if  not  the  first,  at  least  one  of  the  earliest  of  the  colonies,
and  indeed  of  modern  states,  in  which  the  liberty  of
conscience  and  freedom  of  worship  were  boldly  pro-
claimed among  its  fundamental  laws.2 If  at any  time

i  2  Ilaz.  Coll.  613.  2  Walsh's  Appeal,  429.


86  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

afterwards-  the  state  broke  in  upon  the  broad  and
rational  principles  thus  established,  it  was  but  a  momen-
tary deviation  from  the  settled  course  of  its  policy.1
At  the  present  day,  acting  under  this  very  charter,  it
continues  to  maintain  religious  freedom  with  all  the
sincerity  and  liberality  and  zeal,  which  belonged  to  its
founder.  It  has  been  supposed,  that  in  the  laws  passed
by  the  general  assembly  first  convened  under  this  charter,
(1664,)  Roman  Catholics  were  excluded  from  the  privi-
leges of  freemen.  But  this  has  been  very  justly  doubt-
ed ;  and  indeed,  if  well  founded,  the  act  would  deserve
all  the  reproach,  which  has  been  heaped  upon  it.2  The
first  laws,  however,  declared,  that  no  freeman  shall  be
imprisoned,  or  deprived  of  his  freehold,  but  by  the  judg-
ment of  his  peers  or  the  laws  of  the  colony  ;  and  that
no  tax  should  be  imposed  or  required  of  the  colonists,
but  by  the  act  of  the  general  assembly.3

^  99.  It  is  said,  that  the  general  conduct  of  Rhode
Island  seems  to  have  given  entire  satisfaction  to  Charles
the  Second  during  the  residue  of  his  reign.4  Upon  the
accession  of  James,  the  inhabitants  were  among  the  first
to  offer  their  congratulations  ;  and  to  ask  protection  for
their  chartered  rights.  That  monarch  however  disre-
garded their  request.  They  were  accused  of  a  violation
of  their  charter,  and  a  quo  warranto  was  filed  against
them.  They  immediately  resolved,  without  much  hesi-
tation, not  to  contend  with  the  crown,  but  to  surrender


i  3  Hutch.  Coll.  413,415;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  276,  284;  1  Holmes's
Annals,  336.

2  On  this  subject,  see  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  27(1,  264;  and  Doctor
Holmes's  valuable  note  to  his  Annals,  vol.  i.  p.  336,  and  Id.  p.  341  ;
3  Hutch.  Coll.  413,  415  ;  Walsh's  Appeal,  429  to  435.

3  1  Chalm.  Annals,  276  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  336  ;  R.  Island  Colony
Laws,  (1744,)  p.  3.

4  1  Chalm.  Annals,  278.


CH.  VIII.]  RHODE  ISLAND.  87

their  charter ;  and  passed  an  act  for  that  purpose,  which
was  afterwards  suppressed.1  In  December,  1686,  Sir
Edward  Androsj  agreeably  to  his  orders,  dissolved
their  government,  and  assumed  the  administration  of
the  colony.  The  revolution  of  1688  pu1  an  end  to  his
power;  and  the  colony  immediately  afterwards  resum-
ed its  charter,  and,  though  not  without  some  interrup-
tions, continued  to  maintain  and  exercise  its  powers
down  to  the  period  of  the  American  Revolution.1  It
still  continues  to  act  under  the  same  charter  as  a  fun-
damental law,  it  being  the  only  state  in  the  Union,
which  has  not  formed  a  new  constitution  of  government.
It  seems,  that  until  the  year  1696  the  governor,  assist-
ants, and  deputies  of  the  towns  sat  together.  But  by
a  law  then  passed  they  were  separated,  and  the  depu-
ties acted  as  a  lower  house,  and  the  governor  and
assistants  as  an  upper  house.3

§  100.  In  reviewing  the  colonial  legislation  of  Rhode
Island  some  peculiarties  are  discernible,  though  the
general  system  is  like  that  of  the  other  parts  of  New-
England.4  No  persons  but  those,  who  were  admitted
freemen  of  the  colony,  were  allowed  to  vote  at  elec-
tions, and  they  might  do  it  in  person  or  by  proxy  ;  and
none  but  freemen  were  eligible  to  office.  Wills  of  real
estate  were  required  to  have  three  witnesses.  The
probate  of  wills  and  the  granting  of  administrations  of
personal  estate  were  committed  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the
town  councils  of  each  town  in  the  colony,  with  an  ap-
peal to  the  governor  and  council  as  supreme  ordinary.5


i  1  Chalm.  Annals,  280,  281  ;  2  Doug.  Summ.  85.

2  1  Chalm.  Annals,  278,  279;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  415,  420,  428,  442  :
2  Doug.  Summ.  85,  377  ;  Dimmer's  Defence,  1 American  Tracts,  7.

3  R.  Island  Colony  Laws,  (1744,)  24.

4  Id.  p.  1,  147.  5  Id.  p.  1,  4.


88  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

Every  town  was  a  corporate  body,  entitled  to  choose
its  officers,  and  to  admit  persons  as  freemen.1  Sports
and  labour  on  Sunday  were  prohibited.2  Purchases  of
land  from  the  Indians  were  prohibited.3  By  a  formal
enactment  in  1700  it  was  declared,  that  in  all  actions,
matters,  causes,  and  things  whatsoever,  where  no  par-
ticular law  of  the  colony  is  made  to  decide  and  deter-
mine the  same,  then  in  all  such  cases  the  laws  of  Eng-
land shall  be  put  in  force  to  issue,  determine,  and
decide  the  same,  any  usage,  custom,  or  law  to  the
contrary  notwithstanding.4  About  the  same  period  the
English  navigation  laws  were  required,  by  an  act  of  the
colonial  legislature,  to  be  executed.5  Twenty  years'
peaceful  possession  of  lands  under  the  claim  of  a  title  in
fee  simple  was  declared  to  give  a  good  and  rightful  title
to  the  fee ; 6  and  thus  a  just  and  liberal  effect  was  given
to  the  statute  of  limitations,  not  as  a  bar  of  the  remedy,
but  of  the  right.  The  acknowledgment  and  registra-
tion of  conveyances  of  lands  in  a  public  town  registry
were  provided  for.  The  support  of  the  ministry  was
made  to  depend  upon  free  contributions.  Appeals  to
the  king  in  council,  in  cases  exceeding  £300  in  value,
were  allowed.7  A  system  of  redress  in  cases  of  abuses
of  property  devoted  to  charitable  uses  was  establish-
ed ; 8  fines  and  common  recoveries  were  regulated  ;  and
the  trial  by  jury  established.  The  criminal  code  was
not  sanguinary  in  its  enactments  ;  and  did  not  affect
to  follow  the  punishments  denounced  in  the  Scripture
against  particular  offences.9  Witchcraft,  however,  was,
as  in  the  common  law,  punished  with  death.  At  a  later
period,  lands  of  persons  living  out  of  the  colony  or  con-


i  R.  Island  Col.  Laws,  (1744,)  p.  9.  2  Id.  IS.  ;i  Id.  4;

4  Id.  28. 5  id.  28. c  Id.  46. 7  Id.  87,  133. 8  Id.  108. 9  Id.  115.


CIL  VIII.]  RHODE  ISLAM).  89

cealing  themselves  therein  were  made  liable  to  the  pay-
ment of  their  debts.1  In  respect  to  the  descent  of  real
estates,  the  canons  of  the  common  l;i\\  were  adopted,
and  the  eldest  son  took  the  whole  inheritance  by  primo-
geniture. This  system  was  for  a  short  period  repealed
by  an  act,  (1  &,  5  George  1,  1718,)  which  divided  the
estate  amonu;  all  the  children,  giving  the  eldest  son  a
double  share.2  But  the  common  law  was  soon  after-
wards (in  1728)  reinstated  by  the  public  approbation,
and  so  remained  to  regulate  descents  until  a  short  period
(1770)  before  the  Revolution.  Contracts  for  things
above  the  value  often  pounds  were  required  to  be  in
writing;  and  conveyances  in  fraud  of  creditors  were
declared  void.  And  we  may  also  trace  in  its  legislation
provision  respecting  hue  and  cry  in  cases  of  robbery  ;
and  of  forfeiture  in  cases  of  accidental  death  by  way  of
deodand.3

$s  101.  We  have  nowr  finished  our  review  of  all  the
successive  colonies  established  in  New-England.  The
remark  of  Chalmers  is  in  general  well  founded  :  "  Orig-
inally settled  (says  he4)  by  the  same  kind  of  people,  a
similar  policy  naturally  rooted  in  all  the  colonies  of
New-England.  Their  forms  of  government,  their  laws,
their  courts  of  justice,  their  manners,  and  their  religious
tenets,  which  gave  birth#  to  all  these,  were  nearly  the
same."  Still,  however,  the  remark  is  subject  to  many
local  qualifications.  In  Rhode  Island,  for  instance,  the
rigid  spirit  of  puritanism  softened  down  (as  we  have
seen)  into  general  toleration. On  the  other  hand  the

i  11.  Island  Colony  Laws,  (Edit.  L744,)  p.  192.

2  Colony  Laws  of  Rhode  Island,  (Edit  J71!>,  printed  at  Boston,)  p.  05
96.

3  Rhode  Island  Colony  Laws,  (1719,)  p.  5,  8.

4  1  Chalm.  Annals,  296.

VOL.  I.  12


90  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

common  law  rules  of  decents  were  adhered  to  in  its
policy  with  singular  zeal  down  to  the  year  1770,  as
necessary  to  prevent  the  destruction  of  family  estates,
while  the  neighbouring  colonies  adopted  a  rule,  dividing
the  inheritance  among  all  the  children.1

^  102.  One  of  the  most  memorable  circumstances  in
the  history  of  New-England  is  the  early  formation  and
establishment  of  a  confederation  of the  colonies  for
amity,  offence,  and defence,  and mutual  advice  and
assistance. The  project  was  agitated  as  early  as  1637 ;
but  difficulties  having  occurred,  the  articles  of  union
were  not  finally  adopted  until  1643.2 In  the  month  of
May  of  that  year  the  colonies  of  Massachusetts,  Con-
necticut, New-Haven,  and  Plymouth  formed  a  confed-
eracy by  the  name  of  the  United  Colonies  of  New-
England,  and  entered  into  a  perpetual  league  of  friend-
ship and  amity  for  offence  and  defence  and  mutual
advice  and  succour. The  charges  of  all  wars,  offensive
and  defensive,  were  to  be  borne  in  common  and  accord-
ing to  an  apportionment  provided  for  in  the  articles  ;
and  in  case  of  invasion  of  any  colony  the  others  were
to  furnish  a  certain  proportion  of  armed  men  for  its
assistance.3 Commissioners  appointed  by  each  colony
were  to  meet  and  determine  all  affairs  of  war  and
peace,  leagues,  aids,  charges,  &c.  and  to  frame  and
establish  agreements  and  orders  for  other  general  inter-
ests. This union,  so important and  necessary for
mutual defence  and assistance during the  troubles,
which  then  agitated  the  parent  country,  was  not  object-
ed to  by  King  Charles  the  Second  on  his  restoration  ;

i  Gardner  v.  Collins,  2  Peters's  Sup.  Rep.  58.

2  1  Holmes's  Annals,  269,  270  ;  1  Winthrop's  Jour.  237,  284.

3  2  Haz.  Coll.  1  to  6;  2  Winthrop's  Jour.  101  to  106;  1  Hutch.  Hist.
124, 126.


CH.  VIII.]  RHODE  ISLAND.  91

and  with  some  few  alterations  it  subsisted  down  to
1686,  when  all  the  charters  were  prostrated  by  the
authority  of  King  James.1  Rhode  Island  made  appli-
cation to  be  admitted  into  this  Union ;  but  was  refused
upon  the  ground,  that  the  territory  was  within  the  limits
of  Plymouth  colony.  It  does  not  appear  that  subse-
quently the  colony  became  a  party  to  it.2

1  1  Holmes's  Annals,  270  and  note  ;  1  Hutch.  Hist.  12G  note  ;  2  Haz.
Coll.  7  et  seq.

2  1  Holmes's  Annals,  287  and  note  ;  1  Hutch.  Hist.  124  ;  2  Haz.  Coll.
99,  100.


92  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

CHAPTER  IX.

MARYLAND.

§  103.  The  province  of  Maryland  was  included  orig-
inally in  the  patent  of  the  Southern  or  Virginia  company ;
and  upon  the  dissolution  of  that  company  it  reverted  to
the  crown.  King  Charles  the  First,  on  the  20th  June,
1632,  granted  it  by  patent  to  Cecilius  Calvert  Lord
Baltimore,  the  son  of  George  Calvert  Lord  Baltimore,
to  whom  the  patent  was  intended  to  have  been  made,
but  he  died  before  it  was  executed.1  By  the  charter,
the  king  erected  it  into  a  province,  and  gave  it  the  name
of  Maryland,  in  honour  of  his  Queen,  Henrietta  Maria,  the
daughter  of  Henry  the  Fourth  of  France,  to  be  held  of
the  crown  of  England,  he  yearly,  for  ever,  rendering
two  Indian  arrows.  The  territory  was  bounded  by  a
right  line  drawn  from  Watkins's  Point,  on  Chesapeake
bay,  to  the  ocean  on  the  east,  thence  to  that  part  of  the
estuary  of  Delaware  on  the  north,  which  lieth  under  the
40th  degree,  where  New-England  is  terminated ;  thence
in  a  right  line  by  the  degree  aforesaid  to  the  meridian  of
the  fountain  of  Potomac  ;  thence  following  its  course  by
the  further  bank  to  its  confluence  with  the  Chesapeake,
and  thence  to  Watkins's  Point.2

§  104.  The  territory  thus  severed  from  Virginia,  was
made  immediately  subject  to  the  crown,  and  was  grant-
ed in  full  and  absolute  propriety  to  Lord  Baltimore  and
his  heirs,  saving  the  allegiance  and  sovereign  dominion

i  l  Holmes's  Ann.  213;  1  Cb  aim.  Annals,  201,  202;  Bacon's  Laws
of  Maryland,  (17(35);  2  Doug.  Sumrn.  353,  &c.

2  1  Haz.  Coll.  327  to  337  ;  1  Chalra.  Annals,  202  ;  Charters  of  N.  A.
Provinces,  4to,  London,  1766.


CH.  IX.]  MARYLAND.  93

to  the  crown,  with  all  the  right3,  regalities,  and  prerog-
atives, which  the  Bishop  of  Durham  enjoyed  in  thai
palatinate,  to  be  held  of  the  crown  as  of  Windsor  (
tie,  in  the  county  of  Berks,  in  free  and  common  soccage,
and  not  in  capite  or  by  knights'  service.  The  charnr  fur-
ther provided,  that  the  proprietary  should  have  author-
ity by  and  with  the  consent  of  the  freemen,  or  their
delegates  assembled  for  the  purpose,  to  make  all  laws
for  the  province,  "  so  that  such  laws  be  consonant  to
reason,  and  not  repugnant,  or  contrary,  but,  as  far  as
conveniently  might  be,  agreeable  to  the  laws,  statutes,
customs,  and  rights  of  this  our  realm  of  England."  !
The  proprietary  was  also  vested  with  full  executive  pow-
er ;  and  the  establishment  of  courts  of  justice  was  pro-
vided for.  The  proprietary  was  also  authorized  to  levy
subsidies  with  the  assent  of  the  people  in  assembly.
The  inhabitants  and  their  children  were  to  enjoy  all  the
rights,  immunities,  and  privileges  of  subjects  born  in
England.  The  right  of  the  advowsons  of  the  churches,
according  to  the  establishment  of  England,  and  the  right
to  create  manors  and  courts  baron,  to  confer  titles  of  dig-
nity, to  erect  ports  and  other  regalities,  were  expressly
given  to  the  proprietary.  An  exemption  of  the  colon-
ists from  all  talliages  on  their  goods  and  estates  to  be
imposed  by  the  crown  was  expressly  covenanted  for  in
perpetuity  ;  an  exemption,  which  had  been  conferred
on  other  colonies  for  years  only.2  License  was  granted
to  all  subjects  to  transport  themselves  to  the  province  ;
and  its  products  were  to  be  imported  into  England  and
Ireland  under  such  taxes  only,  as  were  paid  by  other

1  1  Haz.  Coll.  327,  &c.  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  202  ;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  2,
p.G9.

2  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  203,  204,  205.


94  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

subjects.  And  the  usual  powers  in  other  charters  to
repel  invasions,  to  suppress  rebellions,  &x.  were  also
conferred  on  the  proprietary.

§  105.  Such  is  the  substance  of  the  patent.  And
Chalmers  has  with  some  pride  asserted,  that  "  Mary-
land has  always  enjoyed  the  unrivalled  honour  of  being
the  first  colony,  which  was  erected  into  a  province  of
the  English  empire,  and  governed  regularly  by  laws
enacted  in  a  provincial  legislature."  *  It  is  also  observ-
able, that  there  is  no  clause  in  the  patent,  which  requir-
ed any  transmission  of  the  province  laws  to  the  king,
or  providing  for  his  approbation  or  assent.  Under  this
charter  Maryland  continued  to  be  governed,  with  some
short  intervals  of  interruption,  down  to  the  period  of
the  American  Revolution,  by  the  successors  of  the
original  proprietary.2

§  106.  The  first  emigration  made  under  the  auspices
of  Lord  Baltimore  was  in  November,  1632,  and  con-
sisted of  about  200  gentlemen  of  considerable  fortune
and  rank,  and  their  adherents,  being  chiefly  Roman
Catholics.  "  He  laid  the  foundation  of  this  province,
(says  Chalmers,3)  upon  the  broad  basis  of  security  to
property,  and  of  freedom  of  religion,  granting  in  absolute
fee  fifty  acres  of  land  to  every  emigrant  ;  establishing
Christianity  agreeably  to  the  old  common  law,  of  which
it  is  a  part,  without  allowing  preeminence  to  any  par-
ticular sect.  The  wisdom  of  his  choice  soon  converted
a  dreary  wilderness  into  a  prosperous  colony."  It  is
certainly  very  honourable  to  the  liberality  and  public
spirit  of  the  proprietary,  that  he  should  have  introduc-
ed into  his  fundamental  policy  the  doctrine  of  general

i  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  200.  2  i  Chalmers's  Annals,  203.

3  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  207,  208.


CH.  IX.]  MARYLAND.  95

toleration  and  equality  among  Christian  sects,  (for  be
does  not  appear  to  have  gone  farther  ;)  and  have  thus
given  the  earliest  example  of  a  legislator  inviting  his
subjects  to  the  free  indulgence  of  religious  opinion.1
This  was  anterior  to  the  settlement  of  Rhode  Island;
and  therefore  merits  the  enviable  rank  of  being  the  first
recognition  among  the  colonists  of  the  glorious  and  in-
defeasible rights  of  conscience.  Rhode  Island  seems
without  any  apparent  consciousness  of  co-operation  to
have  gone  farther,  and  to  have  protected  an  universal
freedom  of  religious  opinion  in  Jew  and  Gentile,  in
Christian  and  Pagan,  without  any  distinction,  to  be
found  in  its  legislation.2

^  107.  The  first  legislative  assembly  of  Maryland,
held  by  the  freemen  at  large,  was  in  1634-  1635  ;  but
little  of  their  proceedings  is  known.  No  acts  appear  to
have  been  adopted  until  1638-  1639,  when  provision
was  made  in  consequence  of  an  increase  of  the  colon-
ists for  a  representative  assembly,  called  the  House  of
Assembly,  chosen  by  the  freemen  ;  and  the  laws  pass-
ed by  the  assembly,  and  approved  by  the  proprietary  or
his  lieutanent,  were  to  be  of  full  force.  The  assembly
was  afterwards  divided  into  an  upper  and  lower  house.
At  the  same  session,  an  act,  which  may  be  considered
as  in  some  sort  a  Magna  Charta,  was  passed,  declar-
ing among  other  things,  that  "  Holy  church  within  this
province  shall  have  all  her  rights  and  prerogatives  ;"
"  that  the  inhabitants  shall  have  all  their  rights  and  liber-
ties  according  to  the  great  charter  of  England; "  and  that
the  goods  of  debtors,  if  not  sufficient  to  pay  their  debts,
shall  be  sold  and  distributed  pro  rata,  saving  debts  to

i  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  213,  218,  219,363.
2  Walsh's  Appeal,  429,  Note  B.


96  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

the  proprietary.1  In  1649  an  act  was  passed,  punishing
blasphemy,  or  denying  the  Holy  Trinity,  with  death  and
confiscation  of  goods  and  lands  ;2  and,  strangely  enough
after  such  a  provision,  in  the  same  act,  after  a  pre-
amble, reciting  that  the  confining  of  conscience  in  mat-
ters of  religion  hath  frequently  fallen  out  to  be  of  dan-
gerous consequence,  it  is  enacted,  that  no  person  "  pro-
fessing to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,"  shall  be  molested
for  or  in  respect  to  his  religion,  or  the  free  exercise
thereof,  nor  any  way  compelled  to  the  belief  or  exer-
cise of  any  other  religion.3  It  seems  not  to  have  been
even  imagined,  that  a  belief  in  the  divine  mission  of
Jesus  Christ  could,  in  the  eyes  of  any  sect  of  Christians,
be  quite  consistent  with  the  denial  of  the  Trinity.  This
act  was  confirmed  among  the  perpetual  laws  in  1676.

^  108.  The  legislation  of  Maryland  does  not,  indeed,
appear  to  have  afforded  an  uniform  protection  in  re-
spect to  religion,  such  as  the  original  policy  of  the  found-
er would  seem  to  indicate.  Under  the  protectorate  of
Cromwell,  Roman  Catholics  were  expressly  denied  any
protection  in  the  province  ;  and  all  others,  "  who  profess
faith  in  God  by  Jesus  Christ,  though  differing  in  judg-
ment from  the  doctrine,  worship,  or  discipline  publicly
held  forth,"  were  not  to  be  restrained  from  the  exercise
of  their  religion.4  In  1696  the  Church  of  England  was
established  in  the  province  ;  and  in  1702,  the  liturgy  and
rites,  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church  of  England  were  re-
quired to  be  pursued  in  all  the  churches,  with  such  tol-


i  Bacon's  Laws  of  Maryland,  ch.  2,  of  1638  5  1650,  eh.  1  :  1  Marsh.
Colon.  &c.  ch.  2,  p.  7:5  ; 1  Chalm.  Ann.  213,  219,  220,  225.

^  1  Chalm.  Annals,  223,  365;  Bacon's  Laws  of  Maryland.  1649.

3  Bacon's  Laws  of  Maryland, 1649,  ch.  1  ;  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  218,

219,  235.

4  Bacon's  Laws  of  Maryland,  1G54,  ch.  4  ;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  2,  p.  75  ;
Chalm.  Ann.  218,  235.


CH.  IX.]  MARYLAND.  [)~

eration  for  Dissenters,  however,  as  was  provided  for  in
the  act  of  1  William  and  Mary.1  And  (he  introduction
of  the  test  and  abjuration  acts,  in  1716,  excluded  all
Roman  Catholics  from  office.2

^  109.  It  appears  to  have  been  a  policy  adopted  at
no  great  distance  of  time  after  the  settlement  of  the
colony  to  provide  for  the  public  registration  of  convey-
ances of  real  estates.3  In  the  silence  of  the  statute  book
until  1715,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  that  the  system  of  de-
scents of  intestate  estates  was  that  of  the  parent  coun  -
try.  In  that  year  an  act  passed,4  which  made  the  estate
partible  among  all  the  children  ;  and  the  system  thus  in-
troduced has,  in  its  substance,  never  since  been  departed
from.  Maryland  too,  like  the  other  colonies,  was  early
alive  to  the  importance  of  possessing  the  sole  power  of
internal  taxation  ;  and  accordingly,  in  1650,5  it  was
declared,  that  no  taxes  should  be  levied  without  the
consent  of  the  general  assembly.

§  110.  Upon  the  revolution  of  1688,  the  government
of  Maryland  was  seized  into  the  hands  of  the  crown,
and  was  not  again  restored  to  the  proprietary  until
1716.  From  that  period  no  interruption  occurred  until
the  American  Revolution.6


i  Bacon's  Laws  of  Maryland,  1702,  ch.  1.

2  Bacon's  Laws  of  Maryland,  1716,  ch.  5;  Walsh's  Appeal,  49,  50;
1  Holmes's  Annals,  476, 4S9.

3  Bacon's  Laws  of  Maryland,  1674.

4  Bacon's  Laws  of  Maryland,  1715,  ch.  39.

s  Bacon's  Laws  of  Maryland,  1650,  ch.  25  ;  1  Chalm.  Ann.  220.
6  Bacon's  Laws  of  Maryland,  1692,  1716.


VOL.  I.  US


98  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

CHAPTER  X.


NEW-YORK.


§  111.  New-York  was  originally  settled  by  emi-
grants from  Holland. But  the  English  government
seems at  all  times  to  have  disputed  the  right  of  the
Dutch  to  make  any  settlement  in  America  ;  and  the
territory  occupied  by  them  was  unquestionably  within
the  chartered  limits  of  New-England  granted  to  the
council  of  Plymouth.1 Charles  the  Second,  soon  after
his  restoration,  instigated  as  much  by  personal  antipa-
thy, as  by  a  regard  for  the  interest  of  the  crown,  deter-
mined to  maintain  his  right,  and  in  March,  1664,  granted
a  patent  to  his  brother,  the  Duke  of  York  and  Albany,
by  which  he  conveyed  to  him the  region  extending
from  the  western  bank  of  Connecticut  to  the  eastern
shore  of  the  Delaware,  together  with  Long  Island,  and
conferred  on  him  the  powers  of  government,  civil  and
military.2 Authority  was  given  (among  other  things)  to
correct,  punish,  pardon,  govern,  and  rule  all  subjects,
that  should  inhabit  the  territory  according  to  such  laws,
ordinances,  &c.  as  the  Duke  should  establish,  so  always
that  the  same  "  were  not  contrary,  but  as  near  as  might
be  agreeable  to  the  laws  and  statutes  and  government
of  the  realm  of  England,"  saving  to  the  crown  aright  to
hear  and  determine  all  appeals. The  usual  authority
was  also  given  to  use  and  exercise  martial  law  in  cases


i  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  569,  570,  572  ;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  5,  p.  143 ;
2  Doug.  Summ.  220,  &c.

2  Smith's  New-Jersey,  35,  59 ;  1  Chalmer's  Annals,  573 ;  Smith's
New-York,  p.  31.  [10]  ;  Smith's  New-Jersey,  p.  21U  to  215.


CH.  X.]  NEW- YORK.  U<)

of  rebellion,  insurrection,  mutiny,  and  invasion.1  A  part
of  this  tract  was  afterwards  conveyed  by  the  Duke,  by
dm!  of  lease  and  release,  in  June,  of  the  same  year,  to
Lord  Berkeley  and  Sir  George  Carteret.  By  this  lat-
ter grant  they  were  entitled  to  all  the  tract  adjacenl  to
New-England,  lying  westward  of  Long  Island,  and
bounded  on  the  east  by  the  main  sea  and  partly  by
Hudson's  river,  and  upon  the  west  by  Delaware  bay
or  river,  and  extending  southward  to  the  main  ocean  as
far  as  Cape  May  at  the  mouth  of  Delaware  bay,  and  to
the  northward  as  far  as  the  northernmost  branch  of
Delaware  bay  or  river,  which  is  41  degrees  40  min-
utes latitude  ;  which  tract  was  to  be  called  by  the  name
of  Nova  Caesarea,  or  New-Jersey.2  So  that  the  terri-
tory then  claimed  by  the  Dutch  as  the  New-Nether-
lands was  divided  into  the  colonies  of  New-York  and
New-Jersey.

§  112.  In  September,  1664,  the  Dutch  colony  was
surprised  by  a  British  armament,  which  arrived  on  the
coast,  and  was  compelled  to  surrender  to  its  authority.
By  the  terms  of  the  capitulation  the  inhabitants  were  to
continue  free  denizens  and  to  enjoy  their  property.
The  Dutch  inhabitants  were  to  enjoy  the  liberty  of
their  conscience  in  divine  worship  and  church  discipline;
and  their  own  customs  concerning  their  inheritances.8
The  government  was  instantly  assumed  by  right  of  con-
quest in  behalf  of  the  Duke  of  York,  the  proprietary,
and  the  territory  was  called  New- York.  Liberty  ol
conscience  was  granted  to  all settlers. No  laws  con-


1  I  copy  from  the  recital  of  it  in  Smith's  History  of  New-Jeraej  in  the
surrender  of  1702,  of  the  provinces  of  Easl  and  \v  est  Jersey.

2  Smith's  New-York,  31,  32,  |  L0,  11.];  1  Chalmers's \m.-.l  s,  6ia

3  Smith's  New- York,  II,  15,  [19,20]; I  Chalm.  Ann.  574; Smith's

New-Jersey,  30,  43,  1 1  ;  v->  Doug.  Summ.  223.


100  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

trary  to  those  of  England  were  allowed ;  and  taxes
were  to  be  levied  by  authority  of  a  general  assembly.1
The  peace  of  Breda,  in  1667,  confirmed  the  title  in  the
conquerors  by  the  rule  of  uti  possidetis.2  In  the  suc-
ceeding Dutch  war  the  colony  was  reconquered ;  but  it
was  restored  to  the  Duke  of  York  upon  the  succeeding
peace  of  1674.3

^  113.  As  the  validity  of  the  original  grant  to  the
Duke  of  York,  while  the  Dutch  were  in  quiet  possession
of  the  country,  was  deemed  questionable,  he  thought  it
prudent  to  ask,  and he  accordingly  obtained,  a  new
grant  from  the  crown  in  June,  1674.4 It  confirmed  the
former  grant,  and  empowered  him  to  govern  the  inhab-
itants by  such  .ordinances,  as  he  or  his  assigns  should
establish.  It  authorized  him  to  administer  justice  accord-
ing to  the  laws  of  England,  allowing  an  appeal  to  the
king  in  council.5 It  prohibited  trade  thither  without  his
permission  ; and  allowed  the  colonists  to  import  mer-
chandize upon  paying  customs  according  to  the  laws  of
the  realm. Under  this  charter  he  ruled  the  province
until  his  accession  to  the  throne.6 No  general  assem-
bly was  called  for  several  years  ;  and  the  people  having
become  clamorous  for  the  privileges  enjoyed  by  other
colonists,  the  governor  was,  in  1682,  authorized  to  call
an  assembly,  which  was  empowered  to  make  laws  for
the  general  regulation  of  the  state,  which,  however,
were  of  no  force  without  the  ratification  of  the  proprie-

i  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  575,  577,  579,  597 ;  Smith's  New-Jersey,  44,
48.

2  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  578;  2  Doug.  Summ.  223.

3  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  57!)  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  364,366.

4  Smith's  New-York,  <)1,  [32]  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  579.
•r>  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  579,  580.

6  1  Chalmers's Annals,  581,  5&3 ;  Smith's  New-York,  123,  125,  126,
[72,  75.]


CH.  X.]  NEW-YORK.  101

tary.1  Upon  the  revolution  of  1 688,  the  people  of  New*
York  immediately  took  side  in  favour  of  the  Prince  of
Orange.2  From  this  era  they  were  deemed  entitled  to
all  the  privileges  of  British  subjects,  inhabiting  a  depen-
dent province  of  the  state.  No  charter  was  subsequently
granted  to  them  by  the  crown ;  and  therefore  they
derived  no  peculiar  privileges  from  that  source.3

^114.  The  government  was  henceforth  administered
by  governors  appointed  by  the  crown.  But  no  effort
was  made  to  conduct  the  administration  without  the  aid
of  the  representatives  of  the  people  in  general  assem-
bly. On  the  contrary,  as  soon  as  the  first  royal  gov-
ernor arrived  in  1691,  an  assembly  was  called,  which
passed  a  number  of  important  acts.  Among  others  was
an  act  virtually  declaring  their  right  of  representation,
and  their  right  to  enjoy  the  liberties  and  privileges  of
Englishmen  by  Magna  Charta.4  It  enacted,  that  the
supreme  legislative  power  shall  for  ever  reside  in  a
governor  and  council  appointed  by  the  crown,  and  the
people  by  their  representatives  (chosen  in  the  manner
pointed  out  in  the  act)  convened  in  general  assembly.
It  further  declared,  that  all  lands  should  be  held  in
free  and  common  soccage  according  to  the  tenure  of
East  Greenwich  in  England  ;  that  in  all  criminal  cases
there  should  be  a  trial  by  a  jury  ;  that  estates  of  femes
covert  should  be  conveyed  only  by  deed  upon  privy


1  Chalm.  Annals,  584,  485 ;  Smith's  N.  York,  127,  [75]  ;  1  Holmes's
Annals,  409.  —  In  the  year  1683  certain  fundamental  regulations  were
passed,  by  the  legislature,  which  will  be  found  in  an  Appendix  to  the
second  volume  of  the  old  edition  of  the  New- York  Laws.

2  1  Holmes's  Annals,  429  ;  Smith's  New- York,  59.

3  1  Chalm.  Annals,  585,  590/591,  592.

4  1  Holmes's  Annals,  435  ;  Smith's  New-York,  127,  [75, 76]  ;  Acts  of
1691.


102  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

examination  ;  that  wills  in  writing,  attested  by  three  or
more  credible  witnesses,  should  be  sufficient  to  pass
lands ;  that  there  should  be  no  fines  upon  alienations,
or  escheats  and  forfeitures  of  lands,  except  in  cases  of
treason  ;  that  no  person  should  hold  any  office,  unless
upon  his  appointment  he  would  take  the  oaths  of  su-
premacy, and  the  test  prescribed  by  the  act  of  Parlia-
ment ; l  that  no  tax  or  talliage  should  be  levied  but  by
the  consent  of  the  general  assembly  ;  and  that  no  per-
son professing  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  should  be  disturb-
ed or  questioned  for  different  opinions  in  religion,  with
an  exception  of  Roman  Catholics.  The  act,  however,
was  repealed  by  king  William,  in  1697.2  Another  act
enabled  persons,  who  were  scrupulous  of  taking  oaths,
to  make  in  lieu  thereof  a  solemn  promise  to  qualify
them  as  witnesses,  jurors,  and  officers.  In  the  year
1693,  an  act  was  passed  for  the  maintenance  of  minis-
ters and  churches  of  the  Protestant  religion.  New-York
(like  Massachusetts)  seemed  at  all  times  determined  to
suppress  the  Romish  church.  In  an  act  passed  in  the
beginning  of  the  last  century  it  was  declared,  that
every  Jesuit  and  Popish  Priest,  who  should  continue  in
the  colony  after  a  given  day,  should  be  condemned  to
perpetual  imprisonment ;  and  if  he  broke  prison  or  es-
caped and  was  retaken,  he  was  to  be  put  to  death.  And
so  little  were  the  spirit  of  toleration  and  the  rights  of
conscience  understood  at  a  much  later  period,  that  one
of  her  historians3  a  half  century  afterwards  gave  this
exclusion  the  warm  praise  of  being  worthy  of  perpetual
duration.  And  the  constitution  of  New- York,  of  1777/

i  1  Holmes's  Annals,  435  ;  Smith's  New- York,  127,  [75,  76]  ; Prov.
Laws  of  1691.

2  1  Holmes's  Annals,  434  ;  Province  Laws  ofl691  ;  Smith's  N.  York,
127,  [76] ;  2  Kent's  Coram.  Lect.  25,  p.  62,  63.

3  Mr. "Smith.  4  Art.  42.


CH.  X.]  NEW-YORK.  103

required  all  persons  naturalized  by  the  State,  to  take  an
oath  of  abjuration  of  all  foreign  allegiance,  and  subjec-
tion in  all  matters,  ecclesiastical  as  well  as  civil.  This
was  doubtless  intended  to  exclude  all  Catholics,  who
acknowledged  the  spiritual  supremacy  of  the  Pope,
from  the  benefits  of  naturalization.1  In  examining  the
subsequent  legislation  of  the  province,  there  do  not
appear  to  be  any  very  striking  deviations  from  the  laws
of  England  ;  and  the  common  law,  beyond  all  question,
was  the  basis  of  its  Jurisprudence.  The  common  law
course  of  descents  appears  to  have  been  silently  but  ex-
clusively followed ; 2  and  perhaps  New-York  was  more
close  in  the  adoption  of  the  policy  and  legislation  of  the
parent  country  before  the  Revolution,  than  any  other
colony.

i  2  Kent's  Coram.  Lect.  25,  p.  62, 63.

2  I  do  not  find  any  act  respecting  the  distribution  of  intestate  estates  in
the  statute  book,  except  that  of  1697,  which  seems  to  have  in  view  only
the  distribution  of  personal  estate  substantially  on  the  basis  of  the  statute
of  distribution  of  Charles  the  Second.


104  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.


CHAPTER  XL

NEW-JERSEY.

§  115.  New- Jersey,  as  we  have  already  seen,  was
a  part  of  the  territory  granted  to  the  Duke  of  York,
and  was  by  him  granted,  in  June,  1664,  to  Lord  Berke-
ley and  Sir  George  Carteret,  with  all  the  rights,  royal-
ties, and  powers  of  government,  which  he  himself  pos-
sessed.1 The  proprietors,  for  the  better  settlement  of
the  territory,  agreed  in  February,  1664-1665  upon  a
constitution  or  concession  of  government,  which  was
so  much  relished,  that  the  eastern  part  of  the  province
soon  contained  a  considerable  population.  By  this  con-
stitution it  was  provided,  that  the  executive  government
should  be  administered  by  a  governor  and  council,  who
should  have  the  appointment  of  officers ;  and  that  there
should  be  a  legislative  or  general  assembly,  to  be  com-
posed of  the  governor  and  council,  and  deputies,  chosen
by  the  people.  The  general  assembly  were  to  have
power  to  make  all  laws  for  the  government  of  the  pro-
vince, so  that  "the  same  be  consonant  to  reason,  and  as
near  as  may  be  conveniently  agreeable  to  the  laws  and
customs  of  his  majesty's  realm  of  England ; "  to  consti-
tute courts  ;  to  levy  taxes  ;  to  erect  manors,  and  ports,
and  incorporations.2  The  registry  of  title  deeds  of  land
and  the  granting  thereof,  as  a  bounty  to  planters,  were  also
provided  for.  Liberty  of  conscience  was  allowed,  and  a
freedom  from  molestation  guaranteed  on  account  of  any
difference  in  opinion  or  practice  in  matters  of  religious

i  1  Chalm.  Ann.  613  ;  Smith's  New-York,  p.  3\  [11.]  ;  Smith's  N.  Jer-
sey, GO  ;  Marsh.  Colon.  177  to  1^0  ;  2  Doug.  Summ.220,  &c.  231,2G7,&c.
2  Smith's  New-Jersey,  G,  Appx.  512  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  G14.


CH.  XI.]  N  KW-JERSEY.  105

concernments,  so  always  that  the  civil  peace  was  not
disturbed.  But  the  general  assembly  were  to  be  at  lib-
erty to  appoint  ministers  and  establish  their  mainte-
nance, giving  liberty  to  others  to  maintain  what  ministers
they  pleased.  Every  inhabitant  was  bound  to  swear  or
subscribe  allegiance  to  the  king  ;  and  the  general  as-
sembly might  grant  naturalization.1

§  1 16.  This  constitution  continued  until  the  province
was  divided,  in  1676,  between  the  proprietors.  By  that
division  East  New-Jersey  was  assigned  to  Carteret ;
and  West  New-Jersey  to  William  Penn  and  others,  who
had  purchased  of  Lord  Berkeley.2  Carteret  then  ex-
plained and  confirmed  the  former  concessions  for  the
territory  thus  exclusively  belonging  to  himself.  The
proprietors  also  of  West  Jersey  drew  up  another  set
of  concessions  for  the  settlers  within  that  territory.
They  contain  very  ample  privileges  to  the  people.  It
was  declared,  that  the  common  law,  or  fundamental
rights  and  privileges  of  West  New-Jersey,  therein  stat-
ed, are  to  be  the  foundation  of  government,  not  altera-
ble by  the  legislature.  Among  these  fundamentals  were
the  following,  "  that  no  man,  nor  number  of  men  upon
earth,  hath  power  or  authority  to  rule  over  men's  con-
sciences in  religious  matters;"3  that  no  person  shall
be  any  ways  called  in  question,  or  in  the  least  pun-
ished, or  either,  for  the  sake  of  his  opinion,  judgment,
faith,  or  worship  towards  God  in  matters  of  religion  ;
that  there  shall  be  a  trial  by  jury  in  civil  and  criminal
cases  ;  that  there  shall  be  a  general  assembly  of  rep-
resentatives of  the  people,  who  shall  have  power  to
provide  for  the  proper  administration  of  the  government ;

i  Smith's  New-Jersey,  512,  514.

2  Smith's  New-Jers(>y,  III.  7!>,  SO,  S~  ; ^Chalm.  Ann.  G17.

3  Smith's  New-Jersey,  80,  App.  521,  &c
VOL.  I.  14


106  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

and  to  make  laws,  so  "  that  the  same  be,  as  near  as  may
be  conveniently,  agreeable  to  the  primitive,  ancient,  and
fundamental  laws  of  England."  *

^  117.  Whether  these  concessions  became  the  gen-
eral law  of  the  province  seems  involved  in  some  obscu-
rity. There  were  many  difficulties  and  contests  for  ju-
risdiction between  the  governors  of  the  Duke  of  York
and  the  proprietors  of  the  Jerseys  ;  and  these  were  not
settled,  until  after  the  Duke,  in  1 680,2  finally  surrender-
ed all  right  to  both  by  letters  patent  granted  to  the  re-
spective proprietors.3  In  1681,  the  governor  of  the  pro-
prietors of  West  Jersey,  with  the  consent  of  the  general
assembly,  made  a  frame  of  government  embracing  some
of  the  fundamentals  in  the  former  concessions.4  There
was  to  be  a  governor  and  council,  and  a  general  assem-
bly of  representatives  of  the  people.  The  general  as-
sembly had  the  power  to  make  laws,  to  levy  taxes,  and
to  appoint  officers.  Liberty  of  conscience  was  allowed,
and  no  persons  rendered  incapable  of  office  in  respect
of  their  faith  and  worship.  West  Jersey  continued  to
be  governed  in  this  manner  until  the  surrender  of  the
proprietary  government,  in  1702.5

§  1 18.  Carteret  died  in  1679,  and  being  sole  proprie-
tor of  East  Jersey,  by  his  will  he  ordered  it  to  be  sold  for
payment  of  his  debts  ;  and  it  was  accordingly  sold  to
William  Penn  and  eleven  others,  who  were  called  the
Twelve  Proprietors.  They  afterwards  took  twelve  more
into  the  proprietaryship ;  and  to  the  twenty-four  thus
formed,  the  Duke  of  York,  in  March,  1682,  made  his


i  Smith's  New-Jersey,  80,  App.  521,  &c.

2  Chalmers  says,  in  1C80,  p.  619.  —  Smith  says  in  1678,  p.  111.

3  Smith's  New-Jersey,  110,  111 ;  1  Chalm.  Ann.  G19,  G2G.

4  Smith's  New-Jersey,  126.

5  Smith's  New-Jersey,  154.


CH.  XI.]  NEW-JERSEY.  107

third  and  last  grant  of  East  Jersey.1  Very  serious  dis-
sensions soon  arose  between  the  two  provinces  them-
selves, as  well  as  between  them  and  New-York  ;  which
banished  moderation  from  their  councils,  and  threaten-
ed the  most  serious  calamities.  A  quo  warranto  was
ordered  by  the  crown  in  1686,  to  be  issued  against
both  provinces.  East  Jersey  immediately  offered
to  be  annexed  to  West  Jersey,  and  to  submit  to  a
governor  appointed  by  the  crown.  Soon  afterwards
the  crown  ordered  the  Jerseys  to  be  annexed  to  New-
England  ;  and  the  proprietors  of  East  Jersey  made  a
formal  surrender  of  its  patent,  praying  only  for  a  new
grant,  securing  their  right  of  soil.  Before  this  request
could  be  granted,  the  revolution  of  1688  took  place,
and  they  passed  under  the  allegiance  of  a  new  sove-
reign.2

§  119.  From  this  period  both  of  the  provinces  were
in  a  great  state  of  confusion,  and  distraction  ;  and  re-
mained so,  until  the  proprietors  of  both  made  a  formal
surrender  of  all  their  powers  of  government,  but  not  of
their  lands,  to  Queen  Anne,  in  April,  1702.  The  Queen
immediately  reunited  both  provinces  into  one  prov-
ince ;  and  by  commission  appointed  a  governor  over
them.  He  was  thereby  authorized  to  govern  with  the
assistance  of  a  council,  and  to  call  general  assemblies  of
representatives  of  the  people  to  be  chosen  by  the  free-
holders, who  were  required  to  take  the  oath  of  allegi-
ance and  supremacy,  and  the  test  provided  by  the  acts
of  Parliament.  The  general  assembly,  with  the  consent
of  the  governor  and  council,  were  authorized  to  make
laws  and  ordinances  for  the  welfare  of  the  people  "not

i  Smith's  New-Jersey, 157  ; 1  Chalmers's  Annals,  680,  621  ; Mar-
shall's Colon.  180.

2  1  Chalm.  Ann.  621,  622  ;  Smith's  New-Jersey,  209,  210,  211,  &c.


108  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

repugnant,  but,  as  near  as  may  be,  agreeable  unto  the
laws  and  statutes  of  this  our  kingdom  of  England ; "
which  laws  were,  however,  to  be  subject  to  the  appro-
bation or  dissent  of  the  crown.1  The  governor  with
the  consent  of  the  council  was  to  erect  courts  of  justice  ;
to  appoint  judges  and  other  officers;  to  collate  to
churches  and  benefices  ;  and  to  command  the  military
force.  Liberty  of  conscience  was  allowed  to  all  per-
sons but  Papists.

^120  From  this  time  to  the  American  Revolution
the  province  was  governed  without  any  charter  under
royal  commissions,  substantially  in  the  manner  point-
ed out  in  the  first.  The  people  always  strenuously
contended  for  the  rights  and  privileges  guaranteed
to  them  by  the  former  concessions  ;  and  many  strug-
gles occurred  from  time  to  time  between  their  repre-
sentatives, and  the  royal  governors  on  this  subject.2

1  Smith's  New-Jersey,  220  to  230,  231  to  261.

2  Smith's  New-Jersey,  ch.  14,  and  particularly  p.  265,  &c.  p.  269,  &c.
275,  292,  304.


CH.  XII.]  PENNSYLVANIA.  109

CHAPTER  XII.

PENNSYLVANIA.

^  121.  Pennsylvania  was  originally  settled  by  dif-
ferent detachments  of  planters  under  various  authorities,
Dutch,  Swedes,  and  others,  which  at  different  times
occupied  portions  of  land  on  South  or  Delaware  river.1
The  ascendency  was  finally  obtained  over  these  settle-
ments by  the  governors  of  New-York,  acting  under
the  charter  of  1664,  to  the  Duke  of  York.  Chalmers,
however,  does  not  scruple  to  say,  that  "  it  is  a  singular
circumstance  in  the  history  of  this  [then]  inconsidera-
ble colony,  that  it  seems  to  have  been  at  all  times  gov-
erned by  usurpers,  because  their  titles  were  defective." 2
It  continued  in  a  feeble  state,  until  the  celebrated  Wil-
liam Penn,  in  March,  1681,  obtained  a  patent  from
Charles  the  Second,  by  which  he  became  the  proprie-
tary of  an  ample  territory,  which  in  honour  of  his  father
was  called  Pennsylvania.  The  boundaries  described  in
the  charter  were  on  the  East  by  Delaware  river  from
twelve  miles  distance  northwards  of  New- Castle  town
to  the  43d  degree  of  north  latitude,  if  the  said  river  doth
extend  so  far  northward;  but  if  not,  then  by  said
river  so  far  as  it  doth  extend  ;  and  from  the  head  of  the
river  the  eastern  bounds  are  to  be  determined  by  a
meridian  line  to  be  drawn  from  the  head  of  said
river  unto  the  said  43d  degree  of  north  latitude.  The
said  lands  to  extend  westward  five  degrees  in  longitude,
to  be  computed  from  the  said  eastern  bounds,  and  the

i  1  Chalm.  Annals,  630  to  634 ;  Smith's  New- York,  [31]  49  ;  1  Proud.
Penn.  110,  111,  112,  113,  116,118,  119, 122;  2  Doug.  Sumrn.  297,  &c.


110  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.


said  lands  to  be  bounded  on  the  north  by  the  beginning
of  the  43d  degree  of  north  latitude  ;  and  on  the  south
by  a  circle  drawn  at  twelve  miles'  distance  from  New-
Castle,  northward  and  westward,  to  the  beginning  of
the  40th  degree  of  northern  latitude ;  and  then  by  a
straight  line  westward  to  the  limits  of  the  longitude
above  mentioned.1

^  122.  The  charter  constituted  Penn  the  true  and
absolute  proprietary  of  the  territory  thus  described,
(saving  to  the  crown  the  sovereignty  of  the  country,  and
the  allegiance  of  the  proprietary  and  the  inhabitants,)
to  be  holden  of  the  crown  as  of  the  castle  of  Windsor
in  Berks,  in  free  and  common  soccage,  and  not  in  cap-
ite,  or  by  knight  service  ;  and  erected  it  into  a  province
and  seignory  by  the  name  of  Pennsylvania.  It  autho-
rized the  proprietary  and  his  heirs  and  successors  to
make  all  laws  for  raising  money  and  other  purposes,
with  the  assent  of  the  freemen  of  the  country,  or  their
deputies  assembled  for  the  purpose.2  But  "the  same
laws  were  to  be  consonant  to  reason,  and  not  repugnant
or  contrary,  but,  as  near  as  conveniently  may  be,  agree-
able to  law  and  statutes  and  rights  of  this  our  kingdom
of  England." 3  The  laws  for  the  descent  and  enjoy-
ment of  lands,  and  succession  to  goods,  and  of  felonies,
to  be  according  to  the  course  in  England,  until  altered
by  the  assembly.  All  laws  were  to  be  sent  to  England
within  five  years  after  the  making  of  them,  and,  if  dis-
approved of  by  the  crown  within  six  months,  to  be-
come null  and  void.4  It  also  authorized  the  proprie-
tary to  appoint  judges  and  other  officers  ;  to  pardon  and

i  1  Proud.  Penn.  172.

2  1  Proud.  Penn.  17G  ;  Laws  of  Pcnnsyl.  Ed.  of  Franklin,  17-12,  App.

3  1  Proud.  Penn.  175,17(5,  177.

4  1  Proud.  Penn.  177,  178.


CH.  XII.]  PENNSYLVANIA.  Ill

reprieve  criminals;  to  establish  courts  of  justice,  with  a
right  of  appeal  to  the  crown  from  all  judgments;  to
create  cities  and  other  corporations;  to  erect  ports,
and  manors,  and  courts  baron  in  such  manors.  Liberty
was  allowed  to  subjects  to  transport  themselves  and
their  goods  to  the  province  ;  and  to  import  the  products
of  the  province  into  England ;  and  to  export  them  from
thence  within  one  year,  the  inhabitants  observing  the
acts  of  navigation,  and  all  other  laws  in  this  behalf  made.
It  was  further  stipulated,  that  the  crown  should  levy  no
tax,  custom,  or  imposition  upon  the  inhabitants  or  their
goods,  unless  by  the  consent  of  the  proprietary  or  as-
sembly, "  or  by  act  of  Parliament  in  England."  Such
are  the  most  important  clauses  of  this  charter,  which
has  been  deemed  one  of  the  best  drawn  of  the  colonial
charters,  and  which  underwent  the  revision,  not  merely
of  the  law  officers  of  the  crown,  but  of  the  then  Lord
Chief  Justice  (North)  of  England.1  It  has  been  re-
marked, as  a  singular  omission  in  this  charter,  that  there  is
no  provision,  that  the  inhabitants  and  their  children  shall
be  deemed  British  subjects,  and  entitled  to  all  the  lib-
erties and  immunities  thereof,  such  a  clause  being  found
in  every  other  charter.2  Chalmers 3  has  observed,  that
the  clause  was  wholly  unnecessary,  as  the  allegiance  to
the  crown  was  reserved ;  and  the  common  law  thence
inferred,  that  all  the  inhabitants  were  subjects,  and  of
course  were  entitled  to  all  the  privileges  of  Englishmen.
^  123.  Penn  immediately  invited  emigration  to  his
province,  by  holding  out  concessions  of  a  very  liberal
nature  to  all  settlers ; 4  and  under  his  benign  and  enlight-

1  1  Chalm.  Annals,  636,  637.

2  1  Graham's  Hist,  of  Colon.  41,  note  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  639,  65S.

3  1 Chalm.  Annals,  639,  658.

4  1  Proud.  Penn.  192  ;  2  Proud.  Penn.  App.  1 ;  2  Doug.  Summ.  300,301.


112  HISTORY OF THE COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

ened  policy  a  foundation  was  early  laid  for  the  estab-
lishment of  a  government  and  laws,  which  have  been
justly  celebrated  for  their  moderation,  wisdom,  and  just
protection  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  people.1 In
the  introduction  to  his  first  frame  of  government,  he
lays  down  this  proposition,  which  was  far  beyond  the
general  spirit  of  that  age,  that  "  any  government  is  free
to  the  people  under  it,  whatever  be  the  frame,  where
the  laws  rule,  and  the  people  are  a  party  to  those  laws ;
and  more  than  this  is  tyranny,  oligarchy,  or  confusion." 2
In  that  frame  of  government,  after  providing  for  the  or-
ganization of  it  under  the  government  of  a  governor,  coun-
cil, and  general  assembly,  chosen  by  the  people,  it  was
declared,  that  all  persons  acknowledging  one  Almighty
God,  and  living  peaceably,  shall  be  in  no  ways  molested
for  their  religious  persuasion  or  practice  in  matters  of
faith  or  worship,  or  compelled  to  frequent  or  maintain
any  religious  worship,  place, or  ministry.3 Provisions
were  also  made  securing  the  right  of  trial  by  jury,  and
the  right  to  dispose  of  property  by  will,  attested  by  two
witnesses  ;  making  lands  in  certain  cases  liable  to  the
payment  of  debts;  giving  to  seven  years'  quiet  possession
the  efficacy  of  an  unquestionable  title ; requiring  the
registry  of  grants  and  conveyances  ;  and  declaring,  that
no  taxes  should  be  levied  but  by  a  law  for  that  purpose
made.4 Among  other  things  truly  honourable  to  the
memory of  this  great  man,  is  the  tender  regard  and
solicitude,  which  on  all  occasions  he  manifested  for  the
rights  of  the  Indians,  and  the  duties  of  the  settlers  to-
wards them. They  are  exhibited  in  his  original  plan  of

i  1  Chalm.  Annals,  638,  642  :  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  (3,  p.  182,  183.

2  1  Proud.  Penn.  1!>7,  198;  2  Proud.  Penn.  App.  7.

3  1  Proud.  Penn.  200;  2  Proud.  Penn.  App.  19.

4  2  Proud.  Penn.  Appx.  15,  20  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  G41,  642.


CH.  XII.]  PENNSYLVANIA.  113

concessions,  as  well  as  in  various  other  public  docu-
ments, and  were  exemplified  in  his  subsequent  conduct.1
In  August,  1682,  in  order  to  secure  his  title  against  ad-
verse claims,  he  procured  a  patent  from  the  Duke  of
York,  releasing  all  his  title  derived  under  any  of  his
patents  from  the  crown.2

§  124.  It  was  soon  found,  that  the  original  frame  of
government,  drawn  up  before  any  settlements  were
made,  was  ill  adapted  to  the  state  of  things  in  an  infant
colony.  Accordingly  it  was  laid  aside,  and  a  new  frame
of  government  was,  with  the  consent  of  the  General
Assembly,  established  in  1683.3  In  1692  Penn  was
deprived  of  the  government  of  Pennsylvania  by  William
and  Mary  ;  but  it  was  again  restored  to  him  in  the  suc-
ceeding year.4  A  third  frame  of  government  was  estab-
lished in  1696.5  This  again  was  surrendered,  and  a
new  final  charter  of  government  was,  in  October,  1701,
with  the  consent  of  the  General  Assembly,  established,
under  which  the  province  continued  to  be  governed
down  to  the  period  of  the  American  Revolution.  It
provided  for  full  liberty  of  conscience  and  worship  ;  and
for  the  right  of  all  persons,  professing  to  believe  in  Jesus
Christ,  to  serve  the  government  in  any  capacity.6  An
annual  assembly  was  to  be  chosen  of  delegates  from
each  county,  and  to  have  the  usual  legislative  authority
of  other  colonial  assemblies,  and  also  power  to  nominate
certain  persons  for  office  to  the  governor.  The  laws  were

i  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  644;  1  Proud.  Penn.  194,  195,212,  129;2  Proud.
App.  4.

2  1  Proud.  Penn.  200.

3  I  Proud.  Penn.  239;  k2  Proud.  Penn.  App.  '21  :  2  Doug.  Sumn.  302.

4  1  Proud.  Penn.  377.  403.

5  1  Proud.  Penn.  415;  2  Proud.  Penn.  App.  30;  Marshall,  Colon,  cli.
6,  p.  183.

6  1  Proud.  Penn.  443  to  450;  2  Doug.  Sunun.  303.

VOL.  I.  15


114  history  ojqjpE  colonies.  [book  I.

to  be  subject  to  the  approbation  of  the  governor,  who
had  a  council  of  state  to  assist  him  in  the  government.1
Provision  was  made  in  the  same  charter,  that  if  the
representatives  of  the  province,  and  territories  (mean-
ing by  territories  the  three  counties  of  Delaware)  should
not  agree  to  join  together  in  legislation,  they  should  be
represented  in  distinct  assemblies.2

^  125.  In  the  legislation  of  Pennsylvania,  early  pro-
vision was  made  (in  1683)  for  the  descent  and  distri-
bution of  intestate  estates,  by  which  it  was  to  be  divided
among  all  the  children,  the  eldest  son  having  a  double
share ;  and  this  provision  was  never  afterwards  depart-
ed from.3  Notwithstanding  the  liberty  of  conscience
recognised  in  the  charters,  the  legislature  seems  to  have
felt  itself  at  liberty  to  narrow  down  its  protection  to
persons,  who  believed  in  the  Trinity,  and  in  the  divine
inspiration  of  the  Scriptures.4


i  1  Proud.  Penn.  450.

2  1  Proud.  Penn.  454,  455  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  485.

3  Laws  of  Penn.,  Ed.  of  Franklin,  1742,  App.  5;  Id.  p.  60;  1  Chalm.
Annals,  649.

4  Laws  of  Penn.,  Ed.  of  Franklin,  1712,  p.  4.  [1705.]


/


cir.  mil  |  delawA:.  I  15

CHAPTER  XIII.

DELAWARE.

\  126.  After  Penn  had  become  proprietary  of
Pennsylvania,  lie  purchased  of  the  Duke  of  York,  in
1682,  all  his  right  and  interest  in  the  territory,  after-
wards called  the  Three  Lower  Counties  of  Delaware,
extending  from  the  south  boundary  of  the  Province,  and
situated  on  the  western  side  of  the  river  and  bay  of
Delaware  to  Cape  Henlopen,  beyond  or  south  of  Lew-
is town  ;  and  the  three  counties  took  the  names  of  New-
Castle,  Kent,  and  Sussex.1  At  this  time  they  were
inhabited  principally  by  Dutch  and  Swedes ;  and  seem
to  have  constituted  an  appendage  to  the  government  of
New-York.2

^  127.  In  the  same  year,  with  the  consent  of  the
people,  an  act  of  union  with  the  province  of  Pennsyl-
vania was  passed,  and  an  act  of  settlement  of  the  frame
of  government  in  a  general  assembly,  composed  ol
deputies  from  the  counties  of  Delaware  and  Penn-
sylvania.3 By  this  act  the  three  counties  were,  under
the  name  of  the  territories,  annexed  to  the  province  ;  and
were  to  be  represented  in  the  General  Assembly,  gov-
erned by  the  same  laws,  and  to  enjoy  the  same  privi-
leges as  the  inhabitants  of  Pennsylvania.4 Difficulties


i  1  Proud.  Penn. 201,202;  I  Chalm. Annals,  643;  2  Doug.  Summ.
297,  &c.

2  1  Chalm.  Annals,  631,632,633,  634,643;  1  Holmes'*  Annals,295,
404  ;  1  Pitk.  Hist.  24,  26,  2?  ;  2  Doug.  Sumnr.  2-21.

3  1  Proud.  Penn.  206;  I  Holmes's  Annals,  404  :  1  Chalm.  Annals,  645,
646.

4  1  Chalm.  Annals,  646;  1  Dull.  Penn.Laws,  App.  24,26;  2  Colden's
Five  Nations,  App.


116  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

soon  afterwards  arose  between  the  deputies  of  the  Pro-
vince and  those  of  the  Territories ;  and  after  various
subordinate  arrangements,  a  final  separation  took  place
between  them,  with  the  consent  of  the  proprietary,
in  1703.  From  that  period  down  to  the  American
Revolution,  the  territories  were  governed  by  a  separate
legislature  of  their  own,  pursuant  to  the  liberty  reserved
to  them  by  a  clause  in  the  original  charter  or  frame  of
government.1

1  1  Proud.  Perm.  358,  454 ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  404,  note ;  2  Doug.
Summ.  297,  298.


CH. XIV.] JVOUTH ANT) SOUTH CAROLINA.  117

CHAPTER  XIV.

NORTH AM) SOI ill CAROLINA.

^  128.  We  next  conic  to  the  consideration  of  the
history  of  the  political  organization  of  the  Carolinas.
That  level  region,  which  stretches  from  the  36th  degr<  e
of  north  latitude  to  Cape  Florida,  afforded  an  ample
theatre  for  the  early  struggles  of  the  three  great  Euro-
pean powers,  Spain,  France,  and  England,  to  maintain
or  acquire  an  exclusive  sovereignty.  Various  settle-
ments were  made  under  the  auspices  of  each  of  die
rival  powers,  and  a  common  fate  seemed  for  a  while  to
attend  them  all.1  In  March,  1662  [April,  1663,]  Charles
the  Second  made  a  grant  to  Lord  Clarendon  and  others
of  the  territory  lying  on  the  Atlantic  ocean,  and  extending
from  the  north  end  of  the  island,  called  Hope  island,  in
the  South  Virginian  seas,  and  within  36  degrees  of  north
latitude ;  and  to  the  west  as  far  as  the  South  seas  ;  and
so  respectively  as  far  as  the  river  Mathias  upon  the
coast  of  Florida,  and  within  31  degrees  of  north  lati-
tude ;  and  so  west  in  a  direct  line  to  the  South  seas ;
and  erected  it  into  a  province,  by  the  name  of  Carolina,
to  be  holden  as  of  the  manor  of  East-Greenwich  in
Kent,  in  free  and  common  soccage,  and  not  in  capite,
or  by  knight  service,  subject  immediately  to  the  crown,
as  a  dependency,  for  ever.2

^  129.  The  grantees  were created  absolute  Lords
Proprietaries,  saving  the  faith,  allegiance,  and  supreme


i  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  513.  514,  515.

2  1  Chalm.  Annals,  519;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  327,  328 ;  Marsh.  Colon.
ch.  5,  p.  152 ;  1  Williamson's  North  Carol.  87,  230 ;  Carolina  Charters,
London,  4to.


118  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

dominion  of  the  crown ;  and  invested  with  as  ample
rights  and  jurisdictions,  as  the  Bishop  of  Durham  pos-
sessed in  his  palatine  diocese.  The  charter  seems  to
have  been  copied  from  that  of  Maryland,  and  resembles
it  in  many  of  its  provisions.  It  authorized  the  proprieta-
ries to  enact  laws  with  the  assent  of  the  freemen  of  the
colony,  or  their  delegates;  to  erect  courts  of  judicature  ;
to  appoint  civil  officers;  to  grant  titles  of  honour;  to
erect  forts ;  to  make  war,  and  in  cases  of  necessity  to
exercise  martial  law ;  to  build  harbours  ;  to  make  ports ;
to  erect  manors;  and  to  enjoy  customs  and  subsidies  im-
posed with  the  consent  of  the  freemen.1  And  it  fur-
ther authorized  the  proprietaries  to  grant  indulgences
and  dispensations  in  religious  affairs,  so  that  persons
might  not  be  molested  for  differences  in  speculative
opinion  with  respect  to  religion,  avowedly  for  the  pur-
pose of  tolerating  non-conformity  to  the  Church  of
England.2  It  further  required,  that  all  laws  should
"be  consonant  to  reason,  and  as  near  as  may  be  con-
veniently, agreeable  to  the  laws  and  customs  of  this  our
kingdom  of  England." 3  And  it  declared,  that  the
inhabitants  and  their  children,  born  in  the  province,
should  be  denizens  of  England,  and  entitled  to  all  the
privileges  and  immunities  of  British  born  subjects.

^  130.  The  proprietaries  immediately  took  measures
for  the  settlement  of  the  province ;  and  at  the  desire  of
the  New-England  settlers  within  it,  (whose  disposition
to  emigration  is  with  Chalmers  a  constant  theme  of
reproach,)  published  proposals,  forming  a  basis  of  gov-

i  1  Holmes's  Annals,  327,  328.  —  This  charter,  and  the  second  charter,
and  the  fundamental  constitutions  made  by  the  Proprietaries,  is  to  be
found  in  a  small  quarto  printed  in  London  without  date,  which  is  in  Har-
vard College  Library.

2  1  Holmes's  Annals,  328  ;  1  Hewatt's  South  Car.  42  to  47.

3  Carolina  Charter,  4to.  London.


CH.  XIV.] NORTH AND SOUTH CAROLINA.  Ill)

eminent.1  It  was  declared,  that  there  should  be  a  gov-
ernor chosen  by  the  proprietaries  from  thirteen  persons
named  !>v  the  colonists;  and  a  genera]  assembly,  com-
posed of  the  governor,  council,  and  representatives  of

the  people,  who  should  have  authority  to  make  laws
not  contrary  to  those  of  England,  which  should  remain  in
force  until  disapproved  of  by  the  proprietaries/  Per-
fect freedom  of  religion  was  also  promised  ;  and  a  hun-
dred acres  of  land  offered,  at  a  half  penny  an  acre,  to
every  settler  within  five  years.

§  131.  In  1665,  the  proprietaries  obtained  from
Charles  the  Second  a  second  charter,  with  an  enlarge-
ment of  boundaries.  It  recited  the  grant  of  the  former
charter,  and  declared  the  limits  to  extend  north  and  east-
ward as  far  as  the  north  end  of  Currituck  river  or  inlet,
upon  a  straight  westerly  line  to  Wyonoak  creek,  which
lies  within  or  about  36  degrees  30  minutes  of  north
latitude ;  and  so  west  in  a  direct  line  as  far  as  the  South
seas ;  and  south  and  westward  as  far  as  the  degrees  of
29  inclusive  of  northern  latitude,  and  so  west  in  a  direct
line  as  far  as  the  South  seas.3  It  then  proceeded  to  con-
stitute the  proprietaries  absolute  owners  and  lords  of
the  province,  saving  the  faith,  allegiance,  and  sovereign
dominion  of  the  crown,  to  hold  the  same  as  of  the  ma-
nor of  East-Greenwich  in  Kent,  in  free  and  common
soccage,  and  not  in  capitc,  or  by  knight  service  ;  and  to
possess  in  the  same  all  the  royalties,  jurisdictions,  and
privileges  of  the  Bishop  of  Durham  in  his  diocese.  It
also  gave  them  power  to  make  laws,  with  the  assent  of
the  freemen  of  the  province,  or  their  delegrates,  pro-

1  1  Chalm.  Annals,  515.

2  1  Chalm.  Annals,  51 8,  553 ;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  5,  p.  152.

3  1  Chalm.  Annals,  521  ;  1  Williams's  N.  Car.  230,  231;  1  Holmes's
Annals,  340  ;  Carolina  Charters,  4to.  London.


120  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

vided  such  laws  were  consonant  with  reason,  and,  as
near  as  conveniently,  may  be  agreeable  to  the  laws  and
customs  of  the  realm  of  England.1  It  also  provided,
that  the  inhabitants  and  their  children  should  be-  deni-
zens and  lieges  of  the  kingdom  of  England,  and  reputed
and  held  as  the  liege  people  born  within  the  kingdom ;
and  might  inherit  and  purchase  lands,  and  sell  and  be-
queath the  same ;  and  should  possess  all  the  privileges
and  immunities  of  natural  born  subjects  within  the  realm.
Many  other  provisions  were  added,  in  substance  like
those  in  the  former  charter.2  Several  detached  settle-
ments were  made  in  Carolina,  which  were  at  first  placed
under  distinct  temporary  governments ;  one  was  in  Al-
bemarle ;  another  to  the  south  of  Cape  Fear.3  Thus
various  independent  and  separate  colonies  were  estab-
lished, each  of  which  had  its  own  assembly,  its  own
customs,  and  its  own  laws ;  a  policy,  which  the  propri-
etaries had  afterwards  occasion  to  regret,  from  its  ten-
dency to  enfeeble  and  distract  the  province.4

^  132.  In  the  year  1669,  the  proprietaries,  dissatis-
fied with  the  systems  already  established  within  the
province,  signed  a  fundamental  constitution  for  the  gov-
ernment thereof,  the  object  of  which  is  declared  to  be,
"  that  we  may  establish  a  government  agreeable  to  the
monarchy,  of  which  Carolina  is  a  part,  that  we  may
avoid  making  too  numerous  a  democracy."  3  This  con-
stitution was  drawn  up  by  the  celebrated  John  Locke  ;


i  1  Williams's  N.  Car.  230,  237.

2  1  Holmes's  Annals,  340  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  521,  522:  I  Williams's
N Car.  230  to  254  ;  Iredell's  Laws  of  N.  Car.  Charter,  p.  J  to  7.

3  1  Chalm.  Annals,  519,  520,  524,525  ;  1  Williams's  N.  Car.  88,  91,  92,
93,96,97,  103,  114.

4  1  Chalm.  Annals,  521.

5  1  Chalm.  Annals,  52(i,  527  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  350,  351,  and  note ;
Carolina  Charters,  4to.  London,  p.  33.


CH. XIV.] NORTH AND SOUTH CAROLINA.  121

and  his  memory  has  been  often  reproached  with  the
illiberal  character  of  some  of  the  articles,  the  oppressive
servitude  of  others,  and  the  general  disregard  of  some
of  those  maxims  of  religious  and  political  liberty,  for
which  he  has  in  his  treatises  of  government  and  other
writings  contended  with  so  much  ability  and  success.
Probably  there  were  many  circumstances  attending  this
transaction,  which  are  now  unknown,  and  which  might
well  have  moderated  the  severity  of  the  reproach,  and
furnished,  if  not  a  justification,  at  least  some  apology
for  this  extraordinary  instance  of  unwise  and  visionary
legislation.

§  133.  It  provided,  that  the  oldest  proprietary  should
be  the  palatine,  and  the  next  oldest  should  succeed
him.  Each  of  the  proprietaries  was  to  hold  a  high  of-
fice. The  rules  of  precedency  were  most  exactly
established.  Two  orders  of  hereditary  nobility  were
instituted,  with  suitable  estates,  which  were  to  descend
with  the  dignity.  The  provincial  legislature,  dignified
with  the  name  of  Parliament,  was  to  be  biennial,  and  to
consist  of  the  proprietaries  or  their  deputies,  of  the  no-
bility, and  of  representatives  of  the  freeholders  chosen
in  districts.  They  were  all  to  meet  in  one  apartment,
(like  the  ancient  Scottish  parliament,)  and  enjoy  an
equal  vote.  No  business,  however,  was  to  be  proposed,
until  it  had  been  debated  in  the  grand  council,  (which
was  to  consist  of  the  proprietaries  and  forty-two  coun-
sellors,) whose  duty  it  was  to  prepare  bills.  No  act  was
of  force  longer  than  until  the  next  biennial  meeting  of  the
parliament,  unless  ratified  by  the  palatine  and  a  quorum
of  the  proprietaries.  All  the  laws  were  to  become  void
at  the  end  of  a  century,  without  any  formal  repeal.
The  Church  of  England  (which  was  declared  to  be  the
only  true  and  orthodox  religion)  was  alone  to  be  allow-

vol.  i.  16


122  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

ed  a  public  maintenance  by  parliament.  But  every
congregation  might  tax  its  own  members  for  the  sup-
port of  its  own  minister.  Every  man  of  seventeen
years  of  age  was  to  declare  himself  of  some  church  or
religious  profession,  and  to  be  recorded  as  such ;  other-
wise he  was  not  to  have  any  benefit  of  the  laws.  And
no  man  was  to  be  permitted  to  be  a  freeman  of  Caro-
lina, or  have  any  estate  or  habitation,  who  did  not  ac-
knowledge a  God,  and  that  God  is  to  be  publicly  wor-
shipped. In  other  respects  there  was  a  guaranty  of
religious  freedom.1  There  was  to  be  a  public  registry
of  all  deeds  and  conveyances  of  lands,  and  of  marriages
and  births.  Every  freeman  was  to  have  "absolute
power  and  authority  over  his  negro  slaves,  of  what
opinion  or  religion  soever."  No  civil  or  criminal  cause
was  to  be  tried  but  by  a  jury  of  the  peers  of  the  party ;
but  the  verdict  of  a  majority  was  binding.  With  a
view  to  prevent  unnecessary  litigation,  it  was  (with  a
simplicity,  which  at  this  time  may  excite  a  smile)  pro-
vided, that  "  it  shall  be  a  base  and  vile  thing  to  plead
for  money  or  reward  ; "  and  that  "  since  multiplicity  of
comments,  as  well  as  of  laws,  have  great  inconveniences,
and  serve  only  to  obscure  and  perplex,  all  manner  of
comments  and  expositions  on  any  part  of  these  funda-
mental constitutions,  or  on  any  part  of  the  common,  or
statute  law  of  Carolina,  are  absolutely  prohibited."  2

^  134.  Such  was  the  substance  of  this  celebrated
constitution.  It  is  easy  to  perceive,  that  it  was  ill  adapt-
ed to  the  feelings,  the  wants,  and  the  opinions  of  the  colo-


i  1  Hewatt's  South  Car.  42  to  47,  321,  &c. ;  Carolina  Charters,  4to.
London,  p.  33,  &c. ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  52G ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  350,  351  ;
1  Williams's  N.  Car.  104  to  111;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  5,  p.  154,  155;
1  Ramsay's  South  Car.  31,  32.

2  Carolina  Charters,  4to.  p.  45,  §  70,  p.  47,  §  80 ;  1  Hewatt's  South
Car.  321,  &c.


CH.  XIV.] NORTH AND SOUTH CAROLINA.  123

nists.  The  introduction  of  it,  therefore,  was  resisted  by
the  people,  as  much  as  it  could  be  ;  and  indeed,  in  some
respects,  it  was  found  impracticable.1  Public  dissatis-
faction daily  increased ;  and  after  a  few  years'  experi-
ence of  its  ill  arrangements,  and  its  mischievous  ten-
dency, the  proprietaries,  upon  the  application  of  the
people,  (in  1693,)  abrogated  the  constitution,  and  re-
stored the  ancient  form  of  government.  Thus  perished
the  labours  of  Mr.  Locke  ;  and  thus  perished  a  system,
under  the  administration  of  which,  it  has  been  remarked,
the  Carolinians  had  not  known  one  day  of  real  enjoy-
ment, and  that  introduced  evils  and  disorders,  which
ended  only  with  the  dissolution  of  the  proprietary  gov-
ernment.2 Perhaps  in  the  annals  of  the  world  there  is
not  to  be  found  a  more  wholesome  lesson  of  the  utter
folly  of  all  efforts  to  establish  forms  of  governments
upon  mere  theory  ;  and  of  the  dangers  of  legislation
without  consulting  the  habits,  manners,  feelings,  and
opinions  of  the  people,  upon  which  they  are  to  operate.
§  135.  After  James  the  Second  came  to  the  throne,
the  same  general  course  was  adopted  of  filing  a  quo  war-
ranto against  the  proprietaries,  as  had  been  successful
in  respect  to  other  colonies.  The  proprietaries,  with  a
view  to  elude  the  storm,  prudently  offered  to  surrender
their  charter,  and  thereby  gained  time.3  Before  any
thing  definitive  took  place,  the  revolution  of  1688  oc-
curred, which  put  an  end  to  the  hostile  proceedings.
In  April,  1698,  the  proprietaries  made  another  system
of  fundamental  constitutions,  which  embraced  many  of


i  1  Ramsay's  South  Car.  39,  43,  88  ;  1  Hewatt's  South  Car.  45  ;  I
Chalmers's  Annals,  527,  598,  529,  530,  532,  550;  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  5,
156, 157,  159 ;  1  Williams's  N.  Car.  122,  143.

2  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  552.

3  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  549 ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  416.


124  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

those  propounded  in  the  first, and,  indeed,  was  mani-
festly a  mere  amendment  of  them.

^  136.  These  constitutions  (for  experience  does  not
seem  to  have  imparted  more  wisdom  to  the  proprieta-
ries on  this  subject) contained  the  most  objectionable
features  of  the  system  of  government,  and  hereditary
nobility  of  the  former  constitutions, and  shareda  common
fate. They  were  never  generally  assented  to  by  the
people  of  the  colony,  or  by  their  representatives,  as  a
body  of  fundamental  laws. Hewatt  says,1  that  none  of
these  systems  ever  obtained  "  the  force  of  fundamental
and  unalterable  laws  in  the  colony. What  regulations
the  people  found  applicable, they  adopted  at  the  re-
quest of their governors; but observed these on
account  of  their  own  propriety  and  necessity,  rather
than  as  a  system  of  laws  imposed  on  them  by  British
legislators."  2

^  137.  There  was  at  this  period  a  space  of  three
hundred  miles  between  the  Southern  and  Northern
settlements  of  Carolina  ;3  and  though  the  whole  prov-
ince was  owned  by  the  same  proprietaries,  the  legisla-
tion of  the  two  great  settlements  had  been  hitherto
conducted  by  separate  and  distinct  assemblies,  some-
times under  the  same  governor,  and  sometimes  under
different  governors.  The  legislatures  continued  to
remain  distinct  down  to  the  period,  when  a  final  sur-
render of  the  proprietary  charter  was  made  to  the
crown  in  1729.4 The  respective  territories  were  de-

1  1  Ilewatt's  South  Carol.  45.

2  Dr.  Ramsay  treats  these  successive  constitutions  as  of  no  authority
whatsoever  in  the  province,  as  a  law  or  rule  of  government.  Rut  in  a
legal  point  of  view  the  proposition  is  open  to  much  doubt.  2  Ramsay's
South  Carol.  121  to  124.

3  1  Williams's  N.  Car.  155.

4  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  !»,  p.  246,  "24?  : 1  Ilewatt's  South  Carol.  212,  318.


CH.  XIV.] NORTH  AND  SOUTH  CAROLINA.  125

signated  by  the  name  of  North  Carolina  and  South
Carolina,  and  the  laws  of  each  obtained  a  like  appella-
tion. Cape  Fear  seems  to  have  been  commonly
deemed,  in  the  commissions  of  the  governor,  the
boundary  between  the  two  colonies.1

^  138.  By  the  surrender  of  the  charter,  the  whole
government  of  the  territory  wras  vested  in  the  crown  ;
(it  had  been  in  fact  exercised  by  the  crown  ever  since
the  overthrow  of  the  proprietary  government  in  17^0  ;)
and  henceforward  it  became  a  royal  province  ;  and  was
governed  by  commission  under  a  form  of  government
substantially  like  that  established  in  the  other  royal
provinces.2  This  change  of  government  was  very
acceptable  to  the  people,  and  gave  a  new  impulse  to
their  industry  and  enterprise.  At  a  little  later  period
[1732],  for  the  convenience  of  the  inhabitants,  the
province  was  divided ;  and  the  divisions  were  dis-
tinguished by  the  names  of  North  Carolina  and  South
Carolina.3

^  139.  The  form  of  government  conferred  on  Caro-
lina, when  it  became  a  royal  province,  was  in  sub-
stance this.  It  consisted  of  a  governor  and  council
appointed  by  the  crown,  and  an  assembly  chosen  by  the
people,  and  these  three  branches  constituted  the  legis-
lature. The  governor  convened,  prorogued,  and  dis-
solved the  legislature,  and  had  a  negative  upon  the
laws,  and  exercised  the  executive  authority.4  He  pos-
sessed also  the  powers  of  the  court  of  chancery,  of  the

1  1  Williams's  N.  Car.  161,  U>2  ;  1  Ramsay's  South  Carol..")!.,  &c  B8,
95;  1  Hewatt's  South  Carol.  212,  318;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  523,  523;
Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  9,  p.  246.

2  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  9,  p.  247.

3  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  9,  p.  247  ;  1  Holmes's  Annals,  544.

4  2  Hewatt's  South  Car.  ch.  7,  p.  1  et  seq. ;  1  Ramsay's  South.  Car.
ch.  4,  p.  95.


126  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

admiralty,  of  supreme  ordinary,  and  of  appointing  mag-
istrates and  militia  officers.  All  laws  were  subject  to
the  royal  approbation  or  dissent ;  but  were  in  the  mean
time  in  full  force.

§  140.  On  examining  the  statutes  of  South  Caro-
lina, a  close  adherence  to  the  general  policy  of  the
English  laws  is  apparent.  As  early  as  the  year  1712,
a  large  body  of  the  English  statutes  were,  by  express
legislation,  adopted  as  part  of  its  own  code ;  and  all
English  statutes  respecting  allegiance,  all  the  test  and
supremacy  acts,  and  all  acts  declaring  the  rights  and
liberties  of  the  subjects,  or  securing  the  same,  were
also  declared  to  be  in  force  in  the  province.  All  and
every  part  of  the  common  law,  not  altered  by  these
acts,  or  inconsistent  with  the  constitutions,  customs,
and  laws  of  the  province,  was  also  adopted  as  part  of
its  jurisprudence.  An  exception  was  made  of  ancient
abolished  tenures,  and  of  ecclesiastical  matters  incon-
sistent with  the  then  church  establishment  "in  the  prov-
ince. There  was  also  a  saving  of  the  liberty  of  con-
science, which  was  allowed  to  be  enjoyed  by  the  char-
ter from  the  crown,  and  the  laws  of  the  Province.1
This  liberty  of  conscience  did  not  amount  to  a  right  to
deny  the  Trinity.2  The  Church  of  England  had  been
previously  established  in  the  province  [in  1704]  and
all  members  of  the  assembly  were  required  to  be  of
that  persuasion.3  Fortunately,  Queen  Anne  annulled
these  obnoxious  laws  ;  and  though  the  Church  of
England  was  established,  dissenters  obtained  a  tolera-
tion, and  the  law  respecting  the  religious  qualification
of  assembly -men  was  shortly  afterwards  repealed.

1  Grimke's  South  Carolina  Laws,  (1712,)  p.  81,  98,  99,  100.

2  Id.  Act  of  1703,  p.  4.

3  1  Holmes's  Annals,  489,  490,  491  ; 1  Hewatt's  South  Carol.  166  to

177.


CH.  XIV.] NORTH  AND  SOUTH  CAROLINA.  127

vjs  141.  The  law  of  descents  of  intestate  real  estates,

of  wills,  and  of  uses,  existing  in  England,  thus  se<  in
to  have  acquired  a  permanent  foundation  in  dp'  c<  lony,
and  remained  undisturbed,  until  after  the  period  of  the
American  Revolution.1  As  in  the  other  colonies,  the
registration  of  conveyances  of  lands  was  early  provided
for,  in  order  to  suppress  fraudulent  grants.

^  142.  In  respect  to  North  Carolina,  there  was  an
early  declaration  of  the  legislature  [1715]  conformably
to  the  charter,  that  the  common  law  was,  and
should  be  in  force  in  the  colony.  All  statute  laws  for
maintaining  the  royal  prerogative  and  succession  to  the
crown ;  and  all  such  laws  made  for  the  establishment  of
the  church,  and  laws  made  for  the  indulgence  to  Pro-
testant dissenters  ;  and  all  laws  providing  for  the  privi-
leges of  the  people,  and  security  of  trade ;  and  all  laws
for  the  limitation  of  actions  and  for  preventing  vexatious
suits,  and  for  preventing  immorality  and  fraud,  and
confirming  inheritances  and  titles  of  land,  were  declared
to  be  in  force  in  the  province.2  The  policy  thus
avowed  was  not  departed  from  down  to  the  period  of
the  American  Revolution;  and  the  laws  of  descents
and  the  registration  of  conveyances  in  both  the  Caro-
linas  was  a  silent  result  of  their  common  origin  and
government.

i  2  Ramsay's  South  Car.  130.  —  The  descent  of  estates  was  not  altered
until  L791.

2  Iredell's  North  Car.  Laws,  1715,  p.  IS,  19.


128  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

CHAPTER  XV.


GEORGIA.


§  1 43.  In  the  same  year,  in  which  Carolina  was  divid-
ed [1732],  a  project  was  formed  for  the  settlement  of  a
colony  upon  the  unoccupied  territory  between  the
rivers  Savannah  and  Altamaha.1  The  object  of  the
projectors  was  to  strengthen  the  province  of  Carolina,
to  provide  a  maintenance  for  the  suffering  poor  of  the
mother  country,  and  to  open  an  asylum  for  the  perse-
cuted  protestants'  in  Europe  ;  and  in  common  with  all
the  other  colonies  to  attempt  the  conversion  and  civili-
zation of  the  natives.2  Upon  application,  George  the
Second  granted  a  charter  to  the  company,  (consisting
of  Lord  Percival  and  twenty  others,  among  whom  was
the  celebrated  Oglethorpe,)  and  incorporated  them  by
the  name  of  the  Trustees  for  establishing  the  Colony  of
Georgia  in  America.3  The  charter  conferred  the
usual  powers  of  corporations  in  England,  and  author-
ized the  trustees  to  hold  any  territories,  jurisdictions,
&,c.  in  America  for  the  better  settling  of  a  colony  there.
The  affairs  of  the  corporation  were  to  be  managed  by
the  corporation,  and  by  a  common  council  of  fifteen
persons  in  the  first  place,  nominated  by  the  crown,
and  afterwards,  as  vacancies  occurred,  filled  by  the  cor-
poration. The  number  of  common-council-men  might,
with  the  increase  of  the  corporation,  be  increased  to
twenty -four. The  charter  further  granted  to  the  cor-

i  1  Holmes's  Annals,  552  ; Marsh.  Colonies,  ch.  9,  p.  247  ; 2  Hew-
att's  South  Car.  15,  16;  Stokes's  Hist.  Colonies,  113.

2  1  Holmes's  Annals,  552  ;  2  Hewatt's  South  Car.  15,  16,  17.

3  Charters  of  N.  A.  Provinces,  4to.  London,  17GG.


CIT. XV.]  NORTH AM) SOUTH  CAROLINA.  ]  29

poration  seven  undivided  parts  of  all  the  territories
lying  in  that  part  of  South  Carolina,  which  lies  from  the
northern  stream  of  a  river,  there  called  the  Savannah,
all  along  the  sea-coasl  to  the  southward  unto  the
southernmos.t  stream  of  a  certain  oilier  great  river,
called  the  Alatamaha,  and  westward  from  the  heads
of  the  said  rivers  respectively  in  direct  lines  to  the
South  seas,  to  be  held  as  of  the  manor  of  Hampton
Court  in  Middlesex  in  free  and  common  soccage  and  not
in  capite.  It  then  erected  all  the  territory  into  an
independent  province  by  the  name  of  Georgia.  It
authorized  the  trustees  for  the  term  of  twenty-one
years  to  make  laws  for  the  province  "not  repugnant  to
the  laws  and  statutes  of  England,  subject  to  the  appro-
bation or  disallowance  of  the  crown,  and  after  such
approbation  to  be  valid.  The  affairs  of  the  corpora-
tion were  ordinarily  to  be  managed  by  the  Common
Council.  It  was  farther  declared,  that  all  persons
born  in  the  province  should  enjoy  all  the  privileges
and  immunities  of  natural  born  subjects  in  Great
Britain.  Liberty  of  conscience  was  allowed  to  all
inhabitants  in  the  worship  of  God,  and  a  free  exercise
of  religion  to  all  persons,  except  Papists.  The  corpo-
ration were  also  authorized,  for  the  term  of  twenty -one
years,  to  erect  courts  of  judicature  for  all  civil  and
criminal  causes,  and  to  appoint  a  governor,  judges,
and  other  magistrates.  The  registration  of  all  convey-
ances of  the  corporation  was  also  provided  for.  The
governor  was  to  take  an  oath  to  observe  all  the  acts
of  parliament  relating  to  trade  and  navigation,  and  to
obey  all  royal  instructions  pursuant  thereto.  The
governor  of  South  Carolina  was  to  have  the  chief
command  of  the  militia  of  the  pro\  ince  ;  and  goods  \\  ere

VOL.  I.  17


130  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

to  be  imported  and  exported  without  touching  at  any
port  in  South  Carolina.  At  the  end  of  the  twenty-one
years  the  crown  was  to  establish  such  form  of  govern-
ment in  the  province,  and  such  method  of  making  laws
therefor,  as  in  its  pleasure  should  be  deemed  meet ;
and  all  officers  should  be  then  appointed  by  the
crown.

|  144.  Such  is  the  substance  of  the  charter,  which
was  obviously  intended  for  a  temporary  duration  only ;
and  the  first  measures  adopted  by  the  trustees,  grant-
ing lands  in  tail  male,  to  be  held  by  a  sort  of  military
service,  and  introducing  other  restrictions,  were  not
adapted  to  aid  the  original  design,  or  foster  the  growth
of  the  colony.1  It  continued  to  languish,  until  at  length
the  trustees,  wearied  with  their  own  labours,  and  the
complaints  of  the  people,  in  June,  1751,  surrendered
the  charter  to  the  crown.2  Henceforward  it  was  gov-
erned as  a  royal  province,  enjoying  the  same  liberties
and  immunities  as  other  royal  provinces ;  and  in  process
of  time  it  began  to  flourish,  and  at  the  period  of  the
American  Revolution,  it  had  attained  considerable  im-
portance among  the  colonies.3

^  145.  In  respect  to  its  ante -revolutionary  jurispru-
dence, a  few  remarks  may  suffice.  The  British  com-
mon and  statute  law  lay  at  the  foundation.4  The  same
general  system  prevailed  as  in  the  Carolinas,  from
which  it  sprung.  Intestate  estates  descended  accord-
ing to  the  course  of  the  English  law. The  registration

i  Marshall's  Colon,  cli.  9,  p.  248,249,  250  ;  2  Holmes's  Annals,  4-45.
2  He  watt's  South  Car.  41, 42,  43.

2  2  Holmes's  Annals,  45.

3  Stokes's  Hist,  of  Colonies,  115,  119;  2  Hewatt's  South  Car.  145;
2  Holmes's  Annals,  45, 117.

4  Stokes's  Hist,  of  Colon.  119,  130-


CH.  XV.] NORTH  AND  SOUTH  CAROLINA. 131

of  conveyances  was  provided  for,  at  once  to  secure;
titles,  and  to  suppress  frauds;  and  the  general  interests

of  religion,  the  rights  of  representation,  of  persona]  lib-
erty, and  of  public  justice,  were  protected  by  ample
colonial  regulations.


132  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

CHAPTER  XVI.

GENERAL  REVIEW  OF  THE  COLONIES.

§  146.  We  have  now  finished  our  survey  of  the
origin  and  political  history  of  the  colonies  ;  and  here
we  may  pause  for  a  short  time  lor  the  purpose  of  some
general  reflections  upon  the  subject.

^  147.  Plantations  or  colonies  in  distant  countries
are  either,  such  as  are  acquired  by  occupying  and
peopling  desert  and  uncultivated  regions  by  emigra-
tions from  the  mother  country  ;a  or  such  as,  being
already  cultivated  and  organized,  are  acquired  by  con-
quest or  cession  under  treaties.  There  is,  however,  a
difference  between  these  two  species  of  colonies  in
respect  to  the  laws,  by  which  they  are  governed,  at
least  according  to  the  jurisprudence  of  the  common
law.  If  an  uninhabited  country  is  discovered  and  planted
by  British  subjects,  the  English  laws  are  said  to  be
immediately  in  force  there  ;  for  the  law  is  the  birth-
right of  every  subject.  So  that  wherever  they  go,  they
carry  their  laws  with  them  ;  and  the  new  found  coun-
try is  governed  by  them.2

§  148.  This  proposition,  however,  though  laid  down
in  such  general  terms  by  very  high  authority,  requires
many  limitations,  and  is  to  be  understood  with  many
restrictions.  Such  colonists  do  not  cany  with  them
the  whole  body  of  the  English  laws,  as  they  then
exist ;  for  many  of  them  must,  from  the  nature  of  the
case,  be  wholly inapplicable to their situation, and

i  1  Bl.  Comm.  107.

2  2  P.  Will.  75 ; 1  Bl.  Comm.  107;  2  Salk.  411 ;  Com.  Dig.  Ley.  C. ;
Rex  v.  Vaughan,  4  Burr.  R.  2500 ;  Chitty  on  Prerog.  ch.  3,  p.  29,  &c.


CH.  XVI.]  GENERAL  REVIEW  .  |;;;{

inconsistent  with  their  comfort  and  prosperity.  There
is,  therefore,  this  necessarj  limitation  implied,  that
they  carry  with them  all  the  laws  applicable  to  their

situation,  and  not  repugnant  to  the  local  and  political
circumstances,  in  which  they  arc  placed.

§  149.  Even  as  thus  stated,  the  proposition  is
full  of  vagueness  and  perplexity;  for  it  must  still  re-
main a  question  of  intrinsic  difficulty  to  say,  what  laws
are,  or  are  not  applicable  to  their  situation  ;  and  wheth  r
they  are  bound  by  the  present  state  of  things,  or  are
at  liberty  to  apply  them  in  future  by  adoption,  as  the
growth  or  interests  of  the  colony  may  dictate.1  The
English  rules  of  inheritance,  and  of  protection  from  per-
sonal injuries,  the  rights  secured  by  Magna  Charta,  and
the  remedial  course  in  the  administration  of  justice,  are
examples  as  clear  perhaps  as  any,  which  can  be  stated,
as  presumptively  adopted,  or  applicable.  And  yet  in
the  infancy  of  a  colony  some  of  these  very  rights,  and
privileges,  and  remedies,  and  rules,  may  be  in  fact  inap-
plicable, or  inconvenient,  and  impolitic.2  It  is  not  per-
haps easy  to  settle,  what  parts  of  the  English  laws  are,
or  are  not  in  force  in  any  such  colony,  until  either  by
usage,  or  judicial  determination,  they  have  been  recog-
nized as  of  absolute  force.

§  150.  In  respect  to  conquered  and  ceded  coun-
tries, which  have  already  laws  of  their  own,  a  different
rule  prevails.  In  such  cases  the  crown  has  a  rieht  to
abrogate  the  former  laws,  and  institute  new  ones.  But
until  such  new  laws  are  promulgated,  the  old  laws  and
customs  of  the  country  remain  in  full  force,  unless  so


i  1  Bl.  Comm.  107;  '2  Merivale  R.  14:},  159.

2  1  Bl.  Comm.  107;  1  Tucker's  Black,  note  E.  378,  384  el  seq.  ;
4Burr.  R.  2500;  2 Merivale  R.  143, 157,158;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect
49  to  54.


134  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

far  as  they  are  contrary  to  our  religion,  or  enact  any
thing,  that  is  malum  in  se  ;  for  in  all  such  cases  the
laws  of  the  conquering  or  acquiring  country  shall  pre-
vail. This  qualification  of  the  rule  arises  from  the  pre-
sumption, that  the  crown  could  never  intend  to  sanc-
tion laws  contrary  to  religion  or  sound  morals.1  But
although  the  king  has  thus  the  power  to  change  the
laws  of  ceded  and  conquered  countries,  the  power  is
not  unlimited.  His  legislation  is  subordinate  to  the  au-
thority of  parliament.  He  cannot  make  any  new
change  contrary  to  fundamental  principles  ;  he  cannot
exempt  an  inhabitant  from  that  particular  dominion,  as
for  instance  from  the  laws  of  trade,  or  from  the  power
of  parliament ;  and  he  cannot  give  him  privileges  ex-
clusive of  other  subjects.2

§  151.  Mr.  Justice  Blackstone,  in  his  Commentaries,
insists,  that  the  American  colonies  are  principally  to  be
deemed  conquered,  or  ceded  countries.  His  language  is,
"  Our  American  Plantations  are  principally  of  this  later
sort,  [i.  e.  ceded  or  conquered  countries,]  being  obtain-
ed in  the  last  century  either  by  right  of  conquest  and
driving  out  the  natives,  (with  what  natural  justice  I
shall  not  at  present  inquire,)  or  by  treaties.  And,
therefore,  the  common  law  of  England,  as  such,  has
no  allowance  or  authority  there ;  they  being  no  part  of
the  mother  country,  but  distinct,  though  dependent
dominions." 3


i  Blankard  v.  Galy,  4  Mod.  222  ;  S.  C.  2  Salk.  411,  412  ;  2  Peere
Will.  75 ;  1  Black.  Comm.  107 ;  Campbell  v.  Hall,  Cowp.  R.  204,
209,  Calvin's  case,  7  Co.  1.  17.  b  ;  Com.  Dig.  Navigation,  G.  1,  3  ;  Id.
Ley.  C.  4  Burr.  R.  2500  ;  2  Merivaie  R.  143, 157,  158.

2  Campbell  v.  Hall,  Cowp.  R.  204,  209  ;  Chitty  on  Prerog.  ch.  3,
p.  29,  &c.

3  1  Bl.  Comm.  107  ;  Chitty  on  Prerog.  ch.  3,  p.  29.


CH.  XVI.]  GENERAL  RE1  IEW.  138

^  152.  There  is  great  reason  to  doubt  tin'  accuracy
o!'  this  statement  in  a  legal  view.  We  have  already
seen,  that  the  European  nations,  by  \\  hom  America  was

colonized,  treated  the  subject  in  a  very  different man-
ner.1 They claimed  an  absolute dominion over the
whole  territories  afterwards occupied by  them,  not  in
virtue of  any  conquest  of, or  cession  by the  Indian
natives;  but  as  a  right  acquired  by  discovery.3 Some
of  them,  indeed,  obtained  a  sort  of  confirmatory grant
from  the  papal  authority.  —  But  as  between  themseh  es
they treated  the dominion and title  of  territory as
resulting  from  priority  of  discovery  ;3 and  that  Euro-
pean power,  which  had  first  discovered  the  country,
and  set  up  marks  of  possession,  was  deemed  to  have
gained  the  right,  though  it  had  not  yet  formed  a  regu-
lar colony  there.4 We  have  also  seen,  that  the  title  of
the  Indians  was  not  treated  as  a  right  of  propriety  and
dominion; but  as a  mere  right  of  occupancy.5 As
inhdels,  heathen,  and  savages,  they  were  not  allow  ed
to  possess  the  prerogatives  belonging  to  absolute,  sove-
reign and  independent  nations.6 The  territory,  over
which  they  wandered,  and  which  they  used  for  their
temporary and  fugitive  purposes,  was,  in  respect  to


i  See  ante,  p.  4  to  20;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  676;  :'>  Wilson's  Works.  231

2  Vattel,  B.  1,  ch.  18,  §  205,  206,207,  208,  209.

3  Johnson  v.  Mcintosh,  8  Wheat.  R.  543,  576,  595.

4  Venn  v.  Lord  Baltimore.  1  Vez. 1  !  I.  151.

5  3  Kent's  Comra.  308  to  313;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  676,  <I77:  4  Jeffer-
son's Corresp.  478  ;  Worcester  v.  Georgia^  Peters's  R.  515.

6  To  do  but  justice  to  those  times,  it  is  proper  to  state,  that  this  pre-
tension did  not  obtain  universal  approbation.  On  the  contrary,  it  was
opposed  by  some  of  the  most  enlightened  ecclesiastics  and  philosophers
of  those  .lays,  as  unjust  and  absurd  :  and  especially  by  two  Spanish
writers  of  eminent  worth,  Soto  and.  Victoria.  Sec  Sir  .lames  .Mcintosh's
elegant  treatise  on  the  Progress  of  Ethical  Philosophy.  Philadelphia
edit  1832,  p.  49,  50.


136  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

Christians,  deemed,  as  if  it  were  inhabited  only  by
brute  animals.  There  is  not  a  single  grant  from  the
British  crown  from  the  earliest  grant  of  Elizabeth
down  to  the  latest  of  George  the  Second,  that  affects
to  look  to  any  title,  except  that  founded  on  discovery.  |
Conquest  or  cession  is  not  once  alluded  to.  And  it  is
impossible,  that  it  should  have  been  ;  for  at  the  time
when  all  the  leading  grants  were  respectively  made,
there  had  not  been  any  conquest  or  cession  from  the
natives  of  the  territory  comprehended  in  those  grants.
Even  in  respect  to  the  territory  of  New-York  and
New-Jersey,  which  alone  afford  any  pretence  for  a
claim  by  conquest,  they  were  conquered  from  the
Dutch,  and  not  from  the  natives ;  and  were  ceded  to
England  by  the  treaty  of  Breda  in  1667.  But  Eng-
land claimed  this  very  territory,  not  by  right  of  this
conquest,  but  by  the  prior  right  of  discovery.1  The
original  grant  was  made  to  the  Duke  of  York  in  1664,
founded  upon  this  right,  and  the  subsequent  confirma-
tion of  his  title  did  not  depart  from  the  original  foun-
dation.

^  153.  The  Indians  could  in  no  just  sense  be  deem-
ed a  conquered  people,  who  had  been  stripped  of  their
territorial  possessions  by  superior  force.  They  were
considered  as  a  people,  not  having  any  regular  laws,  or
any  organized  government  ;  but  as  mere  wandering
tribes.2  They  were  never  reduced  into  actual  obedi-
ence, as  dependent  communities ;  and  no  scheme  of
general  legislation  over  them  was  ever  attempted.  For
many  purposes  they  were  treated  as  independent  com-
munities, at  liberty  to  govern  themselves;  so  always

i  4Wheaton,  575,  576,  5£8. See  also  1 Tuck.  Black.  Appx.  332.
1  Chalm.  Annals,  676.

2  Vattel,  B.  1,  ch.  18,  §  208,  209  ;  3  Kent's  Comm.  312,  313.


CH.  XVI.]  GNEUAL  REVIEW.  137

that  they  did  not  interfere  with  the  paramount  rights  of
the  European  discoverers.1

^  154.  For  the  most  part  at  the  time  of  the  first
grants  of  the  colonial  charters,  there  was  not  any  pos-
session or  occupation  of  the  territory  by  any  British  em-
igrants. The  main  objects  of  these  charters,  as  stated
in  the  preliminary  recitals,  was  to  invite  emigrations,  to
people  the  country,  to  found  colonies,  and  to  chris-
tianize the  natives.  Even  in  case  of  a  conquered  coun-
try, where  there  are  no  laws  at  all  existing,  or  none,
which  are  adapted  to  a  civilized  community  ;  or  where
the  laws  are  silent,  or  are  rejected  and  none  substituted ;
the  territory  must  be  governed  acccording  to  the  rules
of  natural  equity  and  right.  And  Englishmen  removing
thither  must  be  deemed  to  carry  with  them  those  rights
and  privileges,  which  belong  to  them  in  their  native
country.2

§  155.  The  very  ground,  therefore,  assumed  by
England,  as  the  foundation  of  its  title  to  America,  and
the  invitations  to  its  own  subjects  to  people  it,  carry  along
with  them  a  necessary  implication,  that  the  plantations,
subsequently  formed,  were  to  be  deemed  a  part  of  the
ancient  dominions ;  and  the  subjects  inhabiting  them  to
belong  to  a  common  country,  and  to  retain  their  former
rights  and  privileges.  The  government  in  its  public  policy
and  arrangements,  as  well  as  in  its  charters,  proclaimed,
that  the  colonies  were  established  with  a  view  to  extend
and  enlarge  the  boundaries  of  the  empire.  The  colonies,

i  4  Wheat.  R.  590,  59J,  59(3  ;  1  Grahame's  Hist,  of  America,  44  ;
3  Kent's  Comin.  311;  Jf'orcester  v.  State  of  Georgia,  6  Peters's  Sup.  Ct.
Rep.  515.

2  2Salk.  411,412;  See  also  / fall  v.  Campbell,  Cowp.  R.  204,  211,
212  ;  1  Chalm.  Ann.  11,  15,  678,  <i7!>.  68^,  (190  ;  1  Chalm.  Opinions,  194 ;
2  Chalm.  Opinions,  202  ;  Chitty  on  Prerog.  ch.  2  ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.
48, 49.

VOL.  I.  18


138  HISTORY  OF  THE COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

when  so  formed,  became  a  part  of  the  state  equally  with
its  ancient  possessions.1 It  is  not,  therefore,  without
strong  reason,  that  it  has  been  said,  that  "  the  colonists,
continuing  as  much  subjects  in  the  new  establishment,
where  they  had  freely  placed  themselves,  [with  the  con-
sent of  the  crown,]  as  they  had  been  in  the  old,  carried  with
them  their  birthright,  the  laws  of  their  country;  because
the  customs  of  a  free  people  are  a  part  of  their  liberty  ; "
and  that  "  the  jurisprudence  of  England  became  that  of
the  colonies,  so  far  as  it  was  applicable  to  the  situation,
at  which  they  had  newly  arrived,  because  they  were
Englishmen  residing  within  a  distant  territory  of  the
empire."2  And  it  may  be  added,  that  as  there  were  no
other  laws  there  to  govern  them,  the  territory  was  ne-
cessarily treated,  as  a  deserted  and  unoccupied  coun-
try, annexed  by  discovery  to  the  old  empire,  and  com-
posing a  part  of  it.3 Moreover,  even  if  it  were  possible
to  consider  the  case,  as  a  case  of  conquest  from  the  In-
dians, it  would  not  follow,  if  the  natives  did  not  re-
main there,  but  deserted  it,  and  left  it  a  vacant  territory,
that  the  rule  as  to  conquests  would  continue  to  apply
to  it. On  the  contrary,  as  soon  as  the  crown  should
choose  to  found  an  English  colony  in  such  vacant  ter-
ritory, the  general  principle  of  settlements  in  desert
countries  would  govern  it. It  would  cease  to  be  a  con-
quest, and  become  a  colony  ;  and  as  such  be  affected  by
the  British  laws.  This  doctrine  is  laid  down  with  great


i  Vattel,  B.  1,  ch.  18,  §  209  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  676,  6/7,  678,  679  ;
8  Wheat.  R.  595  ;  Grotius,  B.  2,  ch.  9,  §  10.

2  1  Chalm.  Ann.  677  ;  Id.  14,  15,  658  ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  48,  49  ;
3  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  234,  235.

3  Robcrdtau  v.  Rous,  1  Atk.  R.  548,  544  ;  Vaughan  R.  300,  400  ;
Show.  Pari.  Cas.  31 ;  8  Wheat.  R.  595  ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.
382,  383  ;  Dummer's  Defence,  1  American  Tracts,  18.


CH.  XVI.]  GENRAL  REVIEW.  \3Q

clearness  and  force  by  Lord  Mansfield,  in  his  celebrat-
ed judgment  in  Hallv.  Campbell,  (Cowp.  11.  204,  211,
212.)  In  a  still  more  recent  case  it  was  laid  down  by
Lord  Ellenborough,  that  the  law  of  England  might
properly  be  recognised  by  subjects  of  England  in  a  place
occupied  temporarily  by  British  troops,  who  would  im-
pliedly carry  that  law  with  them.1

§  156.  The  doctrine  of  Mr.  Justice  Blackstone,  there-
fore, may  well  admit  of  serious  doubt  upon  general
principles.  But  it  is  manifestly  erroneous,  so  far  as  it  is
applied  to  the  colonies  and  plantations  composing  our
Union.  In  the  charters,  under  which  all  these  colonies
were  settled,  with  a  single  exception,2  there  is,  as  has
been  already  seen,  an  express  declaration,  that  all  sub-
jects and  their  children  inhabiting  therein  shall  be
deemed  natural-born  subjects,  and  shall  enjoy  all  the
privileges  and  immunities  thereof  ;  and  that  the  laws  of
England,  so  far  as  they  are  applicable,  shall  be  in  force
there  ;  and  no  laws  shall  be  made,  which  are  repugnant
to,  but  as  near  as  may  be  conveniently,  shall  conform  to
the  laws  of  England.  Now  this  declaration,  even  if  the
crown  previously  possessed  a  right  to  establish  what
laws  it  pleased  over  the  territory,  as  a  conquest  from
the  natives,  being  a  fundamental  rule  of  the  original  set-
tlement of  the  colonies,  and  before  the  emigrations  thith-
er, was  conclusive,  and  could  not  afterwards  be  abrogated
by  the  crown.  It  was  an  irrevocable  annexation  of  (ho
colonies  to  the  mother  country,  as  dependencies  gov-
erned by  the  same  laws,  and  entitled  to  the  same
rights.3

1  Rex  v.  Brampton,  10  East  \l.  282,  288,  289.

2  That  of  Pennsylvania,  1  Grahame's  Hist  41, note  ;  1  Chalm!  Annals.
14,15,639,640,358;  2  Wilson's  La*  Lect  18,  19.

3  Stokes's  Colon.  30  :  HaU  v.  Campbell,  Cowp.  R.  204,  212  ;  1  Tuck.
Black.  Comm.  App.  383,  384  ;  Chitty  Prerog.  32,  33.


140  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

^  157.  And  so  has  been  the  uniform  doctrine  in
America  ever  since  the  settlement  of  the  colonies.  The
universal  principle  (and  the  practice  has  conformed  to
it)  has  been,  that  the  common  law  is  our  birthright  and
inheritance,  and  that  our  ancestors  brought  hither  with
them  upon  their  emigration  all  of  it,  which  was  applicable
to  their  situation.  The  whole  structure  of  our  present
jurisprudence  stands  upon  the  original  foundations  of
the  common  law.1


l  Notwithstanding  the  clearness  of  this  doctrine,  both  from  the  lan-
guage of  the  charters,  and  the  whole  course  of  judicial  decisions,  Mr.
Jefferson  has  treated  it  with  an  extraordinary  degree  of  derision,  if  not
of  contempt.  "  I  deride  (says  he)  with  you  the  ordinary  doctrine,  that  we
brought  with  us  from  England  the  common  law  rights.  This  narrow  no-
tion was  &  favourite  in  the  first  moment  of  rallying  to  our  rights  against
Great  Britain.  But  it  was  that  of  men,  who  felt  their  rights,  before  they
had  thought  of  their  explanation.  The  truth  is,  that  we  brought  with  us
the  rights  of  men,  of  expatriated  men.  On  our  arrival  here  the  question
would  at  once  arise,  by  what  law  will  we  govern  ourselves  ?  The  reso-
lution seems  to  have  been,  by  that  system,  with  which  we  are  familiar  ;  to
be  altered  by  ourselves  occasionally,  and  adapted  to  our  new  situation."
4  Jefferson's  Corresp.  178.

How  differently  did  the  Congress  of  1774  think.  They  unanimously
resolved,  "That  the  respective  colonies  are  entitled  to  the  common  law  of
England,  and  more  especially  to  the  great  and  inestimable  privilege  of
being  tried  by  their  peers  of  the  vicinage  according  to  the  course  of  that
law."  They  further  resolved,  "  that  they  were  entitled  to  the  benefit  of
such  of  the  English  statutes,  as  existed  at  the  time  of  their  colonization,
and  which  they  have  by  experience  respectively  found  to  be  applicable  to
their  several  and  local  circumstances."  They  alsc  resolved,  that  their
ancestors  at  the  time  of  their  emigration  were  "  entitled  "  (not  to  the
rights  of  men,  of  expatriated  men,  but)  '"  to  all  the  rights,  liberties,  and
immunities  of  fn?e  and  natural  born  subjects  within  the  realm  of  England."
Journal  of  Congress,  Declaration  of  Rights  of  the  Colonies,  Oct.  14,
1774,  p.  27  to  31.

1  Chalm.  Opinion,  202,  220,  295  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  677,  G8I,  082  ;
1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  385  ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  322;  Journal  of  Congress,
177  1,  p.  28,  29 ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  48,  49,50  ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.
App.  380  to  384  : Van  Ness  v.  Packard,  2  Peters's  Sup.  R.  137,  144.


CH.  XVI.]  GENERAL REVIEW.  Ml

§  158.  We  thus  sec  in  a  very  clear  lighl  the  mode,
in  which  the  common  law  was  first  introduced  into  the
colonies  ;  as  well  as  the  true  reason  of  the  exceptions
to  it  to  be  found  in  our  colonial  usages  and  laws.1  h  was
not  introduced,  as  of  origina]  and  universal  obligation  in
its  utmost  latitude;  but  the  limitations  contained  in  the
bosom  of  the  common  law  itself,  and  indeed  constitut-
ing a  part  of  the  law  of  nations,  were  affirmatively  set-
tled and  recognised  in  the  respective  charters  of  set-
tlement. Thus  limited  and  defined,  it  has  become  the
guardian  of  our  political  and  civil  rights ;  it  has  protect-
ed our  infant  liberties  ;  it  has  watched  over  our  maturer
growth  ;  it  has  expanded  with  our  wants  ;  it  has  nur-
tured that  spirit  of  independence,  which  checked  the
first  approaches  of  arbitrary  power  ;  it  has  enabled  us
to  triumph  in  the  midst  of  difficulties  and  dangers
threatening  our  political  existence  ;  and  by  the  goodness
of  God,  we  are  now  enjoying,  under  its  bold  and  manly
principles,  the  blessings  of  a  free,  independent,  and
united  government.2

i  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  48  to  55  ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  380
to  384  ;  1  Chalm.  Opinions,  220.

2  The  question,  whether  the  common  law  is  applicable  to  the  United
States  in  their  national  character,  relations,  and  government,  has  been
much  discussed  at  different  periods  of  the  government,  principally,  how-
ever, with  reference  to  the  jurisdiction  and  punishment  of  common  law
offences  by  the  courts  of  the  United  States.  It  would  be  a  most  extraor-
dinary state  of  things,  that  the  common  law  should  be  the  basis  of  the
jurisprudence  of  the  States  originally  composing  the  Union  ;  and  yet  a
government  engrafted  upon  the  existing  system  should  have  no  jurispru-
dence at  all.  If  such  be  th  result,  there  is  no  guide,  and  no  rule  for  the
courts  of  the  United  States,  or  indeed,  for  any  other  department  of  gov-
ernment, in  the  exercise  of  any  of  the  powers  confided  to  them,  except  so
far  as  Congress  has  laid,  or  shall  lay  down  a  rule.  In  the  immense  mass  of
rights  and  duties,  of  contracts  and  claims,  growing  out  of  the  Constitution
and  laws  of  the  United  States,  (upon  which  positive  legislation  has  hitherto
done  little  or  nothing,)  what  is  the  rule  of  decision,  and  interpretation,  and
restriction  ?  Suppose  the  simplest  case  of  contract  with  the  government  of


142  HISTORY OF THE COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

the  United  States,  how  is  it  to  be  construed  ?  How  is  it  to  be  enforced  ?
What  are  its  obligations  ?  Take  an  Act  of  Congress  —  How  is  it  to  be  in-
terpreted ?  Are  the  rules  of  the  common  law  to  furnish  the  proper  guide,
or  is  every  court  and  department  to  give  it  any  interpretation  it  may
please,  according  to  its  own  arbitrary  will  ?  —  My  design  is  not  here  to
discuss  the  subject,  (for  that  would  require  a  volume,)  but  rather  to  sug-
gest some  of  the  difficulties  attendant  upon  the  subject.  Those  readers,
who  are  desirous  of  more  ample  information,  are  referred  to  Duponceau
on  the  Jurisdiction  of  the  Courts  of  the  United  States  ;  to  1  Tucker's
Black.  Comm.  App.  Note  E,  p.  372 ;  to  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect.  16,  p.  311
to  322;  to  the  report  of  the  Virginia  legislature  of  1799-1800  ;  to
Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  30,  p.  258  ;  to  the  North  American  Re-
view, July,  1825  ;  and  to  Mr.  Bayard's  speech  in  the  Debates  on  the
Judiciary,  in  1802,  p.  372,  &c.  Some  other  remarks  illustrative  of  it  will
necessarily  arise  in  discussing  the  subject  of  Impeachments.


CH.  XVII.]  GENERAL  REVIEW.


13


CHAPTER  XVII.

GENERAL REVIEW OF THE COLONIES.

^  159.  In  respect  to  their  interior  polity,  the  colonies
have  been  very  properly  divided  by  Mr.  Justice  Black-
stone  into  three  sorts  ;  viz.  Provincial,  Proprietary,  and
Charter  Governments.  First,  Provincial  Estal  >lishments.
The  constitutions  of  these  depended  on  the  respective
commissions  issued  by  the  crown  to  the  governors,  and
the  instructions,  which  usually  accompanied  those  com-
missions.1 These  commissions  were  usually in one
form,2  appointing  a  governor,  as  the  king's  representa-
tive or  deputy,  who  was  to  be  governed  by  the  royal
instructions,  and  styling  him  Captain  General  and  Gov-
ernor in  Chief  over  the  Province,  and  Chancellor,  Vice-
Admiral,  and  Ordinary  of  the  same. The  crown  also
appointed  a  council,  who,  besides  their  legislative  au-
thority, were  to  assist  the  governor  in  the  discharge  of
his  official  duties  ;  and  power  was  given  him  to  suspend
them  from  office,  and,  in  case  of  vacancies,  to  appoint
others,  until  the  pleasure  of  the  crown  should  be  known.
The  commissions  also  contained  authority  to  convene  a
general  assembly  of  representatives  of  the  freeholders
and  planters;3  and  under  this  authority  provincial  assem-

i  1  Bl.  Comm.  108;  Stokes's  Hist.  Colon.  20,  23,  149,  184,  1.-:.  :  Cow-
per's  R.  207,  212  ;  Com.  Dig.  Navigation,  G,  1  ;  2  Doug.  Sumni.  1G3,
note  ;  Id.  251  ;  1  Doner.  Summ.  207.

2  Stokes's  Hist.  Colon.  14,  23,  149,  150,  106,  184,  185.  191,  199,202,
237,239;  1  Bl.  Comm.  108.— Stokes  has  given,  in  his  History  of  the
Colonies,  ch.  4,  p.  149,  &c.  a  copy  of  one  of  these  Commissions.  A
copy  is  also  prefixed  to  the  Provincial  Laws  of  New  Hampshire,  Edition
of  1707.

3  Stokes's  Hist.  Colon,  155,  237,  240,  241,  242,  251 ;  1  Pitk.  Hist.  71  ;
1  Chalmers's  Annals,  683.


144  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

blies,  composed  of  the  governor,  the  council, and  the
representatives,  were  constituted ;  (the  council  being  a
separate  branch  or  upper  house,  and  the  governor  hav-
ing a  negative  upon  all  their  proceedings,  and  also  the
right  of  proroguing  and  dissolving  them;)  which  assem-
blies had  the  power  of  making  local  laws  and  ordinances,
not  repugnant  to  the  laws  of  England,  but  as  near  as
may  be  agreeable  thereto,  subject  to  the  ratification  and
disapproval  of  the  crown. The  governors also  had
power,  with  advice  of  council,  to  establish  courts,  and  to
appoint  judges  and  other  magistrates,  and  officers  for
the  province ;  to  pardon  offences,  and  to  remit  fines
and  forfeitures  ;  to  collate  to  churches  and  benefices  ;  to
levy  military  forces  for  defence ;  and  to  execute  martial
law  in  time  of  invasion,  war,  and  rebellion.1 Appeals
lay  to  the  king  in  council  from  the  decisions of  the
highest courts  of  judicature  of the  province,  as  in-
deed they  did  from  all  others  of  the  colonies. Under
this  form  of  government  the  provinces  of  New-Hamp-
shire, New-York,  New-Jersey,  Virginia,  the  Carolinas,
and  Georgia,  were  governed  (as  we  have  seen)  for  a
long  period,  and  some  of  them  from  an  early  period  after
their  settlement.2

^  160.  Secondly,  Proprietary  Governments.  These
(as  we  have  seen)  were  granted  out  by  the  crown  to
individuals,  in  the  nature  of  feudatory  principalities,  with
all  the  inferior  royalties,  and  subordinate  powers  of
legislation,  which  formerly  belonged  to  the  owners  of
counties  palatine.3  Yet  still  there  were  these  express
conditions,  that  the  ends,  for  which  the  grant  was  made,
should be  substantially pursued; and that nothing


i  Stokes's  Hist,  of  Colonies,  157, 158,  184,  264.

2  1  Doug.  Summ.  207.

3  1  Black.  Comm.  108 ;  Stokes's  Hist.  Colon.  19.


CH.  XVII.]  GENERAL REVIEW.  145

should  be  done  or  attempted,  which  might  derogate
from  the  sovereignty  of  the  mother  country.  In  the
proprietary  government  the  governors  were  appointed
by  the  proprietaries,  and  legislative  assemblies  were
assembled  under  their  authority;  and  indeed  all  the
usual  prerogatives  were  exercised,  which  in  provincial
governments  belonged  to  the  crown.1  Three  only  ex-
isted at  the  period  of  the  American  Revolution;  viz.
the  proprietary  governments  of  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,
and  Delaware.2  The  former  had  this  peculiarity  in  its
charter,  that  its  laws  were  not  subject  to  the  supervision
and  control  of  the  crown ;  whereas  in  both  the  latter
such  a  supervision  and  control  were  expressly  or  impli-
edly provided  for.3

^  161.  Thirdly,  Charter  Governments.  Mr.  Justice
Blackstone  describes  them,  (1  Comm.  108,)  as  "in  the
nature  of  civil  corporations  with  the  power  of  making
by-laws  for  their  own  internal  regulation,  not  contrary
to  the  laws  of  England ;  and  with  such  rights  and
authorities  as  are  specially  given  them  in  their  several
charters  of  incorporation.  They  have  a  governor  named
by  the  king,  (or,  in  some  proprietary  colonies,  by  the
proprietor,)  who  is  his  representative  or  deputy.  They
have  courts  of  justice  of  their  own,  from  whose  decis-
ions an  appeal  lies  to  the  king  and  council  here  in
England.  Their  general  assemblies,  which  are  their
house  of  commons,  together  with  their  council  of  state,
being  their  upper  house,  with  the  concurrence  of  the
king,  or  his  representative  the  governor,  make  laws
suited  to  their  own  emergencies."  This  is  by  no  means
a  just  or  accurate  description  of  the  charter  governments.

i  Stokes's  Hist,  of  Colon.  2a

2  1  Pitk.  Hist.  55  ;  Stokes's  Hist,  of  Colon.  19 ;  2  Doug.  Summ.  207.

3  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  203,  G37.
VOL.  I.  19


146  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

They  could  not  be  justly  considered,  as  mere  civil  cor-
porations of  the  realm,  empowered  to  pass  by-laws ;
but  rather  as  great  political  establishments  or  colonies,
possessing  the  general  powers  of  government,  and  rights
of  sovereignty,  dependent,  indeed,  and  subject  to  the
realm  of  England  ;  but  still  possessing  within  their  own
territorial  limits  the  general  powers  of  legislation  and
taxation.1 The  only  charter  governments  existing  at  the
period  of  the  American  Revolution  were  those  of  Mas-
sachusetts, Rhode-Island, and  Connecticut. The  first
charter  of  Massachusetts  might  be  open  to  the  objec-
tion, that  it  provided  only  for  a  civil  corporation  within
the  realm,  and  did  not  justify  the  assumption  of  the  ex-
tensive executive,  legislative,  and  judicial  powers,  which
were  afterwards  exercised  upon  the  removal  of  that
charter  to  America. And  a  similar  objection  might  be
urged  against  the  charter  of  the  Plymouth  colony. But
the  charter  of  William  and  Mary,  in  1691,  was  obvi-
ously upon  a  broader  foundation,  and  was  in  the  strictest
sense  a  charter  for  general  political  government,  a  con-
stitution for  a  state,  with  sovereign  powers  and  pre-
rogatives, and  not  for  a  mere  municipality. By  this  last
charter  the  organization  of  the  different  departments  of
the  government  was,  in  some  respects, similar  to  that
in  the  provincial  governments  ;  the  governor  was  ap-
pointed by  the  crown ;  the  council  annually  chosen  by
the  General  Assembly ;  and  the  House  of  Representa-
tives by  the  people. But  in Connecticut  and  Rhode-
Island  the  charter  governments  were  organized  alto-
gether upon  popular  and  democratical  principles ;  the

i  1  Chalmers's Annals,  274,  275,  293,  687 ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Coram.
App.  385  ;  1  Pitk.  Hist.  108  ;  1  Hutch.  Hist.  No.  13,  p.  529  ;  Mass.  State  (
Papers,  338,  339,  358,  359  ;  Stokes's  Hist,  of  Colon.  21 ;  1  Doug.  Summ.
207.


CH.  XVII.]  GENERAL REVIEW.  147

governor,  council,  and  assembly  being  annually  chosen
by  the  freemen  of  the  colony,  and  all  other  officers  ap-
pointed by  their  authority.1  By  the  statutes  of  7  &,
8  William  3,  (ch.  22,  §  6,)  it  was  indeed  required,
that  all  governors  appointed  in  charter  and  proprietary
governments  should  be  approved  of  by  the  crown,  be-
fore entering  upon  the  duties  of  their  office ;  but  this
statute  was,  if  at  all,  ill  observed,  and  seems  to  have
produced  no  essential  change  in  the  colonial  policy.2

§  162.  The  circumstances,  in  which  the  colonies
were  generally  agreed,  notwithstanding  the  diversities
of  their  organization  into  provincial,  proprietary,  and
charter  governments,  were  the  following.

§  163.  (1.)  They  enjoyed  the  rights  and  privi-
leges of  British  born  subjects ;  and  the  benefit  of  the
common  laws  of  England ;  and  all  their  laws  were  re-
quired to  be  not  repugnant  unto,  but,  as  near  as  might
be,  agreeable  to  the  laws^and  statutes  of  England.3  This,
as  we  have  seen,  was  a  limitation  upon  the  legislative
power  contained  in  an  express  clause  of  all  the  char-
ters; and  could  not  be  transcended  without  a  clear
breach  of  their  fundamental  conditions.  A  very  liberal
exposition  of  this  clause  seems,  however,  always  to  have
prevailed,  and  to  have  been  acquiesced  in,  if  not  adopted
by  the  crown.  Practically  speaking,  it  seems  to  have
been  left  to  the  judicial  tribunals  in  the  colonies  to  as-
certain, what  part  of  the  common  law  was  applicable  to
the  situation  of  the  colonies  ; 4  and  of  course,  from  a  dif-

1  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  274,  293,  294  ;  Stokes's  Hist.  Colon.  21,  22,  23.

2  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  295,;  Stokes's  Hist.  Colon.  20.

3  Com.  Dig.  INavigation,  G.  1  ;  Id.  Ley.  C. ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  48,
49,  50,  51,  52.

4  1  Chalm.  Annals,  677,  678,  687;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  384  ;
1  Vez.  444,  449  ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  49  to  54  ;  Mass.  State  Papers,
(Ed.  1818,)  375, 390,  391.


148  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

ference  of  interpretation,  the  common  law,  as  actually
administered,  was  not  in  any  two  of  the  colonies  ex-
actly the  same.  The  general  foundation  of  the  local
jurisprudence  was  confessedly  composed  of  the  same
materials ;  but  in  the  actual  superstructure  they  were
variously  combined,  and  modified,  so  as  to  present
neither  a  general  symmetry  of  design,  nor  an  unity  of
execution.

^  164.  In  regard  to  the  legislative  power,  there  was
a  still  greater  latitude  allowed  ;  for  notwithstanding  the
cautious  reference  in  the  charters  to  the  laws  of  Eng-
land, the  assemblies  actually  exercised  the  authority  to
abrogate  every  part  of  the  common  law,  except  that,
which  united  the  colonies  to  the  parent  state  by  the  general
ties  of  allegiance  and  dependency ;  and  every  part  of  the
statute  law,  except  those  acts  of  Parliament,  which  ex-
pressly prescribed  rules  for  the  colonies,  and  necessa-
rily bound  them,  as  integral  parts  of  the  empire,  in  a  gen-
eral system,  formed  for  all,  and  for  the  interest  of  all.1
To  guard  this  superintending  authority  with  more  ef-
fect, it  was  enacted  by  Parliament  in  7  &  8  William
3,  ch.  22,  "that  all  laws,  by-laws,  usages,  and  cus-
toms, which  should  be  in  practice  in  any  of  the  planta-
tions, repugnant  to  any  law  made,  or  to  be  made  in  this
kingdom  relative  to  the  said  plantations,  shall  be  utterly
void  and  of  none  effect."  2

^  165.  It  was  under  the  consciousness  of  the  full
possession  of  the  rights,  liberties,  and  immunities  ol
British  subjects,  that  the  colonists  in  almost  all  the  early
legislation  of  their  respective  assemblies  insisted  upon  a

1  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  139,  110,  684, 687, 671, 675 ;  1  Tucker's  Black.

Comm.  3^4,  App. ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lcct.  49,  50;  1  Doug.  Summ.  213;
1  Pitk.  Hist.  108;  Mass.  State  Papers,  345,  34G,  347,  351  to  3G4,  375,
390;  Dummer's  Defence,  1  American  Tracts,  65,  &c.

2  Stokes's  Colon.  27.


CH.  XVII.]  GENERAL REVIEW.  I 10

declaratory  act,  acknowledging  and  confirming  them.1
And  for  the  most  pari  they  thus  succeeded  in  obtaining
a  real  and  effective  magnacharta  of  their  liberties.  The
trial  by  jury  in  all  cases,  civil  and  crimhi  nnly,

and  as  universally  established  in  the  colonies,  as  in  die
mother  country.

^  166.  (-2.)  Inallthe  colonies  loca]  legislatures  were
established,  one  branch  of  which  consisted  of  represen-
tatives of  the  people  freely  chosen,  to  represent  and
defend  their  interests,  and  possessing  a  negative  upon
all  laws.2  We  have  seen,  that  in  the  original  structure
of  the  charters  of  the  early  colonies,  no  provision  was
made  for  such  a  legislative  body.  But  accustomed  as
the  colonists  had  been  to  possess  the  rights  and  privi-
leges of  Englishmen,  and  valuing  as  they  did,  above  all
others,  the  right  of  representation  in  Parliament,  as  the
only  real  security  for  their  political  and  civil  liberties,  it
was  easy  to  foresee,  that  they  would  not  long  endure
the  exercise  of  any  arbitrary  power;  and  that  they
would  insist  upon  some  share  in  framing  the  laws,  by
which  they  were  to  be  governed.  We  find  accordingly,
that  at  an  early  period  [1619]  a  house  of  burgesses  waj
forced  upon  the  then  proprietors  of  Virginia.3  In  Mas-
sachusetts, Connecticut,  New-Hampshire,  and  Rhode-
Island,  the  same  course  was  pursued.1  And  Mr.  Hutch-
inson has  correctly  observed,  that  all  the  colonies  be-
fore the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second,  (Maryland  alone
excepted,  whose  charter  contained  an  express  proT
on  the  subject,)  settled  a  model  of  government
selves,  in  which  the  people  had  a  voice,  and  r<  |  n  sen-

i  1  Pitk.  Hist.  88,  89;  :*  Hutch.  Co!!.  201,  &c. ;  I  Chalraej '
678;  P  Don-.  Summ.  193.

2  1  Doug.  Summ.  ki1.°>  to  215.

3  Robertson's  America,  B.  !>.

4  I  Tucker's  Black.  Comra.  App.  '


150  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

tation  in  framing  the  laws,  and  in  assenting  to  burthens
to  be  imposed  upon  themselves.  After  the  restoration,
there  was  no  instance  of  a  colony  without  a  representa-
tion of  the  people,  nor  any  attempt  to  deprive  the  colo-
nies of  this  privilege,  except  during  the  brief  and  arbi-
trary reign  of  King  James  the  Second.1

i  1  Hutch.  Hist.  Mass.  94,  note  ;  1  Doug.  Summ.  213.  —  Mr.  Hutch-
inson's remarks  are  entitled  to  something  more  than  this  brief  notice,
and  a  quotation  is  therefore  made  of  the  leading  passage.  "It  is  ob-
servable, that  all  the  colonies  before  the  reign  of  King  Charles  the  Se-
cond, Maryland  excepted,  settled  a  model  of  government  for  themselves.
Virginia  had  been  many  years  distracted  under  the  government  of  presi-
dents and  governors,  with  councils,  in  whose  nomination  or  removal  the
people  had  no  voice,  until  in  the  year  1620  a  house  of  burgesses  broke
out  in  the  colony ;  the  king  nor  the  grand  council  at  home  not  having
given  any  powers  or  directions  for  it.  The  governor  and  assistants  of
the  Massachusetts  at  first  intended  to  rule  the  people;  and,  as  we  have
observed,  obtained  their  consent  for  it,  but  this  lasted  two  or  three  years
only ;  and  although  there  is  no  colour  for  it  in  the  charter,  yet  a  house
of  deputies  appeared  suddenly,  in  1634,  to  the  surprise  of  the  magistrates?
and  the  disappointment  of  their  schemes  for  power.  Connecticut  soon
after  followed  the  plan  of  the  Massachusetts.  New-Haven,  although  the
people  had  the  highest  reverence  for  their  leaders,  and  for  near  thirty
years  in  judicial  proceeding  submitted  to  the  magistracy,  (it  must,  how-
ever, be  remembered,  that  it  was  annually  elected,)  without  a  jury ;  yet
in  matters  of  legislation  the  people,  from  the  beginning,  would  have  their
share  by  their  representatives.  —  New-Hampshire  combined  together
under  the  same  form  with  Massachusetts.  —  Lord  Say  tempted  the  princi-
pal men  of  the  Massachusetts,  to  make  them  and  their  heirs  nobles  and
absolute  governors  of  a  new  colony;  but,  under  this  plan,  they  could  find
no  people  to  follow  them.  Barbadoes  and  the  leeward  islands,  began  in
1625,  struggled  under  governors,  and  councils,  and  contending  proprie-
tors, for  about  twenty  years.  Numbers  suffered  death  by  the  arbitrary
sentences  of  courts  martial,  or  other  acts  of  violence,  as  one  side,  or  the
other  happened  to  prevail.  At  length,  in  1645,  the  first  assembly  was
d,  and  no  reason  given  but  this,  viz.  That,  by  the  grant  to  the  Earl
of  Carlisle,  the  inhabitants  were  to  enjoy  all  the  liberties,  privileges,  and
i;\.nchises  of  English  subjects;  and  therefore,  as  it  is  also  expressly
i.oned  in  the  grant,  could  not  legally  be  bound,  or  charged  by  any

•r  without  their  own  consent.  This  grant,  in  1627,  was  made  by  Charles
the  First,  a  prince  not  the  most  tender  of  the  subjects'  liberties.  After
the  restoration,  there  is  no  instance  of  a  colony  settled  without  a  repre-
sentative of  the  people,  nor  any  attempt  to  deprive  the  colonies  of  this
privilege,  except  in  the  arbitrary  reign  of  King  James  the  Second."


Cir. XVII.]  CKMIKAI, REVIEW.  151

^167.  Tn  the  proprietai  \  and  charter  governments,
the  right  o!'  the  people  to  be  governed  by  laws  estab-
lished by  a  local  legislature,  in  which  they  were  repre-
sented,  was recognised  as  a  fundamental principle  oi"
the  compact. But  in  the  provincial  governments  it  was
often  a  matter  of  debate,  whether  the  people  had  a  right
to  be  represented  in  the  legislature,  or  whether  it  was
a  privilege  enjoyed  by  the  favour  and  during  the  plea-
sure of  the  crown. The  former  was  the  doctrine  of  the
colonists;  the  latter  was  maintained  by  the  crown  and
its  legal  advisers. Struggles  took  place  from  time  to
time  on  this  subject  in  some  of  the  provincial  assem-
blies ;  and  declarations  of  rights  were  there  drawn  up,
and  rejected  by  the  crown,  as  an  invasion  of  its  prercg-
ative.1 The  crown  also  claimed,  as  within  its  exclusive
competence,  the  right  to  decide,  what  number  of  repre-
sentatives should  be  chosen,  and  from  what  places  they
should  come.2 The  provincial  assemblies  insisted  upon
an  adverse  claim. The  crow  n  also  insisted  on  the  right
to  continue  the  legislative  assembly  for  an  indefinite
period,  at  its  pleasure,  without  a  new  election  ;  and  to
dissolve  it  in  like  manner. The  latter  power  was  ad-
mitted ;  but  the  former  was  most  stoutly  resisted,  as  in
effect  a  destruction  of  the  popular  right  of  representa-
tion, frequent  elections  being  deemed  vital  to  their  po-
litical safety;  —  "aright,"  (as  the  declaration  of  inde-
pendence emphatically  pronounces,) "inestimable to
them,  and  formidable  to  tyrants  only."3 In  the  colony
of  New- York the  crown  succeeded  at  last [1743]  4
in  establishing  septennial  assemblies,  in  imitation  of  the

i  1  Pitk.  Hist.  85,  86,  87  :  1  Chalm.  Opin.  189  ;  2 Doug.  ISumm.  251,  &c.

2  ]  Pitk.  Hist.  88  ;  1  Chalm.  Opin.  268,  272 ;  2  Doug.  Summ.  37,  38,
39,  40,  41,  73  ;  Chitty  Prerog.  ch.  3.

3  ]  Pitk.  Hist.  86,  87.  *  1  Pitk.  Hist.  87,  88.


152  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

septennial  parliaments  of  the  parent  country,  which  was
a  measure  so  offensive  to  the  people,  that  it  constituted
one  of  their  grievances  propounded  at  the  commence-
ment of  the  American  Revolution.1

§  1 68.  For  all  the  purposes  of  domestic  and  internal
regulation,  the  colonial  legislatures  deemed  themselves
possessed  of  entire  and  exclusive  authority.  One  of
the  earliest  forms,  in  which  the  spirit  of  the  people  ex-
hibited itself  on  this  subject,  was  the  constant  denial  of
all  power  of  taxation,  except  under  laws  passed  by
themselves.  The  propriety  of  their  resistance  of  the
claim  of  the  Crown  to  tax  them  seems  not  to  have
been  denied  by  the  most  strenuous  of  their  opponents.2
It  was  the  object  of  the  latter  to  subject  them  only  to
the  undefined  and  arbitrary  power  of  taxation  by  Par-
liament.  The  colonists  with  a  firmness  and  public
spirit,  which  strike  us  with  surprise  and  admiration,
claimed  for  themselves,  and  their  posterity,  a  total  ex-
emption from  all  taxation  not  imposed  by  their  own
representatives.  A  declaration  to  this  effect  will  be
found  in  some  of  the  earliest  of  colonial  legislation  ;  in
that  of  Plymouth,  of  Massachusetts,  of  Virginia,  of
Maryland,  of  Rhode-Island,  of  New-York,  and  indeed  of
most  of  the  other  colonies.3  The  general  opinion  held
by  them  was,  that  parliament  had  no  authority  to  tax
them,  because  they  were  not  represented  in  parlia-
ment.4

^  169.  On  the  other  hand,  the  statute  of  6  Geo.  3,  ch.
12,  contained  an  express  declaration  by  parliament,  that

i  In  Virginia  also  the  assemblies . re  s<  ptennial. The  Federalist,
No.  I

2  Chalm.  Annals,  058,  681,  683,  686,  687  ; Stat.  6  Geo.  3,  ch.  12.

3  1  Pitkhrs  Hist. 89,  90,  91; 2  Holmes's Annals, 133,  134,135;
2  Dcucr.  Sum.  251 ;  1  Doucr.  Sum.  213 ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  529,  530.

4  1  Pitkin,  89,  &c.  97,  127,  129  ;  Marsh.  Colon.  352,  353  ;  Appx.  469,
470,  472  ;  Chalm.  Annals,  658.


CH.  XVII.]  OE] ERAL  REVIEW.  153

"  the  colonies  and  plantations  in  America  have  been,
are,  and  o(  right  ought  to  be  subordinate  unto  and  d<  -
pendent  upon  the  imperial  crown  and  parliament  of
Great  Britain,"  and  that  the  king,  with  the  advice  and
consent  of  parliament,  "had,  hath,  and  of  right  ought  to
have  full  power  and  authority  to  make  laws  and  stat-
utes of  sufficient  force  and  validity  to  bind  the  colonies
and  people  of  America  in  all  cases  whatsoever."  l

%  170.  It  does  not  appear,  that  this  declaratory  act
of  6  Geo.  3,  met  with  any  general  opposition  among
those  statesmen  in  England,  who  wTere  most  friendly  to
America.  Lord  Chatham,  in  a  speech  on  the  17th  of
December,  1765,  said,  "I  assert  the  authority  of  this
country  over  the  colonies  to  be  sovereign  and  supreme
in  every  circumstance  of  government  and  legislation.
But,  (he  added,)  taxation  is  no  part  of  the  govern-
ing or  legislative  power — taxes  are  the  voluntary  grant
of  the  people  alone."  2  Mr.  Burke,  who  may  justly  be
deemed  the  leader  of  the  colonial  advocates,  maintain-


i  6  Geo.  3,ch.  12;  Stokes's  Colon.  28,  29.  See  also  Marshall  on
Colon,  ch.  13,  p.  353;  Vaughan  R.  300,  400;  1  Pitkins's  Hist.  123.

2  Mr.  Burke  has  sketched  with  a  most  masterly  hand  the  true  origin
of  this  resistance  to  the  power  of  taxation.  The  passage  is  so  full  of
his  best  eloquence,  and  portrays  with  such  striking  fidelity  the  charac-
ter of  the  colonists,  that,  notwithstanding  its  length,  I  am  tempted  to
lay  it  before  the  reader  in  this  note.

"  In  this  character  of  the  Americans,  a  love  of  freedom  is  the  pre-
dominating feature,  which  marks  and  distinguishes  the  whole  ;  and  as
an  ardent  is  always  a  jealous  aifection,  your  colonies  become  suspicious,
restive,  and  untraceable,  whenever  they  see  the  least  attempt  to  wrest
from  them  by  force,  or  shuffle  from  them  by  chicane,  what  they  think
the  only  advantage  worth  living  for.  This  fierce  spirit  of  liberty  is
stronger  in  the  English  colonics  probably  than  in  any  other  people  of
the  earth;  and  this  from  a  groat  variety  of  powerful  causes;  which,  to
understand  the  true  temper  of  their  minds,  and  the  direction  which  this
spirit  takes,  it  will  not  be  amiss  to  lay  open  somewhat  more  largely.

"  First,  the  people  of  the  colonies  are  descendants  of  Englishmen.
England,  Sir,  is  a  nation,  which  still,  1  hope,  respects,  and  formerly  ador-
ed, her  freedom. The  colonists  emigrated  from  you,  when  this  part  of

vol.  i.  20


154  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK I.

ed  the  supremacy  of  parliament  to  the  full  extent  of
the  declaratory  act,  and  as  justly  including  the  power
of  taxation1. But  he  deemed  the  power  of  taxation  in


your  character  was  most predominant ; and  they  took  this  bias  and
direction  the  moment they  parted  from  your  hands. They  are  there-
fore not  only  devoted  to  liberty,  but  to  liberty according  to English
ideas,  and  on  English  principles. Abstract  liberty,  like  other  mere  ab-
stractions, is  not  to  be  found. Liberty  inheres  in  some  sensible  object ;
and  every  nation  has  formed  to  itself  some  favourite  point,  which  by  way
of  eminence  becomes  the  criterion  of  their happiness. It  happened,
you  know,  Sir,  that  the  great  contests  for  freedom  in  this  country  were
from  the  earliest times  chiefly  upon  the question  of  taxing. Most  of
the  contests  in  the  ancient  commonwealths  turned  primarily  on  the  right
of  election  of  magistrates  ;  or  on  the  balance among  the  several  orders
of  the  state. The  question  of  money  was  not  with  them  so  immediate.
But  in  England  it  was  otherwise. On this  point  of  taxes  the ablest
pens,  and  most  eloquent  tongues,  have  been  exercised ; the greatest
spirits  have  acted  and  suffered. In  order  to  give  the  fullest  satisfaction
concerning  the  importance  of  this  point,  it  Mas  not  only  necessary  for
those,  who  in  argument  defended  the  excellence  of  the  English  consti-
tution, to  insist  on  this  privilege  of  granting  money  as  a  dry  point  of
fact,  and  to  prove,  that  the right  had  been  acknowledged  in  ancient
parchments,  and  blind  usages, to  reside  in  a  certain  body  called  an
house  of  commons. They  went  much  further  ;  they  attempted  to  prove,
and  they  succeeded,  that  in  theory  it  ought  to  be  so,  from  the  particular
nature  of  a  house  of  commons,  as  an  immediate  representative  of  the
people;  whether  the  old  records  had  delivered  this  oracle  or  not.  They
took  infinite  pains  to  inculcate, as  a  fundamental principle,  that in  all
monarchies,  the  people  must  in  effect  themselves  mediately  or  immedi-
ately possess  the  power  of  granting  their  own  money,  or  no  shadow  of
liberty  could  subsist.  — The  colonies  draw  from  you,  as  with  their  life-
blood,  these  ideas  and  principles. Their  love  of  liberty,  as  with  you,
fixed  and  attached  on  this  specific  point  of  taxing. Liberty  might  be
safe,  or  might  be  endangered  in  twenty  other  particulars,  without  their
being  much  pleased  or  alarmed. Here  they  felt  its  pulse  ;  and  as  they
found  that  beat,  they thought  themselves  sick  or  sound. I  do  not  say
whether  they  were  right  or  wrong  in  applying  your  general  arguments
to  their  own  case. It  is  not  easy  indeed  to  make  a  monopoly  of  theo-
rems and  corollaries. The  fact  is,  that  they  did  thus  apply  those  gen-
eral arguments  ;  and  your  mode  of  governing  them,  whether  through

l  Burke's  Speech  on  Taxation  of  America  in  177-1  ;  Burke's  Speech
on  Conciliation  with  America,  22  March,  1775.  See  also  his  Letters  to
the  Sheriffs  of  Bristol  in  1777.


CH.  XVII.]  GENERAL  REVIEW.  155

parliament  as  an  instrument of  empire,  and  not  us  a

means  of  supply  ;  and  therefore,  that,  it  should  he
resorted  to  only  in  extreme  Cases  lor  die  former  pur-
lenity  or  indolence,  through  wisdom  or  mistake,  confirmed  them  in  the
imagination,  that  they,  as  well  as  you,  had  an  interest  in  these  common
principles.

"  They  were  further  confirmed  in  this  pleasing  error  by  the  form  of
their  provincial  legislative  assemblies.  Their  governments  are  popu-
lar in  an  high  degree  ;  some  are  merely  popular  ;  in  all,  the  popular  rep-
resentative is  the  most  weighty  ;  and  this  share  of  the  people  in  their
ordinary  government  never  fails  to  inspire  them  with  lofty  sentiments,
and  with  a  strong  aversion  from  whatever  tends  to  deprive  them  of
their  chief  importance.

"  If  any  thing  were  wanting  to  this  necessary  operation  of  the  form
of  government,  religion  would  have  given  it  a  complete  effect.  Reli-
gion, always  a  principle  of  energy,  in  this  new  people,  is  no  way  worn
out  or  impaired  ;  and  their  mode  of  professing  it  is  also  one  main  cause
of  this  free  spirit.  The  people  are  Protestants  ;  and  of  that  kind,  which
is  the  most  adverse  to  all  implicit  submission  of  mind  and  opinion.
This  is  a  persuasion  not  only  favourable  to  liberty,  but  built  upon  it.  I
do  not  think,  Sir,  that  the  reason  of  this  averseness  in  the  dissenting
churches  from  all  that  looks  like  absolute  government  is  so  much  to  be
sought  in  their  religious  tenets,  as  in  their  history.  Every  one  knows,
that  the  Roman  Catholic  religion  is  at  least  coeval  with  most  of  the
governments  where  it  prevails  ;  that  it  has  generally  gone  hand  in  hand
with  them ;  and  received  great  favour  and  every  kind  of  support  from
authority.  The  church  of  England  too  was  formed  from  her  cradle
under  the  nursing  care  of  regular  government.  But  the  dissenting
interests  have  sprung  up  in  direct  opposition  to  all  the  ordinary  powers
of  the  world;  and  could  justify  that  opposition  only  on  a  strong  claim
to  natural  liberty.  Their  very  existence  depended  on  the  powerful
and  unremitted  assertion  of  that  claim.  All  protestantism,  even  the
most  cold  and  passive,  is  a  sort  of  dissent.  But  the  religion  most  pre-
valent in  our  northern  colonies  is  a  refinement  on  the  principle  of  resist-
ance ;  it  is  the  diffidence  of  dissent;  and  the  protestantism  of  the  pro-
testant  religion.  This  religion,  under  a  variety  of  denominations,  agree-
ing in  nothing  but  in  the  communion  of  the  spirit  of  liberty,  is  predom-
inant in  most  of  the  northern  provinces  ;  where  the  church  of  England,
notwithstanding  its  legal  rights,  is  in  reality  no  more  than  a  sort  of  pri-
vate sect,  not  composing  most  probably  the  tenth  of  the  people.  The
colonists  left  England  when  this  spirit  was  high;  and  in  the  emigrants
was  the  highest  of  all  :  and  even  that  stream  of  foreigners,  which  has
been  constantly  flowing  into  these  colonies,  has,  for  the  greatest  part}
been  composed  of  dissenters from  the  establishments of  their  several


156  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

pose.  With  a  view  to  conciliation,  another  act  was
passed  at  a  late  period,  (in  18  Geo.  3,  ch.  12,)  which
declared,  that  parliament  would  not  impose  any  duty

countries,  and  have  brought  with  them  a  temper  and  character  far
from  alien  to  that  of  the  people,  with  whom  they  mixed.

"  Sir,  I  can  perceive  by  their  manner,  that  some  gentlemen  object  to
the  latitude  of  this  description  ;  because  in  the  southern  colonies  the
church  of  England  forms  a  large  body,  and  has  a  regular  establishment.
It  is  certainly  true.  There  is  however  a  circumstance  attending  these
colonies,  which,  in  my  opinion,  fully  counterbalances  this  difference,
and  makes  the  spirit  of  liberty  still  more  high  and  haughty  than  in
those  of  the  northward.  It  is  that  in  Virginia  and  the  Carolinas,  they
have  a  vast  multitude  of  slaves.  Where  this  is  the  case  in  any  part  of
the  world,  those,  who  are  free,  are  by  far  the  most  proud  and  jealous  of
their  freedom.  Freedom  is  to  them  not  only  an  enjoyment,  but  a  kind
of  rank  and  privilege.  Not  seeing  there,  that  freedom,  as  in  countries
where  it  is  a  common  blessing,  and  as  broad  and  general  as  the  air,
may  be  united  with  much  abject  toil,  with  great  misery,  with  all  the  ex-
terior of  servitude,  liberty  looks,  amongst  them,  like  something  that  is
more  noble  and  liberal.  I  do  not  mean,  Sir,  to  commend  the  superior
morality  of  this  sentiment,  which  has  at  least  as  much  pride  as  virtue  in
it  •  but  I  cannot  alter  the  nature  of  man.  The  fact  is  so ;  and  these
people  of  the  southern  colonies  are  much  more  strongly,  and  with  an
higher  and  more  stubborn  spirit,  attached  to  liberty,  than  those  to  the
northward.  Such  were  all  the  ancient  commonwealths  ;  such  were  our
Gothic  ancestors  ;  such  in  our  days  were  the  Poles  ;  and  such  will  be
all  masters  of  slaves,  who  are  not  slaves  themselves.  In  such  a  people
the  haughtiness  of  domination  combines  with  the  spirit  of  freedom,  for-
tifies it,  and  renders  it  invincible.

"Permit  me,  Sir,  to  add  another  circumstance  in  our  colonies,  which
contributes  no  mean  part  towards  the  growth  and  effect  of  this  untrace-
able spirit.  I  mean  their  education.  In  no  country  perhaps  in  the
world  is  the  law  so  general  a  study.  The  profession  itself  is  numerous
and  powerful ;  and  in  most  provinces  it  takes  the  lead.  The  greater
number  of  the  deputies  sent  to  the  congress  were  lawyers.  But  all
who  read,  and  most  do  read,  endeavour  to  obtain  some  smattering  in  that
science.  I  have  born  told  by  an  eminefll  "hook seller,  that  in  no  branch
of  his  business,  after  tracts  of  popular  devotion,  were  so  many  books  as
those  on  the  law  exported  to  the  plantations.  The  colonists  have  now
fallen  into  the  way  of  printing  them  for  their  own  use.  [hear  that
they  have  sold  nearly  as  many  of  Blackstone's  Commentaries  in  Amer-
ica, as  in  England.  General  Gage  marks  out  this  disposition  very  par-
ticularly in  a  letter  on  your  table,  lie  states,  that  all  the  people  in  his
government  are  lawyers,  or  smatterers  in  law  ; and  that  in  Boston  they


CH.  XVII.]  GENERAL  REVIEW.  157

or  tax  on  the  colonics,  except  for  the  regulation  of  com-
merce; and  that  the  net  produce  of  such  duly,  or  tax,

should  be  applied  to  the  use  of  die  colony,  in  which  it

have  been  enabli  d,  by  successful  chicane,  wholly  to  evade  many  parts

of  one  of  your  capital  penal  constitutions.  The  smartness  of  debate  will
say,  that  this  knowledge  oughtto  teach  them  more  clearly  the  rights  of
legislature,  their  obligations  to  obedience,  and  the  penalties  of  rebel-
lion. All  this  is  mighty  well.  But  my  honourable  and  learned  friend*
on  the  floor,  who  condescends  to  mark  what  I  say  for  animadversion,
will  disdain  that  ground.  He  has  heard,  as  well  as  [,  that  when  great
honours  and  great  emoluments  do  not  win  over  this  knowledge  to  the
service  of  the  state,  it  is  a  formidable  adversary  to  government.  If  the
spirit  be  not  tamed  and  broken  by  these  happy  methods,  it  is  stubborn
and  litigious.  Abeunt  studia  in  mores.  This  study  renders  men  acute,
inquisitive,  dexterous,  prompt  in  attack,  ready  in  defence,  full  of  resour-
ces. In  other  countries,  the  people,  more  simple  and  of  a  less  mercu-
rial cast,  judge  of  an  ill  principle  in  government  only  by  an  actual
grievance  ;  here  they  anticipate  the  evil,  and  judge  of  the  pressure  of
the  grievance  by  the  badness  of  the  principle.  They  augur  misgov-
ernment  at  a  distance ;  and  snuff  the  approach  of  tyranny  in  every
tainted  breeze.

'•  The  last  cause  of  this  disobedient  spirit  in  the  colonies  is  hardly
less  powerful  than  the  rest,  as  it  is  not  merely  moral,  but  laid  deep  in
the  natural  constitution  of  things.  Three  thousand  miles  of  ocean  lie
between  you  and  them.  No  contrivance  can  prevent  the  effect  of  this
distance,  in  weakening  government.  Seas  roll,  and  months  pass,  be-
tween the  order  and  the  execution  ;  and  the  want  of  a  speedy  explana-
tion of  a  single  point,  is  enough  to  defeat  a  whole  system.  You  have,
indeed,  winged  ministers  of  vengeance,  who  carry  your  bolts  in  their
pounces  to  the  remotest  verge  of  the  sea.  But  there  a  power  steps  in,
that  limits  the  arrogance  of  raging  passions  and  furious  elements,  and
says,  '  So  far  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  farther.'  Who  arc  you,  that  should
fret  and  rage,  and  bite  the  chains  of  nature  ?  Nothing  worse  happens
to  you,  than  does  to  all  nations,  who  have  extensive  empire  :  and  it  hap-
pens in  all  the  forms,  into  which  empire  can  be  thrown.  In  large  bodies
the  circulation  of  power  must  be  less  vigorous  at  the  extremities.  Nature
has  said  it.  The  Turk  cannot  govern  Egypt,  and  Arabia,  and  Curdis-
tan,  as  he  governs  Thrace  ;  nor  has  he  the  same  dominion  in  Crimea
and  Algiers,  which  he  has  at  Brusa  and  Smyrna.  Despotism  itself  is
obliged  to  truck  and  huckster.  The  Sultan  gets  such  obedience  as  he
can.  He  governs  with  a  loose  rein,  that  he  may  govern  at  all  :  and  the
whole  of  the  force  and  vigour  of  his  authority  in  his  centre,  is  derived

*  Tho  Attorney  General.


158  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

was  levied.  But  it  foiled  of  its  object.  The  spirit  of
resistance  had  then  become  stubborn  and  uncontrolla-
ble. The  colonists  were  awake  to  a  full  sense  of  all
their  rights;  and  habit  had  made  them  firm,  and  common
sufferings  had  made  them  acute,  as  well  as  indignant  in
the  vindication  of  their  privileges.  And  thus  the  struggle
was  maintained  on  each  side  with  unabated  zeal,  until
the  American  Revolution.  The  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence embodied  in  a  permanent  form  a  denial  of
such  parliamentary  authority,  treating  it  as  a  gross  and
unconstitutional  usurpation.

^  171.  The  colonial  legislatures,  with  the  restrictions
necessarily  arising  from  their  dependency  on  Great
Britain,  were  sovereign  within  the  limits  of  their  re-
spective territories.  But  there  was  this  difference
among  them,  that  in  Maryland,  Connecticut,  and
Rhode-Island,  the  laws  were  not  required  to  be  sent
to  the  king  for  his  approval ;  whereas,  in  all  the  other
colonies,  the  king  possessed  a  power  of  abrogating
them,  and  they  were  not  final  in  their  authority  until
they  had  passed  under  his  review.1  In  respect  to
the  mode of enacting  laws, there were some dif-

from  a  prudent  relaxation  in  all  his  borders.  Spain,  in  her  provinces,  is,
perhaps,  not  so  well  obeyed,  as  you  are  in  yours.  She  complies  too  ;
she  submits  ;  she  watches  times.  This  is  the  immutable  condition  ;  the
eternal  law,  of  extensive  and  detached  empire.

"  Then,  Sir,  from  these  six  capital  sources  ;  of  descent ;  of  form  of
government;  of  religion  in  the  northern  provines ;  of  manners  in  the
southern;  of  education;  of  the  remoteness  of  situation  from  the  first
mover  of  government;  from  all  these  causes  a  fierce  spirit  of  liberty  has
grown  up.  It  has  grown  with  the  growth  of  the  people  in  your  colo-
nies, and  increased  with  the  increase  of  their  wealth  ;  a  spirit,  that  un-
happily meeting  with  an  exercise  of  power  in  England,  which,  however
lawful,  is  not  reconcilable  to  any  ideas  of  liberty,  much  less  with  theirs,
has  kindled  this  flame,  that  is  ready  to  consume  us."  2  Burke's  Works,
38  -  45.

i  Chalmers's  Annals,  203,  205  ;  1  Doug.  Summ.  207,  208.


C1I.  XVII.]  GENERAL  REVIEW.  159

ferences  in  the  organization  of  the  colonial  govern-
ments.1 In  Connecticut  and  Rhode-Island  the  gov-
ernor had  no  negative  upon  the  laws;  in  Pennsyl-
vania the  council  had  no  uegative,  but  was  merely
advisory  to  the  executive;  in  Massachusetts,  the
council  was  chosen  by  the  legislature,  and  not  by
the  crown ;  but  the  governor  had  a  negative  on  the
choice.

§  172.  (3.)  In  all  the  colonics,  the  lands  within  their
limits  were  by  the  very  terms  of  their  original  grants
and  charters  to  be  holden  of  the  crown  in  free  and
common  soccage,  and  not  in  capite  or  by  knights  ser-
vice. They  were  all  holden  either,  as  of  the  manor  of
East  Greenwich  in  Kent,  or  of  the  manor  of  Hampton
Court  in  Middlesex,  or  of  the  castle  of  Windsor  in
Berkshire.2  All  the  slavish  and  military  part  of  the
ancient  feudal  tenures  were  thus  effectually  prevent-
ed from  taking  root  in  the  American  soil ;  and  the
colonists  escaped  from  the  oppressive  burdens,  vt
for  a  long  time  affected  the  parent  country,  and  were
not  abolished  until  after  the  restoration  of  Charles  the
Second.3  Our  tenures  thus  acquired  a  universal  sim-
plicity; and  it  is  believed,  that  none  but  freehold  ten-
ures in  soccage  ever  were  in  use  among  us.  No
traces  are  to  be  found  of  copy  hold,  or  gavel  kind,  or
burgage  tenures.  In  short,  for  most  purposes,  our
lands  may  be  deemed  to  be  perfectly  allodial,  or  held
of  no  superior  at  all ;  though  many  of  the  distinctions
of  the  feudal  law  have  necessarily  insinuated  them-
selves into  the  modes  of  acquiring,  transferring,  and
transmitting  real  estates.  One  of  the  most  remarkable
circumstances in our colonial history is  the  almost

i  1  Doug.  Summ.  215.  2  1  Grahame'a  Hist.  43,  44.

3  Stat  12  Car.  2,  ch.  24.


160  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

total  absence  ofleasehold  estates.  The  erection  of
manors  with  all  their  attendant  privileges,  was,  indeed,
provided  for  in  several  of  the  charters.  But  it  was  so
little  congenial  with  the  feelings,  the  wants,  or  the
interests  of  the  people,  that  after  their  erection  they
gradually  fell  into  desuetude  ;  and  the  few  remaining
in  our  day  are  but  shadows  of  the  past,  the  relics  of
faded  grandeur  in  the  last  steps  of  decay,  enjoying  no
privileges,  and  conferring  no  power.

§  173.  In  fact,  partly  from  the  cheapness  of  land,
and  partly  from  an  innate  love  of  independence,  few
agricultural  estates  in  the  whole  country  have  at  any
time  been  held  on  lease  for  a  stipulated  rent.  The
tenants  and  occupiers  are  almost  universally  the  pro-
prietors of  the  soil  in  fee  simple.  The  few  estates  of
a  more  limited  duration  are  principally  those  arising
from  the  acts  of  the  law,  such  as  estates  in  dower,  and
in  curtesy.  Strictly  speaking,  therefore,  there  has
never  been  in  this  country  a  dependent  peasantry.
The  yeomanry  are  absolute  owners  of  the  soil,  on  which
they  tread  ;  and  their  character  has  from  this  circum-
stance been  marked  by  a  more  jealous  watchfulness  of
their  rights,  and  by  a  more  steady  spirit  of  resistance
against  every  encroachment,  than  can  be  found  among
any  other  people,  whose  habits  and  pursuits  are  less
homogeneous  and  independent,  less  influenced  by  per-
sonal choice,  and  more  controlled  by  political  circum-
stances.

§  174.  (4.)  Connected  with  this  state  of  things,
and,  indeed,  as  a  natural  consequence  flowing  from  it,
is  the  simplicity  of  the  system  of  conveyances,  by
which  the  titles  to  estates  are  passed,  and  the  noto-
riety of  the  transfers  made.  From  a  very  early
period  of  their  settlement the colonies adopted an


ch.  xvii.]  gp:neral  review.  161

almost  uniform  mode  of  conveyance  of  land,  at  once
simple  and  practicable  and  safe.  The  differences  are
so  slight,  that  they  became  almost  evanescent  All
lands  were  conveyed  by  a  deed,  commonly  in  the
form  of  a  feoffment,  or  a  bargain  and  sale,  or  a  lease  and
release,  attested  by  one  or  more  witnesses,  acknowl-
edged or  proved  before  some  court  or  magistrate,  and
then  registered  in  some  public  registry.  When  so
executed,  acknowledged,  and  recorded,  they  had  full
effect  to  convey  the  estate  without  any  livery  of  seisin,
or  any  other  act  or  ceremony  whatsoever.  This  mode
of  conveyance  prevailed,  if  not  in  all,  in  nearly  all  the
colonies  from  a  very  early  period ;  and  it  has  now
become  absolutely  universal.  It  is  hardly  possible  to
measure  the  beneficial  influences  upon  our  titles  aris-
ing from  this  source,  in  point  of  security,  facility  of
transfer,  and  marketable  value.

^  175.  (5.)  All  the  colonies  considered  themselves, not
as  parcel  of  the  realm  of  Great  Britain,  but  as  dependen-
cies of  the  British  crown,  and  owing  allegiance  thereto,
the  king  being  their  supreme  and  sovereign  lord.1  In
virtue  of  its  general  superintendency  the  crown  con-
stantly claimed,  and  exercised  the  right  of  entertaining
appeals  from  the  courts  of  the  last  resort  in  the  colonies  ;
and  these  appeals  were  heard  and  finally  adjudged  by
the  king  in  council.2  This  right  of  appeal  was  secured
by  express  reservation  in  most  of  the  colonial  charters.
It  was  expressly  provided  for  by  an  early  proviru  ial
law  in  New-Hampshire,  when  the  matter  in  difference
exceeded  the  true  value  or  sum  of  £300  sterling.  So,  a
like  colonial  law  of  Rhode-Island  was  enacted  by  its

i  1  Vez.  444  ;  Vaughan  R.300,  400  ;  Shower.  Pari.  Cases,  30,  31,  32,
33  ;  Mass.  State  Papers,  359.

2  1  Black.  Comm.  231,  232  ;  Chitty  on  Prerog.  29,  31.

VOL.  I.  21


162  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

local  legislature  in  1719.1  It  was  treated  by  the  crown,
as  an  inherent  right  of  the  subject,  independent  of  any
such  reservation.2  And  so  in  divers  cases  it  was  held  by
the  courts  of  England.  The  reasons  given  for  the  opinion,
that  writs  of  error  [and  appeals]  lie  to  all  the  dominions
belonging  to  England  upon  the  ultimate  judgments  giv-
en there,  are,  (1.)  That,  otherwise,  the  law  appointed,  or
permitted  to  such  inferior  dominion  might  be  considerably
changed  without  the  assent  of  the  superior  dominion  ;
(2.)  Judgments  might  be  given  to  the  disadvantage  or
lessening  of  the  superiority,  or  to  make  the  superiority
of  the  king  only,  and  not  of  the  crown  of  England  ;  and
(3.)  That  the  practice  has  been  accordingly.3

\  176.  Notwithstanding  the  clearness,  with  which  this
appellate  jurisdiction  was  asserted,  and  upheld  by  the
principles  of  the  common  law,  the  exercise  of  it  was
not  generally  assumed  until  about  1680;  and  it  was
not  then  conceded,  as  a  matter  of  right  in  all  the  colo-
nies.4 On  the  contrary,  Massachusetts  resisted  it  under
her  first  charter ;  (the  right  of  appeal  was  expressly  re-
served in  that  of  1691  ;)  and  Rhode-Island  and  Con-
necticut at  first  denied  it,  as  inconsistent  with,  or  rather
as  not provided  for in theirs.5 Rhode  Island soon

i  New-Hampshire  Prov.  Laws,  edit.  1771,  p.  7,  Act  of  11  Will.  3,  ch.
4  ;  Rhode-Island  Laws,  edit.  1744,  p.  78.

2  I  P.  Will.  329  ;  Chitty  on  Prerog.  ch.  3.

3  Vaughan's  Rep.  290,  402  ;  Show.  Pari.  Cases,  30, 31,  32,  33  ;  1  Vez.
444 ;  Stokes's  Colon.  26,  222,  231  ;  2  Ld.  Raym.  1447,  1448  ;  1  Chalm.
Annals,  139,  304,  G71,  678,  684 ;  Christian  v.  Corver,  1  P.  Will.  R.  329  ;
Att.  Gen.w.  Steivart,  2  Merivale  R.  143,  156;  Rex  v.  Coivle,  2  Burr.  834,
852,  854,  856  ;  Fabrics  v.  Mostyn,  Cowp.  174  ;  1  Doug.  Summ.  216  ;
3  Wilson's  Works,  230  ;  2  Chalm.  Opin.  177,  222.

4  Chitty  on  Prerog.  ch.  3,  p.  28,  29  ;  1  Chalm.  Opin.  222  ;  1  Pitk.  Hist.
121,  123,  124,  125,  126  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  139,  140,  678;  5  Mass.  Hist.
Coll.  139.

5  1  Chalm.  Annals,  277,  280,  297,  304,  411,  446,  462  ;  2  Doug.  Summ.
174  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  330, 418,  529 ;  2  Hutch.  Hist.  539.


CH. XVII.]  GENERAL  REVIEW.  101*

afterwards  surrendered  her  opposition.1 But  Connec-
ticut continued  it  to  a  later  period.2 In  a  practical

sense,  however,  the  appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  king  in
council  was  in  full  and  undisturbed  exercise  throughout
the  colonies  at  the  time  of  the  American  Revolution  ;
and  was  deemed  rather  a  protection,  than  a  grievance.3
^  177.  (6.)  Though  the  colonies  had  a  common  origin,
and  owed  a  common  allegiance,  and  the  inhabitants  of
each  were  British  subjects,  they  had  no  direct  political
connexion  with  each  other.  Each  was  independent  of
all  the  others  ;  each,  in  a  limited  sense,  was  sovereign
within  its  own  territory.  There  was  neither  alliance
nor  confederacy  between  them.  The  assembly  of  one
province  could  not  make  laws  for  another ;  nor  confer
privileges,  which  were  to  be  enjoyed  or  exercised  in
another,  farther  than  they  could  be  in  any  independent
foreign  state.  As  colonies,  they  were  also  excluded
from  all  connexions  with  foreign  states.  They  were
known  only  as  dependencies  ;  and  they  followed  the
fate  of  the  parent  country  both  in  peace  and  war,  without
having  assigned  to  them,  in  the  intercourse  or  diplom-
acy of  nations,  any  distinct  or  independent  existence.4

i  2  Doug.  Summ.  97  ;  3  Hutch.  Coll.  412,  413.

2  2  Doug.  Summ.  194  ;  J  Pitk.  Hist  123  to  125.

3  I  have  in  my  possession  a  printed  case,  Thomas  Forshy  v.  Jf'addel
Cunningham,  brought  before  the  governor  and  council  of  New- York
from  the  supreme  court  of  that  province  by  appeal,  in  17014.  The  great
question  was,  whether  an  appeal  or  writ  of  error  lay  ;  and  the  judges  of
the  supreme  court,  and  the  council  held,  that  no  appeal  lay,  for  that
would  be  to  re-examine  facts  settled  by  the  verdict  of  a  jury.  The  lieu-
tenant governor  dissented.  It  was  agreed  on  all  sides,  that  an  appeal  in
matter  of  law  (by  way  of  writ  of  error)  lay  to  the  king  in  council  from
all  judgments  in  the  colonies  ;  but  not  as  to  matters  of  fact  in  suits  at
common  law.  It  was  also  held,  that  in  all  the  colonies  the  subjects  car-
ry with  them  the  laws  of  England,  and  therefore  as  well  those,  which
took  place  after,  as  those,  which  were  in  force  before  Magna  Charta.

4  1  Chalm.  Annals  686,  689,  690.


164  HISTORY  OP  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

They did not possess the power of  forming any
league  or  treaty  among  themselves,  which  should  ac-
quire an  obligatory  force  without  the  assent  of  the  pa-
rent state. And  though  their  mutual  wants  and  neces-
sities often  induced  them  to  associate  for  common  pur-
poses of  defence,  these  confederacies  were  of  a  casual
and  temporary  nature,  and  were  allowed  as  an  indul-
gence, rather  than  as  a  right.  They  made  several  efforts
to  procure  the  establishment  of  some  general  superin-
tending government  over  them  all  ;  but  their  own  dif-
ferences of  opinion,  as  well  as  the  jealousy  of  the  crown,
made  these  efforts  abortive.1 These  efforts,  however,
prepared  their  minds  for  the  gradual  reconciliation  of
their  local  interests,  and  for  the  gradual  developement
of  the  principles,  upon  which  a  union  ought  to  rest,
rather  than  brought  on  an  immediate  sense  of  the  ne-
cessity, or  the  blessings  of  such  a  general  government.
^  178.  But  although  the  colonies  were  independent
of  each  other  in  respect  to  their  domestic concerns,
they  were  not  wholly  alien  to  each  other. On  the  con-
trary, they  were  fellow  subjects,  and  for  many  purposes
one  people. Every  colonist  had  a  right  to  inhabit,  if  he
pleased,  in  any  other  colony  ;  and  as  a  British  subject,
he  was  capable  of  inheriting  lands  by  descent  in  every
other  colony. The  commercial  intercourse  of  the  colo-
nies, too,  was  regulated  by  the  general  laws  of  the  Brit-
ish empire  ;  and  could  not  be  restrained,  or  obstructed
by  colonial  legislation.  The  remarks  of  Mr.  Chief  Justice
Jay  on  this  subject  are  equally  just  and  striking. "  All
the  people  of  this  country  were  then  subjects  of  the  king
of  Great  Britain,  and  owed  allegiance  to  him  ;  and  all

i  1  Pitk.  Hist.  50,  141,  142,  143,  144,  145,  146,  429; 2  Haz.  Coll.  ;
1  Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  10,  p.  284  ;  3  Hutch.  Hist.  21,  22,  23.


CH.  XVII.]  GENERAL  REVIEW.  165

the  civil  authority  then  existing,  or  exercised  here,  flow-
ed from  the  head  of  the  British  empire.  They  were,
in  a  strict  sense,  fellow  subjects,  and  in  a  variety  of  re-
spects one  people.  When  the  Revolution  commenced,  the
patriots  did  not  assert,  that  only  the  same  affinity  and
social  connexion  subsisted  between  the  people  of  the
colonies,  which  subsisted  between  the  people  of  Gaul,
Britain,  and  Spain,  while  Roman  provinces,  to  wit,  only
that  affinity  and  social  connexion,  which  result  from  the
mere  circumstance  of  being  governed  by  the  same
prince."  Different  ideas  prevailed,  and  gave  occasion
to  the  Congress  of  1774  and  1775.1

^  1 79.  Having  considered  some  of  the  particulars,  in
which  the  political  organization,  and  public  rights,  and
juridical  policy  of  the  colonies  were  nearly  similar,  it  re-
mains to  notice  a  few,  in  which  there  were  important
differences.

(1.)  As  to  the  course  of  descents  and  distribution
of  intestate  estates.  And,  here,  the  policy  of  differ-
ent colonies  was  in  a  great  measure  determined  by  the
nature  of  their  original  governments  and  local  positions.
All  the  southern  colonies,  including  Virginia,  adhered  to
the  course  of  descents  at  the  common  law  (as  we  have
had  occasion  to  see)  down  to  the  American  Revolution.
As  a  natural  consequence,  real  property  was  in  these
colonies  generally  held  in  large  masses  by  the  families
of  ancient  proprietors  ;  the  younger  branches  were  in
a  great  measure  dependent  upon  the  eldest ;  and  the
latter  assumed,  and  supported  somewhat  of  the  pre-em-
inence, which  belonged  to  baronial  possessions  in  the
parent  country.  Virginia  was  so  tenacious  of  entails,
that  she  would  not  even  endure  the  barring  of  them  by
the  common  means  of  fines  and  recoveries.  New -York

i  Chisholm  v.  State  of  Georgia,  2  Dull.  470.


166  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

and  New-Jersey  silently  adhered  to  the  English  rule  of
descents  under  the  government  of  the  crown,  as  royal
provinces.  On  the  other  hand,  all  New-England,  with
the  exception  of  Rhode  Island,  from  a  very  early  period
of  their  settlements  adopted  the  rule  of  dividing  the  in-
heritance equally  among  all  the  children,  and  other  next
of  kin,  giving  a  double  share  to  the  eldest  son.  Mary-
land, after  1715,  and  Pennsylvania  almost  from  its  set-
tlement, in  like  manner  distributed  the  inheritance
among  all  the  children  and  other  next  of  kin.  New-
Hampshire,  although  a  royal  province,  steadily  clung  to
the  system  of  Massachusetts,  which  she  had  received,
when  she  formed  an  integral  part  of  the  latter.  But
Rhode-Island  retained  (as  we  have  already  seen)  its
attachment  to  the  common  law  rule  of  descents  down
almost  to  the  era  of  the  American  Revolution.1

^  180.  In  all  the  colonies,  where  the  rule  of  partible
inheritance  prevailed,  estates  were  soon  parcelled  out
into  moderate  plantations  and  farms  ;  and  the  general
equality  of  property  introduced  habits  of  industry  and
economy,  the  effects  of  which  are  still  visible  in  their
local  customs,  institutions,  and  public  policy.  The  phi-
losophical mind  can  scarcely  fail  to  trace  the  intimate
connexion,  which  naturally  subsists  between  the  general
equality  of  the  apportionment  of  property  among  the  mass
of  a  nation,  and  the  popular  form  of  its  government.
The  former  can  scarcely  fail,  first  or  last,  to  introduce  the
substance  of  a  republic  into  the  actual  administration  of
the  government,  though  its  forms  do  not  bear  such  an
external  impress.  Our  revolutionary  statesmen  were  not
insensible  to  this  silent  but  potent  influence  ;  and  the
fact,  that  at  the  present  time  the  law  of  divisible  inher-

\  To  1770,  Gardner  v.  Collins,  2  Peters's  Sup.  Ct.  R.  58.


CH.  XVII.]  GENERAL  REVIEW*  167

itances  pervades  the  Union,  is  a  strong  proof  of  the  gen-
eral sense,  not  merely  oi'  its  equity,  but  of  its  political

importance.

^  181.  Avery  curious  question  was  at  one  time1
agitated  before  the  king  in  council,  upon  an  appeal  from
Connecticut,  how  far  the  statute  of  descents  and  distri-
butions, dividing  the  estate  among  all  the  children,  was
conformable  to  the  charter  of  that  colony,  which  requir-
ed the  laws  to  be  "  not  contrary  to  the  laws  of  the  realm
of  England."  It  was  upon  that  occasion  decided,  that
the  law  of  descents,  giving  the  female,  as  well  as  the
male  heirs,  a  part  of  the  real  estate,  was  repugnant  to
the  charter,  and  therefore  void.  This  determination
created  great  alarm,  not  only  in  Connecticut,  but  else-
where ;  since  it  might  cut  deep  into  the  legislation  of  the
other  colonies,  and  disturb  the  foundation  of  many
titles.  The  decree  of  the  council,  annulling  the  law,
was  upon  the  urgent  application  of  some  of  the  colonial
agents  revoked,  and  the  law  reinstated  with  its  obligato-
ry force.2  At  a  still  later  period  the  same  question  seems
to  have  been  presented  in  a  somewhat  different  shape
for  the  consideration  of  the  law  officers  of  the  crown  ;
and  it  may  now  be  gathered  as  the  rule  of  construction,
that  even  in  a  colony,  to  which  the  benefit  of  the  laws
of  England  is  expressly  extended,  the  law  of  descents
of  England  is  not  to  be  deemed,  as  necessarily  in  force
there,  if  it  is  inapplicable  to  their  situation  ;  or  at  least,
that  a  change  of  it  is  not  beyond  the  general  competen-
cy of  the  colonial  legislature.3

^  18*2.  (2.)  Connected  with  this,  we  may  notice  the
strong  tendency  of  the  colonies  to  make  lands  liable  to

i  In  17-27.

2  1  Pitk.  Hist.  125,  126.

3  Jitt.  Gen,  v.  Stewart,  2  Meriv.  R.  143,  157,  158,  159.


168  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

the  payment  of  debts. In  some  of  them,  indeed,  the
English  rule  prevailed  of  making  lands  liable  only  to
an  extent  upon  an  elegit. But  in  by  far  the  greatest
number,  lands  were  liable  to  be  set  off  upon  appraise-
ment, or  sold  for  the  payment  of  debts.  And  lands  were
also  assets,  in  cases  of  a  deficiency  of  personal  property,
to  be  applied  in  the  course  of  administration  to  dis-
charge the  debts  of  the  party  deceased. This  was  a
natural  result  of  the  condition  of  the  people  in  a  new
country,  who  possessed  little  monied  capital ;  whose
wants  were  numerous  ;  and  whose  desire  of  credit  was
correspondently  great. The  true  policy  in  such  a  state
of  things  was  to  make  land,  in  some  degree,  a  substi-
tute for  money,  by  giving  it  all  the  facilities  of  transfer,
and  all  the  prompt  applicability  of  personal  property.
It  will  be  found,  that  the  growth  of  the  respective  colo-
nies was  in  no  small  degree  affected  by  this  circum-
stance. Complaints  were  made,  and  perhaps  justly,
that  undue  priorities  in  payment  of  debts  were  given  to
the  inhabitants  of  the  colony  over  all  other  creditors ;
and  that  occasional  obstructions  were  thrown  in  the
way  of  collecting  debts.1 But  the  evil  was  not  general
bits  operation  ;  and  the  policy,  wherever  it  was  pursu-
ed, retarded  the  growth,  and  stinted  the  means  of  the
settlements.  For  the  purpose,  however,  of  giving  great-
er security  to  creditors,  as  well  as  for  a  more  easy  re-
covery of  debts  due  in  the  plantations  and  colonies  in
America,  the  statute of  5  George  2,  ch.  7,  [1732,]
among  other  things  declared,  that  all  houses,  lands,  ne-
groes, and  other  hereditaments  and  real  estates  in  the
plantations  should  be  liable  to,  and  chargeable  with  the
debts  of  the  proprietor,  and  be  assets  for  the  satisfaction

1  1  Chalm.  Annals,  692,  693.


CH.  XVI I. j  GENERAL REVIEW.  1 0(J

thereof,  in  like  manner  as  real  estates  are  by  the  law

of  England  liable,  to  th  faction  of  debts due  by

bond  or  other  ■  I  shall  1 subject to  like

and  equity,  for  seizing,  ex-
tending, sellin  |  osing  of  the  same,  towards  sat-
isfaction of  such  debts,  in  like  manner  as  personal  estates
in  any  of  such  plantations  are  seized,  extended,  sold,  or
disposed  of,  for  satisfaction  of  debts.  This  acl  does  not
seem  to  have  been  resisted  on  the  part  of  any  of  the
colonies,  to  whom  it  peculiarly  applied.1

^  183.  In  respect  to  the  political  relations  of  the
colonies  with  the  parent  country,  it  is  not  easy  to  state
the  exact  limits  of  the  dependency,  which  was  admitted,
and  the  extent  of  sovereignty,  which  might  be  lawfully
exercised  over  them,  either  by  the  crown,  or  by  parlia-
ment. In  regard  to  the  crown,  all  of  the  colonies  ad-
mitted, that  they  owed  allegiance  to  the  crown,  as  their
sovereign  liege  lord,  though  the  nature  of  the  powers,
which  he  might  exercise,  as  sovereign,  were  still  unde-
fined.2

§  184.  In  the  silence  of  express  declarations  we
may  resort  to  the  doctrines  maintained  by  the  crown-
writers,  as  furnishing,  if  not  an  exact,  at  least  a  compre-
hensive view  of  the  claims  of  the  royal  prerogative  over
the  colonial  establishments.  They  considered  it  not
necessary  to  maintain,  that  all  the  royal  prerogatives,
exercisable  in  England,  were  of  course  exercisable  in
the  colonies;  but  only  such  fundamental  rights  and  prin-
ciples, as  constituted  the  basis  of  the  throne  and  its
authority,  and  without  which  the  king  would  cease  to
be  sovereign  in  all  his  dominions. Hence  the  attributes


i  Telfair  v.  Stead,  2  Cranch,4l»7.

2  Marshall's  Colon,  ch,  13,  p.  353;  3  Wilson's  Works,  236,  237,  238,
241,  242,  243.

vol.  i.  22


170  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

of  sovereignty,  perfection,  perpetuity,  and  irresponsi-
bility, which  were  inherent  in  the  political  capacity  of
the  king,  belonged  to  him  in  all  the  territories  subject
to  the  crown,  whatever  was  the  nature  of  their  laws,  and
government  in  other  respects. Every  where  he  was
the  head  of  the  church,  and  the  fountain  of  justice ;
every  where  he  was  entitled  to  a  share  in  the  legisla-
tion, (except  where  he  had  expressly  renounced  it ;)
every  where  he  was  generalissimo  of  all  forces,  and
entitled  to  make  peace  or  war. But  minor  prerogatives
might  be  yielded,  where  they  were  inconsistent  with
the  laws  or  usages  of  the  place,  or  were  inapplicable  to
the  condition  of  the  people. In  every  question,  that
respected  the  royal  prerogatives  in  the  colonies,  where
they  were  not  of  a  strictly  fundamental  nature,  the  first
thing  to  be  considered  was,  whether  the  charter  of  the
particular  colony  contained  any  express  provision  on
the  subject. If  it  did,  that  was  the  guide. If  it  was
silent,  then  the  royal  prerogatives  were  in  the  colony
precisely  the  same,  as  in  the  parent  country ;  for  in  such
cases  the  common  law  of  England  was  the  common  law
of  the  colonies  for  such  purposes. Hence,  if  the  colo-
nial charter  contained  no  peculiar  grant  to  the  contrary,
the  king  might  erect  courts  of  justice  and  exchequer
therein ;  and  the  colonial  judicatories,  in  point  of  law,
were  deemed  to  emanate  from  the  crown,  under  the
modifications  made  by  the  colonial  assemblies  under
their  charters. The  king  also  might  extend  the  privi-
lege of  sending  representatives  to  new  towns  in  the
colonial  assemblies. He  might  control,  and  enter  a  nolle
prosequi  in  criminal  prosecutions,  and  pardon  crimes,
and  release  forfeitures. He  might  present  to  vacant
benefices ;  and  he  was  entitled  to  royal  monies,  treasure-
trove,  escheats,  and  forfeitures. No  colonial  assemblies


CH.  XVII.]  GENERAL REVIEW.  1?|

had  a  right  to  enact  laws,  except  with  the  assent  of  the
crown  by  charter,  or  commission,  or  otherwise;  and  if
they  exceeded  the  authority  prescribed  by  the  crown,

their  acts  were  void.  The  king  might  alter  the  consti-
tution and  form  of  the  government  of  the  colony,  where
there  was  no  charter,  or  other  confirmatory  act  by  the
colonial  assembly  with  the  assent  of  the  crown;  and  it
rested  merely  on  the  instructions  and  commissions  given,
from  time  to  time,  by  the  crown  to  its  governors.  The
king  had  power  also  to  vest  in  the  royal  governor-  in
the  colonies,  from  time  to  time,  such  of  his  prerogatives,
as  he  should  please ;  such  as  the  power  to  prorogue,
adjourn,  and  dissolve  the  colonial  assemblies ;  to  con-
firm acts  and  laws ;  to  pardon  offences ;  to  act  as  cap-
tain general  of  the  public  forces ;  to  appoint  public  offi-
cers ;  to  act  as  chancellor  and  supreme  ordinary ;  to
sit  in  the  highest  court  of  appeals  and  errors ;  to
exercise  the  duties  of  vice-admiral,  and  to  grant  com-
missions to  privateers.  These  last,  and  some  other
of  the  prerogatives  of  the  king,  were  commonly  exer-
cised by  the  royal  governors  without  objection.

§  185.  The  colonial  assemblies  were  not  considered
as  standing  on  the  same  footing,  as  parliament,  in  re-
spect to  rights,  powers,  and  privileges  ;  but  as  deriving
all  their  energies  from  the  crown,  and  limited  by  the
respective  charters,  or  other  confirmatory  acts  of  the
crown,  in  all  their  proceedings.  The  king  might,  in
respect  to  a  colonial  assembly, -assent  to  an  act  of  as-
sembly,  before  it  met,  or  ratify  it,  or  dissent  from  it,  after
the  session  was  closed.  He  might  accept  a  surrender
of  a  colonial  charter,  subject  to  the  rights  of  third  per-
sons previously  acquired ;  and  give  the  colony  a  new
charter  or  otherwise  institute  therein  a  new  form  ni'
government. And  it  has  been  even  contended,  that  the


172  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

king  might,  in  cases  of  extraordinary  necessity  or  emer-
gency, take  away  a  charter,  where  the  defence  or  pro-
tection of  the  inhabitants  required  it,  leaving  them  in
possession  of  their  civil  rights.

§  186.  Such  are  some  of  the  royal  prerogatives,
which  were  supposed  to  exist  by  the  crown-writers  in
the  colonial  establishments,  when  not  restrained  by  any
positive  charter  or  bill  of  rights.  Of  these,  many  were
undisputed ;  but  others  were  resisted  with  pertinacity
and  effect  in  the  colonial  assemblies.1

§  187.  In  regard  to  the  authority  of  parliament  to
enact  laws,  which  should  be  binding  upon  them,  there
was  quite  as  much  obscurity,  and  still  more  jealousy
spreading  over  the  whole  subject.2  The  government
of  Great  Britain  always  maintained  the  doctrine,  that  the
parliament  had  authority  to  bind  the  colonies  in  all  cases
whatsoever.3  No  acts  of  parliament,  however,  were
understood  to  bind  the  colonies,  unless  expressly  named
therein.4  But  in  America,  at  different  times  and  in
different  colonies,  different  opinions  were  entertained
on  the  subject.5  In  fact,  it  seemed  to  be  the  policy  of
the  colonies,  as  much  as  possible,  to  withdraw  them-

1  The  reader  will  find  the  subject  of  the  royal  prerogative  in  the  colo-
nies discussed  at  laro-e  in  Chitty  on  the  Prerogatives  of  the  Crown,  ch.
3,  p.  25  to  40;  in  Stokes  on  the  Constitution  of  the  Colonies,  passim;
in  Chalmers's  Annals  of  the  Color.  irs's  Opinions,  2
vols,  passim. Sec  also  Com.  Dig.  Prerogative.

2  ]  Pitk.Hist.  164  to  169,  186,  198,199,  200  to  205;  App.  448,  No  9;
Id.  452,  458  :  3  Wilson's  Works, 238,  2:]!),  24Q,  2-11/2  12,  2  13  :  2  Wilson's
Works,  54,  55,  58  ;  Mass.  State  Papers,  338,339,  814,  352  to  364  ;  1  Pitk.
Hist.  255.

3  3  Wilson's  Works,  '205  ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  140,  687,  690 ;  Stokes's
Colon.  146.

4  1  Black.  Comm.  107,  108  ;  Chitty  on  Prerog.  33.

5  ]  Pitk.  Hist.  198,  L99,  200  to  205,  206,  209;  Marshall's  Colon,  ch.
13,  p.  352;  I  Chitty  on  Prerog.  29;  1  Chalmers's  Opinions,  196  to  225  ;
1  Pitk.  Hist.  ch.  6,p,  16  •  to  212.


en.  xvn.]  iw.  1?:;

selves  from  any  acknowledgment  of  such  authority,
cept  so  far  as  their  necessities,  frotn  tiro  i  om-

pellecl  them  to  acquiesce  in  the  parliamentary  lures

expressly  extending  to  them. We  have  already  seen,

that  they  resisted  the  imposition  of  taxes  upon  th
without  the  consent  of  their  local  legislatures,  from  a
very  early  period.1

§  188.  But  it  was  by  no  means  an  uncommon  opin-
ion in  some  of  the  colonies,  especially  in  the  proprietary
and charter  governments, that  no  act  of  parliament
whatsoever  could  bind  them  without  their  own  consent2
An  extreme  reluctance  was  shown  by  Massachusetts  to
any  parliamentary  interference  as  early  as  1640;3  and
the  famous  navigation  acts  of  1651  and  1660  were  per-
petually evaded, even  when  their  authority  was no
longer  denied,  throughout  the  whole  of  New-England.4
Massachusetts,  in  1679,  in  an address  to  the  crown,
declared,  that  she  "  apprehended  them  to  be  an  invasion
of  the  rights,  liberties,  and  properties  of  the  subjects  of
his  majesty  in  the  colony,  they  not  being  represented
in  parliament ;  and,  according  to  the  usual  sayings  of
the  learned  in  the  law,  the  laws  of  England  were  bound-
ed within  the  four  seas,  and  did  not  reach  Ameru  a."
However,  Massachusetts,  as  well  as  the  other  N
England  colonies,  finally  acquiesced  in  the  authority  of
parliament  to  regulate  trade  and  commerce  ;  but  denied
it  in  regard  to  taxation  and  internal  re  o  o(  the


i  Marshall's  Colon,  ch.  ';  1  Pitk. Hist.  .98;  Id.

164,  174,  179,  182  to  Lte  Papers,  359  to  !

2  1  Pitk.  Hist  91;  1  Chalm.Anna

3  2  Winthrop's  Jour.  25.

4  lChalm.  Annals,  ...  668;
3  Hutch.  Coll.  406;  Mass.  State!'.  [ntroduction ;  Id.  50;
2  Wilson's  Works,  62.

5  1  Chalm.  Ann.  407  ;  I  Hutch.  Hist  322;  2  Wilson's  Works.  '


174  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

colonies.1  As  late  as  1757,  the  general  court  of  Mas-
sachusetts admitted  the  constitutional  authority  of  par-
liament in  the  following  words :  —  "  The  authority  of  all
acts  of  parliament,  which  concern  the  colonies,  and  ex-
tend to  them,  is  ever  acknowledged  in  all  the  courts  of
law,  and  made  the  rule  of  all  judicial  proceedings  in  the
province.  There  is  not  a  member  of  the  general  court,
and  we  know  no  inhabitant  within  the  bounds  of  the
government,  that  ever  questioned  this  authority."  2  And
in  another  address  in  1761,  they  declared,  that  "every
act  we  make,  repugnant  to  an  act  of  parliament  extend-
ing to  the  plantations,  is  ipso  facto  null  and  void.3  And
at  a  later  period,  in  1768,  in  a  circular  address  to  the
other  colonies,  they  admitted,  "  that  his  majesty's  high
court  of  Parliament  is  the  supreme  legislative  power  over
the  whole  empire ; "  contending,  however,  that  as  Brit-
ish subjects  they  could  not  be  taxed  without  their  own
consent.4

§  189.  "In  the  middle  and  southern  provinces,"  (we
are  informed  by  a  most  respectable  historian,5)  "no
question  respecting  the  supremacy  of  parliament  in
matters  of  general  legislation  existed.  The  authority  of
such  acts  of  internal  regulation,  as  were  made  for  Amer-

1  1  Pitk.  Hist.  92,  98, 181  to  212,  285,  473,  475 ;  1  Chalm.  Annals,  452,
460  ;  1  Hutch.  Hist.  322  ;  3  Hutch.  Hist.  23,  24  ;  Dummer's  Defence,  1
American  Tracts,  51  ;  Burke's  Speech  on  Taxation  in  1774,  and  on  Con-
ciliation in  1775.

2  3  Hutch.  Hist.  06 ;  Mass.  State  Papers,  337.

3  3  Hutch.  Hist.  92;  App.  463 ;  Marshall's  Colon.  No.  5,  p.  472.

4  Marshall's  Colon,  ch.  13,  p.  371;  App.  No.  5,  p.  472,  473;  1  Pitk.
Hist.  186;  App.  448,  450,  453.  458.  —  This  was  the  ground  asserted  in
Mr.  J.  Otis's  celebrated  pamphlet  on  the  Rights  of  the  Colonies.  1  Amer-
ican Tracts,  [1766,]  48,  52,  54,  56,  59,  66,  73,  99 ;  and  also  in  Dulany's
Considerations  on  Taxing  the  Colonies,  1  Amer.  Tracts,  14,  18,  36,  52.
See  also  1  Jefferson's  Corrcsp.  6,  7,  12.

5  Marshall's  Colon,  ch.  13,  p.  354.  See  also  1  Pitk.  Hist.  162  to  212,
255,  275,  276  ;  1  Jefferson's  Corresp.  6,  7,  104  ;  Id.  117.


CH. \  Vll.  |  GENERAL REVIEW  .  ]  7  .'>

ica,  as  well  as  those  for  the  regulation  of  commerce,
even  by  the  imposition  of  duties,  provided  these  duties
were  imposed  for  the  purpose  of  regulation,  had  been  at
all  times  admitted.  Bui  these  colonies,  however  they
might  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  parliament  in
other  respects,  denied  the  right  of  that  body  to  tax  them
internally."  If  there  were  any  exceptions  to  the  gene-
ral accuracy  of  this  statement,  they  .seem  to  have  been
too  few  mid  fugitive  to  impair  the  general  result.1  In
the  charter  of  Pennsylvania,  an  express  reservation  was
made  of  the  power  of  taxation  by  an  act  of  parliament,
though  this  was  argued  not  to  be  a  sufficient  foundation
for  the  exercise  of  it.2

§  190.  Perhaps  the  best  general  summary  of  the
rights  and  liberties  asserted  by  all  the  colonies  is  con-
tained in  the  celebrated  declaration  drawn  up  by  the
Congress  of  the  Nine  Colonies,  assembled  at  New-
York,  in  October,  1765.3  That  declaration  asserted,
that  the  colonists  "  owe  the  same  allegiance  to  the  crow  n
of  Great  Britain,  that  is  owing  from  his  subjects  born
within  the  realm,  and  all  due  subordination  to  that  au-
gust body,  the  parliament  of  Great  Britain."  That  the
colonists  "are  entitled  to  all  the  inherent  rights  and  lib-
erties of  his  [the  king's]  natural  born  subjects  within
the  kingdom  of  Great  Britain."  "  That  it  is  inseparably
essential  to  the  freedom  of  a  people,  and  the  undoubted
right  of  Englishmen,  that  no  taxes  be  imposed  on  them,
but  with  their  own  consent,  given  personally,  or  by
their  representatives." That  the  people  of  the  "colo-


i  1  Pitk.  Hist.  92,  96,  98,  162  to  212  ;  App.  No.  4,  448,  450,

2  1  Chalmers's  Annals,  (IMS,  658;  2  Amer.  Tracts,  Rights  ofParlia.
Vind.  25.  26;  3  Amor.  Tracts,  App.  51  ;  Id.  Franklin's  Exam. 46.

3  The  nine  States  were  Massachusetts,  Rhode-Island,  Connecticut,
New- York,  New-Jersey,  Pennsylvania.  Delaware,  Maryland,  and  South
Carolina.


176  HISTORY  OF  THE  COL-  . IES.  [BOOK  I.

nies  are  not,  and  from  their  local  circumstances  cannot
be  represented  in  the  house  of  commons  of  Great  Brit-
ain. That  the  only  representatives  of  these  colonies
are  persons  chosen  therein  by  themselves  ;  and  that  no
taxes  ever  have  been,  or  can  be,  constitutionally  im-
posed upon  them,  but  by  their  respective  legislatures.
That  all  supplies  of  the  crown  being  free  gifts  from  the
people,  it  is  unreasonable  and  inconsistent  with  the
principles  and  spirit  of  the  British  constitution  for  the
people  of  Great  Britain  to  grant  to  his  majesty  the
property  of  the  colonies.  And  that  the  trial  by  jury  is
the  inherent  and  invaluable  right  of  every  British  sub-
ject in  these  colonies." 1

§  191.  We  here  observe,  that  the  superintending
authority  of  parliament  is  admitted  in  general  terms ;
and  that  absolute  independence  of  it  is  not  even  sug-
gested, although  in  subsequent  clauses  certain  grievan-
ces by  the  stamp  act,  and  by  certain  acts  levying  duties
and  restraining  trade  in  the  colonies,  are  disapproved  of
in  very  strong  language.2  In  the  report  of  the  commit-
tee of  the  same  body  on  the  subject  of  colonial  rights,
drawn  up  with  great  ability,  it  was  stated,  "  it  is  acknow-
ledged, that  the  parliament,  collectively  considered,  as
consisting  of  king,  lords,  and  commons,  are  the  supreme
legislature  of  the  whole  empire ;  and  as  such,  have  an
undoubted  jurisdiction  over  the  whole  colonies,  so  far  as
is  consistent  with  our  essential  rights,  of  which  also  they
are  and  must  be  the  final  judges ;  and  even  the  appli-
cations and  petitions  to  the  king  and  parliament  to  im-
plore relief  in  our  present  difficulties,  will  be  an  ample
recognition  of  our  subjection  to,  and  dependence  upon

1  Marsh.  Hist.  Colonies,  ch.  13,  p.  360,  470,  471 ;  1  Pitk-  Hist.  178,
179,  180,  446.

2  Marsh.  Hist.  Colon,  p.  471,  note  4.


CH.  XVII.]  GEICERAL  REVIEW.  177

the  legislature."  l And  they  contended,  that  "  there  m
a  vast  difference  between  the  exercise  of  parliamentary

jurisdiction  in  general  acts  for  the  amendment  of  the
common  law,  or  even  in  general  regulations  of  trade
and  commerce  through  the  empire,  and  the  actual  ex-
erercise  of  that  jurisdiction  in  levying  external  and  in-
ternal duties  and  taxes  on  the  colonists,  while  they
neither  are,  nor  can  be  represented  in  parliament."  2
And  in  the  petition  of  the  same  boody  to  the  house  of
commons,  there  is  the  following  declaration  :  "  We
most  sincerely  recognise  our  allegiance  to  the  crown,
and  acknowledge  all  due  subordination  to  the  parlia-
ment of  Great  Britain,  and  shall  always  retain  the  most
grateful  sense  of  their  assistance  and  protection." 3  But
it  is  "added,  there  is  "a  material  distinction  in  rea-
son and  sound  policy  between  the  necessary  exer-
cise of  parliamentary  jurisdiction  in  general  acts  for  the
amendment  of  the  common  law,  and  the  regulation  of
trade  and  commerce,  through  the  whole  empire  ;  and  the
exercise  of  that  jurisdiction  by  imposing  taxes  on  the
colonies  ; " 4  thus  admitting  the  former  to  be  rightful,
while  denying  the  latter.5

§  192.  But  after  the  passage  of  the  stamp  act,  in
1765,  many  of  the  colonies  began  to  examine  this  sub-
ject with  more  care  and  to  entertain  very  different  opin-
ions, as  to  parliamentary  authority.  The  doctrines  main-
tained in  debate  in  parliament,  as  well  as  the  alarming
extent,  to  which  a  practical  application  of  those  doc-
trines might  lead,  in  drying  up  the  resources,  and  pros-


i  Pitk.  Hist.  448,  450.  2  1  Pitk.  Hist.  153,  454.

3  4  Amor.  Museum.  89;  4  4  Amer.  Museum,  89,  90.

5  The  celebrated  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  the  colonies  by  Congress
in  1771  (hereafter  cited-)  contains  a  summary  not  essentially  different.
1  Journ.  of  Congress,  27  to  31.

vol.  i.  23


178  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

trating  the  strength  and  prosperity  of  the  colonies,  drove
them  to  a  more  close  and  narrow  survey  of  the  founda-
tion of  parliamentary  supremacy.  Doubts  were  soon
infused  into  their  minds  ;  and  from  doubts  they  passed
by  an  easy  transition  to  a  denial,  first  of  the  power  of
taxation,  and  next  of  all  authority  whatever  to  bind  them
by  its  laws.1  One  of  the  most  distinguished  of  our
writers  2  during  the  contest  admits,  that  he  entered  up-
on the  inquiry  "  with  a  view  and  expectation  of  being
able  to  trace  some  constitutional  line  between  those
cases,  in  which  we  ought,  and  those,  in  which  we  ought
not  to  acknowledge  the  power  of  parliament  over  us.
In  the  prosecution  of  his  inquiries  he  became  fully  con-
vinced, that  such  a  line  does  not  exist ;  and  that  there
can  be  no  medium  between  acknowledging  and  deny-
ing that  power  in  all  cases."

§  193.  If  other  colonies  did  not  immediately  arrive  at  the
same  conclusion,  it  was  easy  to  foresee,  that  the  strug-
gle would  ultimately  be  maintained  upon  the  general
ground  ;  and  that  a  common  interest  and  a  common
desire  of  security,  if  not  of  independence,  would  gradu-
ally bring  all  the  colonies  to  feel  the  absolute  necessity
of  adhering  to  it,  as  their  truest  and  safest  defence.3
In  1773,  Massachusetts  found  no  difficulty  in  contend-
ing in  the  broadest  terms  for  an  unlimited  independence
of  parliament  ;  and  in  a  bold  and  decided  tone  denied
all  its  power  of  legislation  over  them.  A  distinction  was
taken  between subjection to  parliament, and  allegi-

1  1  Jefferson's  Corresp.  6,  7,  12,  104  to  11G.

2  3  Wilson's  Works,  203 ;  Mass.  State  Papers,  339,  340.

3  3  Wilson's  Works,  221,  222,  226,  227,  229,  237,  238  ;  2  Wilson's
Works,  54,  55,  58  to  63  ;  1  Pitk.  Hist.  242,  243,  246,  248,  249,  250  ;
Mass.  State  Papers,  331,  333,  337, 339,  342  to  351,  35 1  to  364  ;  4  Debrett's
Pari.  Debates,  251,  &c.  note  ; Marsh.  Hist.  Colon,  ch.  14,  p.  412,  483

1  Jefferson's  Corresp.  6,  7,  12,  100,  104  to  116.


CH.  XVII.]  GENERAL  REVIEW.  j  7!)

ance  to  the  crown.  The  latter  was  admitted  ;  but  the
former  was  resolutely  opposed.1  Ii  is  remarkable, that
the  Declaration  of  Independence,  which  sets  forth  our
grievances  in  such  warm  and  glowing  colors,  does  not
once  mention  parliament,  or  allude  to  our  connexion
with  it ;  but  treats  the  acts  of  oppression  therein  referred
to,  as  acts  of  the  king,  in  combination  "  with  others"  for
the  overthrow  of  our  liberties.3

^  194.  The  colonies  generally  did  not,  however,  at
this  period  concur  in  these  doctrines  of  Massachusetts,
and  some  difficulties  arose  among  them  in  the  discus-
sions on  this  subject.  Even  in  the  declaration  of  rights8
drawn  up  by  the  continental  congress  in  1774,  and  pre-
sented to  the  world,  as  their  deliberate  opinion  of  colo-
nial privileges,  while  it  was  asserted,  that  they  were  en-
titled to  a  free  and  exclusive  power  of  legislation  in
their  provincial  legislatures,  in  all  cases  of  taxation  and
internal  policy,  they  admitted  from  the  necessity  of
the  case,  and  a  regard  to  the  mutual  interests  of
both  countries,  that  parliament  might  pass  laws  bond
fide  for  the  regulation  of  external  commerce,  though  not
to  raise  a  revenue,  for  the  purpose  of  securing  the  com-
mercial advantages  of  the  whole  empire  to  the  mother
country,  and  the  commercial  benefits  of  its  respective
members.4 An  utter  denial  of  all  parliamentary  author-

•  Mass.  State  Papers, edit.  1818,  p.342  to3  15,  384  to396  :  I  Pitk.  Hist
250,251,  453,  154.

2  1  Jefferson's  Corresp.  6,  7,  12,  100  to  1  Hi.

3  l  Pitk.  Hist.  285,  286,340,  344;  Journ.  of  Congress,  1774,  p.  28, 29 ;

Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  14,  p.  412,  183.

4  As  this  document  is  very  important,  and  not  easily  found,  the
material  clauses  will  be  here  extracted.  After  reciting  many  acts  of
grievance, the  Declaration proce  Hows:

"The  good  people  of  the  several  colonies  of  New-Hampshire,  Massa-
chusetts Bay,  Rhode-Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  Connecticut,
New- York,  New-Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Newcastle,  Kent,  and  Sussex  on


180  HISTORY  OF  THE  COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

ity  was  not  generally  maintained  until  after  independ-
ence was  in  the  full  contemplation  of  most  of  the  col-
onies.


Delaware,  Maryland,  Virginia,  North-Carolina,  and  South-Carolina,  justly-
alarmed  at  these  arbitrary  proceedings  of  parliament  and  administration,
have  severally  elected,  constituted,  aud  appointed  deputies  to  meet  and
sit  in  general  congress,  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  in  order  to  obtain
such  establishment,  as  that  their  religion,  laws,  and  liberties  may  not
be  subverted  :  Whereupon  the  deputies  so  appointed  being  now  assem-
bled, in  a  full  and  free  representation  of  these  colonies,  taking  into  their
most  serious  consideration  the  best  means  of  attaining  the  ends  afore-
said, do  in  the  first  place,  as  Englishmen,  their  ancestors,  in  like  cases
have  usually  done,  for  asserting  and  vindicating  their  rights  and  liber-
ties, DECLARE,

"That  the  inhabitants  of  the  English  colonies  in  North-America,  by
the  immutable  laws  of  nature,  the  principles  of  the  English  constitution,
and  the  several  charters  or  compacts,  have  the  following  rights.

"  Resolved,  N.  C.  D.  1.  That  they  are  entitled  to  life,  liberty,  and
property :  and  they  have  never  ceded  to  any  sovereign  power  whatever,
a  rHit  to  dispose  of  either  without  their  consent.

"Resolved,  N.  C.  D.  2.  That  our  ancestors,  who  first  settled  these
colonies,  were,  at  the  time  of  their  emigration  from  the  mother  country,
entitled  to  all  the  rights,  liberties,  and  immunities  of  free  and  natural
born  subjects,  within  the  realm  of  England.

"  Resolved,  N.  C.  D.  3.  That  by  such  emigration  they  by  no  means
forfeited,  surrendered,  or  lost  any  of  those  rights,  but  that  they  were,
and  their  descendants  now  are.  entitled  to  the  exercise  and  enjoyment
of  all  such  of  them,  as  their  local  and  other  circumstances  enable  them
to  exercise  and  enjoy.

»  Resolved,  4.  That  the  foundation  of  English  liberty  and  of  all  free
government  is  a  right  in  the  people  to  participate  in  their  legislative
conncil  :  and  as  the  English  colonists  are  not  represented,  and  from
their  local  and  other  circumstances  cannot  properly  be  represented  in
the  British  parliament,  they  are  entitled  to  a  free  and  exclusive  power
of  legislation  in  their  several  provincial  legislatures,  where  their  right
of  representation  can  alone  be  preserved,  in  all  cases  of  taxation  and  in-
ternal polity,  subject  only  to  the  negative  of  their  sovereign,  in  such
manner,  as  has  been  heretofore  used  and  accustomed.  But  from  the  ne-
cessity of  the  case,  and  a  regard  to  the  mutual  interests  of  both  coun-
tries, we  cheerfully  consent  to  the  operation  of  such  acts  of  the  British
parliament,  as  are  bona  fide  restrained  to  the  regulation  of  our  external
commerce,  for  the  purpose  of  securing  the  commercial  advantages  of  the
whole  empire  to  the  mother  country,  and  the  commercial  benefits  of  its
respective  members;  excluding  every  idea  of  taxation,  internal  or  exter-


CH.  XVII.]  GENERAL  REVIEW.  181

^  195.  The  principal  grounds,  on  which  parliament
asserted  the  right  to  make  laws  to  bind  the  colonic-  in
all  cases  whatsoever,  were,  that  the  colonics  wereorig-
inally  established  under  charters  from  the  crown;
that  the  territories  were  dependencies  of  the  realm,  and

nal,  for  raising  a  revenue  on  the  subjects  in  America without  their  con-
sent.

"  Resolved,  N.  C.  I).  5.  That  the  respective  colonies  are  entitled  to
the  common  law  of  England,  and  more  especially  to  the  gn  al  and  ines-
timable privilege  of  being  tried  by  then  peers  of  the  vicinage,  according
to  the  course  of  that  law.

"Resolved,  (>.  That  they  are  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  such  of  the
English  statutes,  as  existed  at  the  time  of  their  colonization  ;  and  which
they  have,  by  experience,  respectively  found  to  be  applicable  to  their
several  local  and  other  circumstances.

"Resolved,  N.  C.  D.  7.  That  these,  his  majesty's  colonies,  are  like-
wise entitled  to  all  the  immunities  and  privileges  granted  and  confirmed
to  them  by  royal  charters,  or  secured  by  their  several  codes  of  provin-
cial laws.

"Resolved,  N.  C.  D.  8.  That  they  have  a  right  peaceably  to  assem-
ble, consider  of  their  grievances,  and  petition  the  kiig  ;  and  that  all
prosecutions,  prohibitory  proclamations,  and  commitments  for  the  same,
are  illegal.

"Resolved,  N.  C.  D.  9.  That  the  keeping  a  standing  army  in  these
colonies,  in  times  of  peace,  without  the  consent  of  the  legislature  of  that
colony,  in  which  such  army  is  kept,  is  against  law.

"Resolved,  N.  C.  D.  10.  It  is  indispensably  necessary  to  good  govern-
ment, and  rendered  essential  by  the  English  constitution,  that  the  con-
stituent branches  of  the  legislature  be  independent  of  each  othe."  :  that,
therefore,  the  exercise  of  legislative  pou  er  in  several  colonies,  by  a  coun-
cil appointed,  during  pleasure,  by  the  crown,  is  unconstitutional,  dan-
gerous, and  destructive  to  the  freedom  of  American  legislation.

"  AH,  and  each  of  which,  the  aforesaid  deputies  in  behalf  of  themsi
and  their  constituents,  do  claim,  demand,  and  in  list  on,  as  their  indubi-
table rights  and  liberties;  which  cannot  he  legally  taken  from  them,  al-
tered, or  abridged  by  any  power  whatever,  without  their  own  coi
by  their  representatives  in  their  several  provincial  legislatures."
The  plan  of  conciliation  proposed  by  the  provincial  convention  of  New-
Fork  in 1??."),  explicitly admits,  "  that  from  the  necessity  of  the  case
Great  Britain  should  regulate  the  trade  of  the  whole  empire  for  the
eral  benefit  of  the  whole,  but  not  for  the  separate  benefit  of  any  particu-
lar part." 1  Pitk.  Hist.  ch.  <>,  p.  314.


182  HISTORY OF THE COLONIES.  [BOOK  I.

the  crown  could  not  by  its  grants  exempt  them  from
the  supreme  legislative  power  of  parliament,  which  ex-
tended wherever  the  sovereignty  of  the  crown  extend-
ed ;  that  the  colonists  in  their  new  settlements  owed
the  same  subjection  and  allegiance  tothe  supreme  pow-
er, as  if  they  resided  in  England,  aflnhat  the  crown
had  no  authority to  enter  into  any  ff^act  to  impair
it  ;  that the  legislative  power  over  the  colonies  is  su-
preme and  sovereign  ;  that  the  supreme  power  must
be  entire  and  complete  in  taxation,  as  well  as  in  legisla-
tion ;  that  there  is  no difference  between  a  grant  of
duties  on  merchandise,  and  a  grant  of  taxes  and  subsi-
dies ; that there is  no  difference between  external
and  internal  taxes,  and  though  different  in  name,  they
are  in  effect  the  same; that  taxation  is  a  part  of  the
sovereign  power,  and  that  it  may  be  rightfully  exercis-
ed over  those,  who  are  not  represented.1

^  196.  The  grounds,  on  which  the  colonies  resisted
the  right  of  taxation  by  parliament,  were,  (as  we  have
seen,)  that  they  were  not  represented  in  parliament ;
that  they  were  entitled  to  all  the  privileges  and  immu-
nites  of  British  subjects  ;  that  the  latter  could  not
be  taxed  but  by  their  own  representatives ;  that  rep-
resentation and  taxation  were  inseparably  connected  ;
that  the  principles  of  taxation  were  essentially  distinct
from  those  of  legislation ;  that  there  is  a  wide  difference
between  the  power  of  internal  and  external  taxation  ;
that  the  colonies  had  always  enjoyed  the  sole  right
of  imposing  taxes  upon  themselves  ;  and  that  it  was  es-
sential to  their  freedom.2

1  1  Pitk.  Hist.  199,  201,  '202,  204, 205,  20G,  208,  209,  457  :  Mass.  State
Papers,  338,  339  :  1  Chalm.  Annals,  15,  28  ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  54
to  63 ;  Chitty  on  Prerocr.  cli.  3 ;  1  Chalm.  Opin.  196  to  225.

2  1  Pitk.  Mist.  199,  200,  201,  208,  209,  211,  219,  285  to  288,  311,  443,


CH.  XVII. J  GENEBAL  REVIEW.  183

^  197.  The  stamp  act  was  repealed;  but  within  a
few  years  afterwards  duties  of  another  sort  were  laid,

the  object  of  which  was  to  raise  a  revenue  from  impor-
tations into  the  colonies.  These  of  course  became
as  offensive  to the  colonies as  the prior  attempt at

internal  la\ati<j^Mml  were  resisted  upon  the  same
grounds  of  uirF^7ilulionalit\Y:  Il  soon  became  obvi-
ous, that  the  great  struggle  in  respect  to  colonial  and
parliamentary  rights  could  scarcely  be  decided  other-
wise, than  by  an  appeal  to  arms.  Great  Britain  was
resolutely  bent  upon  enforcing  her  claims  by  an  open
exercise  of  military  power;  and  on  the  other  hand,
America  scarcely  saw  any  other  choice  left  to  her,  but
unconditional  submission,  or  bold  and  unmeasured  re-
sistance.

446,  447,  448,  453,  458,  459,  467  ;  Mass.  State  Papers,  344,  345,  34G  to
351  ;  4  Debrett's  Pari.  Debates,  251,  note,  &c. ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.
54  to  63.

i  lPitk.  Hist.  217,219,  &c.


BOOK  II.

HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  AND  OF  THE
CONFEDERATION.


CHAPTER  I.


THE  REVOLUTION.


^  198.  We  have  now  completed  our  survey  of  the
origin  and  political  history  of  the  American  colonies  up
to  the  period  of  the  Revolution.  We  have  examined
the  more  important  coincidences  and  differences  in  their
forms  of  government,  in  their  laws,  and  in  their  politi-
cal institutions.  We  have  presented  a  general  outline  of
their  actual  relations  with  the  parent  country  ;  of  the
rights,  which  they  claimed  ;  of  the  dependence,  which
they  admitted  ;  and  of  the  controversies,  which  exist-
ed at  this  period,  in  respect  to  sovereign  powers  and
prerogatives  on  one  side,  and  colonial  rights  and  liber-
ties on  the  other.

^  199.  We  are  next  to  proceed  to  an  historical  re-
view of  the  origin  of  that  union  of  the  colonies,  which
led  to  the  declaration  of  independence  ;  of  the  effects
of  that  event,  and  of  the  subsequent  war  upon  the  po-
litical character  and  rights  of  the  colonies  ;  of  the  form-
ation and  adoption  of  the  articles  of  confederation ;  of
the  sovereign  powers  antecedently  exercised  by  the
continental  congress  ; of  the  powers  delegated  by  the


CH.  I.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  185

confederation  to  the  general  government;  of  the  causes
of  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  confederation  ;  and  final-
ly, of  the  establishment  of  the  present constitution  of

the  United  States.  Having  disposed  of  those  interest-
ing and  important  topics,  we  shall  then  be  prepared  to

enter  upon  the  examination  of  the  details  of  that  consti-
tution, which  has  justly  been  deemed  one  of  the  most
profound  efforts  of  human  wisdom,  and  which  fit  is  be-
lieved) will  awaken  our  admiration,  and  warm  our  affec-
tion more  and  more,  as  its  excellencies  are  unfolded  in
a  minute  and  careful  survey.

§  200.  No  redress  of  grievances  having  followed
upon  the  many  appeals  made  to  the  king,  and  to  parlia-
ment, by  and  in  behalf  of  the  colonies,  either  conjointly
or  separately,  it  became  obvious  to  them,  that  a  closer
union  and  co-operation  were  necessary  to  vindicate
their  rights,  and  protect  their  liberties.  If  a  resort  to
arms  should  be  indispensable,  it  was  impossible  to  hope
for  success,  but  in  united  efforts.  If  peaceable  redress
was  to  be  sought,  it  was  as  clear,  that  the  voice  of  the
colonies  must  be  heard,  and  their  power  felt  in  a  na-
tional organization.  In  1774  Massachusetts  recom-
mended the  assembling  of  a  continental  congress  to  de-
liberate upon  the  state  of  public  affairs ;  and  according
to  her  recommendation,  delegates  were  appointed  by
the  colonies  for  a  congress,  to  be  held  in  Philadelphia
in  the  autumn  of  the  same  year.  In  some  of  the  legis-
latures of  the  colonies,  which  were  then  in  session,  del-
egates were  appointed  by  the  popular,  or  representa-
tive branch  ;  and  in  other  cases  they  were  appointed
by  conventions  of  the  people  in  the  colonies.1  The  con-


i  1  Journ.  of  Cong.  %  3.  &c.  27,  4">  ;  0  Dane's  Abridg.  App.  §5, p.  16,
§  10,  p.  21.

vol.  i.  24


186  HISTORY OF  THE  REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

gress  of  delegates  (calling  themselves  in  their  more
formal  acts  "  the  delegates  appointed  by  the  good  people
of  these  colonies  ")  assembled  on  the  4th  of  September,
1774  ;l  and  having  chosen  officers,  they  adopted  cer-
tain fundamental  rules  for  their  proceedings.

§  201.  Thus  was  organized  under  the  auspices,  and
with  the  consent  of  the  people,  acting  directly  in  their  pri-
mary, sovereign  capacity,  and  without  the  intervention  of
the  functionaries,  to  whom  the  ordinary  powers  of  gov-
ernment were  delegated  in  the  colonies,  the  first  gen-
eral or  national  government,  which  has  been  very  aptly
called  "  the  revolutionary  government,"  since  in  its  ori-
gin and  progress  it  was  wholly  conducted  upon  revo-
lutionary principles.2  The  congress,  thus  assembled,
exercised  de  facto  and  de  jure  a  sovereign  authori-
ty ;  not  as  the  delegated  agents  of  the  governments
de  facto  of  the  colonies,  but  in  virtue  of  original  powers
derived  from  the  people.  The  revolutionary  govern-
ment, thus  formed,  terminated  only,  when  it  was  regu-
larly superceded  by  the  confederated  government  un-
der the  articles  finally  ratified,  as  we  shall  hereafter
see,  in  1781.3

§  202.  The  first  and  most  important  of  their  acts  was
a  declaration,  that  in  determining  questions  in  this  con-
gress, each  colony  or  province  should  have  one  vote;  and
this  became  the  established  course  during  the  revolu-
tion. They  proposed  a  general  congress  to  be  held  at  the
same  place  in  May,  in  the  next  year.  They  appointed
committees  to  take  into  consideration  their  rights  and
grievances.  They  passed  resolutions,  that  "  after  the  1st
of  December,  1774,  there  shall  be  no  importation  into

1  All  the  States  were  represented,  except  Georgia.

2  9  Dane's  Abridg.  App.  P.  1,  §  5,  p.  16,  §  13,  p.  23.

3  Sergeant  on  Const.  Introd.  7,  8,  (2d  ed.)


CH.  I.]  HISTORY  OF  Tin; REVOLUTION.  187

British  America  from  Greal  Britain  or  Ireland  of  anj
goods,  &c.  or  from  any  other  place,  of  any  such  goods,
as  shall  hare  been  exported  from  Greal  Britian  or  Ire-
land;" that  "after the  10th  ofSeptember,  1775,  the  ex-
portation of  all  merchandise,  <5s:e.  to  Great  Britain,  Ire-
land, and  the  West  Indies  ought  to  cease,  unless  the
grievances  of  America  arc  redressed  before  that  time."1
They  adopted  a  declaration  of  rights,  not  differing  in
substance  drom  that  of  the  congress  of  1765,2  and
affirming,  that  the  respective  colonies  are  entitled  to
the  common  law  of  England  and  the  benefit  of  such
English  statutes,  as  existed  at  the  time  of  their  coloni-
zation, and  which  they  have  by  experience  respec-
tively found  to  be  applicable  to  their  local  and  other
circumstances.  They  also,  in  behalf  of  themselves  and
their  constituents,  adopted  and  signed  certain  articles
of  association,  containing  an  agreement  of  non-importa-
tion, non-exportation,  and  non-consumption  in  order  to
carry  into  effect  the  preceding  resolves  ;  and  also  an
agreement  to  discontinue  the  slave-trade.  They  also
adopted  addresses  to  the  people  of  England,  to  the
neighbouring  British  colonies,  and  to  the  king,  explain-
ing their  grievances,  and  requesting  aid  and  redress.

^  203.  In  May,  1775,  a  second  congress  of  dele-
gates met  from  all  the  states.3  These  delegates  w<  re
chosen,  as  the  preceding  had  been,  partly  by  the  pop-
ular branch  of  the  state  legislatures,  when  in  session  ;
but  principally  by  conventions  of  the  people  in  the
various  states.4  In  a  few  instances  the  choice  by  the
legislative  body  was  confirmed  by  that  of  a  convention,

i  1  Jour,  of  Cong.  21.  2  See  ante,  note,  p.  179.

3  Georgia  did  not  send  delegates  until  the  15th  of  July.  1775,  who
did  not  take  their  seats  until  the  13th  ofSeptember.

4  See  Penhallow  v.  J):>,>>«\  3  Dal!.  54,  and  particularly  the  opinions  of
Iredell  J.  and  Blair  J.  on  this  point. Journals  of  177."),  p.  73  to  79.


188  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

and  e  converso.1  They  immediately  adopted  a  resolu-
tion, prohibiting  all  exportations  to  Quebec,  Nova- Sco-
tia, St.  Johns,  Newfoundland,  Georgia,  except  St.
Johns  Parish,  and  East  and  West  Florida.2  This  was
followed  up  by  a  resolution,  that  the  colonies  be  im-
mediately put  into  a  state  of  defence.  They  prohib-
ited the  receipt  and  negotiation  of  any  British  govern-
ment bills,  and  the  supply  of  any  provisions  or  neces-
saries for  the  British  army  and  navy  in  Massachusetts,
or  transports  in  their  service.3  They  recommended  to
Massachusetts  to  consider  the  offices  of  governor  and
lieutenant  governor  of  that  province  vacant,  and  to  make
choice  of  a  council  by  the  representatives  in  assembly,
by  whom  the  powers  of  government  should  be  exer-
cised, until  a  governor  of  the  king's  appointment
should  consent  to  govern  the  colony  according  to  its
charter.  They  authorized  the  raising  of  continental
troops,  and  appointed  General  Washington  commander
in  chief,  to  whom  they  gave  a  commission  in  the  name
of  the  delegates  of  the  united  colonies.  They  had  pre-
viously authorized  certain  military  measures,  and  espe-
cially the  arming  of  the  militia  of  New-York,  and  the
occupation  of  Crown  Point  and  Ticoncleroga.  They
authorized  the  emission  of  two  millions  of  dollars  in
bills  of  credit,  pledging  the  colonies  to  the  redemption
thereof.  They  framed  rules  for  the  government  of  the
army.  They  published  a  solemn  declaration  of  the
causes  of  their  taking  up  arms,  an  address  to  the  king,
entreating  a  change  of  measures,  and  an  address  to
the  people  of  Great  Britain,  requesting  their  aid,  and
admonishing  them  of  the  threatening  evils  of  a  separa-


1  Journals  of  Congress  of  1775,  p.  73  to  79.

2  Journals  of  Congress  of  1775,  p.  103.

3  Journals  of  Congress  of  1775,  p.  115.


CH.  I.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  REYOLFTIOIC.  189

tion.  They  erected  a  general  post-office,  and  organ-
ized the  department  for  all  the  colonies.  They  ap-
portioned the  quota,  thai  each  colony  should  pay  of  the
bills  emitted  by  congress.1

^  204.  At  a  subsequent  adjournment,  they  author-
ized the  equipment  of  arm&kvessels  to  intercept  sup-
plies to  the  British,  and  the  organization  of  a  marine
coips.  They  prohibited  all  exportations,  except  from
colony  to  colony  under  the  inspection  of  committees.
They  recommended  to  New-Hampshire,  Virginia,  and
South-Carolina,  to  call  conventions  of  the  people  to
establish  a  form  of  government.2  They  authorized  the
grant  of  commissions  to  capture  armed  vessels  and
transports  in  the  British  service  ;  and  recommended
the  creation  of  prize  courts  in  each  colony,  reserving  a
right  of  appeal  to  congress.3  They  adopted  rules  for
the  regulation  of  the  navy,  and  for  the  division  of
prizes  and  prize  money.4  They  denounced,  as  ene-
mies, all,  who  should  obstruct  or  discourage  the  circula-
tion of  bills  of  credit.  They  authorized  further  emissions
of  bills  of  credit,  and  created  two  military  departments
for  the  middle  and  southern  colonies.  They  author-
ized general  reprisals,  and  the  equipment  of  private
armed  vessels  against  British  vessels  and  properly.
They  organized  a  general  treasury  department.  They
authorized  the  exportation  and  importation  of  all  goods
to  and  from  foreign  countries,  not  subject  to  Great
Britain,  with  certain  exceptions;  and  prohibited  the
importation  of  slaves; and declared a  forfeiture  o\  all


1  Journals  of  Congress  of  1775,  p.  177.

2  Journals  of  Congress  of  1775,  p.  231,  235,  279.

3  Journals  of  Congress  of  1775,  p.  259,  860,  &c.

4  Journals  of  Congress  of  1776,  p.  13.

5  Journals  of  Congress  of  1776,  p.  106,  107,  118,  119.


190  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

prohibited  goods.1  They  recommended  to  the  re-
spective assemblies  and  conventions  of  the  colonies,
where  no  government,  sufficient  to  the  exigencies,  had
been  established,  to  adopt  such  government,  as  in  the
opinion  of  the  representatives  should  best  conduce  to
the  happiness  and  safety  of  their  constituents  in  par-
ticular, and  America  in  general,  and  adopted  a  pream-
ble, which  stated,  "  that  the  exercise  of  every  kind  of
authority  under  the  crown  of  Great  Britain  should  be
totally  suppressed.2

^  205.  These  measures,  all  of  which  progressively
pointed  to  a  separation  from  the  mother  country,  and
evinced  a  determination  to  maintain,  at  every  hazard,  the
liberties  of  the  colonies,  were  soon  followed  by  more  de-
cisive steps. On  the  7th  of  June,  1776,  certain  resolu-
tions respecting  independency  were  moved,  which  were
referred  to  a  committee  of  the  whole.  On  the  lOthof  June
it  was  resolved,  that  a  committee  be  appointed  to  pre-
pare a  declaration,  "  that  these  united  colonies  are,  and
of  right  ought  to  be,  free  and  independent  states ;  that
they are  absolved  from  all  allegiance  to  the  British
crown  ;  and  that  all  political  connexion  between  them
and  the  state  of  Great  Britain  is,  and  ought  to  be,  dis-
solved." 3 On  the  11th  of  June  a  committee  was  ap-
pointed to  prepare  and  digest  the  form  of  a  confedera-
tion to  be  entered into  between the colonies, and
also  a  committee  to  prepare  a  plan  of  treaties  to  be
proposed  to  foreign  powers.4 On  the  28th  of  June  the
committee  appointed  to  prepare  a  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence brought  in  a  draft.  On  the  2d  of  July,  congress

1  Journals  of  Congress  of]  776,  p.  122,  123.

2  Journals  of  Congress  of  177(5,  p.  166,  174.

3  Journals  of  Congress  of  1776,  p.  B05,  '206.

4  Journals  of  Congress  of  1776,  p.  207.


CH.  I.]  HISTORY OF THE UK  VOLITION.  1  9  1

adopted  the  resolution  for  Independence  ;  and  <>n  the
4th  of  July  they  adopted  tin-  Declaration  of  Indepen-
dence; and  thereby  solemn^  published  and  declared,
"  That  these  united  colonies  are,  and  ofrighi  ought  to  be,

free  and  independent  states  ;  that  they  are  absolved  from

all  allegiance  to  the  British  crown;  and  that  all  politi-
cal connexion  between  them  and  the  state  oi  Great
Britain  is,  and  oughl  to  he,  totally  dissolved  ;  and  that,
as  free  and  independent  states,  they  have  lull  power  to
levy  war,  conclude  peace,  contract  alliances,  establish
commerce,  and  to  do  all  other  acts  and  things,  which
independent  states  may  of  right  do."
•  §  206.  These  minute  details  have  been  given,  not
merely,  because  they  present  an  historical  vie*  of  the
actual  and  slow  progress  towards  independence  ;  but
because  they  give  rise  to  several  very  important  con-
siderations respecting  the  political  rights  and  sove-
reignty of  the  several  colonies,  and  of  the  union,  which
was  thus  spontaneously  formed  by  the  people  of  the
united  colonies.

§  207.  In  the  first  place,  antecedent  to  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  none  of  the  colonies  were,  or  pretend-
ed to  be  sovereign  states,  in  the  sense,  in  which  the  term
"  sovereign "  is  sometimes  applied  to  states.1  The
term  "  sovereign  "  or  "  sovereignty  "  is  used  in  differ-
ent senses,  which  often  leads  to  a  confusion  of  ideas,
and  sometimes  to  very  mischievous  and  unfounded
conclusions.  By  "sovereignty"  in  its  largest  sense  is
meant,  supreme,  absolute,  uncontrollable  power,  the
jus  summi  imperii,2  the  absolute  right  to  govern.  A
state  or  nation  is  a  body  politic,  or  society  of  men,

i  3  Ball.  110.  Per  Bluir  J.;  9  Dane's  Abridg.  Appx.  §  2,  p.  10,  §  3,
p.  12,  §5,  p.  16.

2  1  Bl.  Comm.  49;  2  Dall.  471.  Per  Jay  C.  J.


192  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

united  together  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  their
mutual  safety  and  advantage  by  their  combined
strength.1  By  the  very  act  of  civil  and  political  asso-
ciation, each  citizen  subjects  himself  to  the  authority
of  the  whole;  and  the  authority  of  all  over  each
member  essentially  belongs  to  the  body  politic.2  A
state,  which  possesses  this  absolute  power,  without  any
dependency  upon  any  foreign  power  or  state,  is  in  the
largest  sense  a  sovereign  state.3  And  it  is  wholly  im-
material, what  is  the  form  of  the  government,  or  by
whose  hands  this  absolute  authority  is  exercised.  It
may  be  exercised  by  the  people  at  large,  as  in  a  pure
democracy  ;  or  by  a  select  few,  as  in  an  absolute  aris-
tocracy ;  or  by  a  single  person,  as  in  an  absolute  mon-
archy.4 But  "  sovereignty  "  is  often  used  in  a  far  more
limited  sense,  than  that,  of  which  we  have  spoken,  to
designate  such  political  powers,  as  in  the  actual  organi-
zation of  the  particular  state  or  nation  are  to  be  exclu-
sively exercised  by  certain  public  functionaries,  without
the  control  of  any  superior  authority.  It  is  in  this  sense,
that  Blackstone  employs  it,  when  he  says,  that  it  is  of
"  the  very  essence  of  a  law,  that  it  is  made  by  the
supreme  power.  Sovereignty  and  legislature  are,  in-
deed, convertible  terms ;  one  cannot  subsist  without
the  other."5  Now,  in  every  limited  government  the
power  of  legislation  is,  or  at  least  may  be,  limited  at  the
will  of  the  nation ;  and  therefore  the  legislature  is  not
in  an  absolute  sense  sovereign.  It  is  in  the  same
sense,  that  Blackstone says, u  the  law  ascribes  to  the


i  Vattel,  B.  1,  ch.  1,  §  1  ;  2  Dall.  455. Per  Wilson  J.

2  Vattel,  B.  1,  ch.  1,  §  2.

3  2  Dall.  456,  457.  Per  Wilson  J.

4  Vattel,  B.  1,  ch.  1,  §  2,  3.

5  1  Bl.  Comm.  46. See  also  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comin.  App.  note  A.
a  commentary  on  this  clause  of  the  Author's  text.


CH.  I.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  [ftfl

king  of  England  the  attribute  of  sovereignty  or  pre-
eminence,"J  because,  in  respeel  to  the  powers  con-
fided to  him,  he  i.^  dependant  on  no  man,  and  ac-
countable to  no  man,  and  subjected  to  no  superior
jurisdiction.  Yet  the  king  of  England  cannot  make
a  law;  and  his  acts,  beyond  the  powers  assigned  to
him  by  the  constitution,  are  utterly  void.

§  208.  In  like  manner  the  word  "state"  is  used  in
various  senses.  In  its  most  enlarged  sense  ii  means
the  people  composing  a  particular  nation  or  commu-
nity. In  this  sense  the  state  means  the  whole  people,
united  into  one  body  politic  ;  and  the  state,  and  the
people  of  the  state,  are  equivalent  expressions.2  Mr.
Justice  Wilson,  in  his  Law  Lectures,  uses  the  word
"  state  "  in  its  broadest  sense.  "  In  free  states,"  says
he,  "  the  people  form  an  artificial  person,  or  body  poli-
tic, the  highest  and  noblest,  that  can  be  known.  They
form  that  moral  person,  which  in  one  of  my  former
lectures,3  I  described,  as  a  complete  body  of  free,  nat-
ural persons,  united  together  for  their  common  benefit ;
as  having  an  understanding  and  a  will ;  as  deliberating,
and  resolving,  and  acting ;  as  possessed  of  interests,
which  it  ought  to  manage  ;  as  enjoying  rights,  which  it
ought  to  maintain ;  and  as  lying  under  obligations,
which  it  ought  to  perform.  To  this  moral  person,  we
assign,  by  way  of  eminence,  the  dignified  appellation  of
state."4  But  there  is  a  more  limited  sense,  in  which
the  word  is  often  used,  where  it  expresses  merely  the

i  1  Bl.  Comm.  24L

2  Penhallow  v.  Doanc,  1  Pcters's  Cond.  Rep.  37,  38,  30  ;  3  Dall.  R.  03,
94.  Per  Iredell  J.  Chisholm  v.  Georgia,  2  Dall.  455.  Per  Wilson  J.
S.  C.  2  Cond.  Rep.  656,  670; 2  Wilson's  Lect 120; Dane's  Appx.

§  50,  p.  G3.

3  1  Wilson's  Leet.  not.  305.

4  2  Wilson's  Lect.  120,  121.

vol.  i.  25


194  HISTORY OF  THE  REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

positive  or  actual  organization  of  the  legislative,  exec-
utive, or  judicial  powers.1^  Thus,  the  actual  govern-
ment of  a  state  is  frequently  designated  by  the  name
of  the  state.  We  say,  the  state  has  power  to  do  this
or  that ;  the  state  has  passed  a  law,  or  prohibited  an
act,  meaning  no  more  than,  that  the  proper  functiona-
ries, organized  for  that  purpose,  have  power  to  do  the
act,  or  have  passed  the  law,  or  prohibited  the  particu-
lar action.  The  sovereignty  of  a  nation  or  state,  con-
sidered with  reference  to  its  association,  as  a  body  pol-
itic, may  be  absolute  and  uncontroltable  in  all  respects,
except  the  limitations,  which  it  chooses  to  impose  upon
itself.2  But  the  sovereignty  of  the  government,  organ-
ized within  the  state,  may  be  of  a  very  limited  nature.
It  may  extend  to  few,  or  to  many  objects.  It  may  be
unlimited,  as  to  some  ;  it  may  be  restrained,  as  to  others.
To  the  extent  of  the  power  given,  the  government  may
be  sovereign,  and  its  acts  may  be  deemed  the  sove-
reign acts  of  the  state.  Nay  the  state,  by  which  we
mean  the  people  composing  the  state,  may  divide  its
sovereign  powers  among  various  functionaries,  and
each  in  the  limited  sense  would  be  sovereign  in  respect
to  the  powers,  confided  to  each ;  and  dependent  in  all
other  cases.3 Strictly speaking, in our republican

1  Mr.  Madison,  in  his  elaborate  Report  in  the  Virginia  legislature  in
January,  1800,  adverts  to  the  different  senses,  in  which  the  word
"  state  "  is  used.  He  says,  "  It  is  indeed  true,  that  the  term  "  states  "
is  sometimes  used  in  a  vague  sense,  and  sometimes  in  different  senses,
according  to  the  subject,  to  which  it  is  applied.  Thus  it  sometimes
means  the  separate  sections  of  territory,  occupied  by  the  political  socie-
ties within  each  ;  sometimes  the  particular  governments  established  by
those  societies ;  sometimes  those  societies,  as  organized  into  those  par-
ticular governments;  and  lastly,  it  means  the  people,  composing  those
political  societies  in  their  highest  sovereign  capacity."

2  2  Dall.  433  ;  Iredell  J. Id.  455,  456. Per  Wilson  .7.

3  3  Dall.  93.  Per  Iredell  J.  2  Dall.  455,  457.  Per  Wilson  J.


CH.  I.]  HISTORY  OF  THE REVOLUTION.  195

forms  of  government,  the  absolute  sovereignty  of  the
nation  is  in  i\w  people  of  the  nation  ;  and  the  residu-
ary sovereignty  of  each  state,  not  granted  to  any  of  its
public  functionaries,  is  in  the  people  of  the  state.1

§  209.  There  is  another  mode,  in  which  we  speak
of  a  state  as  sovereign,  and  that  is  in  reference  to  for-
eign states.  Whatever  may  be  the  internal  organiza-
tion of  the  government  of  any  state,  if  k  has  the  sole
power  of  governing  itself  and  is  not  dependent  upon
any  foreign  state,  it  is  called  a  sovereign  state ;  that  is,
it  is  a  state  having  the  same  rights,  privileges,  and  pow-
ers, as  other  independent  states.  It  is  in  this  sense,
that  the  term  is  generally  used  in  treatises  and  discus-
sions on  the  law  of  nations.  A  full  consideration  of
this  subject  will  more  properly  find  place  in  some
future  page.2

i  2  DaU.  471,  472. Per  Jay  C.  J.

Mr.  J.  Q.  Adams,  in  his  Oration  on  the  4th  of  July,  1831,  published
after  the  preparation  of  these  Commentaries,  uses  the  following  lan-
guage :  "  It  is  not  true,  that  there  must  reside  in  all  governments  an
absolute,  uncontrollable,  irresistible,  and  despotic  power  ;  nor  is  such
power  in  any  manner  essential  to  sovereignty.  Uncontrollable  power
exists  in  no  government  on  earth.  The  sternest  despotisms  in  any  re-
gion and  in  every  age  of  the  world,  arc  and  have  been  under  perpetual
control.  Unlimited  power  belongs  not  to  man;  and  rotten  will  be  the
foundation  of  every  government,  leaning  upon  sucli  a  maxim  for  its  sup-
port. Least  of  all  can  it  be  predicated  of  a  government,  professing  to  be
founded  upon  an  original  compact.  The  pretence  of  an  absolute,  irre-
sistible, despotic  power,  existing  in  every  government  somewhere,  is
incompatible  with  the  first  principles  of  natural  right."

2  Dr.  Rush,  in  a  political  communication,  in  178  ;.  uses  til'*  term  u  sove-
reignty "  in  another,  and  somewhat  more  limited  sense-  He  says,
"The  people  of  America  have  mistaken  the  meaning  of  the  word  'sove-
reignty.' Hence  each  state  pretends  to  be  sovereign.  In  Europe  it  is
applied  to  those  states,  which  possess  the  power  of  making  war  and
peace,  of  forming  treaties,  and  the  like.  As  this  power  belongs  only  to
congress,  they  are  the  only  sovereign  power  in  the  United  Slates.  We
commit  a  similar  mistake  in  our  ideas  of  the  word  'independent' No

I  Amrr.  Museum, .  9


196  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

§  210.  Now  it  is  apparent,  that  none  of  the  colonies
before  the  Revolution  were,  in  the  most  large  and  gen-
eral sense, independent,  or sovereign communities.
They  were  all  originally  settled  under,  and  subjected  to
the  British  crown.1 Their  powers  and  authorities  were
derived  from,  and  limited  by  their  respective  charters.
All,  or  nearly  all,  of  these  charters  controlled  their  legis-
lation by  prohibiting  them  from  making  laws  repugnant,
or  contrary  to  those  of  England. The  crown,  in  many
of  them,  possessed  a  negative  upon  their  legislation,  as
well  as  the  exclusive  appointment  of  their  superior  offi-
cers ;  and  a  right  of  revision,  by  way  of  appeal,  of  the
judgments  of  their  courts.2 In  their  most  solemn  dec-
larations of  rights,  they  admitted  themselves  bound,  as
British  subjects,  to  allegiance  to  the  British  crown ;  and
as  such,  they  claimed  to  be  entitled  to  all  the  rights,  lib-
erties,  and  immunities of  free  born  British subjects.
They  denied  all  power  of  taxation,  except  by  their  own
colonial  legislatures  ;  but  at  the  same  time  they  admitted
themselves  bound  by  acts  of  the  British  parliament  for
the  regulation  of  external  commerce,  so  as  to  secure  the
commercial  advantages  of  the  whole empire to the
mother  country,  and  the  commercial  benefits  of  its  re-
spective members.3 So  far,  as  respects  foreign  states,
the  colonies  were  not,  in  the  sense  of  the  laws  of  nations,


individual  state,  as  such,  lias  any  claim  to  independence.  She  is  inde-
pendent only  in  a  union  with  her  sister  states  in  congress."  Dr.  Bar-
ton, on  the  other  hand,  in  a  similar  essay,  explains  the  operation  of  the
system  of  the  confederation  in  the  manner,  which  has  been  given  in  the
text*

i  2  Dall.  471. Per  Jay  C.  J.

2  See  Marshall's  Hist,  of  Colonies,  p.  483  ;  Journals  of  Congress,  1774,

p.  29.

3  Journal  of  Congress,  1774,  p.  27,  20,  38,  30;  1775,  p.  152,  156  ;  Mar-
shall's Hist,  of  Colonies,  ch.  11,  p.  412,  483.

I \  ner.  Museum,  13,  I  I.


CH.  I.]  HISTORY  OF  THE REVOLUTION.  197

sovereign  states;  but  mere  dependencies  of  Great
Britain.  They  could  make  no  treaty,  declare  ao  war,
send  no  ambassadors,  regulate  no  intercourse  or  com-
merce, nor  in  any  other  shape  act,  as  sovereigns,  in  the
negociations  usual  between  independent  states.  In
respect  to  each  ether,  they  stood  in  the  common  rela-
tion of  British  subjects;  the  legislation  of  neither  could
be  controlled  by  any  other;  but  there  was  a  common
subjection  to  the  British  crown.1  If  in  any  sense  they
might  claim  the  attributes  of  sovereignty,  it  was  only  in
that  subordinate  sense,  to  which  we  have  alluded,  as
exercising  within  a  limited  extent  certain  usual  powers
of  sovereignty.  They  did  not  even  affect  to  claim  a
local  allegiance.2

§  211.  In  the  next  place,  the  colonies  did  not  seve-
rally act  for  themselves,  and  proclaim  their  own  inde-
pendence. It  is  true,  that  some  of  the  states  had  pre-
viously formed  incipient  governments  for  themselves  ;
but  it  was  done  in  compliance  with  the  recommenda-
tions of  congress.3  Virginia,  on  the  29th  of  June,  1776,
by  a  convention  of  delegates,  declared  "  the  government
of  this  country,  as  formerly  exercised  under  the  crown
of  Great  Britain,  totally  dissolved  ; "  and  proceeded  to
form  a  new  constitution  of  government.  New-Hamp-
shire also  formed  a  government,  in  December,  1  775,
which  was  manifestly  intended  to  he  temporary,  "during
(as  they  said)  the  unhappy  and  unnatural  contest  with
Great  Britain.'*4 New-Jersey,  too,  established  a  frame


i  1  Chalmers's  Annals, 686,  687  ;  2  Dall.  170. Per  Jay  (\  J.

2  Journal  of  Congress, 177C,  \k  282;  2  Ilaz.  Coll.  591  :  Marsh.  Colo-
nies, App.  No.  3,  p.  4(1!  >.

3  Journal  of  Congress,  1775,  p.  115,231,235,279;  1  Pitk.  Hist  351, 355;

Marsh.  Colon,  ch.  1  t.  p.  Ill,  -147;  9  Honing.  Stat.  112,  113;  9  Dane's
AbriuV.  App.  §  5,  p.  16.

4  2  Belk.  N.  llamp.  cb.  25,  p.  300,  308,  310  ;  1  Pitk.  Hist.  351,  355.


198  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

of  government,  on  the  2d  of  July,  1776  ;  but  it  was  ex-
pressly  declared,  that  it  should  be  void  upon  a  recon-
ciliation with  Great  Britain.1 And  South  Carolina,  in
March, 1776,  adopted  a  constitution  of  government;
but  this  was,  in  like  manner,  "  established  until  an  ac-
commodation between  Great  Britain  and  America  could
be  obtained."  2  *  But  the  declaration  of  the  independence
of  all  the  colonies  was  the  united  act  of  all. It  was  "  a
declaration  by  the  representatives  of  the  United  States
of  America  in  congress  assembled ; "  "  by  the  delegates
appointed  by  the  good  people  of  the  colonies,"  as  in  a
prior  declaration  of  rights  they  were  called.3 It  was
not  an  act  done  by  the  state  governments  then  organ-
ized ;  nor  by  persons  chosen  by  them. It  was  em-
phatically the  act  of  the  whole  people  of  the  united
colonies,  by  the  instrumentality  of  their  representatives,
chosen  for  that,  among  other  purposes.4 It  was  an  act
not  competent  to  the  state  governments,  or  any  of  them,
as  organized  under  their  charters,  to adopt. Those
charters  neither  contemplated  the  case,  nor  provided
for  it. It  was  an  act  of  original,  inherent  sovereignty
by  the  people  themselves,  resulting  from  their  right  to
change  the  form  of  government,  and  to  institute  a  new
government,  whenever  necessary  for  their  safety  and
happiness. So  the  declaration  of  independence  treats
it. No  state  had  presumed  of  itself  to  form  a  new  gov-
ernment, or  to  provide  for  the  exigencies  of  the  times,
without  consulting  congress  on  the  subject ;  and  when
they  acted,  it  was  in  pursuance  of  the  recommendation


i  Stokes's  Hist.  Colon.  51,75.

2  Stokes's  Hist.  Colon.  105 ;  1  Pitk.  Hist.  355.

3  Journal,  177G,  p.  241 ;  Journal,  1774,  p.  27,  45.

4  2.  Dall.  47d,  471. Per  Jay  C.  J. ;  9  Dane's  Abridg. App.  §  12,  13,
p.  23,  24.


CH.  I.]  HISTORY  OP  THE  REVOLUTION.  199

of  congress.  It  was,  therefore,  the  achievement  of  the
whole  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole.  ri  he  people  of  the
united  colonies  made  the  united  colonies  free  and  inde-
pendent states,  and  absolved  them  from  all  allegiance  to

the  British  crown.  The  declaration  of  independence
has  accordingly  always  been  treated,  as  an  act  of  para-
mount and  sovereign  authority,  complete  and  perfect
perse,  and  ipso  facto  working  an  entire  dissolution  of  all
political  connexion  with  and  allegiance  to  Great  Brit-
ain. And  this,  not  merely  as  a  practical  fact,  but  in  a
legal  and  constitutional  view  of  the  matter  by  c<
of  justice.1

^  212.  In  the  debates  in  the  South  Carolina  legisla-
ture, in  January,  1788,  respecting  the  propriety  of  call-
ing a  convention  of  the  people  to  ratify  or  reject  the
constitution,  a  distinguished  statesman  2  used  the  fol-
lowing language :  "  This  admirable  manifesto  (i.  e.
the  declaration  of  independence)  sufficiently  refutes
the  doctrine  of  the  individual  sovereignty  and  indepen-
dence of  the  several  states.  In  that  declaration  the
several  states  are  not  even  enumerated ;  but  after  recit-
ing in  nervous  language,  and  with  convincing  arguments
our  right  to  independence,  and  the  tyranny,  which  com-
pelled us  to  assert  it,  the  declaration  is  made  in  the
following  words:  /We,  therefore,  the  representatives
of  the  United  States,  &c.  do,  in  the  name,  &,c.  of  the
good  people  of  these  colonies,  solemnly  publish,  Slc
that  these  united  colonies  are,  and  of  right  ought  to
be,  free  and  ind  -.' The  separate  inde-

pendence  and individual  sovereignty of  the several
states  were  never  thought  of  by  the  enlightened  band
of  patriots,  who  framed  this  declaration. The  se
states  are  not  even  mentioned  by  name  in  any  part,  as

i  2  Dallas  R.  470.  a  Mr.  Charles  Cote^vorth  Pinckncv.


200  HISTORY OF THE REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

if  it  was  intended  to  impress  the  maxim  on  America,
that  our  freedom  and  independence  arose  from  our
union,  and  that  without  it  we  could  never  be  free  or
independent.  Let  us  then  consider  all  attempts  to
weaken  this  union  by  maintaining,  that  each  state  is
separately  and  individually  independent,  as  a  species  of
political  heresy,  which  can  never  benefit  us,  but  may
bring  on  us  the  most  serious  distresses."  *

§  213.  In  the  next  place  we  have  seen,  that  the
power  to  do  this  act  was  not  derived  from  the  state
governments ;  nor  was  it  done  generally  with  their  co-
operation. The  question  then  naturally  presents  itself,
if  it  is  to  be  considered  as  a  national  act,  in  what  man-
ner did  the  colonies  become  a  nation,  and  in  what  man-
ner did  congress  become  possessed  of  this  national
power? The  true  answer  must  be,  that  as  soon  as

l  Debates  in  South  Carolina,  1788,  printed  by  A.  E.  Miller,  Charles-
ton, 1831,  p.  43,  44.  —  Mr.  Adams,  in  his  Oration  on  the  4th  of  July,  1831?
which  is  valuable  for  its  views  of  constitutional  principles,  insists  upon
the  same  doctrine  at  considerable  length.  Though  it  has  been  publish-
ed since  the  original  preparation  of  these  lectures,  I  gladly  avail  myself
of  an  opportunity  to  use  his  authority  in  corroboration  of  the  same  views.
"The  union  of  the  colonies  had  preceded  this  declaration,  [of  independ-
ence,] and  even  the  commencement  of  the  war.  The  declaration  was
joint,  that  the  united  colonies  were  free  and  independent  states,  but  not
that  any  one  of  them  was  a  free  and  independent  state,  separate  from  the
.  rest."  "  The  declaration  of  independence  was  a  social  compact,  by
which  the  whole  people  covenanted  with  each  citizen,  and  each  citizen
with  the  whole  people,  that  the  united  colonies  were,  and  of  right  ought
to  be  free  and  independent  states.  To  this  compact  union  was  as  vital,
as  freedom  or  independence."  "  The  declaration  of  independence  an-
nounced the  severance  of  the  thirteen  united  colonies  from  the  rest  of
the  British  empire,  and  the  existence  of  their  people  from  that  day  forth
as  an  independent  nation.  The  people  of  all  the  colonies,  speaking  by
their  representatives,  constituted  themselves  one  moral  person  before  the
face  of  their  fellow  men."  "  The  declaration  of  independence  was  not
a  declaration  of  liberty  merely  acquired,  nor  was  it  a  form  of  govern-
ment. The  people  of  the  colonies  were  already  free,  and  their  forms  of
government  were  various.  They  were  all  colonies  of  a  monarchy.  The
king  of  Great  Britain  was  their  common  sovereign."


CH. I.]  HISTORY  OF  Till:  REVOLUTION.  20l

congress  assumed  powers  and  passed  measures,  which
were  in  their  nature  national,  to  thai  extent  the  people,
from  whose  acquiescence  and  consent  they  took  effect;
must  be  considered  as  agreeing  to  form  a  nation.1 The
congress  of  177  1,  looking  at  the  genera]  terms  of  the
commissions,  under  which  the  delegates  were  appointed,
seem  to  have  possessed  the  power  of  concerting  such
measures,  as  they  deemed  best,  to  redress  the  grievan-
ces, and  preserve  the  rights  and  liberties  of  all  the  colo-
nies. Their  duties  seem  to  have  been  principally  of  an
advisory  nature ;  but  the  exigencies  of  the  times  led
them  rather  to  follow  out  the  wishes  and  objects  of
their constituents,  than  scrupulously  to  examine  the
words,  in  which  their  authority  was  communicated.2  The
congress  of  1775  and 1776  were  clothed  with  more
ample  powers,  and  the  language  of  their  commissions
generally  was  sufficiently  broad  to  embrace  the  right  to
pass  measures  of  a  national  character  and  obligation.
The  caution  necessary  at  that  period  of  the  revolutionary
struggle  rendered  that  language  more  guarded,  than  the
objects  really  in  view  would  justify  ;  but  it  was  foreseen,
that  the  spirit  of  the  people  would  eagerly  second  every
measure  adopted  to  further  a  general  union  and  resist-
ance against  the  British  claims. The  congress  of  1775
accordingly  assumed  at  once  (as  we  have  seen)  the  ex-
ercise of  some  of  the  highest  functions  of  sovereignty.
They  took  measures  for  national  defence  and  resistance  ;
they  followed  up  the  prohibitions  upon  trade  and  inter-
course with  Great  Britain;  they  raised  a  national  army
and  navy,  and authorized limited national  hostilities
against  Great  Britain  ;  they  raised  money,  emitted  bills
of  credit,  and  contracted  debts  upon  national  account;

i  3  Dall.  R.  80,  81,  90,  91*  109,  110,  11J,  117.
2  3  Dall.  R.  91.
VOL.  I.  '26


202  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

they  established  a  national  post-office  ;  and  finally  they
authorized  captures  and  condemnation  of  prizes  in
prize  courts,  with  a  reserve  of  appellate  jurisdiction  to
themselves.

§  214.  The  same  body,  in  1776,  took  bolder  steps,
and  exerted  powers,  which  could  in  no  other  manner
be  justified  or  accounted  for,  than  upon  the  supposition,
that  a  national  union  for  national  purposes  already  ex-
isted, and  that  the  congress was  invested  with  sove-
reign power  over  all  the  colonies  for  the  purpose  of
preserving  the  common  rights  and  liberties  of  all. They
accordingly  authorized  general  hostilities  against  the
persons  and  property  of  British  subjects ;  they  opened
an  extensive  commerce  with  foreign  countries,  regu-
lating the  whole  subject  of  imports  and  exports ;  they
y  authorized  the  formation  of  new  governments  in  the
colonies ;  and  finally  they  exercised  the  sovereign  pre-
rogative of  dissolving  the  allegiance  of  all  colonies  to  the
British  crown. The  validity  of  these  acts  was  never
doubted,  or  denied  by  the  people. On  the  contrary,
they  became  the  foundation, upon  which  the  super-
structure of  the  liberties  and  independence  of  the  Uni-
ted States  has  been  erected. Whatever,  then,  may  be
the  theories  of  ingenious  men  on  the  subject,  it  is  his-
torically true,  that  before  the  declaration  of  indepen-
dence these  colonies  were  not,  in  any  absolute  sense,
sovereign  states ;  that  that  event  did  not  find  them  or
make  them  such  ;  but  that  at  the  moment  of  their  sepa-
ration they  were  under  the  dominion  of  a  superior  con-
trolling national  government,  whose  powers  were  vested
in  and  exercised  by  the  general  congress  with  the  con-
sent of  the  people  of  all  the  states.1

i  This  whole  subject  is  very  amply  discussed  by  Mr.  Dane  in  his  Ap-
pendix to  the  (Jth  volume  of  his  Abridgment  of  the  Laws ;  and  many  of


CH.  I.]  HISTORY  OF  THE REVOLUTION.  208


Hie

>e


§  ^15.  Prom  the  moment  of  the  declaration  of  in
pendence,  ii'  nol  formosi  purposes  al  an  antecedent  p<
riod,  (he  united  colonics  must  be  considered  as  being  a
nation  de  facto,  having  a  genera]  government  overit  cre-
ated, and  acting  by  the  general  consent  of  the  people  of
all  the  colonics.  The  powers  of  thai  government  were
not,  and  indeed  could  not  he  well  defined.  But  still  its
exclusive  sovereignty,  in  many  cases,  was  firmly  estab-
lished; and  its  controlling  power  over  the  states  was
in  most,  if  not  in  all  national  measures,  universally  ad-
mitted.1 The  articles  of  confederation,  of  which  we
shall  have  occasion  to  speak  more  hereafter,  were  not
prepared  or  adopted  by  congress  until  November,  1 777  ;2
they  were  not  signed  or  ratified  by  any  of  the  states
until  July,  1778;  and  they  were  not  ratified,  so  as  to
become  obligatory  upon  all  the  states,  until  March,  1781.
In  the  intermediate  time,  congress  continued  to  exer-
cise the  powers  of  a  general  government,  whose  acts

his  views  coincide  with  those  stated  in  the  text.  The  whole  of  that  Ap-
pendix is  worthy  of  the  perusal  of  every  constitutional  lawyer,  even
though  he  might  differ  from  some  of  the  conclusions  of  the  learned  au-
thor. He  will  there  find  much  reasoning  from  documentary  evidence  of
a  public  nature,  which  has  not  hitherto  been  presented  in  a  condensed
or  accurate  shape.

Some  interesting  views  of  this  subject  are  also  presented  in  President
Monroe's  Message  on  Internal  Improvements,  on  the  4th  of  May,  I82SJ,
appended  to  his  .Message  respecting  the  Cumberland  Road.  Sec,  espe<  tal-
ly, pages  8  and  9.

*  When  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Marshall,  in  Ogdmv.  Gibbons,  (9  Wheat
R.  187,)  admits,  that  the  states,  before  the  formation  of  the  constitu-
tion, were  sovereign  and  independent,  and  were  connected  with  each
other  only  by  a  league,  it  is  manifest,  that  he  uses  the  word  "sovereign"
in  a  very  restricted  sense.  Under  the  confederation  there  were  many  limi-
tations upon  the  powers  of  the  states.

i  See.Pcnhitlloicx.  M>,/„,.:5  Dall.  R.  54:  Wan  v.  HyUon,  3  Dall.  l!'!'.
per  Chase  J.  See  the  Circular  Letter  of  Congress,  13th  Sept.  1 77 : » ;
5  Jour.  Cong.  341,  348, 349.

2  Jour,  of  Cong.  1 777,  f>  502.


204  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

were  binding  on  all  the  states. And  though  they  con-
stantly admitted  the  states  to  be  "  sovereign  and  inde-
pendent communities  ; "  1  yet  it  must  be  obvious,  that  the
terms  were  used  in  the  subordinate  and  limited  sense
alread}^  alluded  to ;  for  it  was  impossible  to  use  them  in
any  other  sense,  since  a  majority  of  the  states  could  by
their  public  acts  in  congress  control  and  bind  the  mi-
nority. Among  the  exclusive  powers  exercised  by  con-
gress, were  the  power  to  declare  war  and  make  peace  ;
to  authorize  captures ;  to  institute  appellate  prize  courts ;
to  direct  and  control  all  national,  military,  and  naval
operations ;  to  form alliances,  and  make  treaties ;  to
contract  debts, and  issue  bills  of  credit  upon  national
account. In  respect  to  foreign  governments,  we  were
politically  known  as  the  United  States  only ;  and  it  was
in  our  national  capacity,  as  such,  that  we  sent  and  re-
ceived ambassadors,  entered  into  treaties  and  alliances,
and  were  admitted  into  the  general  community  of  na-
tions, who  might  exercise  the  right  of  belligerents,  and
claim  an  equality  of  sovereign  powers  and  prerogatives.2
^216.  In  confirmation  of  these  views,  it  may  not  be
without  use  to  refer  to  the  opinions  of  some  of  our  most
eminent  judges,  delivered  on  occasions,  which  required
an  exact  examination  of  the subject. In Chisholm's
Executors  v.  The  Stale  of  Georgia,  (3  Dall.  419,  470,3)
Mr.  Chief  Justice  Jay,  who  was  equally distinguished
as  a  revolutionary statesman  and  a  general  jurist,  ex-
pressed himself  to  the  following  effect :  "  The  revolu-
tion, or  rather  the  declaration  of  independence,  found
the  people  already  united  for  general  purposes,  and  at

1  See  Letter  of  17th  Nov.  1777,  by  Congress,  recommending  the  arti-
cles of  confederation ;  Journal  of  1777,  p.  513,  514.

2  1  Amer.  Museum,  15 ;  1  Kent.  Comm.  197,  198,  199.
S.  C.  1  Peters's  Cond.  R.  635.


CH.  I.]  HISTOKV OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  BOA

the  same  time  providing  for  their  more  domestic  con-
cents by  state  conventions,  and  other  temporary  arrang
incuts. From  ilic  crown  of  Great Britain the  sove«
peignty  of  their  country  passed  to  the  people  of  it ;  and

it  was  then  not  an  uncommon  opinion,  thai  the  unap-
propriated lands,  which  belonged  to  thai  crown,  passed,
not  to  the  people  of  the  colony  or  stales,  within  whosq
limits  they  were  situated,  hut  to  the  whole  people.  On
whatever  principle  this  opinion  rested,  it  did  not  give
way  to  the  other ;  and  thirteen  sovereignties  were  con-
sidered as  emerging  from  the  principles  of  the  revolu-
tion, comhined  by  local  convenience  and  considerations
The  people,  nevertheless,  continued  to  consider  them-
selves, in  a  national  point  of  view,  as  one  people ;  and
they  continued  without  interruption  to  manage  their
national  concerns  accordingly."  In  Penhallow  v.  Boone,
(3  Dall.  R.  54,1)  Mr.  Justice  Patterson  (who  was  also
a  revolutionary  statesman)  said,  speaking  of  the  period
before  the  ratification  of  the  confederation :  "  The  pow-
ers of  congress  were  revolutionary  in  their  nature,  aris-
ing out  of  events  adequate  to  every  national  emergency,
and  co-extensive  with  the  object  to  be  attained.  Con-
gress Avas  the  general,  supreme,  and  controlling  council
of  the  nation,  the  centre  of  the  union,  the  centre  of
force,  and  the  sun  of  the  political  system.  Congress
raised  armies,  fitted  out  a  navy,  and  prescribed  rules  for
their  government,  &c.  &,c.  These  high  acts  of  sove-
reignty were  submitted  to,  acquiesced  in,  and  approved
of  by  the  people  of  America,  &,c.  ^lc.  The  danger  be-
ing imminent  and  common,  it  became  necessary  for  the
people  or  colonies  to  coalesce  and  act  in  concert,  in
order  to  divert,  or  break  the  violence  of  the  gathering

i  S.  C.  1  Peters's  Cond.  Rep.  '21.


206  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

storm.  They  accordingly  grew  into  union,  and  formed
one  great  political  body,  of  which  congress  was  the  di-
recting principle  and  soul,  &c.  &,c.  The  truth  is,  that
the  states,  individually,  were  not  known,  nor  recognized
as  sovereign  by  foreign  nations,  nor  are  they  now.  The
states  collectively  under  congress,  as  their  connecting
point  or  head,  were  acknowledged  by  foreign  powers,
as  sovereign,  particularly  in  that  acceptation  of  the  term,
which  is  applicable  to  all  great  national  concerns,  and
in  the  exercise  of  which  other  sovereigns  would  be
more  immediately  interested."  In  Ware  v.  Hylton,  (3
Dall.  199,1)  Mr.  Justice  Chase  (himself  also  a  revolu-
tionary statesman)  said:  "It  has  been  inquired,  what
powers  congress  possessed  from  the  first  meeting  in
September,  1774,  until  the  ratification  of  the  confede-
ration on  the  1st  of  March,  1781.  It  appears  to  me,
that  the  powers  of  congress  during  that  whole  period
were  derived  from  the  people  they  represented,  ex-
pressly given  through  the  medium  of  their  state  con-
ventions or  state  legislatures ;  or,  that  after  they  were
exercised,  they  were  impliedly  ratified  by  the  acquies-
cence and  obedience  of  the  people,  &c.  The  powers
of  congress  originated  from  necessity,  and  arose  out  of
it,  and  were  only  limited  by  events ;  or,  in  other  words,
they  were  revolutionary  in  their  nature.  Their  extent
depended  on  the  exigencies  and  necessities  of  public
affairs.^  J  entertain  this  general  idea,  that  the  several
states  retained  all  internal  sovereignty ;  and  that  con-
gress properly  possessed  the  rights  of  external  sove-
reignty. In  deciding  on  the  powers  of  congress,  and
of  the  several  states  before  the  confederation,  I  see  but
one  safe  rule,  namely,  that  all  the  powers  actually  exer-

1  S.  C.  1  Peters's  Cond.  R.  99.


CH.  I.]  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  207

cised  by  congress  before  that period were  rightfully

exercised,  on  the  presumption  not  to  be  controverted,
that  they  were  so  authorized  bj  the  people  they  repre-
sented, by  an  express  or  implied  grant ;  and  that  all  the

powers  exercised  by  the  state  conventions  or  state
legislatures  were  also  rightfully  exercised,  on  the  same
presumption  of  authority  from  the  people."1

§217.  In  respect  to  the  powers  of  the  continental
congress  exercised  before  the  adoption  of  the  articles  of
confederation,  few  questions  were  judicially  discussed
during  the  revolutionary  contest;  for  men  had  not  lei-
sure in  the  heat  of  war  nicely  to  scrutinize  or  weigh
such  subjects  ;  inter  arma  silent  leges.  The  people,
relying  on  the  wisdom  and  patriotism  of  congress,  si-
lently acquiesced  in  whatever  authority  they  assumed.
But  soon  after  the  organization  of  the  present  govern-
ment, the  question  was  most  elaborately  discussed  be-
fore the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  in  a  case
calling  for  an  exposition  of  the  appellate  jurisdiction
of  congress  in  prize  causes  before  the  ratification  of  the
confederation.2  The  result  of  that  examination  was,  as
the  opinions  already  cited  indicate,  that  congress,  be-
fore the  confederation,  possessed,  by  the  consent  of  the
people  of  the  United  States,  sovereign  and  supreme
powers  for  national  purposes ;  and  among  others,  the
supreme  powers  of  peace  and  war,  and,  as  an  incident,
the  right  of  entertaining  appeals  in  the  last  resort  in
prize  causes,  even  in  opposition  to  state  legislation.
And  that  the  actual  powers  exercised  by  congress,  in


1  Sec  also  1  Kent.  Comm.  Lcct.  10,  p.  196;  President  Monroe's  Ex-
position and  Message,  l'h  of  May.  1822,  p.  8,  9,  10,  1 1.

2  Penhallowv.  Doane,  3  Dall.  54,  80,  83,  90,  91,94,  109,110,111,  112,
117;  Journals  of  Congress,  March,  1779,  p.  t<i  to  88  :  1  Kent.  Comm.
19S,  199.


208  HISTORY  OF  THE  REVOLUTION. [BOOK  II.

respect  to  national  objects,  furnished  the  best  exposi-
tion of  its  constitutional  authority,  since  they  emanated
from  the  representatives  of  the  people,  and  were  acqui-
esced in  by  the  people.


CH.  II.] ORIGIN OF THE CONFEDERATION.  209

CHAPTER  II.

ORIGIN OF THE CONFEDERATION.

^  218.  The  union,  thus  tunned,  grew  out  of  the
exigencies  of  the  times;  and  from  its  nature  and  objects
might  be  deemed  temporary,  extending  only  to  the
maintenance  of  the  common  liberties  and  independence
of  the  states,  and  to  terminate  with  the  return  of  peace
with  Great  Britain,  and  the  accomplishment  of  the  ends
of  the  revolutionary  contest.  It  was  obvious  to  reflecting
minds,  that  such  a  future  separation  of  the  states  into
absolute,  independent  communities  with  no  mutual  ties,
or  controlling  national  government,  would  be  fraught
With  the  most  imminent  dangers  to  their  common  safety
and  peace,  and  expose  them  not  only  to  the  chance  of
re-conquest  by  Great  Britain,  after  such  separation  in
detached  contests,  but  also  to  all  the  hazards  of  internal
warfare  and  civil  dissensions.  So,  that  those,  who  had
stood  side  by  side  in  the  common  cause  against  Great
Britain,  might  then,  by  the  intrigues  of  their  enemies,  and
the  jealousies  always  incident  to  neighbouring  nations,
become  instruments,  in  the  hands  of  the  ambitious
abroad,  or  the  corrupt  at  home,  to  aid  in  the  mutual
destruction  of  each  other ;  and  thus  all  successively
fall,  the  victims  of  a  domestic  or  foreign  tyranny.
Such  considerations  could  not  but  have  great  weight
with  all  honest  and  patriotic  citizens,  independent  of  the
real  blessings,  which  a  permanent  union  could  not
fail  to  secure  throughout  all  the  states.

$s  219.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  a  project,
which,  even  in  their  colonial  state,  had  been  so  often  at-
tempted by  some  of  them  to  guard  themselves  against

vol.  i.  27


210  HISTORY  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION. [BOOK  I.

the  evils  incident  to  their  political  weakness  and  their
distance  from  the  mother  country,  and  which  had  been
so  often  defeated  by  the  jealousy  of  the  crown,  or  of  the
colonies,1  should  have  occurred  to  the  great  and  wise
men,  who  assembled  in  the  Continental  Congress  at  a
very  early  period.

§  220.  It  will  be  an  instructive  and  useful  lesson  to  us
to  trace  historically  the  steps,  which  led  to  the  formation
and  final  adoption  of  the  articles  of  confederation  and
perpetual  union  between  the  United  States.  It  will  be
instructive,  by  disclosing  the  real  difficulties  attendant
upon  such  a  plan,  even  in  times,  when  the  necessity  of  it
was  forced  upon  the  minds  of  men  not  only  by  common
dangers,  but  by  common  protection,  by  common  feelings
of  affection,  and  by  common  efforts  of  defence."*  It  willfce
useful,  by  moderating  the  ardour  of  inexperienced  minds^
which  are  apt  to  imagine,  that  the  theory  of  government
is  too  plain,  and  the  principles,  on  which  it  should  be
formed,  too  obvious,  to  leave  much  doubt  for  the  exercise
of  the  wisdom  of  statesmen,  or  the  ingenuity  of  specu-
latists.  Nothing  is  indeed  more  difficult  to  forsee,  than
the  practical  operation  of  given  powers,  unless  it  be  the
practical  operation  of  restrictions,  intended  to  control
those  powers.  It  is  a  mortifying  truth,  that  if  the
possession  of  power  sometimes  leads  to  mischievous
abuses,  the  absence  of  it  also  sometimes  produces
a  political  debility,  quite  as  ruinous  in  its  consequences
to  the  great  objects  of  civil  government.

^  221.  It  is  proposed,  therefore,  to  go  into  an  historical
review  of  the  manner  of  the  formation  and  adoption  of
the  articles  of  confederation.  This  will  be  followed  by
an  exposition  of  the  general  provisions  and  distributions

i  2  Haz.  Coll.  1,  &c. ;  Id.  521 ;  2  Holmes's  Annals,  55  and  note  ;  Mar-
shall Colon.  284,  285,  4(34;  1  Kent.  Comm.  190,  191.


CII.  II.] ORKIIN  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.  211

of  power  under  it.  And  this  will  naturallj  lead  us  to  a
consideration  of  the  causes  of  its  decline  and  fall;  and
thus  prepare  the  way  to  a  consideration  of  the  measures,
which  led  to  the  origin  and  final  adoption  of  the  pres<  at
constitution  of  the  United  States.1

^222.  On  the  11th  of  June,  1776,- the  same  day,  on
which  the  committee  for  preparing  the  declaration  of  in-
dependence was  appointed,  congress  resolved,  that  "a
committee  be  appointed  to  prepare  and  digest  the  form
of  a  confederation  to  be  entered  into  between  these  colo-
nies; "  and  on  the  next  day  a  committee  was  accordingly
appointed,  consisting  of  a  member  from  each  colony.2
Nearly  a  year  before  this  period,  (viz.  on  the  21st  of  July,
1775,)  Dr.  Franklin  had  submitted  to  congress  a  sketch
of  articles  of  confederation,  which  does  not,  however,
appear  to  have  been  acted  on.  These  articles  contem-
plated a  union,  until  a  reconciliation  with  Great  Britain,
and  on  failure  thereof,  the  confederation  to  be  perpetual.

§  223.  On  the  12th  of  July,  1776,  the  committee,  ap-
pointed to  prepare  articles  of  confederation,  presented  a
draft,3  which  was  in  the  hand-writing  of  Mr.  Dickenson,
one  of  the  committee,  and  a  delegate  from  Pennsylvania.
The  draft,  so  reported,  was  debated  from  the  22d  to  the
31st  of  July,  and  on  several  days  between  the  5th  and
20th  of  August,  1776. On  this  last  day,  congress,  in

1  The  first  volume  of  the  United  States  Laws,  published  by  Bioren  &
Dunne,  contains  a  summary  view  of  the  proceedings  in  Congress  for  the
establishment  of  the  confederation,  and  also  of  the  convention  for  the

establishment  of  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  And  the  whole
proceedings  are  given  at  large  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Secret  Jour-
nals,  published  by  Congress  in  1821,  p.  283  et  seq.

2  Journals  of  177(5,  p.  '207.

3  The  draft  of  Dr.  Franklin,  and  this  draft,  understood  to  be  by  Mr.
Dickenson,  were  never  printed,  until  the  publication  of  the  Secret  Jour-
nals by  order  of  Congress  in  1821,  where  they  will  be  found  under  pages
283  and  290.


212  HISTORY  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION. [BOOK  II.

committee  of  the  whole,  reported  a  new  draft,  which
was  ordered  to  be  printed  for  the  use  of  the  members.1

§  224.  The  subject  seems  not  again  to  have  been
touched  until  the  8th  of  April,  1777,  and  the  articles  were
debated  at  several  times  between  that  time  and  the  15th
of  November  of  the  same  year.  On  this  last  day  the  arti-
cles were  reported  with  sundry  amendments,  and  finally
adopted  by  congress.  A  committee  was  then  appointed
to  draft,  and  they  accordingly  drafted,  a  circular  letter,
requesting  the  states  respectively  to  authorize  their  dele-
gates in  congress  to  subscribe  the  same  in  behalf  of  the
state.  The  committee  remark  in  that  letter,  "that  to
form  a  permanent  union,  accommodated  to  the  opinions
and  wishes  of  the  delegates  of  so  many  states,  differing  in
habits,  produce, commerce,  and  internal  police,  was  found
to  be  a  work,  which  nothing  but  time  and  reflection,  con-
spiring with  a  disposition  to  conciliate,  could  mature  and
accomplish.  Hardly  is  it  to  be  expected,  that  any  plan,
in  the  variety  of  provisions  essential  to  our  union,  should
exactly  correspond  with  the  maxims  and  political  views
of  every  particular  state.  Let  it  be  remarked,  that  after
the  most  careful  inquiry  and  the  fullest  information,  this
is  proposed,  as  the  best,  which  could  be  adapted  to  the
circumstances  of  all,  and  as  that  alone,  which  affords  any
tolerable  prospect  of  general  ratification.  Permit  us,
then,  (add  the  committee,)  earnestly  to  recommend
these  articles  to  the  immediate  and  dispassionate  at-
tention of  the  legislatures  of  the  respective  states.  Let
them  be  candidly  reviewed  under  a  sense  of  the  diffi-
culty of  combining,  in  one  general  system,  the  various
sentiments  and  interests  of  a  continent,  divided  into  so
many  sovereign  and  independent  communities,  under


1  Secret  Journals,  1776,  p.  304.


CH.  II.] ORIGIN  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.  2  I  3

a  conviction  of  the  absolute  necessity  of  uniting  all  our

councils,  and  all  our  strength,  to  maintain  and  defend  our
common  liberties.  Let  them  be  examined  with  a  liber-
ality becoming  brethren  and  fellow  citizens,  surrounded
by  the  same  imminent  dangers,  contending  for  the  same
illustrious  prize,  and  deeply  interested  in  being  forever
bound,  and  connected  together,  by  ties  the  most  intimate
and  indissoluble.  And  finally,  let  them  be  adjusted  with
the  temper  and  magnanimity  of  wise  and  patriotic  legis-
lators, who,  while  they  are  concerned  for  the  prosperity
of  their  own  more  immediate  circle,  are  capable  of
rising  superior  to  local  attachments,  when  they  may  be
incompatible  with  the  safety,  happiness,  and  glory  of  the
general  confederacy."

§  225.  Such  was  the  strong  and  eloquent  appeal
made  to  the  states.  It  carried,  however,  very  slowly
conviction  to  the  minds  of  the  local  legislatures.  Many
objections  were  stated;  and  many  amendments  were
proposed.  All  of  them,  however,  were  rejected  by
congress,  not  probably  because  they  were  all  deemed
inexpedient  or  improper  in  themselves  ;  but  from  the
danger  of  sending  the  instrument  back  again  to  all  the
states,  for  reconsideration.  Accordingly,  on  the  26th
of  June,  1778,  a  copy,  engrossed  for  ratification,  was
prepared,  and  the  ratification  begun  on  the  9th  day  of
July  following.  It  was  ratified  by  all  the  states,  except
Delaware  and  Man  land,  in  1778;  by  Delaware  in  1779,
and  by  Maryland  on  the  first  of  March,  1781,  from
which  last  date  its  final  ratification  took  effect,  and  was
joyfully  announced  by  congress.1

§  226.  In  reviewing  the  objections,  taken  by  the  va-
rious states  to  the  adoption  of  the  confederation  in  the

i  Secret  Journals,  401,  418,  423,  424,  436  ;  3  Kent's  Coram.  196,  197.


214  ORIGIN  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION. [ROOK  II.

form,  in  which  it  was  presented  to  them,  at  least  so  far
as  those  objections  can  be  gathered  from  the  official
acts  of  those  states,  or  their  delegates  in  congress,  some
of  them  will  appear  to  be  founded  upon  a  desire  for
verbal  amendments  conducing  to  greater  accuracy  and
certainty  ;  and  some  of  them,  upon  considerations  of  a
more  large  and  important  bearing, upon  the  interests  of
the  states  respectively,  or  of  the  Union.1  Among  the
latter  were  the  objections  taken,  and  alterations  pro-
posed in  respect  to  the  apportionment  of  taxes,  and  of
the  quota  of  public  forces  to  be  raised  among  the  states,
by  Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  New- Jersey,  and
Pennsylvania.2  There  was  also  an  abundance  of  jeal-
ousy of  the  power  to  keep  up  a  standing  army  in  time
of  peace.3

§  227.  But  that,  which  seemed  to  be  of  paramount
importance,  and  which,  indeed,  protracted  the  ratifica-
tion of  the  confederation  to  so  late  a  period,  was  the
alarming  controversy  in  respect  to  the  boundaries  of
some  of  the  states,  and  the  public  lands,  held  by  the
crown,  within  these  reputed  boundaries.  On  the  one
hand,  the  great  states  contended,  that  each  of  them
had  an  exclusive  title  to  all  the  lands  of  the  crown  with-
in its  boundaries  ;  and  these  boundaries,  by  the  claims
under  some  of  the  charters,  extended  to  the  South  sea,
or  to  an  indefinite  extent  into  the  uncultivated  western
wilderness.  On  the  other  hand,  the  other  states  as
strenuously  contended,  that  the  territory,  unsettled  at
the  commencement  of  the  war,  and  claimed  by  the
British  crown,  which  was  ceded  to  it  by  the  treaty  of

1  2  Pitk.  Hist.  ch.  11,  p.  19  to  3(3  ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  197,  198.

2  Secret  Journals,  371,  373,  376,  378,  381  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist.  ch.  11,  p.  19
to  32.

3  Secret  Journals,  373,  376,  383 ;  2  Pitk.  Hist.  ch.  11,  p.  19  to  32.


OH.  II.] ORIGIN  OF  THE  CON  FEDERATION.  215

Paris  of  176)>,  if  wrested  from  the  common  <  nemy  by
the  blood  and  treasure  of  the  thirteen  states,  ought  to
be  deemed  a  common  property,  subject  to  the  disposi-
tion of  congress  for  the  general  good.1  Rhodi  -Island,
Delaware,  New-Jersey,  and  Maryland  insisted  upon
some  provision  for  establishing  the  western  boundaries
of  the  states;  and  for  the  recognition  of  the  unsettled
western  territory,  as  the  property  of  the  Union.

^  228.  The  subject  was  one  of  a  perpetually  recur-
ring interest  and  irritation  ;  and  threatened  a  dissolution
of  the  confederacy.  New-York,  at  length,  in  February,
1780, 'passed  an  act,  authorizing  a  surrender  of  a  part
of  the  western  territory  claimed  by  her.  Congress  em-
braced the  opportunity,  thus  afforded,  to  address  the
states  on  the  subject  of  ceding  the  territory,  reminding
them,  "how  indispensably  necessary  it  is  to  establish  the
federal  union  on  a  fixed  and  permanent  basis,  and  on
principles,  acceptable  to  all  its  respective  members  ;
how  essential  to  public  credit  and  confidence,  to  the
support  of  our  army,  to  the  vigor  of  our  councils,  and  the
success  of  our  measures;  to  our  tranquillity  at  home,
our  reputation  abroad  ;  to  our  very  existence,  as  a  free,
sovereign,  and  independent  people."  They  recom-
mended, with  earnestness,  a  cession  of  the  western  ter-
ritory ;  and  at  the  same  time,  they  as  earnestly  recom-
mended to  Maryland  to  subscribe  the  articles  of  con-
federation.2 A  cession  was  accordingly  made  by  the
delegates  of  New-York  on  the  first  of  March,  1781,  the
very  day,  on  which  Maryland  acceded  to  the  confede-
ration. Virginia  had  previously  acted  upon  the  recom-
mendation of  congress  ; and  by  subsequent  cessions


1  2  Dall.  R.470,  per  Jay C.  J.:  '2  Pitk.  Hist.  el..  11,  p.  19  to  36.

2  Secret  Journals,  6  Sept.  1780,  p.  442  ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  197,  198  j
2  Pitk.  Hist.  ch.  11,  p.  19  to  36.


216  ORIGIN  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION. [BOOK  II.

from  her,  and  from  the  states  of  Massachusetts,  Con-
necticut, South-Carolina,  and  Georgia,  at  still  later  pe-
riods, this  great  source  of  national  dissension  was  at
last  dried  up.1

l  The  history  of  these  cessions  will  be  found  in  the  Introduction  to
the  Land  Laws  of  the  United  States,  printed  by  order  of  congress  in
1810,  1817,  and  1828  ;  and  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Laws  of  the
United  States,  printed  by  Bioren  and  Duane  in  1815,  p.  452,  &c.


CH.  III. J ANALYSIS  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION. ^17

CHAPTER  III.

ANALYSIS  OF  THE ARTICLES  OF  CONFEDERATION.

§  229.  In  pursuance  of  the  design  already  announced,
it  is  now  proposed  to  give  an  analysis  of  the  articles  of
confederation,  or,  as  they  are  denominated  in  the  instru-
ment itself,  the  "Articles  of  Confederation  and  Perpet-
ual Union  between  the  States,"  as  they  were  finally
adopted  by  the  thirteen  states  in  1781.

§  230.  The  style  of  the  confederacy  was,  by  the  first
article,  declared  to  be,  "The  United  Sates  of  America."
The  second  article  declared,  that  each  state  retained
its  sovereignty,  freedom,  and  independence,  and  every
power,  jurisdiction,  and  right,  which  was  not  by  this  con-
federation expressly  delegated  to  the  United  States,  in
congress  assembled. The  third article  declared,  that
the  states  severally  entered  into  a  firm  league  offri<  nd-
ship  with  each  other,  for  their  common  defence,  the  se-
curity of  their  liberties,  and  their  mutual  and  general
welfare ;  binding  themselves  to  assist  each  other  against
all  force  offered  to,  or  attacks  made  upon  them,  or  any
of  them,  on  account  of  religion,  sovereignty,  trade,  or
any  other  pretence  whatever. The  fourth  article  de-
clared, that  the  free  inhabitants  of  each  of  the  states
(vagabonds  and  fugitives  from  justice  excepted)  should
be  entitled  to  all  the  privileges  of  free  citizens  in  the
several  states ;  that  the  people  of  each  state  should  have
free  ingress  and  regress  to  and  from  any  other  state,  and
should  enjoy  all  the  privileges  of  trade  and  commerce,
subject  to  the  same  duties  and  restrictions,  as  the  in-
habitants ; that fugitives  from justice should,  upon
demand  of  the  executive  of  the  state,  from  which  they
vol.  i.  28


218 HISTORY  OF  THE CONFEDERATION. [BOOK  II.

fled,  be  delivered  up  ;  and  that  full  faith  and  credit
should  be  given,  in  each  of  the  states,  to  the  records,
acts,  and  judicial  proceedings  of  the  courts  and  magis-
trates of  every  other  state.

^231.  Having  thus  provided  for  the  security  and  in-
tercourse of  the  states,  the  next  article  (5th)  provided
for  the  organization  of  a  general  congress,  declaring,
that  delegates  should  be  chosen  in  such  manner,  as  the
legislature  of  each  state  should  direct ;  to  meet  in  con-
gress on  the  first  Monday  in  every  year,  with  a  power,
reserved  to  each  state,  to  recall  any  or  all  of  the  dele-
gates, and  to  send  others  in  their  stead. No  state  was
to  be  represented  in  congress  by  less  than  two,  nor
more than  seven  members. No^delegate  was  eligible
for  more  than  three,  in  any  term  of  six  years  ;  and  no
delegate  was  capable  of  holding  any  office  of  emolument
under  the  United  States. Each  state  was  to  maintain
its  own  delegates  ; and,  in  determining  questions  in
congress,  was  to  have  one  vote. Freedom  of  speech
and  debate  in  congress  was  not  to  be  impeached  or
questioned  in  any  other  place  ;  and  the  members  were
to  be  protected  from  arrest  and  imprisonment,  during
the  time  of  their  going  to  and  from,  and  attendance  on
congress,  except  for  treason,  felony,  or  breach  of  the

peace.

^  232.  By  subsequent  articles,  congress  was  invest-
ed with  the  sole  and  exclusive  right  and  power  of  de-
termining on  peace  and  war,  unless  in  case  of  an  inva-
sion of  a  state  by  enemies,  or  an  imminent  danger  of
an  invasion  by  Indians  ;  of  sending  and  receiving  am-
bassadors ;  entering  into  treaties  and  alliances,  under
certain  limitations,  as  to  treaties  of  commerce ; 1  of  es-

l  "  No  treaty  of  commerce  could  be  made,  whereby  the  legislative  pow-
er of  the  states  was  to  be  restrained  from  imposing  such  imposts  and


CH.  III.] ANALYSIS  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION. 219

tablishing  rules  for  deciding  all  cases  of  capture  on  land
and  water,  and  for  the  division  and  appropriation  of
prizes  taken  by  the  land  or  naval  threes,  in  the  service
of  the  United  States  ;  of  granting  letters  of  marque  and
reprisal  in  times  of  peace ;  of  appointing  courts  for  the
trial  of  piracies  and  felonies  commited  on  the  high  seas;
and  of  establishing  courts  for  receiving  and  finally  de-
termining appeals  in  all  cases  of  captures.

^  233.  Congress  was  also  invested  with  power  to  de-
cide in  the  last  resort,  on  appeal,  all  disputes  and  differ-
ences between  two  or  more  states  concerning  boundary,
jurisdiction,  or  any  other  cause  whatsoever ;  and  the
mode  of  exercising  that  authority  was  specially  prescrib-
ed. And  all  controversies  concerning  the  private  right
of  soil,  claimed  under  different  grants  of  two  or  more
states  before  the  settlement  of  their  jurisdiction,  were
to  be  finally  determined  in  the  same  manner,  upon  the
petition  of  either  of  the  grantees.  But  no  state  was  to
be  deprived  of  territory  for  the  benefit  of  the  United
States.

^  234.  Congress  was  also  invested  with  the  sole  and
exclusive  right  and  power  of  regulating  the  alloy  and
value  of  coin  struck  by  their  own  authority,  or  that  of
the  United  States  ;  of  fixing  the  standard  of  weights
and  measures  throughout  the  United  States  ;  of  regu-
lating the  trade  and  managing  all  affairs  with  the  Indi-
ans, not  members  of  any  of  the  states,  provided,  that  the
legislative  right  of  any  state  within  its  own  limits  should
be  not  infringed  or  violated  ;  of  establishing  and  regu-
lating post-offices  from  one  state  to  another,  and  exact-
ing postage  to  defray  the  expenses  ;  of  appointing  all

duties  on  foreigners,  as  their  own  people  were  subjected  to,  or  prohibiting-
the  exportation  or  importation  of  any  species  of  <;oods  or  commodities
whatever."


220  HISTORY  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION. [BOOK  II.

officers  of  the  land  forces  in  the  service  of  the  United
States,  except  regimental  officers  ;  of  appointing  all
officers  of  the  naval  forces,  and  commissioning  all  offi-
cers whatsoever  in  the  service  of  the  United  States  ;
and  of  making  rules  for  the  government  and  regulation
of  the  land  and  naval  forces,  and  directing  their  op-
erations.

§  235.  Congress  was  also  invested  with  authority  to
appoint  a  committee  of  the  states  to  sit  in  the  recess  of
congress,  and  to  consist  of  one  delegate  from  each  state,
and  other  committees  and  civil  officers,  to  manage  the
general  affairs  under  their  direction  ;  to  appoint  one  of
their  number  to  preside,  but  no  person  was  to  serve  in
the  office  of  president  more  than  one  year  in  the  term  of
three  years  ;  to  ascertain  the  necessary  sums  for  the
public  service,  and  to  appropriate  the  same  for  defraying
the  public  expenses  ;  to  borrow  money,  and  emit  bills
on  credit  of  the  United  States  ;  to  build  and  equip  a
navy  ;  to  agree  upon  the  number  of  land  forces,  and
make  requisitions  upon  each  state  for  its  quota,  in  pro-
portion to  the  number  of  white  inhabitants  in  such  state.
The  legislature  of  each  state  were  to  appoint  the  regi-
mental officers,  raise  the  men,  and  clothe,  arm,  and  equip
them  at  the  expense  of  the  United  States.

^  236.  Congress  was  also  invested  with  power  to
adjourn  for  any  time  not  exceeding  six  months,  and  to
any  place  within  the  United  States  ;  and  provision  was
made  for  the  publication  of  its  journal,  and  for  entering
the  yeas  and  nays  thereon,  when  desired  by  any  del-
egate.

^  237.  Such  were  the  powers  confided  in  congress.
But  even  these  were  greatly  restricted  in  their  exer-
cise; for  it  was  expressly  provided,  that  congress  should
never  engage  in  a  war  ;  nor  grant  letters  of  marque  or


CH.  III.] ANALYSIS  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION. liii  1

reprisal  in  time  of  peace  ;  nor  enter  into  anj  treaties
or  alliances  ;  nor  coin  money,  or  regulate  the value

thereof;  nor  ascertain  (lie  sums  or  expenses  necessary
for  the  defence  and  welfare  of  the  United  States  ;  nor
emit  bills  ;  nor  borrow  money  on  the  credit  of  the
United  States;  nor  appropriate  money  ;  nor  agree  up-
on the  number  of  vessels  of  war  to  be  built,  or  purchas-
ed; or  the  number  of  land  or  sea  forces  to  be  raised  ;
nor  appoint  a  commander  in  chief  of  the  army  or  aavy  ;
unless  nine  stales  should  assent  to  the  same.  And  no
question  on  any  other  point,  except  for  adjourning  from
day  to  day,  was  to  be  determined,  except  by  the  vote
of  a  majority  of  the  states.

§  238.  The  committee  of  the  states,  or  any  nine  of
them,  were  authorized  in  the  recess  of  congress  to  ex-
ercise such  powers,  as  congress,  with  the  assent  of  nine
states,  should  think  it  expedient  to  vest  them  with,  ex-
cept such  powers,  for  the  exercise  of  which,  by  the  ar-
ticles of  confederation,  the  assent  of  nine  states  was  re-
quired, which  could  not  be  thus  delegated.

§  239.  It  was  further  provided,  that  all  bills  of  credit,
monies  borrowed,  and  debts  contracted  by  or  under  the
authority  of  congress  before  the  confederation,  should
be  a  charge  against  the  United  States  ;  that  when  land
forces  were  raised  by  any  state  for  the  common  de-
fence, all  officers  of  or  under  the  rank  of  colonel  should
be  appointed  by  the  legislature  of  the  state,  or  in  such
manner,  as  the  state  should  direct  ;  and  all  vacancies
should  be  filled  up  in  the  same  manner  ;  that  all  charges
of  war,  and  all  other  expenses  for  the  common  defence
or  general  welfare,  should  be  defrayed  out  of  a  com-
mon treasury,  which  should  be  supplied  by  the  several
states,  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  land  within  each
state  granted  or  surveyed,  and  the  buildings  and  im-


222  HISTORY  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION. [BOOK  II.

provements  thereon,  to  be  estimated  according  to  the
mode  prescribed  by  congress  ;  and  the  taxes  for  that
proportion  were  to  be  laid  and  levied  by  the  legisla-
tures of  the  states  within  the  time  agreed  upon  by
congress.

§  240.  Certain  prohibitions  were  laid  upon  the  ex-
ercise of  powers  by  the  respective  states.  No  state,
without  the  consent  of  the  United  States,  could  send
an  embassy  to,  or  receive  an  embassy  from,  or
enter  into,  any  treaty  with  any  king,  prince,  or  state  ;
nor  could  any  person  holding  any  office  under  the
United  States,  or  any  of  them,  accept  any  present,
emolument,  office,  or  title,  from  any  foreign  king,
prince,  or  state  ;  nor  could  congress  itself  grant
any  title  of  nobility.  No  two  states  could  enter  in-
to any  treaty,  confederation,  or  alliance  with  each
other,  without  the  consent  of  congress.  No  state
could  lay  any  imports  or  duties,  which  might  interfere
with  any  then  proposed  treaties.  No  vessels  of  war
were  to  be  kept  up  by  any  state  in  time  of  peace,
except  deemed  necessary  by  congress  for  its  defence,
or  trade,  nor  any  body  of  forces,  except  such,  as  should
be  deemed  requisite  by  congress  to  garrison  its  forts,  and
necessary  for  its  defence.  But  every  state  was  re-
quired always  to  keep  up  a  well  regulated  and  disci-
plined militia,  sufficiently  armed  and  accoutred,  and
to  be  provided  with  suitable  field-pieces,  and  tents,
and  arms,  and  ammunition,  and  camp-equipage.  No
state  could  engage  in  war  without  the  consent  of  con-
gress, unless  actually  invaded  by  enemies,  or  in  danger
of  invasion  by  the  Indians.  Nor  could  any  state  grant
commissions  to  any  ships  of  war,  nor  letters  of  marque
and  reprisal,  except  after  a  declaration  of  war  by  con-
gress, unless  such  state  were  infested  by  pirates,  and


CH.  III.] ANALYSIS  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.  223

then  subject  to  the  determination  of  congress.  No
stale  could  prevent  the  removal  of  any  property  im-
ported into  any  state  to  any  other  state,  of  which  the
owner  was  an  inhabitant.  And  no  imposition,  dutii  %
or  restriction  could  be  laid  by  any  state  on  the  prop-
erty of  the  United  States  or  of  either  of  them.

§  211.  There  was  also  provision  made  for  die  ad-
mission of  Canada  ink)  the  union,  and  of  Other  colonies
with  the  assent  of  nine  states.  And  it  was  finally
declared,  that  every  state  should  abide  by  the  d<  ter-
minations of  congress  on  all  questions  submitted:  to
it  by  the  confederation;  that  the  articles  should  he
inviolably  observed  by  every  state  ;  that  the  union
should  be  perpetual ;  and  that  no  alterations  should  he
made  in  any  of  the  articles,  unless  agreed  to  by  con-
gress, and  confirmed  by  the  legislatures  of  every
state.

^€42.  Such  is  the  substance  of  this  celebrated
instrument,  under  which  the  treaty  of  peace,  acknowl-
edging our  independence,  was  negotiated,  the  war  of
the  revolution  concluded,  and  the  union  of  the'  states
maintained  until  the  adoption  of  the  present  constitu-
tion.


224  DECLINE  AND  FALL  [BOOK  II.


CHAPTER  IV.

DECLINE  AND  FALL  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.

^  243.  Any  survey,  however  slight,  of  the  confed-
eration will  impress  the  mind  with  the  intrinsic  diffi-
culties, which  attended  the  formation  of  its  principal
features.  It  is  well  known,  that  upon  three  important
points,  touching  the  common  rights  and  interests  of  the
several  states,  much  diversity  of  opinion  prevailed,  and
many  animated  discussions  took  place.  The  first
was,  as  to  the  mode  of  voting  in  congress,  whether  it
should  be  by  states,  or  according  to  wealth,  or  popula-
tion. The  second,  as  to  the  rule,  by  which  the  ex-
penses of  the  Union  should  be  apportioned  among  the
states.  And  the  third,  as  has  been  already  seen,  rel-
ative to  the  disposal  of  the  vacant  and  unappropriated
lands  in  the  western  territory.1

§  244.  But  that,  which  strikes  us  with  most  force,
is the unceasing jealousy and watchfulness every-
where betrayed  in  respect  to  the  powers to  be  con-
fided to  the  general  government. For  this,  several
causes  may  be  assigned. The  colonies  had  been  long
engaged in struggles against the superintending
authority  of  the  crown,  and  had  practically  felt  the
inconveniences of the restrictive legislation of the
parent  country. These  struggles  had  naturally  led  to
a  general  feeling  of  resistance  of  all  external  authority  ;
and  these  inconveniences  to  extreme  doubts,  if  not  to
dread  of  any  legislation,  not  exclusively  originating  in
their  domestic  assemblies. They  had,  as  yet,  not  felt
the  importance  or  necessity  of  union  among  themselves,
having  been  hitherto  connected  with  the  British  sove-

i  2  Pitk.  Hist.  16.


CH.  IV.]  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.  225

reignty  in  all  their  foreign  relations.  Wliat  would  be
their  fate,  as  separate  and  independent  communities ;
how  far  their  interests  would  coincide  or  rary  from
each  other,  as  such  ;  what  would  be  the  effects  of  the
union  upon  their  domestic  peace,  their  territorial  inter-
ests, their  external  commerce,  their  political  security,
or  their  civil  liberty,  were  points  to  them  wholly  of  a
speculative  character,  in  regard  to  which  various  opin-
ions might  be  entertained,  and  various,  and  even  op-
posite conjectures  formed  upon  grounds,  apparently  of
equal  plausibility.  They  were  smarting,  too,  under
the  severe  sufferings  of  war  ;  and  hardly  had  time  to
look  forward  to  the  future  events  of  a  peace ;  or  if  they
did,  it  would  be  obviously  a  period  for  more  tranquil
discussions,  and  for  a  better  understanding  of  their
mutual  interests.  They  were  suddenly  brought
together,  not  so  much  by  any  deliberate  choice  of  a
permanent  union,  as  by  the  necessity  of  mutual  co-op-
eration and  support  in  resistance  of  the  measures  of
Great  Britain.  They  found  themselves,  after  having
assembled  a  general  congress  for  mutual  advice  and
encouragement,  compelled  by  the  course  of  events  to
clothe  that  body  with  sovereign  powers  in  the  most
irregular  and  summary  manner,  and  to  permit  them  to
assert  the  general  prerogatives  of  peace  and  war,  with-
out any  previous  compact,  and  sanctioned  only  by  the
silent  acquiescence  of  the  people.  Under  such  cir-
cumstances each  state  felt,  that  it  was  the  true  path  of
safety  to  retain  all  sovereign  powers  within  its  own
control,  the  surrender  of  which  was  not  clearly  seen,
under  existing  circumstances,  to  be  demanded  by  an
imperious  public  necessity.*

1  Dr.  Rush,  in  apologizing  for  the  detects  of  the  confederation,  lias
observed,  —  "The  confederation,  together  with  most  of  our  state  con-

vol.  i.  29


226  DECLINE  AND  FALL  [BOOK  II.

§  245.  Notwithstanding  the  declaration  of  the  arti-
cles, that  the  union  of  the  states  was  to  be  perpetual,
an  examination  of  the  powers  confided  to  the  general
government  would  easily  satisfy  us,  that  they  looked
principally  to  the  existing  revolutionary  state  of  things.
The  principal  powers  respected  the  operations  of  war,
and  would  be  dormant  in  times  of  peace.  In  short,
congress  in  peace  was  possessed  of  but  a  delusive  and
shadowy  sovereignty,  with  little  more,  than  the  empty
pageantry  of  office.  They  were  indeed  clothed  with  the
authority  of  sending  and  receiving  ambassadors ;  of
entering  into  treaties  and  alliances,  of  appointing  courts
for  the  trial  of  piracies  and  felonies  on  the  high  seas  ;
of  regulating  the  public  coin  ;  of  fixing  the  standard  of
weights  and  measures  ;  of  regulating  trade  with  the
Indians  ;  of  establishing  post-offices  ;  of  borrowing
money,  and  emitting  bills  on  the  credit  of  the  United
States  ;  of  ascertaining  and  appropriating  the  sums
necessary  for  defraying  the  public  expenses,  and  of
disposing  of  the  western  territory.  And  most  of  these
powers  required  for  their  exercise  the  assent  of  nine
states.  [But  they  possessed  not  the  power  to  raise  any
revenue,  to  levy  any  tax,  to  enforce  any  law,  to  secure
any  right,  to  regulate  any  trade,  or  even  the  poor  pre-
rogative of  commanding  means  to  pay  its  own  minis-
ters at  a  foreign  court.  They  could  contract  debts  ;  but
they  were  without  means  to  discharge  them.  They  could

stitutions,  was  formed  under  very  unfavourable  circumstances.  We
had  just  emerged  from  a  corrupted  monarchy.  Although  we  under-
stood perfectly  the  principles  of  liberty,  yet  most  of  us  were  ignorant  of
the  forms  and  combinations  of  power  in  republics.  Add  to  this  the
British  army  in  the  heart  of  our  country,  spreading  desolation  wherever
it  went."  -  The  North  Ame  an  Review,  for  Oct.  18"27,  contains  a  sum-
mary of  some  of  the  prominent  defects  of  the  confederation.  Art.  I.
p.  249,  &c.

*  1  Amur.  Museum,  8. Sco  also,  1  Amer.  Museum,  270.


OH.  IV.]  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.  227

pledge  the  public  faith  ;  but  the}  were  incapable  of  re-
deemingit.  They  could  entei  into  treaties  ;  bul  every
state  in  the  union  mighl  disobey  them  with  impunity.
They  could  contract  alliances  ;  but  could  nol  command
men  or  money  to  give  them  vigour.  They  could  insti-
tute courts  for  piracies  and  felonies  on  the  high  seas;
but  they  had  no  means  to  pay  either  the  judges,  or  the
jurors.  In  short,  all  powers,  which  did  not  execute
themselves,  were  at  the  mercy  of  the  states,  and  might
be  trampled  upon  at  will  with  impunity.  J

246.  One  of  our  leading  writers  addressed  the  fol-
lowing strong  language  to  the  public:1  "By  this
political  compact  the  United  States  in  congress  have
exclusive  power  for  the  following  purposes,  without
being  able  to  execute  one  of  them.  They  may  make
and  conclude  treaties  ;  but  can  only  recommend  the
observance  of  them.  They  may  appoint  ambassadors ;
but  cannot  defray  even  the  expenses  of  their  tables.
They  may  borrow  money  in  their  own  name  on  the
faith  of  the  Union ;  but  cannot  pay  a  dollar.  They
may  coin  money  ;  but  they  cannot  purchase  an  ounce
of  bullion.  They  may  make  war,  and  determine  what
number  of  troops  are  necessary  ;  but  cannot  raise  a
single  soldier.  In  short,  they  may  dec/arc  every  thing,
but  do  nothing.992

^  247.  Strong  as  this  language  may  seem,  it  has  no
colouring  beyond  what  the  naked  truth  would  justify.8


i  1  Amcr.  Mus.  1786,  p.  270.

2  Lano-uao-e  equally  strong,  and  almost  identical  in  expression,  will  be
found  in  Mr.  Jay's  Letter,  addressed  to  the  people  of  New- York,  1767  ;
3  Amer.  Museum,  554,  556.

3  Mr.  Justice  Patterson,  in  Hijllon  v.  Tin  United  States,*  after  remark-
ing, that  congress,  under the  confederation,  had no coercive  author-

*  3  Dall.  17f. ;  1  Cond.  Rep.  S3,  B8.


228  DECLINE  AND  FALL  [BOOK  II.

Washington  himself,  that  patriot  without  stain  or
reproach,  speaks,  in  1 785,  with  unusual  significancy  on
the  same  subject.  "  In  a  word,"  says  he,  "  the  con-
federation appears  to  me  to  be  little  more,  than  a
shadow  without  the  substance  ;  and  congress  a  nuga-
tory body,  their  ordinances  being  little  attended  to." 1
The  same  sentiments  may  be  found  in  many  public
documents.2  One  of  the  most  humiliating  proofs  of
the  utter  inability  of  congress  to  enforce  even  the  ex-
clusive powers  vested  in  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  argu-
mentative circular,  addressed  by  it  to  the  several  states,
in  April.  1787,  entreating  them  in  the  most  supplicating
manner  to  repeal  such  of  their  laws,  as  interfered  with
the  treaties  with  foreign  nations.3  "  If  in  theory,"
says  the  historian  of  Washington,  "  the  treaties  formed
by  congress  were  obligatory ;  yet  it  had  been  demon-
strated, that  in  practice  that  body  was  absolutely  una-
ble to  carry  them  into  execution." 4

§  248.  The  leading  defects  of  the  confederation  may
be  enumerated  under  the  following  heads:

In  the  first  place,  there  was  an  utter  want  of  all  coer-
cive authority  to  carry  into  effect  its  own  constitutional
measures.5  This,  of  itself,  was  sufficient  to  destroy  its
whole  efficiency,  as  a  superintending  government,  if

ity,  said,  "  Requisitions  were  a  dead  letter,  unless  the  state  legislatures
could  be  brought  into  action  ;  and  when  they  were,  the  sums  raised  were
very  disproportional."

i  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  64.  See  also  2  Pitk.  Hist.  217  ;
North  Amer.  Rev.  Oct.  1827,  p.  249,  254,  25(3,  259.

2  See  1  Amer.  Museum,  275,  290,  364,  430,  447,  448,  449-  The  Fed-
eralist, No.  15  to  22;  2  Amer.  Museum,  383;  Id.  395,  &c. ;  3  Amer.
Museum,  62  to  69  ;  Id.  73  ;  Id.  334  to  338  ;  Id.  342  ;  Id.  348,  &c. ;  Id.
549,  &c. ;  ]  Kent's  Comra.  201.

3  1  Amer.  Museum,  352.

4  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  83.

5  1  Jefferson's  Corresp.  63.


OH.  IV.]  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.  229

that  may  be  called  a  government,  which  p<  I  ao

one  solid  attribute  pf  power. It has  been  justlj  ob-
served, that  "  a  government  authorized  to  declare  war,
but  relying  on  independent states  for  the  means  of
prosecuting  it; capable  of  contracting  debts,  and  of
pledging  the  public  faith for  their  payment; but  de-
pending on  thirteen  distinct  sovereignties  for  the  pre-
servation of  that  faith  ;  could  only  be  rescued  from  igno-
miny and  contempt  by  finding  those  sovereignty  -  ad-
ministered by  men  exempt  from  the  passions  incident
to  human  nature."1 That  is,  by supposing  a  case,  in
which  all  human  governments  would  become  unne-
cessary, and  all  differences  of  opinion  would  become
impossible. In  truth,  congress  possessed only the
power  of  recommendation.2 It  depended  altogether
upon  the  good  will  of  the  states,  whether  a  measure
should  be  carried  into  effect  or  not. And  it  can  fur-
nish no  matter  of  surprise  under  such  circumstances,
that  great  differences  of  opinion  as  to  measures  should
have  existed  in  the  legislatures  of  the  different  states  ;
and  that  a  policy,  strongly  supported  in  some,  should
have  been  denounced  as  ruinous  in  others.  Honest  and
enlightened  men  might  well  divide  on  such  matters  ;
and  in  this  perpetual  conflict  of  opinion  the  state  might
feel  itself  justified  in  a  silent,  or  open  disregard  of  the
act  of  congress.

^  249.  The  fact  corresponded  with  the  theory.  Even
during  the  revolution,  while  all  hearts  and  hands  were
engaged  in  the  common  cause,  many  of  the  measures
of  congress were defeated by the  inactivity of the

1  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  31.  See  also  1  Cent's  Comtn.  199;
1  Elliot's  Debates,  208,  209,  210,  211;  North  Amer.  Rev,  Oct.  L827,
p.  249,  257,  &c. ;  The  Federalist,  No.  15,

2  The  Federalist,  No.  15.


230  DECLINE  AND  FALL  [BOOK  II.

states  ;  and  in  some  instances  the  exercise  of  its  pow-
ers were  resisted.  But  after  the  peace  of  1783,  such
opposition  became  common,  and  gradually  extended
its  sphere  of  activity,  until,  in  the  expressive  language
already  quoted,  "  the  confederation  became  a  shadow
without  the  substance."  There  were  no  national
courts  having  original  or  appellate  jurisdiction  over
cases  regarding  the  powers  of  the  union ;  and  if  there
had  been,  the  relief  would  have  been  but  of  a  very  par-
tial nature,  since,  without  some  act  of  state  legislation,
many  of  those  powers  could  not  be  brought  into  life.

^  250.  A  striking  illustration  of  these  remarks  may
be  found  in  our  juridical  history.  The  power  of  appeal
in  prize  causes,  as  an  incident  to  the  sovereign  powers
of  peace  and  war,  was  asserted  by  congress  after  the
most  elaborate  consideration,  and  supported  by  the
voice  of  ten  states,  antecedent  to  the  ratification  of  the
articles  of  confederation.1  The  exercise  of  that  power
was,  however,  resisted  by  the  state  courts,  notwith-
standing its  immense  importance  to  the  preservation
of  the  rights  of  independent  neutral  nations.  The  con-
federation gave,  in  express  terms,  this  right  of  appeal.
The  decrees  of  the  court  of  appeals  were  equally  re-
sisted ;  and  in  fact,  they  remained  a  dead  letter,  until
they  were  enforced  by  the  courts  of  the  United  States
under  the  present  constitution.2

^251.  The  Federalist  speaks  with  unusual  energy
on  this  subject.3  "The  great  and  radical  view  in  the
construction  of  the  confederation  is  in  the  principle  of
legislation  for  states  or  governments  in  their  corporate

1  Journals  of  Congress,  6th  of  March,  1779,  5th  vol.  p.  $6  &c.  to  90.

2  Penhallow  v.  Doane,  3  Dall.  54  ;  Carson  v.  Jennings,  4  Cranch,  2.
The  Federalist,  No.  15. See  also  1  Jefferson's  Corresp.  63 ;  Presi-
dent Monroe's  Message  of  May,  1822  ; 1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.
note  D.  passim.


CH.  IV.]  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.  2iH

or  collective  capacities,  and  as  contradistinguished  from
the  individuals,  ol  whom  thej  consist.  Though  this  prin-
ciple docs  not  run  through  all  the  powers  delegated  to
the  union  ;  yet  ii  pervades  and  governs  those,  on  which
the  efficacy  of  the  rest  depends.  Except  as  to  the  rule
of  apportionment,  the  United  States  have  an  indefinite
discretion  to  make  requisitions  for  men  and  money  5
but  they  have  no  authoritj  to  raise  either  l>\  regula-
tions extending  to  the  individuals  of  America.  The
consequence  of  this  is,  that  though  in  theory  their  n  so-
lutions concerning  those  objects  are  laws,  constitu-
tionally binding  on  the  members  of  the  Union  ;  yet,  in
practice,  they  are  mere  recommendations,  which  the
states  observe  or  disregard  at  their  option."  Again.
"The  concurrence  of  thirteen  distinct  sovereignties  is
requisite  under  the  confederation  to  the  complete  exe-
cution of  every  important  measure',  that  proceeds  from
the  Union.  It  has  happened,  as  was  to  have  been  fore-
seen. The  measures  of  the  Union  have  not  been  exe-
cuted. The  delinquences  of  the  state  have,  step  by
step,  matured  themselves  to  an  extreme,  which  has  at
length  arrested  all  the  wheels  of  the  national  govern-
ment, and  brought  them  to  an  awful  stand.  Congress
at  this  time  scarcely  possess  the  means  of  keeping  up
the  forms  of  administration  till  the  states  can  have
time  to  agree  upon  a  more  substantial  substitute  for
the  present  shadow  of  a  federal  government."

^  452.  A  farther  illustration  oi'  this  topic  may  be
gathered  from  the  palpable  delect  in  the  confederation,
of  any  power  to  give  a  sanction  to  its  laws.1  Congress
had  no  power  to  exact  obedience,  01  punish  disobedi-
ence to  its  ordinances. They  could  neither  impose  fines,

*  1  Kent's  Comm.  200.


232  DECLINE  AND  FALL  [BOOK  II.

nor  direct  imprisonment,  nor  divest  privileges,  nor  de-
clare forfeitures,  nor  suspend  refractory  officers.  There
was  in  the  confederation  no  express  authority  to  exer-
cise force ;  and  though  it  might  ordinarily  be  implied,
as  an  incident,  the  right  to  make  such  implication  was
prohibited,  for  each  state  was  to  "  retain  every  power,
right,  and  jurisdiction,  not  expressly  delegated  to  con-
gress." *  The  consequence  naturally  was,  that  the  res-
olutions of  congress  were  disregarded,  not  only  by
states,  but  by  individuals.  Men  followed  their  interests
more  than  their  duties ;  they  cared  little  for  persuasions,
which  came  without  force;  or  for  recommendations,
which  appealed  only  to  their  consciences  or  their  patri-
otism.2 Indeed,  it  seems  utterly  preposterous  to  call
that  a  government,  which  has  no  power  to  pass  laws ;
or  those  enactments  laws,  which  are  attended  with  no
sanction,  and  have  no  penalty  or  punishment  annexed
to  the  disobedience  of  them.3

^  253.  But  a  still  more  striking  defect  was  the  total
want  of  power  to  lay  and  levy  taxes,  or  to  raise  reve-
nue to  defray  the  ordinary  expenses  of  government.4
The  whole  power,  confided  to  congress  upon  this  head,
was  the  power  "  to  ascertain  the  sums  necessary  to  be
raised  for  the  service  of  the  United  States ; "  and  to
apportion  the  quota  or  proportion  on  each  state.  But
the  power  was  expressly  reserved  to  the  states  to  lay
and  levy  the  taxes,  and  of  course  the  time,  as  well  as
the  mode  of  payment,  was  extremely  uncertain. The

i  The  Federalist,  No.  21.

2  Yates's  Minutes,  4  Elliot's  Deb.  84.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  15  ;  1  Kent  Comm.  200,  201.

4  See  in  1  U.  S.  Laws,  (Bioren  &  Duane's  Edition,  p.  37  to  54,)  the
proceedings  of  the  old  congress  on  this  subject.  See  also  The  Fede-
ralist, No.  21  ;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  235  to  238 ;  The  Federalist,
No.  22,  32.


CH.  I.]  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.  L>.!:i

evils  resulting  from  this  source,  even  during  the  revolu-
tionary war,  were  of  incalculable  extent ;!  and,  but  for
the  good  fortune  of  congress  in  obtaining  foreign  loans,
it  is  far  from  being  certain,  thai  thej  would  no!  have
been  fatal.2  The  principle,  which  formed  the  basis  of
the  apportionment,  was  sufficiently  objectionable,  as  it
took  a  standard  extremely  unequal  in  its  operation  upon
the  different  states.  The  value  of  its  lands  was  by  no
means  a  just  representative  of  the  proportionate  contri-
butions, which  each  state  ought  to  make  towards  the
discharge  of  the  common  burthens.3

^  254.  But  this  consideration  sinks  into  utter  insig-
nificance, in  comparison  with  others.  Requisitions
were  to  be  made  upon  thirteen  independent  states ;  and
it  depended  upon  the  good  will  of  the  legislature  of  each
state,  whether  it  would  comply  at  all;  or  if  it  did  com-
ply, at  what  time,  and  in  what  manner.  The  very
tardiness  of  such  an  operation,  in  the  ordinary  course
of  things,  was  sufficient  to  involve  the  government  in
perpetual  financial  embarrassments,  and  to  defeat  many
of  its  best  measures,  even  when  there  was  the  utmost
good  faith  and  promptitude  on  the  part  of  the  states  in
complying  with  the  requisitions.  But  many  reasons
concurred  to  produce  a  total  want  of  promptitude  on
the  part  of  the  states,  and,  in  numerous  instances,  a
total  disregard  of  the  requisitions.4  Indeed,  from  the
moment,  that  the  peace  of  1783  secured  the  country
from  the  distressing  calamities  of  war,  a  general  relaxa-

i  5  Marshall's  Life  of  W  ashing  ton,  .V) ;  I  Amer.  Museum,  1 !!'.

2  2  Pitk.  Hist  158,  159,  160,  163;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  237,
243  to  24(1;  I  V.  S.  Laws,  37,54.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  21,  30.

4  2  Pitk.  Hist.  156,  157.  See  also  Remarks  of  Patterson  J.  in  Hylton
v.  United  States,  3  Ball.  171;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  206;  The  Fedeialisb
No.  21,31;  3Dall.  171,  17c.

VOL.  I.  30


234  DECLINE  AND  FALL  [BOOK  II.

tion  took  place  ;  and  many  of  the  states  successively
found  apologies  for  their  gross  neglect  in  evils  common
to  all,  or  complaints  listened  to  by  all.  Many  solemn
and  affecting  appeals  were,  from  time  to  time,  made  by
congress  to  the  states ;  but  they  were  attended  with  no
salutary  effect.1  Many  measures  were  devised  to  ob-
viate the  difficulties,  nay,  the  dangers,  which  threatened
the  Union  ;  but  they  failed  to  produce  any  amendments
in  the  confederation.2  An  attempt  was  made  by  con-
gress, during  the  war,  to  procure  from  the  states  an
authority  to  levy  an  impost  of  live  per  cent,  upon  im-
ported and  prize  goods ;  but  the  assent  of  all  the  states
could  not  be  procured.3  The  treasury  was  empty ;  the
credit  of  the  confederacy  was  sunk  to  a  low  ebb ;  the
public  burthens  were  increasing ;  and  the  public  faith
was  prostrate.

§  255.  These  general  remarks  may  be  easily  verified
by  an  appeal  to  the  public  acts  and  history  of  the  times.
The  close  of  the  revolution,  independent  of  the  enor-
mous losses,  occasioned  by  the  excessive  issue  and  cir-
culation, and  consequent  depreciation  of  paper  money,
found  the  country  burthened  with  a  public  debt  of  up-
wards of  forty-two  millions  of  dollars  ; 4  eight  millions  of
which  was  due  for  loans  obtained  in  France  or  Holland,
and  the  remainder  to  our  own  citizens,  and  principally
to  those,  whose  bravery  and  patriotism  had  saved  their
country.5 Congress,  conscious  of  its  inability  to  dis-

1  See  1  U.  S.  Laws,  (Bioren  &  Duane's  ed.  1815,)  from  page  87  to  54.

2  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  p.  35,  36,  37.

3  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  37  ;  Jour,  of  Congress,  3d  Feb.
1781,  p.  26;  Id.  16th  Dec.  1782,  p/~38  ;  Id.  26th  April,  1783,  p.  194,  203.

4  The  whole  expense  of  the  war  was  estimated  at  135  millions  of
dollars,  including  the  specie  value  of  all  treasury  bills  of  the  United
States,  reduced  according  to  the  scale  of  depreciation  established  by
congress. 2  Pitk.  Hist.  180.

5  2  Pitk.  Hist.  180  ;  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  33.


CII.  I.]  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.  235

charge  even  the  interest  of  this  debt  by  its  existing
means,  on  the  L 2th  of  February,  L783,  resolved,  that
the  establishment  of  permanent  and  adequate  funds,  or
taxes,  or  duties  throughout  the  United  States,  was  in-
dispensable to  do  justice  to  the  public  creditors.  On
the  18th  of  April  following,  after  much  debate,  a  resolu-
tion was  passed,  recommending  to  .the  states  to  vest
congress  with  power  to  levy  certain  specified  duties  mi
spirits,  wines,  teas,  pepper,  sugar,  molasses,  cocoa,  and
coffee,  and  a  duty  of  jive  per  ant.  ad  valorem  on  all
other  imported  goods.  These  duties  were  to  continue
for  twenty-five  years,  and  were  to  be  applied  solely  to
the  payment  of  the  principal  and  interest  of  the  public
debt ;  and  were  to  be  collected  by  officers  chosen  by
the  states,  but  removable  by  congress.  The  states
were  further  required  to  establish,  for  the  same  time
and  object,  other  revenues,  exclusive  of  the  duties  on
imports,  according  to  the  proportion  settled  by  the  con-
federation; and  the  system  was  to  take  effect  only
when  the  consent  of  all  the  states  was  obtained.1

^  256.  The  measure  thus  adopted  was  strongly  urg-
de  upon  the  states  in  an  address,  drawn  up  under  the
authority  of  congress,  by  some  of  our  most  distinguished
statesmen.  Whoever  reads  it,  even  at  this  distance  of
time,  will  be  struck  with  the  force  of  its  style,  the  Iofti- "
ness  of  its  sentiments,  and  the  unanswerable  reasoning,
by  which  it  sustained  this appeal to  the  justice and

i  2  Pitk.  Hist.  180,  181;  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  35,  :5«i:  Journals  of
Congress,  12th  Feb.  1783,  p.  126;  Id. 20th  March,  1783,  p.  154,  157,  158,
160;  Id.  18th  April,  1783,  ;>.  185 to  189.  -An  attempt  was  subsequently

made  in  Congress  to  procure  authority  to  levy  the  taxes  for  the  Union  sep-
arately from  other  state  taxes  ;  and  to  make  the  collectors  liable  to  an  exe-
cution by  the  treasurer  or  his  deputy,  under  the  direction  of  con  press.
But  the  measure  failed  of  receiving  the  vote  of  congress  itself  5  Marsh.
Life  of  Washington,  36,  note.


236  DECLINE  AND  FALL  [BOOK  II.

patriotism  of  the  nation.1  It  was  also  recommended  by
Washington  in  a  circular  letter,  addressed  to  the  gov-
ernors of  the  several  states ;  availing  himself  of  the  ap-
proaching resignation  of  his  public  command  to  impart
his  farewell  advice  to  his  country.  After  having  stated,
that  there  were,  in  his  opinion,  four  things  essential  to
the  well  being  and  existence  of  the  United  States,  as
an  independent  power,  viz  :  1.  An  indissoluble  union
of  the  states  under  one  federal  head ;  2.  A  sacred  regard
to  public  justice ;  3.  The  adoption  of  a  proper  peace
establishment ;  4.  The  prevalence  of  a  pacific  and
friendly  disposition  of  the  people  of  the  United  States
towards  each  other  ;  he  proceeded  to  discuss  at  large
the  first  three  topics.  The  following  passage  will  at
once  disclose  the  depth  of  his  feelings,  and  the  extent
of  his  fears.  "  Unless  (said  he)  the  states  will  suffer
congress  to  exercise  those  prerogatives,  they  are  un-
doubtedly invested  with  by  the  constitution,  every  thing
must  very  rapidly  tend  to  anarchy  and  confusion.  It
is  indispensable  to  the  happiness  of  the  individual  states,
that  there  should  be  lodged  somewhere  a  supreme
power  to  regulate  and  govern  the  general  concerns  of
the  confederated  republic,  without  which  the  union  can-
not be  of  long  duration.  There  must  be  a  faithful  and
pointed  compliance  on  the  part  of  every  state  with  the
late  proposals  and  demands  of  congress,  or  the  most
fatal  consequences  will  ensue.  Whatever  measures
have  a  tendency  to  dissolve  the  Union,  or  contribute  to
violate,  or  lessen  the  sovereign  authority,  ought  to  be
considered  hostile  to  the  liberty  and  independence  of
America,  and  the  authors  of  them  treated  accordingly.
And  lastly ;  unless  we  can  be  enabled  by  the  concur-
rence of  the  states  to  participate  of  the  fruits  of  the  rev-

i  2  Pitk.  Hist.  181, 182 ;  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  32,  38,  39.


CH.  1.]  or  THE  CONFEDERATION.  237

olution,  and  enjoy  the  essential  benefits  of  civil  society
under  a  form  of  governmenl  so  free  and  uncorrupted,
so  happily  guarded  agains!  the  danger  of  oppression,  *a

has  been  devised  by  the  articles  <>f  confederation,  it  will
be  a  subject  of  regret,  that  so  much  blood  and  treasure
have  been  lavished  for  no  purpose;  thai  so  many  suf-
ferings have  been  encountered  without  compensation;
and  that  so  many  sacrifices  have  been  made  in  vain."1
^257.  Notwithstanding  the  warmth  of  this  appeal;
and  the  urgency  of  the  occasion,  the  measure  was  n<  \  er
ratified.  A  jealousy  began  to  exist  between  the  state
and  general  governments ;  and  the  state  interests,  as
might  naturally  be  presumed,  predominated.  Some  of
the  states  adopted  the  resolution,  as  to  the  imposts,
with  promptitude ;  others  gave  a  slow  and  lingering  as-
sent ;  and  others  held  it  under  advisement.2  In  the
mean  time,  congress  was  obliged  to  rely,  for  the  imme-
diate supply  of  the  treasury,  upon  requisitions  annually
made,  and  annually  neglected.  The  requisitions  for
the  payment  of  the  interest  upon  the  domestic  debt,  from
1782  to  1786,  amounted  to  more  than  six  millions  of
dollars;  and  of  this  sum  up  to  March,  1787,  about  a
million  only  was  paid;3  and  from  November,  1784,  to
January,  1786,  483,000  dollars  only  had  been  received
at  the  national  treasury.4  But  for  a  temporary  loan
negotiated  in  Holland,  there  would  have  been  an  utter
prostration  of  the  government. In  this  state  of  things  the

i  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  |.i.  17.  18;  2  Pitk.  Hist  216,217.  Sep  also
2  Amer.  Museum,  153  to  158,  Mr.  Pinckney's  Speech.  See  also  1  Kent.
Comm.  Lect.  10,  p.  212  to217,  (2d  edition.)

2  Journals  of  Congress,  1786,  p.  34.  Sec  also  %2  American  Museum,
153.  —  The  Report  of  a  committee  of  congress  of  the  15th  of  February,
1786,  contains  a  detailed  statement  of  the  acts  of  the  states  relative  to
the  measure.  Jour,  of  Congress,  1786,  p.  34 ;  1  Amer.  Museum,  282;
2  Amer.  Museum,  153  to  160.

3  o  pitk.  Hist.  184.  4  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Washington,  <i<>.


238  DECLINE  AND  FALL  [BOOK II.

value  of  the  domestic  debt  sunk  down  to  about  one
tenth  of  its  nominal  amount.1

^  -258.  In  February,  1786,  congress  determined  to
make  another  and  last  appeal  to  the  states  upon  the
subject.  The  report  adopted  upon  that  occasion  con-
tains a  melancholy  picture  of  the  state  of  the  nation.
"  In  the  course  of  this  inquiry  (said  the  report)  it  most
clearly  appeared,  that  the  requisitions  of  congress  for
eight  years  past  have  been  so  irregular  in  their  opera-
tion, so  uncertain  in  their  collection,  and  so  evidently
unproductive,  that  a  reliance  on  them  in  future,  as  a
source,  from  whence  monies  are  to  be  drawn  to  dis-
charge the  engagements  of  the  confederation,  definite
as  they  are  in  time  and  amount,  would  be  no  less  dis-
honourable to  the  understandings  of  those,  who  enter-
tained such  confidence,  than  it  would  be  dangerous  to
the  welfare  and  peace  of  the  Union."  "  It  has  become
the  duty  of  congress  to  declare  most  explicitly,  that  the
crisis  has  arrived,  when  the  the  people  of  these  United
States,  by  whose  will  and  for  whose  benefit  the  federal
government  was  instituted,  must  decide,  whether  they
will  support  their  rank,  as  a  nation,  by  maintaining  the
public  faith  at  home  or  abroad ;  or  whether,  for  want  of
a  timely  exertion  in  establishing  a  general  revenue,  and
thereby  giving  strength  to  the  confederacy,  they  will
hazard,  not  only  the  existence  of  the  Union,  but  of  those
great  and  invaluable  privileges,  for  which  they  have  so
arduously  and  so  honourably  contended."  2  After  the
adoption  of  this  report,  three  states,  which  had  hitherto
stood  aloof,  came  into  the  measure. New-York  alone


i  2  Pitk.Hist.  185.

2  Journals  of  Congress,  178G,  p.  34  to  36  ;  1  Amer.  Museum,  282,  &c.  —
The  Committee,  who  made  the  Report,  were  Mr.  King,  Mr.  Pinckney,
Mr.  Kean,  Mr.  Monroe,  and  Mr.  Pettit.


CIT.  I.]  OF Till: CON  FEDERATION.  239

refused  to  comply  with  it;  and  aftei  a  most  animated
debate  in  her  legislature,  she  remained  inflexible,  and
the  fate  of  the  measure  was  sealed  forever  by  her
solitary  negative.1

^259.  Independent,  however,  of  this  inability  to  lay
taxes,  or  collect  revenue,  the  want  of  any  power  in  con-
gress to  regulate  foreign  or  domestic  commerce  was
deemed  a  leading  defect  in  the  confederation.  This
evil  was  felt  in  a  comparatively  slighi  degree  during  the
war.  But  when  the  return  of  peace  restored  the  country
to  its  ordinary  commercial  relations,  the  want  of  some
uniform  system  to  regulate  them  was  early  perceived  ;
and  the  calamities,  which  followed  our  shipping  and
navigation,  our  domestic,  as  well  as  our  foreign  trade,
convinced  the  reflecting,  that  ruin  impended  upon  these
and  other  vital  interests,  unless  a  national  remedy  could
be  devised.  We  accordingly  find  the  public  papers  ol
that  period  crowded  with  complaints  on  this  subject.
It  was,  indeed,  idle  and  visionary  to  suppose,  that  while
thirteen  independent  states  possessed  the  exclusive
power  of  regulating  commerce,  there  could  be  found
any  uniformity  of  system,  or  any  harmony  and  co-
operation for  the  general  welfare.  Measures  of  a  com-
mercial nature,  which  were  adopted  in  one  state  from  a
sense  of  its  own  interests,  would  be  often  counter-
vailed or  rejected  by  other  states  from  similar  motives.

i  2  Pitk.  Hist.  1S4.  222;  .">  Marsh.  Life  of  Washing*  •  .  I  -J.  I  3,  124  ;
1  Tuck.  Black.  App.  158. — The  speech  of  Col.  Hamilton,  the  in  legisla-
ture of  New- York,  in  February,  1787,  contains  a  very  powerful  argument

in  favour  of  the  impost;  ami a  statement  of  the  extent,  to  whir:
of  the  states  had  complied  with,  or  refused  the  requisitions  of  coi
During  tin?  past  five  years,  he  says,  New- Hampshire,  North  Carolina,
South  Carolina,  and  Georgia  had  paid  nothing;  Connecticut  ami
ware,  about  one  third: Massachusetts, Rhode  Island,  and  Maryland,
about  one  halt*;  Virginia,  three  fifths  :  Pensylvania,  near  the  whole  :  ami
New-York,  more  than  her  quota.  1  Amer.  Museum,  445,  448.


240  DECLINE  AJVD  FALL  [BOOK  II.

If  one  state  should  deem  a  navigation  act  favourable  to
its  own  growth,  the  efficacy  of  such  a  measure  might
be  defeated  by  the  jealousy  or  policy  of  a  neighbouring
state.  If  one  should  levy  duties  to  maintain  its  own
government  and  resources,  there  were  many  tempta-
tions for  its  neighbours  to  adopt  the  system  of  free
trade,  to  draw  to  itself  a  larger  share  of  foreign  and
domestic  commerce.  The  agricultural  states  might
easily  suppose,  that  they  had  not  an  equal  interest  in  a
restrictive  system  with  the  navigating  states.  And,  at
all  events,  each  state  would  legislate  according  to  its
estimate  of  its  own  interests,  the  importance  of  its  own
products,  and  the  local  advantages  or  disadvantages  of
its  position  in  a  political  or  commercial  view.  To  do
otherwise  would  be  to  sacrifice  its  immediate  interests,
without  any  adequate  or  enduring  consideration  ;  to
legislate  for  others,  and  not  for  itself;  to  dispense
blessings  abroad,  without  regarding  the  security  of  those
at  home.1

^  260.  Such  a  state  of  things  necessarily  gave  rise
to  serious  dissensions  among  the  states  themselves.
The  difference  of  regulations  was  a  perpetual  source
of  irritation  and  jealousy.  Real  or  imaginary  griev-
ances were  multiplied  in  every  direction;  and  thus
state  animosities  and  local  prejudices  were  fostered  to
a  high  degree,  so  as  to  threaten  at  once  the  peace  and
safety  of  the  Union.2

1  New  Jersey  early  felt  the  want  of  a  power  in  congress,  to  regulate
foreign  commerce,  and  made  it  one  of  her  objections  to  adopting  the
articles  of  confederation,  in  her  representation  to  congress.— 2  Pitk.
Hist.  23,  24  ;  1  Secret  Journ.  375  ;  The  Federalist,  No.  38.

2  2  Pitk.  Hist.  192,214,  215;  1  Amer.  Museum,  272,  273,  281,  282,
2S8  ;  The  Federalist,  No.  22.— 1  Amer.  Mus  13  to  16;  2  Amer.  Mus.  •  95
to  399  ;  The  Federalist,  No.  7  :  1  Elliot's  Debates,  75;  1  Tucker's  Black.
Comm.  App.  159,  246,  249.— Mons.  Turgot,  the  Comptroller  General  of


CII.  IV. ]  OF THE CONFEDERATION.  1^11

^  261.  These  evils  were  aggravated  by  the  situation
of  our  foreign  commerce.  During  the  war,  our  com-
merce was  nearly  annihilated  by  the  superior  naval
power  of  the  enemy;  and  the  return  of  peace  enabled
foreign  nations,  ami  especially  Great  Britain,  in  a  great
measure  to  monopolize  all  the  benefits  of  our  home
trade.  In  the  first  place,  our  navigation,  having  no  pro-
tection, was  unable  to  engage  in  competition  with  for-
eign ships.  In  the  next  place,  our  supplies  were  almost
altogether  furnished  by  foreign  importers  or  on  foreign
account.  We  were  almost  Hooded  with  foreign  manu-
factures, while  our  own  produce  bore  but  a  reduced
price.1  It  was  easy  to  foresee,  that  such  a  state  of
things  must  soon  absorb  all  our  means  ;  and  as  our
industry  had  but  a  narrow  scope,  would  soon  reduce
us  to  absolute  poverty.  Our  trade  in  our  own  ships
with  foreign  nations  was  depressed  in  an  equal  degree  ;
for  it  was  loaded  with  heavy  restrictions  in  their  ports.
While,  for  instance,  British  ships  with  their  commodi-
ties had  free  admission  into  our  ports,  American  ships
and  exports  were  loaded  with  heavy  exactions,  or  pro-
hibited from  entry  into  British  ports.2  We  were,
therefore,  the  victims  of  our  own  imbecility,  and  reduc-
ed to  a  complete  subjection  to  the  commercial  regula-


the  Finances  of  France,  among  other  errors  in  our  national  policy,  ob-
served, that  in  the  several  states,  "one  fixed  principle  is  established  in
regard  to  imposts.  Each  state  is  supposed  to  be  at  liberty  to  tax  itself  at
pleasure,  and  to  lav  its  taxes  upon  persons,  consumptions,  or  importa-
tions; that  is  to  say,  to  erect  an  interest  contrary  to  that  of  other  states" —

1  Amer.  Museum,  16.

i  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Washington,  69,  72,  75,  79,  80.

2  1  Tuck.  Black.  App.  L57, L59  ; •"">  .Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  77,  78;

2  Pitk.  Hist.  186  to  1!»: ;  1  Amer.  Museum,  282,  288;  2  Amer.  Museum,
263  to  276  ;  Id.  371  to  373  ;  3  Amer.  Museum,  554  to  557,562  ;  North
American  Review,  Oct.  1827,  p.  249,  257,  258.

VOL.  I.  31


242  DECLINE  AND  FALL  [BOOK  II.

tions  of  other  countries,  notwithstanding  our  boasts  of
freedom  and  independence. Congress  had  been  long
sensible  of  the  fatal effects  flowing  from  this  source ;
but  their  efforts  to  ward  off  the  mischiefs  had  been
unsuccessful. Being  invested  by  the  articles  of  con-
federation with  a  limited  power  to  form  commercial
treaties,  they  endeavoured  to  enter  into  treaties  with  for-
eign powers  upon  principles  of  reciprocity. But  these
negotiations  were,  as  might  be  anticipated,  unsuccess-
ful, for  the  parties  met  upon  very  unequal  terms. For-
eign nations,  and  especially  Great  Britain,  felt  secure  in
the  possession  of  their  present  command  of  our  trade,
and  had  not  the  least  inducement  to  part  with  a  single
advantage. It  was  further  pressed  upon  us,  wdth  a  truth
equally  humiliating  and  undeniable,  that  congress  pos-
sessed no  effectual  power  to  guaranty  the  faithful  observ-
ance of  any  commercial  regulations  ;  and  there  must  in
such  cases  be  reciprocal  obligations.1 "  America  (said
Washington)  must  appear  in  a  very  contemptible  point  of
view  to  those,  with  wThom  she  was  endeavouring  to
form  commercial  treaties,  without  possessing  the  means
of  carrying  them  into  effect. They  must  see  and  feel,
that  the  Union,  or  the  states  individually,  are  sove-
reign, as  best  suits  their  purposes. In  a  word,  that  we
are  a  nation  to-day,  and  thirteen  to-morrow. Who  will
treat  with  us  on  such  terms  1 "  2

§  262.  The  difficulty  of  enforcing  even  the  obliga-
tions of  the  treaty  of  peace  of  1 783  was  a  most  serious
national  evil.  Great  Britain  made  loud  complaints  of
infractions  thereof  on  the  part  of  the  several  states,  and

i  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  71,  72,  73;  2  Pitk.  Hist.  189,  190;  3  Amer.
Museum,  62,  04,  Go.

2  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  73 ;  North  American  Review,  Oct.  1827,
p.  257,  258  ;  Atcheson's  Coll.  of  Reports,  p.  55.


CH.  IV.]  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.  243

demanded  redress.  She  refused  on  account  of  these
alleged  infractions  to  surrender  up  the  western  ports
according  to  the  stipulations  of  that  treaty  ;  and  the
whole  confederacy  was  consequently  threatened  with
the  calamities  of  [ndian  depredations  on  the  whole  c
our  western  borders,  and  was  in  danger  of  having  its  puty
lie  peace  subverted  through  its  mere  inability  to  enforcl
the  treaty  stipulations.  The  celebrated  address  c.
congress,  in  1787,  to  the  several  states  on  this  subject
is  replete  with  admirable  reasoning,  and  contains  melan-
choly proofs  of  the  utter  inefficiency  of  the  confedera-
tion, and  of  the  disregard  by  the  states  in  their  legisla-
tion of  the  provisions  of  that  treaty.1

§  263.  In  April,  1784,  congress  passed  a  resolution,
requesting  the  states  to  vest  the  general  governmer3
with  power,  for  fifteen  years  only,  to  prohibit  the  impo^
tation  and  exportation  of  goods  in  the  ships  of  nation!
with  which  we  had  no  commercial  treaties ;  and  also  tc
prohibit  the  subjects  of  foreign  nations,  unless  authorizes
by  treaty,  to  import  any  goods  into  the  United  States,
not  the  produce  or  manufacture  of  the  dominions  of  their
own  sovereign. Although  congress  expressly  stated,
that  without  such  a  power  no  reciprocal  advantages
could  be  acquired,  the  proposition  was  never  assented
to  by  the  states  ; and  their  own  countervailing  laws
were  either  rendered  nugatory  by  the  laws  of  other
states,  or  were  repealed  by  a  regard  to  their  own  inter-


l  Journals  of  congress,  April  13,  1787,  p. '3*2  ;  Rawle  on  Constitution,
App.  2,  p.  31G.  —  It  was  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Jay,  then  Secretary  of  For-
eign Affairs,  and  was  unanimously  adopted  by  congress.  It  however
failed  of  its  object.  And  the  treaty  of  1783,  so  far  as  it  respected  Brit-
ish debts,  was  never  faithfully  executed  until  after  the  adoption  of  the
constitution  of  the  United  States.  See  Ware  v.  Hylton,  3  Dall.  R.  199  ;
Hopkins  v.  Bell,  3  Cranch,  454.


244  DECLINE  AND  FALL  [BOOK  II.

•

tests.1  At  a  still  later  period  a  resolution  was  moved  in
f3ongress,  recommending  it  to  the  states  to  vest  in  the
general  government  full  authority  to  regulate  external
Land  internal  commerce,  and  to  impose  such  duties,  as
might  be  necessary  for  the  purpose,  which  shared  even  a
fe  ore  mortifying  fate  ;  for  it  was  rejected  in  that  body,
ti  hough  all  the  duties  were  to  be  collected  by,  and
ei  id  over  to  the  states.2

r  §  264.  Various  reasons  concurred  to  produce  these
i  itraordinary  results. But  the  leading  cause  was  a

•owing  jealousy  of  the  general  government ;  and  a
.nore  devoted  attachment  to  the  local  interests  of  the
states ;  —  a  jealousy,  which  soon  found  its  way  even
into  the  councils  of  congress,  and  enervated  the  little
eower,  which  it  was  yet  suffered  to  exert.  One  mem-
stable  instance  occurred,  when  it  was  expected,  that
axe  British  garrisons  would  surrender  the  western
$  jsts,  and  it  was  thought  necessary  to  provide  some

egular  troops  to  take  possession  of  them  on  the  part
of  America.  The  power  of  congress  to  make  a  requi-
sition on  the  states  for  this  purpose  was  gravely  con-
tested ;  and,  as  connected  with  the  right  to  borrow
money  and  emit  bills  of  credit,  was  asserted  to  be  dan-
gerous to  liberty,  and  alarming  to  the  states.  The
measure  was  rejected,  and  militia  were  ordered  in  their
stead.3

§  265.  There  were  other  defects  seriously  urged
against  the  confederation,  which,  although  not  of  such  a
fatal  tendency,  as  those  already  enumerated,  were
deemed  of  sufficient  importance  to  justify  doubts,  as  to
its  efficacy  as  a  bond  of  union,  or  an  enduring  scheme

1  2Pitk.  Hist.  192;  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  70.

2  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Washington,  80,  81.

3  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Washington,  App.  note  1.


CH.  IV.]  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION.  246

of  government  It  is  not  necessary  to  go  at  large  into
a  consideration  of  them.  It  will  suffice  for  the  pres<  m
purpose  to  enumerate  the  principal  heads.  (\.)  The
principle  of  regulating  the  contributions  of  the  states

into  the  common  treasurj  l>\  quotas,  apportioned  ac-
cording to  the  value  of  lau.ls,  which  (as  has  been  already
suggested)  was  objected  to,  as  unjust,  unequal,  and
inconvenient  in  its  operation.1  (2.)  The  want  of  a
mutual  guaranty  of  the  state  governments,  so  as  to  pro-
tect them  against  domestic  insurrections,  and  usurpa-
tions destructive  of  their  liberty.2  (3.)  The  want  of  a
direct  power  to  raise  armies,  which  was  objected  to,  as
unfriendly  to  vigour  and  promptitude  of  action,  as  well
as  to  economy  and  a  just  distribution  of  the  public  bur-
thens.3 (4.)  The  right  of  equal  suffrage  among  all  the
states,  so  that  the  least  in  point  of  wealth,  population,
and  means  stood  equal  in  the  scale  of  representation
with  those,  which  were  the  largest.  From  this  circum-
stance it  might,  nay  it  must  happen,  that  a  majority  of
the  states,  constituting  a  third  only  of  the  people  of
America,  could  control  the  rights  and  interests  of  the
other  two  thirds.4  Nay,  it  was  constitutionally,  not
only  possible,  but  true  in  fact,  that  even  the  votes  of
nine  states  might  not  comprehend  a  majority  of  the
people  in  the  Union.  The  minority,  therefore,  possess-
ed a  negative  upon  the  majority.  (&.)  The  organiza-
tion of  the  whole  powers  of  the  general  government  in
a  single  assembly,  without  any  separate  or  distinct  dis-
tribution or  the executive, judicial, and legislative


1  The  Federalist,  No.  21  ;  :\  Amor.  Museum,  62,  63,  64.

2  The  Federalist,  No.  21  ;  3  Amer.  Museum,  62,  65.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  22.

4  The  Federalist,  No.  22  ;  I  Amer.  Museum,  275  ;  3  Amer.  Museum,
G2,  66.


246  DECLINE AND FALL  [BOOK  II.

functions.1  It  was  objected,  that  either  the  whole  su-
perstructure would  thus  fall,  from  its  own  intrinsic  fee-
bleness ;  or,  engrossing  all  the  attributes  of  sovereignty,
entail  upon  the  country  a  most  execrable  form  of  gov-
ernment in  the  shape  of  an  irresponsible  aristocracy.
(6.)  The  want  of  an  exclusive  power  in  the  general
government  to  issue  paper  money  ;  and  thus  to  prevent
the  inundation  of  the  country  with  a  base  currency,
calculated  to  destroy  public  faith,  as  well  as  private
morals.2  (7.)  The  too  frequent  rotation  required  by
the  confederation  in  the  office  of  members  of  congress,
by  which  the  advantages,  resulting  from  long  experi-
ence and  knowledge  in  the  public  affairs,  were  lost  to
the  public  councils.3  (8.)  The  want  of  judiciary  power
co-extensive  with  the  powers  of  the  general  gov-
ernmejxy  5,  >\{  >

V  §  266.  In  respect  to  this  last  defect,  the  language  of
the  Federalist 4  contains  so  full  an  exposition,  that  no
farther  comment  is  required.  "  Laws  are  a  dead  letter
without  courts  to  expound  and  define  their  true  mean-
ing and  operation.  The  treaties  of  the  United  States,
to  have  any  force  at  all,  must  be  considered  as  part  of
the  law  of  the  land.  Their  true  import,  as  far  as  re-
spects individuals,  must,  like  all  other  laws,  be  ascertain-
ed by  judicial  determinations.  To  produce  uniformity
in  these  determinations,  they  ought  to  be  submitted,  in
the  last  resort,  to  one  supreme  tribunal.  And  this  tri-
bunal ought  to  be  instituted  under  the  same  authority,
which  forms  the  treaties  themselves. These  ingredi-


1  The  Federalist,  No.  22 ;  1  Amer.  Museum,  8,  9 ;  Id.  272  ;  3  Amer.
Museum,  62,  66  ;  1  Kent's  Coram.  Lect.  10,  p.  200.  [2d  edit.  p.  212.]

2  1  Amer.  Museum,  8,  9  ;  Id.  363.

3  1  Amer.  Museum,  8,  9  ;  3  Amer.  Museum,  62,  66.

4  The  Federalist,  No.  22-


CH.  IV.]  OF THE CONFEDERATION.  2  I?

ents  are  botli  indispensable. It'  there  is  in  each  state

a  court  of  final  jurisdiction,  there  may  be  as  many  dif-
ferent final  determinations  on  the  same  point,  as  there
are  courts.  There  are  endless  diversities  in  the  opinions

of  men.  We  often  see  not  only  different  courts,  but  the
judges  of  the  same  court  differing  from  each  oilier.
To  avoid  the  confusion,  which  would  unavoidably  re-
sult from  the  contradictory  decisions  of  a  number  of  in-
dependent judicatories,  all  nations  have  found  it  neces-
sary to  establish  one  tribunal  paramount  to  the  rest,
possessing  a  general  superintendence,  and  authorized
to  settle  and  declare,  in  the  last  resort,  an  uniform  rule
of  justice."

§  267.  "  This  is  the  more  necessary,  where  the
frame  of  government  is  so  compounded,  that  the  laws
of  the  whole  are  in  danger  of  being  contravened  by  the
laws  of  the  parts,  &x.  The  treaties  of  the  United  States,
under  the  present  confederation,  are  liable  to  the  infrac-
tions of  thirteen  different  legislatures,  and  as  many  dif-
ferent courts  of  final  jurisdiction,  acting  under  the  au-
thority of  these  legislatures.  The  faith,  the  reputation,
the  peace  of  the  whole  Union,  are  thus  continually  at
the  mercy  of  the  prejudices,  the  passions,  and  the  inter-
ests of  every  member,  of  which  these  are  composed.
Is  it  possible,  under  such  circumstances,  that  foreign
nations  can  either  respect,  or  confide  in  such  a  govern-
ment 1  Is  it  possible,  that  the  people  of  America  will
longer  consent  to  trust  their  honour,  their  happiness,
their  safety,  on  so  precarious  a  foundation  ?  "  It  might
have  been  added,  that  the  rights  of  individuals,  so  far  as
they  depended  upon  acts  or  authorities  derived  from
the  confederation,  were  liable  to  the  same  difficulties,  as
the  rights  of  other  nations  dependent  upon  treaties.1

i  See  Chishvlm  v.  Georgia,  2  Dall.  R.  419,  447.


248  DECLINE AND FALL  [BOOK  II.

§  268.  The  last  defect,  which  seems  worthy  of  enu-
meration, is,  that  the  confederation  never  had  a  ratifi-
cation of  the  people.  Upon  this  objection,  it  will  be
sufficient  to  quote  a  single  passage  from  the  same  cel-
ebrated work,  as  it  affords  a  very  striking  commentary
upon  some  extraordinary  doctrines  recently  promulgat-
ed.1 "  Resting  on  no  better  foundation  than  the  consent
of  the  state  legislatures,  it  [the  confederation]  has  been
exposed  tc  frequent  and  intricate  questions  concerning
the  validity  of  its  powers  ;  and  has,  in  some  instances,
given  birth  to  the  enormous  doctrine  of  a  right  of  legis-
lative repeal.  Owing  its  ratification  to  a  law  of  a  state,
it  has  been  contended,  that  the  same  authority  might
repeal  the  law,  by  which  it  was  ratified.  However  gross
a  heresy  it  may  be  to  maintain,  that  a  party  to  a  com-
pact has  a  right  to  revoke  that  compact,  the  doctrine
itself  has  had  respectable  advocates.  The  possibility
of  a  question  of  this  nature  proves  the  necessity  of
laying  the  foundations  of  our  national  government  deep-
er, than  in  the  mere  sanction  of  delegated  authority.
The  fabric  of  American  empire  ought  to  rest  on  the
solid  basis  of  the  consent  of  the  people.  The
streams  of  national  power  ought  to  flow  immediately
from  that  pure,  original  fountain  of  all  legitimate  au-
thority." 2

^  269.  The  very  defects  of  the  confederation  seem
also  to  have  led  congress,  from  the  pressure  of  public
necessity,  into  some  usurpations  of  authority ;  and  the
states  into  many  gross  infractions  of  its  legitimate  sove-
reignty.3 "  A  list  of  the  cases,  (says  the  Federalist,)  in
which  congress  have  been  betrayed  or  forced  by  the

i  The  Federalist,  No.  22.  2  The  Federalist,  No.  43.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  43  ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect.  10,  p.  201.  [2d  edit,
p.  214,  215.]


CH.  IV.]  OP  THE  CONFEDERATION.  249

defects  of  the  confederation, into  violations  of  their
chartered  authorities,  would  nol  a  little  surprise  those,
who  have  paid  no  attention  to  the  subject" 1 Again,
speaking  of  the  western  territory,  and  referring  to  the
ordinance  of 1787,  for  the  government  thereof,  it  is
observed:  "Congress  have  assumed  the  administration
of  this  stock.  They  have  begun  to  render  it  productive.
Congress have  undertaken to  do  more  ; they have
proceeded  to  form  now  states,  to  ered  temporary  gov-
ernments, to  appoint  officers  for  thorn,  and  to  prescribe
the  conditions,  on  which  such  states  shall  be  admitted
into  the  confederacy. All  this  has  been  done,  and  done
without  the  least  colour  of  constitutional  authority. Yet
no  blame  has been  whispered  ; no alarm  has been
sounded."  2

§  270.  Whatever  may  be  thought  as  to  some  of  these
enumerated  defects,  whether  they  were  radical  defi-
ciences  or  not,  there  cannot  be  a  doubt,  that  others  of
them  went  to  the  very  marrow  and  essence  of  govern-
ment. There  had  been,  and  in  fact  then  were,  different
parties  in  the  several  states,  entertaining  opinions  hostile,
or  friendly  to  the  existence  of  a  general  government.3  The
former  would  naturally  cling  to  the  state  governments
with  a  close  and  unabated  zeal,  and  deem  the  least  pos-
sible delegation  of  power  to  the  Union  sufficient,  (if  any
were  to  be  permitted,)  with  which  it  could  creep  on  in
a  semi-animated  state. The  latter  would  as  naturally
desire,  that the powers  of the general government
should  have  a  real,  and  not  merely  a  suspended  vital-
ity ;  that  it  should  act,  and  move,  and  guide,  and  not
merely  totter  under  its  own  weight,  or  sink  intoa  drowsy
decrepitude,  powerless  and.  palsied.  But  each  party  must

i  The  Federalist.  No.  42.  a  The  Federalist,  No.  36.

3  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Washington, 33.
vol.  i.  32


250 * DECLINE  AND  FALL [BOO  K  II.

have  felt,  that  the  confederation  had  at  last  totally  fail-
ed, as  an  effectual  instrument  of  government ;  that  its
glory  was  departed,  and  its  days  of  labour  done  ;  that
it  stood  the  shadow  of  a  mighty  name  ;  that  it  was  seen
only,  as  a  decayed  monument  of  the  past,  incapable  of
any  enduring  record ;  that  the  steps  of  its  decline
were  numbered  and  finished ;  and  that  it  was  now  paus-
ing at  the  very  door  of  that  common  sepulchre  of  the
dead,  whose  inscription  is,  JYulla  vestigia  retrorsum.

^  271.  If  this  language  should  be  thought  too  figu-
rative to  suit  the  sobriety  of  historical  narration,  we
might  avail  ourselves  of  language  as  strongly  coloured,
and  as  desponding,  which  was  at  that  period  wrung
from  the  hearts  of  our  wisest  patriots  and  statesmen.1
It  is,  indeed,  difficult  to  overcharge  any  picture  of  the
gloom  and  apprehensions,  which  then  pervaded  the
public  councils,  as  well  as  the  private  meditations  of  the
ablest  men  of  the  country.  We  are  told  by  an  histori-
an of  almost  unexampled  fidelity  and  moderation,  and
himself  a  witness  of  these  scenes,2  that  "  the  confeder-
ation was  apparently  expiring  from  mere  debility.  In-
deed, its  preservation  in  its  actual  condition,  had  it  been
practicable,  was  scarcely  to  be  desired.  Without  the
ability  to  exercise  them,  it  withheld  from  the  states
powers,  which  are  essential  to  their  sovereignty.  The
last  hope  of  its  friends  having  been  destroyed,  the  vital
necessity  of  some  measure,  which  might  prevent  the
separation  of  the  integral  parts,  of  which  the  American
empire  was  composed,  became  apparent  even  to  those,
who  had  been  unwilling  to  perceive  it." 3

1  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  92,  93,  94,  95,  96,  104,  113, 114,  118,  120  ;
1  Kent's  Comm.  202  ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  note  D,  142,  150;
1  Elliot's  Debates,  203  to  213  ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  30,  31  to  34.

2  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  124.

3  Mr.  Jefferson  uses  the  following  language  :  "The  alliance  between


CH.  V I .  ]  0  F  T HE  CO  X  P  E  ! )  I 3  RATION.  2 5  I

the  states,  under  the  old  articles  <>f  confederation,  for  the  purpo
joint  defence  against  the  aggressions  of  Gr<  at  Britain,  was  found  insuf-
ficient, as  treaties  of  alliance  generally  are,  to  enforce  compliance  with
their  mutual  stipulations;  and  these  -mum-  fulfilled,  that  bond
pire  of  itself,  and  each  stat.-  to  become  sovereign  and  independent  in  all
things."  4  Jefferson's  Corres|>.  I II.  Thus,  he  seems  to  have  held  the
extraordinary  opinion,  that  tiie  confederation  was  to  cease  with  the  war,
or,  at  all  events,  with  the  fulfilment  (four  treaty  stipulations.


BOOK  III.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES.


CHAPTER  I.

ORIGIN  AND  ADOPTION  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.

^  272.  In  this  state  of  things,  commissioners  were
appointed  by  the  legislatures  of  Virginia  and  Maryland
early  in  1 785,  to  form  a  compact  relative  to  the  naviga-
tion of  the  rivers  Potomac  and  Pocomoke,  and  the
Chesapeake  Bay.  The  commissioners  having  met  in
March,  in  that  year,  felt  the  want  of  more  enlarged
powers,  and  particularly  of  powers  to  provide  for  a  lo-
cal naval  force,  and  a  tariff  of  duties  upon  imports.
Upon  receiving  their  recommendation,  the  legislature  of
Virginia  passed  a  resolution  for  laying  the  subject
of  a  tariff*  before  all  the  states  composing  the  Union.
Soon  afterwards,  in  January,  1 786,  the  legislature  adopt-
ed another  resolution,  appointing  commissioners,  "  who
were  to  meet  such,  as  might  be  appointed  by  the  other
states  in  the  Union,  at  a  time  and  place  to  be  agreed  on,
to  take  into  consideration  the  trade  of  the  United
States  ;  to  examine  the  relative  situation  and  trade  of
the  states  ;  to  consider  how  far  a  uniform  system  in
their  commercial  relations  may  be  necessary  to  their


CH.  I.]  ORIGIN OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  253

common  interest,  and  their  permanent  harmony;  and
to  report  to  the  several  states  such  an  act,  relative  to
this  great  object,  as,  when  unanimously  ratified  bj
them,  will  enable  the  United  States  in  congress  assem-
bled to  provide  for  the  same."  *

&  273.  These  resolutions  were  communicated  to  the
states,  and  a  convention  of  commissioners  from  five
states  only,  viz.  New- York,  New- Jersey,  Pennsylva-
nia, Delaware,  and  Virginia,  met  at  Annapolis  in  Sep-
tember, 1786.2  After  discussing  the  subject,  they
deemed  more  ample  powers  necessary,  and  as  well
from  this  consideration,  as  because  a  small  number  on-
ly of  the  states  was  represented,  they  agreed  to  come
to  no  decision,  but  to  frame  a  report  to  be  laid  before
the  several  states,  as  well  as  before  congress.3  In  this  re-
port they  recommended  the  appointment  of  commission-
ers from  all  the  states,  "  to  meet  at  Philadelphia,  on  the
second  Monday  of  May,  then  next,  to  take  into  consid-
eration the  situation  of  the  United  States ;  to  devise
such  further  provisions,  as  shall  appear  to  them  neces-
sary, to  render  the  constitution  of  the  federal  govern-
ment adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  the  Union  ;  and
to  report  such  an  act  for  that  purpose  to  the  United
States  in  congress  assembled,  as  when  agreed  to  by
them,  and  afterwards  confirmed  by  the  legislature  of
every  state,  will  effectually  provide  for  the  same."  4

^  274.  On  receiving  this  report,  the  legislature of
Virginia  passed  an  act  ibv  the  appointment  of  dele:
to  meet  such,  as  might  be  appointed  by  other  stat<  s,  al
Philadelphia.5  rJ  ne  report  was  also  received  in  congress.

i  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  90,  91  ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  203.

2  1  Amer.  Museum,  267  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist.  218.

3  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  97  :  2  Pitk.  Hist.  218 ;  1  U.  S.  Laws,  (Bioren
&  Duane's  edit..  1815,)  p.  55,  &c.  to  58.

4  1  Amer.  Museum,  267,  268.  ■"•  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  98.


254 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

But  no  step  was  taken,  until  the  legislature  of  New-
York  instructed  its  delegation  in  congress  to  move  a
resolution,  recommending  to  the  several  states  to  ap-
point deputies  to  meet  in  convention  for  the  purpose
of  revising  and  proposing  amendments  to  the  federal
constitution.1  On  the  21st  of  February,  1787,  a  resolu-
tion was  accordingly  moved  and  carried  in  congress,
recommending  a  convention  to  meet  in  Philadelphia,  on
the  second  Monday  of  May  ensuing,  "  for  the  purpose
of  revising  the  articles  of  confederation,  and  reporting
to  congress,  and  the  several  legislatures,  such  altera-
tions and  provisions  therein,  as  shall,  when  agreed  to
in  congress,  and  confirmed  by  the  states,  render  the  fed-
eral constitution  adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  govern-
ment, and  the  preservation  of  the  Union."  2  The  alarm-
ing insurrection  then  existing  in  Massachusetts,  with-
out doubt,  had  no  small  share  in  producing  this  result.
The  report  of  congress,  on  that  subject,  at  once  de-
monstrates their  fears,  and  their  political  weakness.3

^  275.  At  the  time  and  place  appointed,  the  repre-
sentatives of  twelve  states  assembled.  Rhode-Island
alone  declined  to  appoint  any  on  this  momentous  oc-
casion.4 After  very  protracted  deliberations,  the  con-
vention finally  adopted  the  plan  of  the  present  consti-
tution on  the  17th  of  September,  1787;  and  by  a  con-
temporaneous resolution,  directed  it  to  be  "  laid  before
the  United  States  in  congress  assembled,"  and  declar-
ed their  opinion,  "  that  it  should  afterwards  be  submit-

1  It  was  carried  in  the  senate  of  the  state  by  a  majority  of  one  only.
5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  125.

2  2  Pitk.  Hist.  219  ;  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  124,  125  ; 12  Journ.  of
Congress,  12,  13, 14  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist.  219,  220,  222.

3  2  Pitk.  Hist.  220,  221  ;  Journ.  of  Congress,  Oct.  1786;  1 Secret
Journ.  2G8.

4  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash.  128.


CH.  I.] ADOPTION OF  THE CONSTITUTION.  255

ted  to  a  convention  of  delegates  chosen  in  each  state  hy
the  people  thereof,  under  a  recommendation  of  its  legis-
lature for  their  assent  and  ratification ; "  l  and  that  each
convention,  assenting  to  and  ratifying  the  same,  should
give  notice  thereof  to  congress. The  convention,  by  a
further  resolution,  declared  their  opinion,  that  as  soon
as  nine  states  had  ratified  the  constitution,  congress
should fix  a  day,  on which  electors  should  be  ap-
pointed by  the states,  which  should  have  ratified  the
same,  and  a  day,  on  which  the  electors  should  assemble
and  vote  for  the  president,  and the  time  and  place  of
commencing  proceedings  under  the  constitution  ;  and
that  after  such  publication,  the  electors  should  be  ap-
pointed, and  the  senators  and  representatives  elected.
The  same  resolution  contained  further  recommenda-
tions for  the  purpose  of  carrying  the  constitution  into
effect.

§  276.  The  convention,  at  the  same  time,  addressed
a  letter  to  congress,  expounding  their  reasons  for  their
acts,  from  which  the  following  extract  cannot  but  be
interesting.  "  It  is  obviously  impracticable  (says  the
address)  in  the  federal  government  of  these  states,  to
secure  all  rights  of  independent  sovereignty  to  each,
and  yet  provide  for  the  interest  and  safety  of  all.  Indi-
viduals, entering  into  society,  must  give  up  a  share  of
liberty  to  preserve  the  rest.  The  magnitude  of  the
sacrifice  must  depend,  as  well  on  situation  and  circum-
stance, as  on  the  object  to  be  obtained.  It  is  at  all  times
difficult  to  draw  with  precision  the  line  between  those
rights,  which  must  be  surrendered,  and  those,  which
may  be  reserved  ;  and  on  the  present  occasion  this
difficulty  was  increased  by  a  difference  among  the  sev-

1  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Washington,  12$,  129  ;  Journ.  of  Convention,  :j?0  •
12  Journ.  of  Congress,  109  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist.  224,  264.


256  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

eral  states,  as  to  their  situation,  extent,  habits,  and  par-
ticular interests.  In  all  our  deliberations  on  this  subject,
we  kept  steadily  in  our  view  that,  which  appears  to  us
the  greatest  interest  of  every  true  American,  the  con-
solidation of  our  Union,  in  which  is  involved  our  pros-
perity, felicity,  safety,  perhaps  our  national  existence.
This  important  consideration,  seriously  and  deeply  im-
pressed on  our  minds,  led  each  state  in  the  convention
to  be  less  rigid  on  points  of  inferior  magnitude,  than
might  have  been  otherwise  expected.  And  thus  the
constitution,  which  we  now  present,  is  the  result  of  a
spirit  of  amity,  and  of  that  mutual  deference  and  conces-
sion, which  the  peculiarity  of  our  political  situation  ren-
dered indispensable."  1

§  277.  Congress,  having  received  the  report  of  the
convention  on  the  28th  of  September,  1787,  unanimous-
ly resolved,  "  that  the  said  report,  with  the  resolutions
and  letter  accompanying  the  same,  be  transmitted  to
the  several  legislatures  in  order  to  be  submitted  to  a
convention  of  delegates  chosen  in  each  state  hy  the  peo-
ple thereof,  in  conformity  to  the  resolves  of  the  conven-
tion, made  and  provided  in  that  case."  2

§  278.  Conventions  in  the  various  states,  which  had
been  represented  in  the  general  convention,  were  ac-
cordingly called  by  their  respective  legislatures  ;  and
the  constitution  having  been  ratified  by  eleven  out  of  the
twelve  states,  congress,  on  the  13th  of  September,  1788,
passed  a  resolution  appointing  the  first  Wednesday  in
January  following,  for  the  choice  of  electors  of  presi-

1  12  Journ.  of  Congress,  109,  110;  Journ.  of  Convention,  367,368;
5  Marsh.  Life  ofWasS  129.

2  5  Marsh  Life  of  Wash.  128  ;  12  Journ.  of  Congress,  99, 110  ;  Journ.
of  Convention,  App.  391.

3  Journ.  of  Convention,  App.  449,  450,  451  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist.  291.


CH. I.] ADOPTION  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  257

dent ;  the  first  Wednesday  of  February  following,  for
the  assembling  of  the  electors  to  \ote  for  a  president;

and  the  first  Wednesday  of  March  following-,  at  the
then  seat  of  congress  [New-York]  the  time  and  place
for  commencing  proceedings  under  the  constitution.
Electors  were  accordingly  appointed  in  the  several
states,  who  met  and  gave  their  votes  for  a  president  ;
and  the  other  elections  for  senators  and  representatives
having  been  duly  made,  on  Wednesday,  the  4th  of
March,  1789,  congress  assembled  under  the  new  con-
stitution, and  commenced  proceedings  under  it.  A  quo-
rum of  both  houses,  however,  did  not  assemble  until
the  6th  of  April,  when  the  votes  for  president  being
counted,  it  was  found  that  George  Washington  was
unanimously  elected  president,  and  John  Adams  was
elected  vice  president.1  On  the  30th  of  April,  president
Washington  was  sworn  into  office,  and  the  government
then  went  into  full  operation  in  all  its  departments.

^  279.  North- Carolina  had  not,  as  yet,  ratified  the
constitution.  The  first  convention  called  in  that  state,
in  August,  1788,  refused  to  ratify  it  without  some  pre-
vious amendments,  and  a  declaration  of  rights,  in  a
second  convention,  however,  called  in  November,  1 789,
this  state  adopted  the  constitution.2  The  state  of
Rhode-Island  had  declined  to  call  a  convention  ;  but
finally,  by  a  convention  held  in  May,  1790,  its  assent
was  obtained ;  and  thus  all  the  thirteen  original  states
became  parties  to  the  new  government.3

§  280.  Thus  was  achieved  another,  and  still  more
glorious triumph  in  the  cause  of  national  jihejly,  than

i  5  Marsh.  Life  of  Wash. 133, 151, 152;  2 Pitk.  Hist.  317,  318  :

1  Lloyd's  Debates.  3,  1.  5,  6.

2  2  Pitk.  Hist.  263;  Journ.  of  Convention,  App.  452:  1  Kent's  Comm.
204,  205.

3  2  Pitk.  Hist.  265  ;  Journ.  of  Convention,  App.  452,  458.

vol.  i.  33


258 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

(>

even  that,  which  separated  us  from  the  mother  .country.
By  it  we  fondly  trust,  that  our  republican  institutions  will
grow  up,  and  be  nurtured  into  more  mature  strength  and
vigour ;  our  independence  be  secured  against  foreign
usurpation  and  aggression ;  our  domestic  blessings  be
widely  diffused,  and  generally  felt  ;  and  our  union,  as  a
people,  be  perpetuated,  as  our  own  truest  glory  and
support,  and  as  a  proud  example  of  a  wise  and  benefi-
cent government,  entitled  to  the  respect,  if  not  to  the
admiration  of  mankind.


CH.  II.] OHJECTIOi\S  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION.  259

CHAPTER  II.

OBJECTIONS  TO  THE CONSTITUTION.

§  281. Let  it  not,  however,  be  supposed,  that  a

constitution,  which  is  now  looked  upon  with  such
general favour  and  affection  by  the  people,  had no

difficulties  to  encounter  at  its  birth.  The  history  of
those  times  is  lull  of  melancholy  instruction  on  this
subject,  at  once  to  admonish  us  of  past  dangers,  and
to  awaken  us  to  a  lively  sense  of  the  necessity  of  future
vigilance.  The  constitution  wras  adopted  unanimously
by  Georgia,  New-Jersey,  and  Delaware.  It  was  sup-
ported by  large  majorities  in  Pennsylvania,  Connecti-
cut, Maryland,  and  South- Carolina.  It  was  carried  in
the  other  states  by  small  majorities,  and  especially  in
Massachusetts,  New-York,  and  Virginia  by  little  more
than  a  preponderating  vote.1  Indeed,  it  is  believed,
that  in  each  of  these  states,  at  the  first  assembling  of
the  conventions,  there  was  a  decided  majority  opposed
to  the  constitution.  The  ability  of  the  debates,  the
impending  evils,  and  the  absolute  necessity  of  the  case
seem  to  have  reconciled  some  persons  to  the  adoption
of  it,  whose  opinions  had  been  strenuously  the  other
way.3  "In  our  endeavours,"  said  Washington,  "to
establish  a  new  general  government,  the  contest  na-
tionally considered,  seems  not  to  have  been  so  much
for  glory,  as  for  existence.  It  was  for  a  long  time
doubtful,  whether  we  were  to  survive,  as  an  indepen-

i  2  Pitk.  Hist  2  ">.  2  .  273,  279,  28J  ;  North  Amor.  Rev.  Oct.  1827,
p.  270  to  278.

a  2  Pitk.  Hist.  266,  269,  281  :  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  132,
1&3,  188.


260  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

dent  republic,  or  decline  from  our  federal  dignity  into
insignificant  and  withered  fragments  of  empire."  '

^  282.  It  is  not  difficult  to  trace  some  of  the  more
important  causes,  which  led  to  so  formidable  an  oppo-
sition, and  made  the  constitution  at  that  time  a  theme,
not  merely  of  panegyric,  but  of  severe  invective,  as
fraught  with  the  most  alarming  dangers  to  public  lib-
erty, and  at  once  unequal,  unjust,  and  oppressive.

§  283.  Almost  contemporaneously  with  the  first
proposition  for  a  confederation,  jealousies  began  to  be
entertained  in  respect  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
authority,  which  should  be  exercised  by  the  national
government.  The  large  states  would  naturally  feel,
that  in  proportion  as  congress  should  exercise  sove-
reign powers,  their  own  local  importance  and  sove-
reignty would  be  diminished  injuriously  to  their  gen-
eral influence  on  other  states  from  their  strength,  popula-
tion, and  character.  On  the  other  hand,  by  an  oppo-
site course  of  reasoning,  the  small  states  had  arrived
nearly  at  the  same  result.  Their  dread  seems  to  have
been,  lest  they  should  be  swallowed  up  by  the  power
of  the  large  states  in  the  general  government,  through
common  combinations  of  interest  or  ambition.2

§  284.  There  was,  besides,  a  very  prevalent  opinion,
that  the  interests  of  the  several  states  were  not  the
same ;  and  there  had  been  no '  sufficient  experience
during  their  colonial  dependence  and  intercommunica-
tion to  settle  such  a  question  by  any  general  reasoning,
or  any  practical  results,  j  During  the  period,  therefore,
in  which  the  confederation  was  under  discussion  in
congress,  much  excitement  and  much  jealousy  was
exhibited  on  this  subject. The  original  draft,  submit-

i  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  138.

2  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  130,  131 ;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  &c.


CH.  II.] OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION.  261

ted  l»\  Dr.  Franklin,  in  July,  I77>,  contained  a  much
1 1 ion'  ample  granl  of  |>o\\  ers,  than  thai  actual  I  \  adopted  ;
for  congress  were  to  be  invested  with  powei  to  make
ordinances  relating  "  to  our  general  commerce,  or  gen-
eral currency,"  to  establish  posts,  &c.  and  to  possess
other  important  powers  of  a  different  character.1  The
draft  submitted  by  Mr.  Dickenson,  on  the  12th  of
July,  1776,  contains  less  ample  powers;  but  still  more
broad,  than  the  articles  of  confederation.3  Jn  the  subse-
quent discussions  few  amendments  were  adopted,
which  were  not  of  a  restrictive  character;  and  the  real
difficulties  of  the  task  of  overcoming  the  prejudices,
and  soothing  the  fears  of  the  different  states,  are  am-
ply displayed  in  the  secret  journals  now  made  public.
In  truth,  the  continent  soon  became  divided  into  two
great  political  parties,  "  the  one  of  which  contemplated
America  as  a  nation,  and  laboured  incessantly  to  invest
the  federal  head  with  powers  competent  to  the  preser-
vation of  the  Union  ;  the  other  attached  itself  to  the
state  authorities  ;  viewed  all  the  powers  of  congress
with  jealousy  ;  and  assented  reluctantly  to  measures,
which  would  enable  the  head  to  act  in  any  respect
independently  of  the  members."3  During  the  war,
the  necessities  of  the  country  confined  the  operations
of  both  parties  within  comparatively  narrow  limits.
But  the  return  of  peace,  and  the  total  imbecility  of  the
general  government,  gave  (as  we  have  seen)  increased
activity  and  confidence  to  both.

*  -285.  The  differences  of  opinion  between  these
parties  were  too  honest,  too  earnest,  and  too  deep  to
be  reconciled,  or  surrendered. They equally  per-

1  1  Secret  Journals,  285,  Art  5.

2  ]  Secret  Journals,  290.

3  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  33.


262 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  IT.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

vaded  the  public  councils  of  the  states,  and  the  private
intercourse  of  social  life.  They  became  more  warm,
not  to  say  violent,  as  the  contest  became  more  close,
and  the  exigency  more  appalling.  They  were  inflamed
by  new  causes,  of  which  some  were  of  a  permanent,
and  some  of  a  temporary  character.  The  field  of
argument  was  wide ;  and  experience  had  not,  as  yet,
furnished  the  advocates  on  either  side  with  such  a
variety  of  political  tests,  as  were  calculated  to  satisfy
doubts,  allay  prejudices,  or  dissipate  the  fears  and  illu-
sions of  the  imagination.

^  486.  In  this  state  of  things  the  embarrassments  of
the  country  in  its  financial  concerns,  the  general  pecu-
niary distress  among  the  people  from  the  exhausting
operations  of  the  war,  the  total  prostration  of  commerce,
and  the  languishing  unthriftiness  of  agriculture,  gave
new  impulses  to  the  already  marked  political  divisions
in  the  legislative  councils.  Efforts  were  made,  on  one
side,  to  relieve  the  pressure  of  the  public  calamities  by
a  resort  to  the  issue  of  paper  money,  to  tender  laws,
and  instalment  and  other  laws,  having  for  their  object
the  postponement  of  the  payment  of  private  debts,  and
a  diminution  of  the  public  taxes.  On  the  other  side,
public  as  well  as  private  creditors  became  alarmed
from  the  increased  dangers  to  property,  and  the
increased  facility  of  perpetrating  frauds  to  the  destruc-
tion of  all  private  faith  and  credit.  And  they  insisted
strenuously  upon  the  establishment  of  a  government,  and
system  of  laws,  which  should  preserve  the  public  faith,
and  redeem  the  country  from  that  ruin,  which  always
follows  upon  the  violation  of  the  principles  of  justice,
and  the  moral  obligation  of  contracts.  "  At  length,"
we are told,1 "  two  great parties were formed  in

i  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  83.


CH.  II.] OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  < 'OXSTITI I  [<>  \.  jKi^

every  state,  which  were  distinctly  marked,  and  which
pursued  distinct  objects  with  systematic  arrangement
The  one  struggled  with  unabated  zeal  for  the  exacl
observance  of  public  and  private  engagements. The
distresses  ot  individuals  were,  they  thought,  to  be  alle-
viated by  industry  and  frugality,  and  not  by  a  relaxa-
tion of  the  laws,  or  by  a  sacrifice  of  the  rights  of  oth-
ers. They were  consequently uniform friends  of  a
regular administration of  justice, and  of  a vigorous
course  of  taxation,  which  would enable the  state  to
comply  with  its  engagements. By  a  natural  associa-
tion of  ideas,  they  were  also,  with  very  few  exceptions,
in  favour  of  enlarging  the  powers  of  the  federal  gov-
ernment, and  of  enabling  it  to  protect  the  dignity  and
character  of  the  nation abroad, and  its interests at
home. The  other  party  marked out  for  itself  a  more
indulgent  course. They  were  uniformly  in  favour  of
relaxing  the  administration  of  justice,  of  affording  facil-
ities for  the  payment  of  debts,  or  of  suspending  their
collection,  and  of  remitting  taxes. The  same  course
of  opinion  led  them to  resist  every  attempt  to  transfer
from  their  own  hands  into  those  of  congress  powers,
which  were  by'  others  deemed  essential  to  the  presf  r  -
vation  of  the  Union. In  many  of  the  states  the  party
last  mentioned  constituted  a  decided  majority  of  the
people ; and in  all  of  them  it  was  very  powerful."
Such  is  the  language  of  one  of  our  best  historians  in
treating  of  the  period  immediately  preceding  the  for-
mation of  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.1

^  287.  Without  supposing,  that  the  parties,  here
alluded  to,  were  in  all  respects  identified  with  those,
of  which  we  have  already  spoken,  as  contemporaneous
with  the  confederation,  it  is  easy  to  perceive,  what  pro-

1  See  also  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  130,  131.


264 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

digious  means  were  already  in  existence  to  oppose  a
new  constitution  of  government,  which  not  only  trans-
ferred from  the  states  some  of  the  highest  sovereign
prerogatives,  but  laid  prohibitions  upon  the  exercise  of
other  powers,  which  were  at  that  time  in  possession  of
the  popular  favour.  The  wonder,  indeed,  is  not,  under
such  circumstances,  that  the  constitution  should  have
encountered  the  most  ardent  opposition  ;  but  that  it
should  ever  have  been  adopted  at  all  by  a  majority  of
the  states.

^  288.  In  the  convention  itself,  which  framed  it,
there  was  a  great  diversity  of  judgment,  and  upon
some  vital  subjects,  an  intense  and  irreconcilable
hostility  of  opinion.1  It  is  understood,  that  at  several
periods,  the  convention  were  upon  the  point  of  break-
ing up  without  accomplishing  any  thing.2  In  the  state
conventions,  in  which  the  constitution  was  presented
for  ratification,  the  debates  were  long,  and  animated,
and  eloquent ;  and,  imperfect  as  the  printed  collections
of  those  debates  are,  enough  remains  to  establish  the
consummate  ability,  with  which  every  part  of  the  con-
stitution was  successively  attacked,  and  defended.3
I1  or  did  the  struggle  end  here.  The  parties,  which
were  then  formed,  continued  for  a  long  time  afterwards
to  be  known  and  felt  in  our  legislative  and  other  pub-
lic deliberations.  Perhaps  they  have  never  entirely
ceased.


i  2  Pitk.  Hist.  225  to  260;  Dr.  Franklin's  Speech,  2  Amer.  Museum,
534,  538;  3  Amer.  Museum,  62,  66,  70,  157,  559,  5(30;  4  Elliot's  De-
bates.—Three  members  of  the  convention,  Mr.  Gerry  of  Massachu-
setts, and  Mr.  Mason  and  Mr.  Randolph  of  Virginia,  declined  sign-
ing the  constitution  ;  3  Amer.  Museum,  68.  See  also  Mr.  Jay's  Let-
ter in  1787  ;  3  Amer.  Museum,  554  to  565.

2  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  128.

3  o  pltk.  Hist.  265  to  283.


CII.  JJ.] OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  COXS'J '1TUTION.  265

&  289.  Perhaps,  from  the  very  nature  and  organiza-
tion of  our  government,  being  partly  federal  and  partly
national  in  its  character,  whatever  modifications  in
other  respects  parties  ma}  undergo,  there  will  forever
continue  to  be  a  strong  line  of  division  between  those,
who  adhere  to  the  stale  governments,  and  those,  who
adhere  to  the  national  government,  in  respect  to  prin-
ciples and  policy.  It  was  long  ago  remarked,  thai  in
a  contest  for  power,  "the  body  of  the  people  will
always  be  on  the  side  of  the  state  governments.  This
will  not  only  result  from  their  love  of  liberty  and  regard
to  their  own  safety,  but  from  other  strong  principles  of
human  nut  are.  The  state  governments  operate  upon
those  familiar  personal  concerns,  to  which  the  sensi-
bility of  individuals  is  awake.  The  distribution  of  pri-
vate justice,  in  a  great  measure  belonging  to  them,
they  must  always  appear  to  the  sense  of  the  people,  as
the  immediate  guardians  of  their  rights.  They  will  of
course  have  the  strongest  hold  on  their  attachment,
respect,  and  obedience."1  To  which  it  may  be  added,
that  the  state  governments  must  naturally  open  an
easier  field  for  the  operation  of  domestic  ambition,  of
local  interests,  of  personal  popularity,  and  of  flattering
influence  to  those,  who  have  no  eager  desire  for  a
wide  spread  tame,  or  no  acquirements  to  justify  it.

§  290.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  votaries  oi'  the  na-
tional government  are  fewer  in  number,  they  are  likely
to  enlist  in  its  favour  men  of  ardent  ambition,  compre-
hensive views,  and  powerful  genius.  A  love  of  the
Union;  a  sense  of  its  importance,  nay,  o\'  its  necessity,
to  secure  permanence  and  safety  to  our  political  liberty  ;
a  consciousness,  that  die  powers  of  the  national  consti-

1  Gen.  Hamilton's  Speech  in  l7S<i;  1  Amer.  Museum,  445,  447. See
also  The  Federalist,  No.  17,  31,  45,  K3.

vol.  i.  34


266 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

tution  are  eminently  calculated  to  preserve  peace  at
home,  and  dignity  abroad,  and  to  give  value  to  proper-
ty, and  system and  harmony  to  the  great  interests  of
agriculture,  commerce,  and  manufactures ;  a  conscious-
ness, too,  that  the  restraints,  which  it  imposes  upon  the
states,  are  the  only  efficient  means  to  preserve  public
and  private  justice,  and  to  ensure  tranquillity  amidst  the
conflicting  interests  and  rivalries  of  the  states  :  —  these
will,  doubtless,  combine  many  sober  and  reflecting  minds
in  its  support. If  to  this  number  we  add  those,  whom  the
larger  rewards  of  fame,  or  emolument,  or  influence,  con-
nected with  a  wider  sphere  of  action,  may  allure  to  the
national  councils,  there  is  much  reason  to  presume,  that
the  Union  will  not  be  without  resolute  friends.

^  291.  This  view  of  the  subject,  on  either  side,  (for
it  is  the  desire  of  the  commentator  to  abstain,  as  much
as  possible,  from  mere  private  political  speculation,)  is
not  without  its  consolations. If  there  were  but  one
consolidated  national  government,  to  which  the  people
might  look  up  for  protection  and  support,  they  might  in
time  relax  in  that  vigilance  and  jealousy,  which  seem  so
necessary  to  the  wholesome  growth  of  republican  insti-
tutions. If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  state  governments
could  engross  all  the  affections  of  the  people,  to  the  ex-
clusion of  the  national  government,  by  their  familiar  and
domestic  regulations,  there  would  be  danger,  that  the
Union,  constantly  weakened  by  the distance  and  dis-
couragements of  its  functionaries,  might  at  last  become,
as  it  was  under  the  confederation,  a  mere  show,  if  not
a  mockery  of  sovereignty. So,  that  this  very  division
of  empire  may,  in  the  end,  by  the  blessing  of  Provi-
dence, be  the  means  of  perpetuating  our  rights  and  lib-
erties, by  keeping  alive  in  every  state  at  once  a  sincere
love  of  its  own  government,  and  a  love  of  the  Union,


CH.  II.] OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION.  '267

and  by  cherishing  in  different  minds  a  jealousy  of  each,

which  shall  check,  as  well  as  enlighten,  public  opinion.

^  292.  The  objections  raised  against  the  adoption  of
the  constitution  were  of  very  different  natures,  and,  in
some  instances,  of  entirely  opposite  characters.  They
will  be  found  embodied  in  various  public  documents,  in
the  printed  opinions  of  distinguished  men,  in  the  debates
of  the  respective  state  conventions,  and  in  a  still  more
authentic  shape  in  the  numerous  amendments  proposed
by  these  conventions,  and  accompanying  their  acts  of
ratification.  It  is  not  easy  to  reduce  them  all  into  gen-
eral heads ;  but  the  most  material  will  here  be  enume-
rated, not  only  to  admonish  us  of  the  difficulties  of  the
task  of  framing  a  general  government ;  but  to  prepare
us  the  better  to  understand,  and  expound  the  constitu-
tion itself.

^  293.  Some  of  the  objections  were  to  the  supposed
defects  and  omissions  in  the  instrument ;  others  were
to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  powers  conferred  by  it ;
and  others  again  to  the  fundamental  plan  or  scheme  of
its  organization.

(1.)  It  was  objected  in  the  first  place,  that  the
scheme  of  government  was  radically  wrong,  because  it
was  not  a  confederation  of  the  states  ;  but  a  government
over  individuals.1  It  was  said,  that  the  federal  form,
which  regards  the  Union,  as  a  confederation  of  sove-
reign states,  ought  to  have  been  preserved ;  instead  of
which  the  convention  had  framed  a  national  govern-
ment, which  regards  the  Union,  as  a  consolidation  of
states.2  This  objection  was  far  from  being  universal;
for  many  admitted,  that  there  ought  to  be  a  government
over  individuals  to  a  certain  extent,  but  by  no  means

i  The  Federalist,  No.  38,  39  ;  2  Amcr.  Museum,  423  ;  Id.  543,  546.
2  The  Federalist,  No.  39  ;  Id.  No.  3S ;  2  Pitk.  Hist.  270,  272.


268 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  IT.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

to  the  extent  proposed.  It  is  obvious,  that  this  objec-
tion, pushed  to  its  full  extent,  went  to  the  old  question
of  the  confederation;  and  was  but  are-argument  of  the
point,  whether  there  should  exist  a  national  government
adequate  to  the  protection  and  support  of  the  Union.
In  its  mitigated  form  it  was  a  mere  question,  as  to  the
extent  of  powders  to  be  confided  to  the  general  govern-
ment, and  was  to  be  classed  accordingly.  It  was  urg-
ed, however,  with  no  inconsiderable  force  and  empha-
sis ;  and  its  supporters  predicted  with  confidence,  that
a  government  so  organized  wTould  soon  become  corrupt
and  tyrannical,  "  and  absorb  the  legislative,  executive,
and  judicial  powers  of  the  several  states,  and  produce
from  their  ruins  one  consolidated  government,  which,
from  the  nature  of  things,  would  be  an  iron-handed  des-
potism." 1  Uniform  experience  (it  was  said)  had  de-
monstrated,2 "  that  a  very  extensive  territory  cannot  be
governed  on  the  principles  of  freedom  otherwise,  than
by  a  confederacy  of  republics,  possessing  all  the  powers
of  internal  government,  but  united  in  the  management
of  their  general  and  foreign  concerns." 3  Indeed,  any
scheme  of  a  general  government,  however  guarded,
appeared  to  some  minds  (which  possessed  the  public
confidence)  so  entirely  impracticable,  by  reason  of  the
extensive  territory  of  the  United  States,  that  they  did
not  hesitate  to  declare  their  opinion,  that  it  would  be
destructive  of  the  civil  liberty of  the  citizens.4 And

1  Address  of  the  Minority  of  Penn.  Convention,  2  Amer.  Museum,  542,
543. See  also  2  Pitk.  Hist.  2/2,  273.

2  2  Amer.  Museum,  542.

3  See  also  2  Amer.  Museum,  422,  423,  424.

4  Yates  and  Lansing's  Letter,  3  Amer.  Museum,  156,  157;  .Mr.  Jay's
Letter,  1787,  3  Amer.  Museum,  554,  5G2.  —  The  same  objection  is  re-
peatedly taken  notice  of  in  the  Federalist,  as  one  then  beginning  to  be
prevalent. The  Federalist,  No.  1, 2,  9,  13, 14,  23.


OH.  II.] OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  CONSTIT1 rio.N.  269

others  of  <'([iial  eminence  foretold,  thai  it  would  com-
mence in  a  moderate  aristocracy,  and  end  either  in  a
monarchy,  or  a  corrupt,  oppressive  aristocracy.1  Ii  was
not  denied,  that,  in  form,  the  constitution  was  strictly
republican;  for  all  its  powers  were  derived  directly  or
indirectly  from  the  people,  and  were  administered  by
functionaries  holding  their  offices  during  pleasure,or  for  a
limited  period,  or  during  good  behaviour;  and  in  the  sere-
-spects  it  bore  an  exact  similitude  to  the  state  governments,
whose  republican  character  had  never  been  doubted.2

^  294.  But  the  friends  of  the  constitution  met  the
objection  by  asserting  the  indispensable  necessity  of
a  form  of  government,  like  that  proposed,  and  demon-
strating the  utter  imbecility  of  a  mere  confederation,
without  powers  acting  directly  upon  individuals.  They
considered,  that  the  constitution  was  partly  federal,
and  partly  national  in  its  character,  and  distribution
of  powers.  In  its  origin  and  establishment  it  was
federal.3  In  some  of  its  relations  it  was  federal ;
in  others,  national.  In  the  senate  it  was  federal ;  in
the  house  of  representatives  it  was  national ;  in  the  ex-
ecutive it  was  of  a  compound  character ;  in  the  opera-
tion of  its  powers  it  was  national ;  in  the  extent  of  its
powers,  federal.  It  acted  on  individuals,  and  not  on
states  merely.  But  its  powers  were  limited,  and  left  a
large  mass  of  sovereignty  in  the  states.  In  making
amendments,  it  was  also  of  a  compound  character,  re-
quiring the  concurrence  of  more  than  a  majority,  and
less  than  the  whole  of  the  states.  So,  that  on  the
whole  their  conclusion  was,  that  "  the  constitution  is,  in
strictness,  neither  a  national  nor  a  federal  constitution,

i .Mr.  George  Mason's  Letter,  2  Ainer.  Museum,  534,  536.

2  The  Federalist,  No.  39.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  39.


270 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

but  a  composition  of  both.  In  its  foundation  it  is  fede-
ral, not  national ;  in  the  sources,  from  which  the  ordinary
powers  of  the  government  are  drawn,  it  is  partly  federal
and  partly  national ;  in  the  operation  of  these  powers
it  is  national,  not  federal ;  in  the  extent  of  them  again
it  is  federal,  not  national ;  and,  finally,  in  the  authorita-
tive mode  of  introducing  amendments  it  is  neither
wholly  federal,  nor  wholly  national.1

^  295.  Time  has  in  this,  as  in  many  other  respects,
assuaged  the  fears,  and  disproved  the  prophesies  of  the
opponents  of  the  constitution.  It  has  gained  friends  in
its  progress.  The  states  still  nourish  under  it  with  a
salutary  and  invigorating  energy ;  and  its  power  of  di-
rect action  upon  the  people  has  hitherto  proved  a  com-
mon blessing,  giving  dignity  and  spirit  to  the  govern-
ment, adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  war,  and  preserving
us  from  domestic  dissensions,  and  unreasonable  bur-
thens in  times  of  peace.

^  296.  If  the  original  structure  of  the  government
was,  as  has  been  shown,  a  fertile  source  of  opposition,
another  objection  of  a  more  wide  and  imposing  nature
was  drawn  from  the  nature  and  extent  of  its  powers.
This,  indeed,  like  the  former,  gave  rise  to  most  animat-
ed discussions,  in  which  reason  was  employed  to  de-
monstrate the  mischiefs  of  the  system,  and  imagination
to  portray  them  in  all  the  exaggerations,  which  fear  and
prophesy  could  invent.  Looking  back,  indeed,  to  that
period with  the  calmness,  with  which we  naturally

i  The  Federalist,  No.  39. See  also  ]  Tucker's  Black.  App.  145,  146.

The  whole  reasoning  contained  in  the  39th  number  of  the  Federalist

(of  which  the  above  is  merely  a  summary)  deserves  a  thorough  exam-
ination by  every  statesman.  See  also  on  the  same  subject,  Dane's  App.
§  14,  p.  25,  &c. ;  §  35,  p.  44,  &c. ;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Coram.  App.  146,
&c;  The  Federalist,  No.  9  ;  3  Dall.  R.  473.


CH. II.] OBJECTIONS  TO  THE CONSTITUTION.  271

review  events  and  occurrences,  which  are  now  felt  only
as  matters  of  history,  one  is  surprised  at  the  futility  of
some  of  the  objections,  the  absurdity  of  others,  and  the

overwrought  colouring  of  almost  all,  which  were  urged
on  this  head  against  the  constitution.  That  some  of
them  had  a  just  foundation,  need  not  be  denied  or  con-
cealed ;  for  the  system  was  human,  and  the  result  of
compromise  and  conciliation,  in  which  something  of  the
correctness  of  theory  was  yielded  to  the  interests  or
prejudices  of  particular  states,  and  something  of  ine-
quality of  benefit  borne  for  the  common  good.

§  297.  The  objections  from  different  quarters  were
not  only  of  different  degrees  and  magnitude,  but  often
of  totally  opposite  natures. With  some  persons  the
mass  of  the  powers  was  a  formidable  objection ;  with
others, the  distribution  of  those  powers. With  some
the  equality  of  vote  in  the  senate  was  exceptionable ;
with  others  the  inequality  of  representation  in  the  house.
With  some  the  power  of  regulating  the  times  and  pla-
ces of  elections  was  fatal ;  with  others the  power  of
regulating  commerce  by  a  bare  majority. With some
the  power  of  direct  taxation  was  an  intolerable  griev-
ance ;  with others the  power  of  indirect  taxation  by
duties  on  imports. With  some  the  restraint  of  the  state
legislatures  from  laying  duties  upon  exports  and  passing
ex  post  facto  laws  was  incorrect ;  with  others  the  lodg-
ing of  the  executive  power  in  a  single  magistrate.1 With
some  the  term  of  office  of  the  senators  and  representa-
tives was  too long ;  with  others the  term  of  office  of
the  president  was  obnoxious  to  a  like  censure,  as  well
as  his  re-eligibility.2 With some the intermixture  of


i  2  Amer.  Museum,  534,586,540;  [d.  427,  135;  [d.  547,  555.

2  3  Amer.  Museum,  62  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist.  263,  2S4 ;  The  Federalist,  No.
71,  72.


272 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

the  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial  functions  in  the
senate  was  a  mischievous  departure  from  all  ideas  of
regular  government ;  with  others  the  non-participation
of  the  house  of  representatives  in  the  same  functions
was  the  alarming  evil.  With  some  the  powers  of  the
president  were  alarming  and  dangerous  to  liberty  ;  with
others  the  participation  of  the  senate  in  spme  of  those
powers.  With  some  the  powers  of  the  judiciary  were
far  too  extensive;  with  others  the  power  to  make
treaties  even  with  the  consent  of  two  thirds  of  the  sen-
ate. With  some  the  power  to  keep  up  a  standing  ar-
my was  a  sure  introduction  to  despotism  ;  with  others
the  power  over  the  militia.1  With  some  the  paramount
authority  of  the  constitution,  treaties,  and  laws  of  the
United  States  was  a  dangerous  feature ;  with  others
the  small  number  composing  the  senate  and  the  house
of  representatives was an alarming and corrupting

evil.2

&  298.  In  the  glowing  language  of  those  times  the
people  were  told,  "  that  the  new  government  will  not
be  a  confederacy  of  states,  as  it  ought,  but  one  con-
solidated government,  founded  upon  the  destruction  of
the  several  governments  of  the  states.  The  powers  of
congress,  under  the  new  constitution,  are  complete  and
unlimited  over  the  purse  and  the  sword,  and  are  per-
fectly independent  of,  and  supreme  over  the  state  gov-
ernments, whose  intervention  in  these  great  points  is
entirely  destroyed.  By  virtue  of  their  power  of  taxa-
tion, congress  may  command  the  whole,  or  any  part  of
the  properties  of  the  people. They  may  impose  what


i  See  2  Amer.  Museum,  422,  etc.  ;  Id.  435;  Id.  534;  Id.  540,  &c.  543,
&c. ;  Id.  553:  3  Amer.  Museum,  62  ;  Id.  157  ;  Id.  419,  120,  &c.

2  Many  of  the  objections  are  summed  up  in  the  Federalist,  No.  38,
with  great  force  and  ability.


CH.  II.] OBJECTIONS  TO  THE CONSTITUTION.  273

imposts  upon  commerce,  they  may  impose  what  land
taxes,  and  taxes,  excises,  vau\  duties  on  all  instruments,
and  duties  on  every  fine  article,  that  they  may  judge
proper."  "  Congress  may  monopolize  every  source  of
revenue,  and  thus  indirectly  demolish  the  state  govern-
ments ;  for  without  funds  they  could  not  exist."  "  As
congress  have  the  control  over  the  time  of  the  appoint-
ment of  the  president,  of  the  senators,  and  of  the  rep-
resentatives of  the  United  States,  they  may  prolong
their  existence  in  office  for  life  by  postponing  the  time
of  their  election  and  appointment  from  period  to  period,
under  various  pretences."  "  When  the  spirit  of  the
people  shall  be  gradually  broken ;  when  the  general
government  shall  be  firmly  established ;  and  when  a  nu-
merous standing  army  shall  render  opposition  vain,  the
congress  may  complete  the  system  of  despotism  in  re-
nouncing ail  dependence  on  the  people,  by  continuing
themselves  and  their  children  in  the  government."  1

§  299.  A  full  examination  of  the  nature  and  extent
of  the  objections  to  the  several  powers  given  to  the
general  government  will  more  properly  find  a  place,
when  those  powers  come  successively  under  review  in
our  commentary  on  the  different  parts  of  the  constitu-
tion itself.  The  outline  here  furnished  may  serve  to
show  what  those  were,  which  were  presented  against
them,  as  an  aggregate  or  mass.  It  is  not  a  little  remark-
able, that  some  of  the  most  formidable  applied  with
equal  force  to  the  articles  of  confederation,  with  this  dif-
ference only,  that  though  unlimited  in  their  terms,  they
were  in  some  instances  checked  by  the  want  of  power
to  carry  them  into  effect,  otherwise  than  by  requisitions

1  Address  of  the  minority  in  the  Pennsylvania  Convention,  2  Amcr.
Museum,  536,  543,  544,  545.  See  also  the  Address  of  Virginia,  2  Pitk.
History,  334.

vol.  i.  35


274 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

on  the  states.  Thus  presenting,  as  has  been  justly  ob-
served, the  extraordinary  phenomenon  of  declaring  cer-
tain powers  in  the  federal  government  absolutely  ne-
cessary, and  at  the  same  time  rendering  them  abso-
lutely nugatory.1

^  300.  Another  class  of  objections  urged  against  the
constitution  was  founded  upon  its  deficiencies  and  omis-
sions. It  cannot  be  denied,  that  some  of  the  objections
on  this  head  were  well  taken,  and  that  there  was  a  fit-
ness in  incorporating  some  provision  on  the subject
into  the  fundamental articles of  a  free  government.
There  were  others  again,  which  might  fairly  enough  be
left  to  the  legislative  discretion  and  to  the  natural  influ-
ences of  the  popular  voice  in  a  republican  form  of  gov-
ernment. There  were  others  again  so  doubtful,  both  in
principle  and  policy,  that  they  might  properly  be  exclud-
ed from  any  system  aiming  at  permanence  in  its  secu-
rities as  well  as  its  foundations.

^301.  Among  the  defects  which  were  enumerated,
none  attracted  more  attention,  or  were  urged  with  more
zeal,  than  the want  of  a  distinct  bill  of  rights,  which
should  recognise  the  fundamental  principles  of  a  free
republican  government,  and  the  right  of  the  people  to
the  enjoyment  of  life,  liberty,  property,  and  the  pursuit
of  happiness. It  was  contended,  that  it  was  indispen-
sable, that  express  provision  should  be  made  for  the
trial  by  jury  in  civil  cases,  and  in  criminal  cases  upon  a
presentment  by  a  grand  jury  only ;  and  that  all  criminal
trials  should  be  public,  and  the  party  be  confronted
with  the  witnesses  against  him;  that  freedom  of  speech
and  freedom  of  the  press  should  be  secured ;  that  there
should  be  no  national  religion,  and  the  rights  of  con-


i  The  Federalist,  No.  38.


CH.  II.] OBJECTIONS  TO  THE CONSTITUTION.  ^75

science  should  be  inviolable  ;  that  excessive  bail  should
not  be  required,  nor  cruel  and  unusual  punishments  in-
flicted ;  that  the  people  should  have  a  right  to  bear
arms ;  that  persons  conscientiously  scrupulous  should
not  be  compelled  to  bear  arms;  that  every  person
should  be  entitled  of  right  to  petition  lor  the  redress  of
grievances  ;  that  search  warrants  should  not  be  granted
without  oath,  nor  general  warrants  at  all ;  that  soldiers
should  not  be  enlisted  except  for  a  short,  limited  term  ;
and  not  be  quartered  in  time  of  peace  upon  private
houses  without  the  consent  of  the  owners ;  that  mutiny
bills  should  continue  in  force  for  two  years  only ;  that
causes  once  tried  by  a  jury  should  not  be  re-examina-
ble  upon  appeal,  otherwise  than  according  to  the  course
of  the  common  law ;  and  that  the  powers  not  expressly
delegated  to  the  general  government  should  be  declar-
ed to  be  reserved  to  the  states.  In  all  these  particu-
lars the  constitution  was  obviously  defective ;  and  yet
(it  was  contended)  they  were  vital  to  the  public  se-
curity.1

^  302.  Besides  these,  there  were  other  defects  re-
lied on,  such  as  the  want  of  a  suitable  provision  for  a
rotation  in  office,  to  prevent  persons  enjoying  them  for
life ;  the  want  of  an  executive  council  for  the  president ;
the  want  of  a  provision  limiting  the  duration  of  standing
armies ;  the  want  of  a  clause  securing  the  people  the
enjoyment  of  the  common  law;2  the  want  of  security
for  proper  elections  of  public  officers ;  the  want  of  a
prohibition  of  members  of  congress  holding  any  public
offices,  and  of  judges  holding  any  other  offices ;  and


i  2  Aracr.  Museum,  422 *to  430;  W.  4:55,  fcc. ;  Id.  534,  &c.  536,  540,
&C  553,  &c.  557;  3  Amer.  Museum,  62;  Id.  157;  IH.  41!),  420,  &c;
The  Federalist,  No.  38.

2  Mr.  Mason,  2  Amer.  Museum,  534.


276 CONSTITUTION OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK III.

finally  the  want  of  drawing  a  clear  and  direct  line  be-
tween the  powers  to  be  exercised  by  congress  and  by
the  states.1

^  303.  Many  of  these  objections  found  their  way  into
the  amendments,  which,  simultaneously  with  the  ratifi-
cation, were  adopted  in  many  of  the  state  conventions.
With  the  view  of  carrying  into  effect  the  popular  will,
and  also  of  disarming  the  opponents  of  the  constitution
of  all  reasonable  grounds  of  complaint,  congress,  at  its
very  first  session,  took  into  consideration  the  amend-
ments so  proposed ;  and  by  a  succession  of  supplemen-
tary articles  provided,  in  substance,  a  bill  of  rights,  and
secured  by  constitutional  declarations  most  of  the  other
important  objects  thus  suggested.  These  articles  (in
all,  twelve)  were  submitted  by  congress  to  the  states  for
their  ratification  ;  and  ten  of  them  were  finally  ratified
by  the  requisite  number  of  states ;  and  thus  became  in-
corporated into  the  constitution.2  It  is  a  curious  fact,
however,  that  although  the  necessity  of  these  amend-
ments had  been  urged  by  the  enemies  of  the  constitution,
and  denied  by  its  friends,  they  encountered  scarcely
any  other  opposition  in  the  state  legislatures,  than  what
was  given  by  the  very  party,  which  had  raised  the
objections.3  The  friends  of  the  constitution  generally
supported  them  upon  the  ground  of  a  large  public  pol-
icy, to  quiet  jealousies,  and  to  disarm  resentments.

^  304.  It  is  perhaps  due  to  the  latter  to  state,  that
they  believed,  that  some  of  the  objections  to  the  consti-
tution existed  only  in  imagination,  and  that  others  deriv-
ed their  sole support  from  an erroneous  construction

i  2  Amer.  Museum,  426,  428 ;  Id.  534,537  ;  Id.  557,  549  ;  3  Amor.  Mus.
Gi ;  Id.  419,  420,  &c.  :  2  Pitk.  Hist.  267,218,  28U,  262,  283,  2

2  2  Pitk.  Hist.  332,  ' :

3  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington  209,210.


CH. II.] OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION.  All

of  that  instrument.1 In  respect  to  a  bill  of  rights,  it
was  stated,  that  several  of  the state  constitutions  con-
tained none  in  form ;  and  y  not  on  that  account
thought  objectionable. That  it  was  not  true, that  the
constitution  of  the  United  States  did  not,  in  the  true
sense  of  the  terms,  contain  a  bill  of  rights. It  was
emphatically  found  in  those  clauses,  which  respected
political  rights, the  guaranty  of  republican forms  of
government,  the  trial  of  crimes  by  jury,  the  definition
of  treason,  the  prohibition  against  bills  of  attainder  and
ex  post  facto  laws  and  titles  of  nobility,  the  trial  by
impeachment,  and  the privilege  of  the  writ  of  habeas
corpus. That a general  bill  of  rights  would  be  im-
proper in  a  constitution  of  limited  powers,  like  that  of
the  United  States  ;  and  might  even  be  dangerous,  as  by
containing  exceptions  from  powers  not  granted  it  might
give  rise  to  implications  of  constructive  power. That
in  a  government,  like  ours,  founded  by  the  people,  and
managed  by  the  people,  and  especially  in  one  of  lim-
ited authority,  there  was  no  necessity  of  any  bill  of
rights  ;  for  all  powers  not  granted  were  reserved  ;  and
even  those  granted  might  at  will  be  resumed,  or  altered
by  the  people. That,  a  bill  of  rights  might  be  fit  in  a
monarchy,  where there  were  struggles  between  the
crown  and  the  people  about  prerogatives and  privi-
leges. But,  here,  the  government  is  the  government  of
the  people  ;  all  its  officers  are  their  officers  ;  and  they
can  exercise  no  rights  or  powers,  but  such  as  the  peo-
ple commit  to  them. In  such  a  case  the  silence  of  the
constitution argues  nothing. The  trial  by  jury, the
freedom  of  the  press,  and  the  liberty  of  conscience  are
not  taken  a , (  ause  they  are  not  secured. They


ill's  Life  of  Washington,  207,  208.


278  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

remain  with  the  people  among  the  mass  of  ungranted
powers,  or  find  an  appropriate  place  in  the  laws  and
institutions  of  each  particular  state.1

^  305.  Notwithstanding  the  force  of  these  sugges-
tions, candour  will  compel  us  to  admit,  that  as  certain
fundamental  rights  were  secured  by  the  constitution,
there  seemed  to  be  an  equal  propriety  in  securing  in
like  manner  others  of  equal  value  and  importance.
The  trial  by  jury  in  criminal  cases  was  secured  ;  but
this  clause  admitted  of  more  clear  definition,  and  of
auxiliary  provisions.  The  trial  by  jury  in  civil  cases
at  common  law  was  as  dear  to  the  people,  and  afforded
at  least  an  equal  protection  to  persons  and  property.
The  same  remark  may  be  made  of  several  other  pro-
visions included  in  the  amendments.  But  these  will
more  properly  fall  under  consideration  in  our  com-
mentary upon  that  portion  of  the  constitution.  The
promptitude,  zeal,  and  liberality,  with  which  the  friends
of  the  constitution  supported  these  amendments,  evince
the  good  faith  and  sincerity  of  their  opinions,  and
increase  our  reverence  for  their  labours,  as  well  as
our  sense  of  their  wisdom  and  patriotism.


l  The  Federalist,  No.  84 ; Mr.  Jay's Address  ; 3  Amer.  Museum,
554,  559  ;  2  Amer.  Museum,  422,  425.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  'll\)


CHAPTER  III.

NATURE  OF  THE CONSTITUTION  —  WHETHER  A
(  OMPACT.

^  30G.  Having  thus  sketched  out  a  genera]  history
of  the  origin  and  adoption  of  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  and  a  summary  of  the  principal  objec-
tions and  difficulties,  which  it  had  to  encounter,  we
are  at  length  arrived  at  the  point,  at  which  it  may  be
proper  to  enter  upon  the  consideration  of  the  actual
structure,  organization,  and  powers,  which  belong  to
it.  Our  main  object  will  henceforth  be  to  unfold  in
detail  all  its  principal  provisions,  with  such  commen-
taries, as  may  explain  their  import  and  effect,  and  with
such  illustrations,  historical  and  otherwise,  as  will  ena-
ble the  reader  fully  to  understand  the  objections,
which  have  been  urged  against  each  of  them  respec-
tively ;  the  amendments,  which  have  been  proposed  to
them  ;  and  the  arguments,  which  have  sustained  them
in  their  present  form.

^  307.  Before  doing  this,  however,  it  seems  neces-
sary, in  the  first  place,  to  bestow  some  attention  upon
several  points,  which  have  attracted  a  good  deal  of
discussion,  and  which  are  preliminary  in  their  own
nature  ;  and  in  the  next  place  to  consider,  what  are
the  true  rules  of  interpretation  belonging  to  the  instru-
ment.

^  308.  In  the  first  place,  what  is  the  true  nature
and  import  of  the  instrument  ?  Is  it  a  treaty,  a  con-
vention, a  league,  a  contract,  or  a  compact?  Who
are  the  parties  to  it  ?  By  whom  was  it  made  ?  By
whom  was  it  ratified  ? What  are  its  obligations  ? By


280 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

whom,  and  in  what  manner  may  it  be  dissolved  ?  Who
are  to  determine  its  validity  and  construction  1  Who
are  to  decide  upon  the  supposed  infractions  and  vio-
lations of  it  1  These  are  questions  often  asked,  and
often  discussed,  not  merely  for  the  purpose  of  theo-
retical speculation  ;  but  as  matters  of  practical  im-
portance, and  of  earnest  and  even  of  vehement  debate.
The  answers  given  to  them  by  statesmen  and  jurists
are  often  contradictory,  and  irreconcilable  with  each
other ;  and  the  consequences,  deduced  from  the  views
taken  of  some  of  them,  go  very  deep  into  the  founda-
tions of  the  government  itself,  and  expose  it,  if  not  to
utter  destruction,  at  least  to  evils,  which  threaten  its
existence,  and  disturb  the  just  operation  of  its  powers.

§  309.  It  will  be  our  object  to  present  in  a  con-
densed form,  some  of  the  principal  expositions,  which
have  been  insisted  on  at  different  times,  as  to  the
nature  and  obligations  of  the  constitution,  and  to  offer
some  of  the  principal  objections,  which  have  been  sug-
gested against  those  expositions.  To  attempt  a  minute
enumeration  would,  indeed,  be  an  impracticable  task ;
and  con3idering  the  delicate  nature  of  others,  which
are  still  the  subject  of  heated  controversy,  where  the
ashes  are  scarcely  yet  cold,  which  cover  the  concealed
fires  of  former  political  excitements,  it  is  sufficiently
difficult  to  detach  some  of  the  more  important  from
the  mass  of  accidental  matter,  in  which  they  are
involved.

§  310.  It  has  been  asserted  by  a  learned  commen-
tator,1 that  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  is  an
original,  written,  federal,  and  social  compact,  freely,  vol-
untarily, and  solemnly  entered into by the several


i  1  Tucker's  Black.  Coram.  App,  note  D,  p.  140  et  seq.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE COA  STITULTO.V.  281

states,  and  ratified  by  the  people  thereof  respectively  ;

whereby  the  several  stales,  and  the  people  thereof,
respectively  have  bound  themselves  to  each  other,  and
to  the  federal  government  of  the  United  States,  and
by  which  the  federal  government  is  bound  to  the  sev-
eral states  and  to  every  citizen  of  the  United  States.
The  author  proceeds  to  expound  every  part  of  this
definition  at  large.  It  is  (says  he)  a  compact,  by
which  it  is  distinguished  from  a  charter  or  grant,  which
is  either  the  act  of  a  superior  to  an  inferior,  or  is  founded
upon  some  consideration  moving  from  one  of  the  par-
ties to  the  other,  and  operates  as  an  exchange  or  sale.1
But  here  the  contracting  parties,  whether  considered
as  states  in  their  political  capacity  and  character,  or  as
individuals,  are  all  equal;  nor  is  there  any  thing  granted
from  one  to  another ;  but  each  stipulates  to  part  with,
and  receive  the  same  thing  precisely  without  any  dis-
tinction or  difference  between  any  of  the  parties.

§  311.  It  is  a  federal  compact.2  Several  sovereign
and  independent  states  may  unite  themselves  together
by  a  perpetual  confederation,  without  each  ceasing  to
be  a  perfect  state.  They  will  together  form  a  federal
republic. The  deliberations  in  common  will  offer  no

i  1  Tucker's  Black.  Coram.  App.  note  D.  p.  141.

2  Mr.  Jefferson  asserts,  that  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  is  a
compact  between  the  states.  "They  entered  into  a  compact,"  says  he,
(in  a  paper  designed  to  be  adopted  by  the  legislature  of  Virginia,  as  a
solemn  protest,)  "  which  is  called  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States
of  America,  by  which  they  agreed  to  unite  in  a  single  government,  as  to
their  relations  with  each,  and  with  foreign  nations,  and  as  to  certain
other  articles  particularly  specified."*  It  would,  I  imagine,  be  very
difficult  to  point  out  when,  and  in  what  manner,  any  such  compact  was
made.  The  constitution  was  neither  made,  nor  ratified  by  the  states,
as  sovereignties,  or  political  communities.  It  was  framed  by  a  conven-
tion, proposed  to  the  people  of  the  states  for  their  adoption  by  congress  ;
and  was  adopted  by  state  conventions.  —  the  immediate  representatives
of  the  people.

*  4  JcflVrson's  Corve^p.  41.">.

VOL.  T.  36


282 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

violence  to  each  member,  though  they  may  in  certain
respects  put  some  constraint  on  the  exercise  of  it  in
virtue  of  voluntary  engagements.  The  extent,  modifi-
cations, and  objects  of  the  federal  authority  are  mere
matters  of  discretion.1  So  long,  as  the  separate  organ-
ization of  the  members  remains  ;  and,  from  the  nature
of  the  compact,  must  continue  to  exist  both  for  local
and  domestic,  and  for  federal  purposes,  the  union  is  in
fact,  as  well  as  in  theory,  an  association  of  states,  or  a
confederacy.

^312.  It  is,  also,  to  a  certain  extent,  a  social  com-
pact. In  the  act  of  association,  in  virtue  of  which  a
multitude  of  men  form  together  a  state  or  nation,  each
individual  is supposed  to  have  entered into  engage-
ments with  all, to  procure the  common  welfare ;  and
all  are supposed  to  have  entered  into  engagements
with  each  other,  to  facilitate  the  means  of  supplying  the
necessities  of  each  individual,  and  to  protect  and  de-
fend him.2 And  this  is  what  is ordinarily  meant  by
the  original  contract  of  society. But  a  contract  of  this
nature  actually  existed  in  a  visible  form  between  the
citizens  of  each  state  in  their  several  constitutions. It
might,  therefore,  be  deemed  somewhat  extraordinary,
that  in  the  establishment  of  a  federal  republic,  it  should
have  been  thought  necessary to  extend  its  operation
to  the  persons  of  individuals,  as  wTell  as to  the  states
composing  the  confederacy.

^313.  It  may  be  proper  to  illustrate  the  distinction
between  federal  compacts  and  obligations,  and  such  as
are  social,  by  one  or  two  examples.3  A  federal  com-
pact, alliance,  or  treaty,  is  an  act  of  the  state  or  body
politic,  and  not  of  an  individual. On  the  contrary,  a

1  1  Tucker's  Black.  Coram.  Appx.  note  D.  p.  141.

2  Id.  p.  144.  3  Id.  145.


CH.  III.] NATURE OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  283

social  compact  is  understood  to  mean  the  act  of  indi-
viduals about  to  create,  and  establish  a  state  or  body
politic  among  themselves.  If  one  nation  binds  itself  by
treaty  to  pay  a  certain  tribute  to  another ;  or  if  all  the
members  of  the  same  confederacy  oblige  themselves  to
furnish  their  quotas  of  a  common  expense,  when  requir-
ed ;  in  either  of  these  cases,  the  state  or  body  politic
only,  and  not  the  individual,  is  answerable  for  this  trib-
ute or  quota.  This  is,  therefore,  a  federal  obligation.
But,  where  by  any  compact,  express  or  implied,  a  num-
ber of  persons  are  bound  to  contribute  their  proportions
of  the  common  expenses,  or  to  submit  to  all  laws  made
by  the  common  consent ;  and  where  in  default  of  com-
pliance with  these  engagements  the  society  is  author-
ized to  levy  the  contribution,  or  to  punish  the  person  of
the  delinquent ;  this  seems  to  be  understood  to  be  more
in  the  nature  of  a  social,  than  a  federal  obligation.1

^314.  It  is  an  original  compact.  Whatever  politi-
cal relation  existed  between  the  American  colonies
antecedent  to  the  Revolution,  as  constituent  parts  of  the
British  empire,  or  as  dependencies  upon  it,  that  relation
was  completely  dissolved,  and  annihilated  from  that
period.  From  the  moment  of  the  Revolution  they
became  severally  independent  and  sovereign  states,
possessing  all  the  rights,  jurisdictions,  and  authority,
that  other  sovereign  states,  however  constituted,  or  by
whatever  title  denominated,  possess  ;  and  bound  by  no
ties,  but  of  their  own  creation,  except  such,  as  all  other
civilized  nations  are  equally  bound  by,  and  which
together  constitute  the  customary  law  of  nations.2

i  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  note  D.  p.  145.

2  Id.  150. —These  views  are  very  different  from  those,  which  Mr.
Dane  has,  with  so  much  force  and  perspicuity,  urged  in  his  Appendix  to
his  Abridgment  of  the  Law,  §  %  p.  10,  &.c.

"  In  order,  correctly,  to  ascertain  this  rank,  this  linking  together,  and


284  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

§  315.  It  is  a  written  compact.  Considered  as  a
federal  compact  or  alliance  between  the  states,  there  is
nothing  new  or  singular  in  this  circumstance,  as  all  na-
tional compacts  since  the  invention  of  letters  have  prob-
ably been  reduced  to  that  form.  But  considered  in  the
light  of  an  original  social  compact,  the  American  Revo-
lution seems  to  have  given  birth  to  this  new  political
phenomenon.  In  every  state  a  written  constitution
was  framed,  and  adopted  by  the  people  both  in  their
individual  and  sovereign  capacity  and  character.1

this  subordination,  we  must  go  back  as  far  as  January,  1774,  when  the
thirteen  states  existed  constitutionally,  in  the  condition  of  thirteen  Brit-
ish colonies,  yet,  de  facto,  the  people  of  them  exercised  original,  sovereign
power  in  their  institution  in 1774, of  the continental  congress; and,
especially,  in  June,  1775,  then  vesting-  in it  the  great  national  powers,
that  will  be  described  ;  scarcely  any  of  which  were  resumed. The  re-
sult will  show,  that,  on  revolutionary principles,  the  general  government
was,  by  the  sovereign  acts  of  this  people,  first  created  de  novo,  and  de  facto
instituted  ;  and,  by  the  same  acts,  the  people  vested  in  it  very  extensive
powers,  which have  ever remained  in  it,  modified  and  defined  by  the
articles  of  confederation,  and enlarged  and  arranged  anew  by  the  con-
stitution of the  United  States  —  2d.  that  the  state  governments  and
states,  as  free  and  independent  states,  were,  July  4th,  J  776,  created  by
the  general  government,  empowered  to  do  it  by  the  people,  acting  on
revolutionary  principles,  and  in  their  original,  sovereign  capacity ;  and
that  all  the  state  governments,  as  such,  have  been  instituted during  the
existence  of  the  general  government,  and  in  subordination  to  it,  and  two
thirds  of  them  since  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  was  ordained
and  established  by  all  the people  thereof,  in  that  sovereign  capacity.
These  state  governments  have  been,  by  the  people  of  each  state,  insti-
tuted under,  and,  expressly  or  impliedly,  in  subordination  to  the  general
government,  which  is  expressly recognized  by  all  to  be  supreme  law  :
and  as  the  power  of  the  whole  is,  in  the  nature  of  things,  superior  to  the
power  of  a  part,  other  things  bring  equal,  the  power  of  a  state,  a  part,  is
inferior  to  the  power  of  all  the  states. Assertions,  that  each  of  the
twenty-four  states  is  completely  sovereign,  that  is,  as  sovereign  as  Rus-
sia, or  Prance,  of  course  as  sovereign  as  all  the  states,  and  that  this  sove-
reignty is  above  judicial  cognizance,  merit  special  atten

l  1  Tuck  p.  noteD.  p,  153.  —  Tl  i inac-

curacy here ;  Connecticut,  did  not  form a  constitution until  1818,  and
existed  until  thai  period  under  her  colonial  charter. B  ud  still


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE CONSTITUTION.  285

^316.  It  is  a  compact  freely,  voluntarily,  and  sol-
emnly entered  into  by  the  several  states,  and  ratified  by

the  people  thereof  respectively  ;  freely,  there  being
neither  external  nor  internal  force  or  violence  to  influ-
ence, or  promote  the  measure;  the  United  States  being
at  peace  with  all  the  world  and  in  perfect  tranquillity  in
each  state ;  voluntarily,  because  the  measure  had  its
commencement  in  the  spontaneous  acts  of  the  state
legislatures,  prompted  by  a  clue  sense  of  the  necessity
of  some  change  in  the  existing  confederation ;  and  sol-
emnly, as  having  been  discussed,  not  only  in  the  gen-
eral convention,  which  proposed  and  framed  it ;  but  af-
terwards in  the  legislatures  of  the  several  states  ;  and
finally  in  the  conventions  of  all  the  states,  by  whom  it
was  adopted  and  ratified.1

^317.  It  is  a  compact,  by  which  the  several  states
and  the  people  thereof  respectively  have  bound  them-
selves to  each  other,  and  to  the  federal  government.
The  constitution  had  its  commencement  with  the  body
politic  of  the  several  states  ;  and  its  final  adoption  and
ratification  was  by  the  several  legislatures  referred  to,
and  completed  by  conventions  especially,  called  and
appointed  for  that  purpose  in  each  state.  The  accep-
tance of  the  constitution  was  not  only  an  act  of  the
body  politic  of  each  state,  but  of  the  people  thereof
respectively  in  their  sovereign  character  and  capacity.
The  body  politic  was  competent  to  bind  itself,  so  far  as
the  constitution  of  the  stare  permitted.2  But  not  hav-
ing power  to  bind  the  people  in  cases  beyond  their
constitutional  authority,  the  assent  of  the  people  was
indispensably  necessary  to  the  validity  of  the  compact,

is  without  any  constitution,  and  exercises  the  powers  of  government  un-
der her  colonial  charter.

i  Id.  1.r,r>,  156.  2  Id.  169.


286  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

by  which  the  rights  of  the  people  might  be  diminished,
or  submitted  to  a  new  jurisdiction,  or  in  any  manner
affected.  From  hence,  not  only  the  body  politic  of  the
several  states,  but  every  citizen  thereof,  may  be  consid-
ered as  parties  to  the  compact,  and  to  have  bound
themselves  reciprocally  to  each  other  for  the  due
observance  of  it ;  and  also  to  have  bound  themselves  to
the  federal  government,  whose  authority  has  been
thereby  created  and  established.1

^318.  Lastly.  It  is  a  compact,  by  which  the  federal
government  is  bound  to  the  several  states,  and  to  every
citizen  of  the  United  States.  Although  the  federal
government  can  in  no  possible  view  be  considered  as
a  party  to  a  compact  made  anterior  to  its  existence,
and  by  which  it  was  in  fact  created  ;  yet,  as  the  creature
of  that  compact,  it  must  be  bound  by  it  to  its  creators,
the  several  states  in  the  union,  and  the  citizens  thereof.
Having  no  existence,  but  under  the  constitution,  nor  any
rights,  but  such  as  that  instrument  confers  ;  and  those
very  rights  being  in  fact  duties,  it  can  possess  no  legiti-
mate power,  but  such  as  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the
performance  of  a  duty  prescribed,  and  enjoined  by  the
constitution.2  Its  duties  then  became  the  exact  meas-
ure of  its  powers ;  and  whenever  it  exerts  a  power  for
any  other  purpose,  than  the  performance  of  a  duty  pre-
scribed by  the  constitution,  it  transgresses  its  proper
limits,  and  violates  the  public  trust.  Its  duties  being
moreover  imposed  for  the  general  benefit  and  security
of  the  several  states  in  their  political  character,  and  of
the  people,  both  in  their  sovereign  and  individual  capaci-
ty, if  these  objects  be  not  obtained,  the  government
does  not  answer  the  end  of  its  creation. It  is,  there-

i  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.note  D.  p.  170.  2  Id.  170.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  287

tore,  bound  to  the  several  stales  respectively,  and  to
every  citizen  thereof,  for  the  due  execution  of  those

duties,  and  the  observance  of  this  pbligation  is  enforced
under  the  solemn  sanction  of  an  oath  from  those,  who
administer  the  government.

^  319.  Such  is  a  summary  of  the  reasoning  of  the
learned  author,  by  which  he  has  undertaken  to  vindi-
cate his  views  of  the  nature  of  the  constitution.  That
reasoning  has  been  quoted  at  large,  and  for  the  most
part  in  his  own  words  ;  not  merely  as  his  own,  but  as
representing,  in  a  general  sense,  the  opinions  of  a  large
body  of  statesmen  and  jurists  in  different  parts  of  the
Union,  avowed  and  acted  upon  in  former  times  ;  and
recently  revived  under  circumstances,  which  have  given
them  increased  importance,  if  not  a  perilous  influence.1

^  320.  It  is  wholly  beside  our  present  purpose  to
engage  in  a  critical  commentary  upon  the  different
parts  of  this  exposition.  It  will  be  sufficient  for  all  the
practical  objects  w7e  have  in  view,  to  suggest  the  diffi-
culties of  maintaining  its  leading  positions,  to  expound
the  objections,  which  have  been  urged  against  them,
and  to  bring  into  notice  those  opinions,  which  rest  on  a
very  different  basis  of  principles.

^  321.  The  obvious  deductions,  which  may  be,  and
indeed  have  been,  drawn  from  considering  the  consti-
tution as  a  compact  between  the  states,  are,  that  it  op-

l  Many  traces  of  these  opinions  will  be  found  in  the  public  debates  in
the  state  legislatures  and  in  congress  ;ti  different  periods.  In  the  reso-
lutions of  Mr.  Taylor,  in  the  Virginia  legislature  in  17!>S,  it  was  resolv-
ed, "that  this  assembly  doth  explicitly  and  peremptorily  declare,  that  it
views  the  powers  of  the  federal  government  as  resulting  from  the  com-
pact, to  tchich  the  stales  are  parties."  —  See  Dane's  Appendix,  p.  1 7.  The
original  resolution  had  the  word  "alone  "  after  "states,"  which  was  struck
out  upon  the  motion  of  the  original  mover,  it  having  been  asserted  in
the  debate,  that  the  people  were  parties  also,  and  by  some  of  the  speak-
ers, that  the  people  were  exclusively  parties.


288 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

erates  as  a  mere  treaty,  or  convention  between  them,
and  has  an  obligatory  force  upon  each  state  no  longer,
than  suits  its  pleasure,  or  its  consent  continues  ;  that
each  state  has  a  right  to  judge  for  itself  in  relation
to  the  nature,  extent,  and  obligations  of  the  instrument,
without  being  at  all  bound  by  the  interpretation  of  the
federal  government,  or  by  that  of  any  other  state ;  and
that  each  retains  the  power  to  withdraw  from  the  con-
federacy and  to  dissolve  the  connexion,  when  such  shall
be  its  choice  ;  and  may  suspend  the  operations  of  the
federal  government,  and  nullify  its  acts  within  its  own
territorial  limits,  whenever,  in  its  own  opinion,  the  exi-

The  Kentucky  Resolutions  of  1797,  (which  were  drafted  by  Mr.  Jef-
ferson,) declare,  "  that  to  this  compact  [the  federal  constitution]  each
state  acceded  as  a  state,  and  is  an  integral  party."  North  American  Re-
view, Oct.  1630,  p.  501,  545.  In  the  resolutions  of  the  senate  of  South
Carolina,  in  Nov.  1817,  it  is  declared,  "  that  the  constitution  of  the  United
States  is  a  compact  between  the  people  of  the  different  states  with  each
other,  as  separate  and  independent  sovereignties."  In  Nov.  1799  the
Kentucky  legislature  passed  a  resolution,  declaring,  that  the  federal
states  had  a  right  to  judge  of  any  infraction  of  the  constitution,  and,  that
a  nullification  by  those  sovereignties  of  all  unauthorized  arts  done  un-
der color  of  that  instrument  is  the  rightful  remedy.  North  American
Review,  Id.  503.  Mr.  Madison,  in  the  Virginia  Report  of  1800,  re-as-
serts the  right  of  the  states,  as  parties,  to  decide  upon  the  unconstitu-
tionality of  any  measure.  Report,  p.  6,  7,  8,  9.  The  Virginia  legisla-
ture, in  1829,  passed  a  resolution,  declaring,  that  "  the  constitution  of
the  United  States  being  a  federative  compact  between  sovereign  states,
in  construing  which  no  common  arbiter  is  known,  each  state  has  the
rio-ht  to  construe  the  compact  for  itself*  Mr.  Vice  President  Calhoun's
letter  to  Gov.  Hamilton  of  Aug.  28,  1832,  contains  a  very  eloborate  ex-
position of  this  among  other  doctrines.

Mr.  Dane,  in  his  Appendix,  (§  3,  p.  11,)  says,  that  for  forty  years  one
great  party  has  received  the  constitution,  as  a  federative  compact  among
the  states,  and  the  othar  great  party,  not  as  such  a  compact,  but  in  the
main,  national  and  popular.  The  grave  debate  in  the  Senates  of  the
United  States,  on  Mr.  Foot's  resolution,  in  the  winter  of  1830,  deserves
to  be  read  for  its  able  exposition  of  the  doctrines  maintained  on  each
side.  Mr.  Dane  makes  frequent  references  to  it  in  Lis  Appendix.  —  4
Elliot's  Debates,  315  to  330.

*  3  American  Annual  Register;  Local  History-,  131.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  289

gency  of  the  case  may  require.1  These  conclusions
may  not  always  be  avowed ;  but  they  How  naturally
from  the  doctrines,  which  we  have  under  considera-
tion.2 They  go  to  the  extent  of  reducing  the  govern-
ment to  a  mere  confederacy  during  pleasure  ;  and  of
thus  presenting  the  extraordinary  spectacle  of  a  nation
existing  only  at  the  will  of  each  of  its  constituent  parts.

1  Virginia,  in  the resolutions  of  her  legislature  on  the  tariff,  in  Feb.

1829,  declared,  "  that  there  is  no  common  arbiter  to  construe  the  con-
stitution ;  being  a  federative  compact  between  sovereign  states,  each  state
has  a  right  to  construe  the  compact  for  itself."  9  Dane's  Abridg.  ch.
1S7,  art.  20,  §  14,  p.  589.  See  also  North  American  Review,  Oct.  1830,
p.  488  to  528.  The  resolutions  of  Kentucky  of  1798  contain  a  like
declaration,  that  '•  to  this  compact  [the  constitution]  each  state  acceded
as  a  state,  and  is  an  integral  party  ;  that  the  government  created  by  this
compact  was  not  made  the  exclusive,  or  final  judge  of  the  powers  delegat-
ed to  itself,  &c.  ;  but  that,  as  in  all  other  cases  of  compact  among  parties
having  no  common  judge,  each  party  has  an  equal  right  to  judge  for
itself,  as  well  of  infractions,  as  of  the  mode  and  measure  of  redress"
North  American  Review,  Oct.  1830,  p.  501.  The  Kentucky  resolutions
of  1799  go  further,  and  assert,  "that  the  several  states,  who  formed
that  instrument,  [the  constitution]  being  sovereign  and  independent,  have
the  unquestionable  right  to  judge  of  its  infraction  ;  and  that  a  nullifica-
tion by  those  sovereignties  of  all  unauthorized  acts  done  under  colour  of
that  instrument  is  the  rightful  remedy."  North  American  Review,  Id.
503 ;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  315,  322.  In  Mr.  Madison's  Report  in  the  Vir-
ginia legislature,  in  January,  1800,  it  is  also  affirmed,  that  the  states  are
parties  to  the  constitution  ;  but  by  states  he  here  means  (as  the  context
explains)  the  people  of  the  states.  That  report  insists,  that  the  states  are
in  the  last  resort  the  ultimate  judges  of  the  infractions  of  the  constitu-
tion, p.  6,  7,  8,  9.

2  I  do  not  mean  to  assert,  that  all  those,  who  held  these  doctrines,  have
adopted  the  conclusions  drawn  from  them.  There  are  eminent  excep-
tions ;  and  among  them  the  learned  commentator  on  Blackstone's  Com-
mentaries seems  properly  numbered.  See  1  Tucker's  Black.  App.  170,
171,  §  8. See  the  Debates  in  the  senate on  Mr.  Foot's  Resolution  in

1830,  and  Mr.  Dane's  Appendix,  and  his  Abridgment  and  Digest,  9th
Vol.  ch.  187,  art.  20,  §  13  to  22,  p.  588  et  seq. ;  North  American  Review
for  Oct.  1830,  on  the  Debates  on  the  Public  Lands,  p.  481  to  486,488  to
528;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  315  to  330;  Madison's  Virginia  Report,  Jan.
1800,  p.  6,  7,  8,  9 ;  4  Jefferson's  Correspondence,  415  ;  Vice  President
Calhoun's  Letter  to  Gov.  Hamilton,  Aug.  28,  1832.

vol.  i.  37


290  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

§  322.  If  this  be  the  true  interpretation  of  the  instru-
ment, it  has  wholly  failed  to  express  the  intentions  of
its  framers,  and  brings  back,  or  at  least  may  bring  back,
upon  us  all  the  evils  of  the  old  confederation,  from
which  we  were  supposed  to  have  had  a  safe  deliverence.
For  the  power  to  operate  upon  individuals,  instead  of
operating  merely  on  states,  is  of  little  consequence,
though  yielded  by  the  constitution,  if  that  power  is  to
depend  for  its  exercise  upon  the  continual  consent  of
all  the  members  upon  every  emergency.  We  have  al-
ready seen,  that  the  framers  of  the  instrument  contem-
plated no  such  dependence.  Even  under  the  confed-
eration it  was  deemed  a  gross  heresy  to  maintain,  that
a  party  to  a  compact  has  a  right  to  revoke  that  com-
pact ;  and  the  possibility  of  a  question  of  this  nature
was  deemed  to  prove  the  necessity  of  laying  the  foun-
dations of  our  national  government  deeper,  than  in  the
mere  sanction  of  delegated  authority.1  "A  compact
between  independent  sovereigns,  founded  on  acts  of
legislative  authority,  can  pretend  to  no  higher  validity,
than  a  league  or  treaty  between  the  parties.  It  is  an
established  doctrine  on  the  subject  of  treaties,  that  all
the  articles  are  mutually  conditions  of  each  other;  that
a  breach  of  any  one  article  is  a  breach  of  the  whole
treaty ;  and  that  a  breach  committed  by  either  of  the
parties  absolves  the  others,  and  authorizes  them,  if  they
please,  to  pronounce  the  compact  violated  and  void."  2
Consequences  like  these,  which  place  the  dissolution

i  The  Federalist,  No.  92  ;  Id.  No.  43  ;  see  also  Mr.  Patterson's  Opin-
ion in  the  Convention,  4  Elliot's  Debates,  74,  75 ;  and  Yates's  Minutes.

4  The  Federalist,  No.  43.  —  Mr.  Madison,  in  the  Virginia  Report  of
January  1800,  asserts,  (p.  G,  7,)  that  "  the  states  being  parties  to  the  con-
stitutional compact,  and  in  their  sovereign  capacity,  it  follows  of  necessi-
ty, that  there  can  be  no  tribunal  above  their  authority  to  decide  in  the
last  resort,  whether  the  compact  made  by  them  be  violated  ;  and  conse-


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  291

of  the  government  in  the  hands  of  a  single  state,  and
enable  it  at  will  to  defeat,  or  suspend  the  operation  of
the  laws  of  the  union,  are  too  serious,  not  to  require  us
to  scrutinize  with  the  utmost  care  and  caution  the  prin-
ciples, from  which  they  How,  and  by  which  they  are
attempted  to  be  justified.

^  323.  The  word  "  compact,"  like  many  other  im-
portant words  in  our  language,  is  susceptible  of  differ-
ent shades  of  meaning,  and  may  be  used  in  different
senses.  It  is  sometimes  used  merely  to  express  a  de-
liberate and  voluntary  assent  to  any  act  or  thing.  Thus,
it  has  been  said  by  Dr.  South,  that  "  in  the  beginnings
of  speech,  there  was  an  implicit  compact  founded  upon
common  consent,  that  such  words,  voices,  or  gestures,
should  be  signs,  whereby  they  would  express  their
thoughts  ;"*  where,  it  is  obvious,  that  nothing  more  is
meant,  than  a  mutual  and  settled  appointment  in  the
use  of  language.  It  is  also  used  to  express  any  agree-
ment or  contract  between  parties,  by  which  they  are
bound,  and  incur  legal  obligations.2  Thus  we  say,  that
one  person  has  entered  into  a  compact  with  anoth-
er, meaning,  that  the  contracting  parties  have  entered

quently,  that,  as  the  parties  to  it,  they  must  themselves  decide  in  the  last
resort  such  questions,  as  may  he  of  sufficient  magnitude  to  require  their
interposition." Id.  p.  8,  9.

1  Cited  in  Johnson's  Dictionary,  verb  Compact.  See  Heinecc.  Elem.
Juris.  Natur.  L.  2,  ch.  6,  §  109  to  112.

2  Pothier  distinguishes  between  a  contract  and  an  agreement.  An
agreement,  he  says,  is  the  consent  of  two  or  more  persons  to  form  some
engagement,  or  to  rescind,  or  modify  an  engagement  already  made.
Duorum  vel  plurium  in  idem  placitum  consensus.  Pand.  Lib.  1,  §  1.  de
Pactis.  An  agreement,  by  which  two  parties  reciprocally  promise  and
engage,  or  one  of  them  singly  promises  and  engages  to  the  other,  to  give
some  particular  thing,  or  to  do  or  abstain  from  a  particular  act,  is  a  contract:
by  which  he  means  such  an  agreement,  as  gives  a  party  the  right  legal-
ly to  demand  its  performance.  Pothier,  Oblig.  Part.  1,  ch-  I,  §  1,  art.  T,
§  1. See  1  Black.  Comm.  44,  45.


292  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

into  some  agreement,  which  is  valid  in  point  of  law,  and
includes  mutual  rights  and  obligations  between  them.
And  it  is  also  used,  in  an  emphatic  sense,  to  denote
those  agreements  and  stipulations,  which  are  entered
into  between  nations,  such  as  public  treaties,  conven-
tions, confederacies,  and  other  solemn  acts  of  national
authority.1  When  we  speak  of  a  compact  in  a  legal
sense,  we  naturally  include  in  it  the  notion  of  distinct
contracting  parties,  having  mutual  rights,  and  remedies
to  enforce  the  obligations  arising  therefrom.  We  sup-
pose, that  each  party  has  an  equal  and  independent
capacity  to  enter  into  the  contract,  and  has  an  equal
right  to  judge  of  its  terms,  to  enforce  its  obligations,  and
to  insist  upon  redress  for  any  violation  of  them.2  This,
in  a  general  sense,  is  true  under  our  systems  of  muni-
cipal law,  though  practically,  that  law  stops  short  of
maintaining  it  in  all  the  variety  of  forms,  to  which  mod-
ern refinement  has  pushed  the  doctrine  of  implied
contracts.

§  324.  A  compact  may,  then,  be  said  in  its  most  gen-
eral sense  to  import  an  agreement  according  to  Lord
Coke's  definition,  aggregatio  mentium,  an  aggregation
or  consent  of  minds  ;  in  its  stricter  sense  to  import  a
contract  between  parties,  which  creates  obligations,  and
rights  capable  of  being  enforced,  and  contemplated,  as
such,  by  the  parties,  in  their  distinct  and  independent
characters.  This  is  equally  true  of  them,  whether  the
contract  be  between  individuals,  or  between  nations.
The  remedies  are,  or  may  be,  different ;  but  the  right
to  enforce,  as  accessory  to  the  obligation,  is  equally  re-
tained in  each  case.  It  forms  the  very  substratum  of
the  engagement.

i  Vattel,  B.  %  ch.  12, 152; I  Black.  Coram.  43.
2  2  Black.  Coram.  J  12.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  293

^  325.  The  doctrine  maintained  by  many  emi-
nent writers  upon  public  law  in  modern  times  is,  that
civil  society  has  its  foundation  in  a  voluntary  consent
or  submission  ; 1  and,  therefore,  it  is  often  said  to  de-
pend upon  ii  social  compact  of  the  people  composing
the  nation.  And  this,  indeed,  does  not,  hrsubstance,
differ  from  the  definition  of  it  by  Cicero, .  Multitudo,  juris
consensu  et  utilitatis  communione  sociata  ;  that  is,  (as
Burlamaqui  gives  it,)  a  multitude  of  people  united  to-
gether by  a  common  interest,  and  by  common  laws,  to
which  they  submit  with  one  accord.2

1  Woodeson's  Elements  of  Jurisprudence,  21,22;  1  Wilson's  Law
Lect.  304,305  ;  Vattcl,  B.  l,ch.  1,  §  1,  2  ;  2  Burlamaqui,  Part  1,  ch.  2,3,
4;  1  Black.  Comm.  47,  48;  Heinecc.  L.  2,  ch.  1,  §  12  to  IS  ;  (2  Turnbull,
Heinecc.  System  of  Universal  Law,  B.  2,  ch.  I,  §  9  to  J 2  ;)  Id.  ch.  G,
§  109  to  115.

2  2  Burlamaqui,  Part  J,  ch.  4,  §  9 :  Heinecc.  Elem.  Juris.  Natur.  L.
2,  ch.  (I,  §  107.

Mr.  Locke  is  one  of  the  most  eminent  authors,  who  have  treated  on
this  subject.  lie  founds  all  civil  government  upon  consent.  "  When,"
says  he,  "  any  number  of  men  have  so  consented  to  make  a  community
or  government,  they  are  thereby  presently  incorporated,  and  make  one
body  politic,  wherein  the  majority  hare  a  right  to  act,  and  conclude  the  rest."*
And  he  considers  this  consent  to  be  bound  by  the  will  of  the  majority,  as
the  indispensable  result  of  becoming  a  community  ;  "  else,"  says  he,  '•  this
original  compact,  whereby  he,  with  others,  incorporates  into  one  society,
would  signify  nothing,  and  be  no  compact  at  all."  f  Doctor  Paley  has
!  some  very  forcible  objections  against  this  doctrine,  both  as  matter
of  theory  ami  of  fact,  with  which,  however,  il  is  unnecessary  here  to  in-
termeddle.  The  discussion  of  them  would  more  properly  'lelong  to  lec-
tures upon  natural  and  political  law.}:  Mr.  Burke  has,  in  one  of  his  most
splendid  performances,  made  some  profound  reflections  on  this  subject,
the  conclusion  of  which  seems  to  be,  that  if  society  is  to  be  deemed  a
contract,  it  is  one  of  eternal  obligation,  and  not  liable  to  be  dissolved  at
the  will  of  those,  who  have  entered  into  it.  The  passage  is  as  follows  :
"  Society  is  indeed  a  contract.  Subordinate  contracts  for  objects  of
more  occasional  interest  may  be  deposited  at  pleasure.  But  the  state
ought  not  to  be  considered  as  nothing  better  than  a  partnership  agree-

*  Locke  on  Government,  B.  -2.  ch.  9,  $95.

t  Locke  on  Government,  I!.  -J,  §  96,  97,98,  99  ;  Id.  $  1 19,  120.

I  Paley  on  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy,  1!.  6,  ch.  :?.


294 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

^  326.  Mr.  Justice  Blackstone  has  very  justly  ob-
served, that  the  theory  of  an  original  contract  upon
the  first  formation  of  society  is  a  visionary  notion.
"  But  though  society  had  not  its  formal  beginning
Irom  any  convention  of  individuals  actuated  by  their
wants  and  fears ;  yet  it  is  the  sense  of  their  weak-
ness and  imperfection,  that  keeps  mankind  together  ;
that  demonstrates  the  necessity  of  this  union ;  and  that,
therefore,  is  the  solid  and  natural  foundation,  as  well


nient  in  a  trade  of  pepper  and  coffee,  calico  or  tobacco,  or  some  other  such
low  concern,  to  be  taken  up  for  a  little  temporary  interest,  and  to  be  dis-
solved by  the  fancy  of  the  parties.  It  is  to  be  looked  on  with  other  rev-
erence ;  because  it  is  not  a  partnership  in  things,  subservient  only  to  the
gross  animal  existence,  of  a  temporary  and  perishable  nature.  It  is  a
partnership  in  all  science  ;  a  partnership  in  all  art;  a  partnership  in  ev-
ery virtue,  and  in  all  perfection.  As  the  ends  of  such  a  partnership  can-
not be  obtained  in  many  generations,  it  becomes  a  partnership  not  only
between  those,  who  are  living,  but  between  those,  who  are  living,  those,
who  are  dead,  and  those,  who  are  to  be  born.  Each  contract  of  each  par-
ticular state  is  but  a  clause  in  the  great  primeval  contract  of  eternal  so-
ciety, linking  the  lower  with  the  higher  natures,  connecting  the  visible
and  invisible  world,  according  to  a  fixed  compact,  sanctioned  by  the
inviolable  oath,  which  holds  all  physical  and  all  moral  natures,  each  in
their  appointed  place.  This  law  is  not  subject  to  the  will  of  those,  who
by  an  obligation  above  them,  and  infinitely  superior,  are  bound  to  submit
their  will  to  that  law.  The  municipal  corporations  of  that  universal  king-
dom are  not  morally  at  liberty  at  their  pleasure,  and  on  their  specula-
tions of  a  contingent  improvement,  wholly  to  separate  and  tear  asunder
the  bands  of  their  subordinate  community,  and  to  dissolve  it  into  an  un-
social, uncivil,  unconnected  chaos  of  elementary  principles.  It  is  the  first
and  supreme  necessity  only,  a  necessity,  that  is  not  chosen,  but  choos-
es, a  necessity  paramount  to  deliberation,  that  admits  no  discussion,
and  demands  no  evidence,  which  alone  can  justify  a  resort  to  anar-
chy. This  necessity  is  no  exception  to  the  rule  ;  because  this  ne-
cessity itself  is  a  part  too  of  that  moral  and  physical  disposition  of
things,  to  which  man  must  be  obedient  by  consent  or  force.  But,  if  that,
which  is  only  submission  to  necessity,  should  be  made  the  object  of  choice,
the  law  is  broken,  nature  is  disobeyed,  and  the  rebellious  are  outlawed,
cast  forth,  and  exiled  from  this  world  of  reason,  and  order,  and  peace,
and  virtue,  and  fruitful  penitence,  into  the  antagonist  world  of  madness,
discord,  vice,  confusion,  and  unavailing  sorrow."  Reflections  on  the
Revolution  in  France.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  295

as  the  cement  of  civil  society.  And  this  is  what  we
mean  by  the  original  contract  of  society  ;  which,  though
perhaps  in  no  instance  it  has  ever  been  formally  express-
ed at  the  first  institution  of  a  state,  yet,  in  nature  and
reason,  must  always  be  understood,  and  implied  in  the
very  act  of  associating  together  ;  namely,  that  the  whole
should  protect  all  its  parts,  and  that  every  part  should
pay  obedience  to  the  will  of  the  whole  ;  or,  in  other
words,  that  the  community  should  guard  the  rights  of
each  individual  member  ;  and  that  in  return  for  this
protection  each  individual  should  submit  to  the  laws  of
the  community."1  It  is  in  this  sense,  that  the  preamble
of  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts  asserts,  that  "  the
body  politic  is  formed  by  a  voluntary  association  of  indi-
viduals ;  that  it  is  a  social  compact,  by  which  the  whole
people  covenants  with  each  citizen  and  each  citizen  with
the  whole  people,  that  all  shall  be  governed  by  certain
laws  for  the  common  good ; "  and  that  in  the  same  pre-
amble, the  people  acknowledge  with  grateful  hearts,  that
Providence  had  afforded  them  an  opportunity  "  of  en-
tering into  an  original,  explicit,  and  solemn  compact  with
each  other,and  of  forming  a  new  constitution  of  civil  gov-
ernment for  themselves  and  their  posterity."  It  is  in  this
sense  too,  that  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Jay  is  to  be  understood,
when  he  asserts,2  that  "every  state  constitution  is  a  com-
pact made  by  and  between  the  citizens  of  a  state  to
govern  themselves  in  a  certain  manner ;  and  the  con-
stitution of  the  United  States  is,  likewise,  a  compact

i  1  Black.  Comm.  47  ;  see  also  1  Hume's  Essays,  Essay  12.  —  Mr.  1  lunie
considers,  that  the  notion  of  government,  being  universally  founded  in
original  contract,  is  visionary,  unless  in  the  sense  of  its  being  founded
upon  the  consent  of  those,  who  first  associate  together,  and  subject
themselves  to  authority.  He  has  discussed  the  subject  at  large  in  an
elaborate  Essay. Essay  1*-?,  p.  491.

2  Chisholm  v.  Slate  of  Georgia,  3  Dall.  R.  419  ;  2  Cond.  Rep.  Go5,6G8 ;
see  also  1  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  305.


296 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

made  by  the  people  of  the  United  States,  to  govern
themselves  as  to  general  objects  in  a  certain  manner."
He  had  immediately  before  stated,  with  reference  to
the  preamble  of  the  constitution,  "Here  we  see  the
people  acting,  as  sovereigns  of  the  whole  country  ;  and
in  the  language  of  sovereignty,  establishing  a  constitu-
tion, by  which  it  was  their  will,  that  the  state  govern-
ments should  be  bound,  and  to  which  the  state  consti-
tutions should  be  made  to  conform."  l

^  327.  But  although  in  a  general  sense,  and  theo-
retically speaking,  the  formation  of  civil  societies  and
states  may  thus  be  said  to  be  founded  in  a  social  compact
or  contract,  that  is,  in  the  solemn,  express  or  implied
consent  of  the  individuals  composing  them  ;  yet  the  doc-
trine itself  requires  many  limitations  and  qualifications,
when  applied  to  the  actual  condition  of  nations,  even
of  those,  which  are  most  free  in  their  organization.2
Every  state,  however  organized,  embraces  many  per-
sons in  it,  who  have  never  assented  to  its  form  of  gov-
ernment ;  and  many,  who  are  deemed  incapable  of  such
assent,  and  yet  who  are  held  bound  by  its  fundamental
institutions  and  laws.  Infants,  minors,  married  women,
persons  insane,  and  many  others,  are  deemed  subjects
of  a  country,  and  bound  by  its  laws  ;  although  they  have

i  In  the  ordinance  of  congress  of  1787,  for  the  government  of  the  ter-
ritory of  the  United  States  northwest  of  river  Ohio,  in  which  the  settle-
ment of  the  territory,  and  the  establishment  of  several  states  therein,  was
contemplated,  it  was  declared,  that  certain  articles  therein  enumerated
"  shall  be  considered  as  articles  of  compact  between  the  original  states
and  the  people  and  states  in  the  said  territory,  and  for  ever  remain  unal-
terable, unless  by  common  consent."  Here  is  an  express  enumeration  of
parties,  some  of  whom  were  not  then  in  existence,  and  the  articles  of
compact  attached  as  such  only,  when  they  were  brought  into  life.  And
then  to  avoid  all  doubt,  as  to  their  obligatory  force,  they  were  to  be  unal-
terable, except  by  common  consent.  One  party  could  not  change  or  ab-
solve itself  from  the  obligation  to  obey  them".

2  See  Burke's  Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  297

never  assented  thereto,  and  may  by  those  very  laws
be  disabled  from  such  an  act.  Even  our  most  sol-
emn instruments  of  government,  framed  and  adopt-
ed as  the  constitutions  of  our  state  governments,  are
not  only  not  founded  upon  the  assent  of  all  the  peo-
ple within  the  territorial  jurisdiction  ;  but  that  assent  is
expressly  excluded  by  the  very  manner,  in  which  the
ratification  is  required  to  be  made.  That  ratification  is
restricted  to  those,  who  are  qualified  voters  ;  and  who
are,  or  shall  be  qualified  voters,  is  decided  by  the  ma-
jority in  the  convention  or  other  body,  which  submits  the
constitution  to  the  people.  All  of  the  American  consti-
tutions have  been  formed  in  this  manner.  The  assent
of  minors,  of  women,  and  of  unqualified  voters  has  nev-
er been  asked  or  allowed  ;  yet  these  embrace  a  major-
ity of  the  whole  population  in  every  organized  society,
and  are  governed  by  its  existing  institutions.  Nay  more;
a  majority  only  of  the  qualified  voters  is  deemed  suffi-
cient to  change  the  fundamental  institutions  of  the  state,
upon  the  general  principle,  that  the  majority  has  at
all  times  a  right  to  govern  the  minority,  and  to  bind  the
latter  to  obedience  to  the  will  of  the  former.  And  if
more  than  a  plurality  is,  in  any  case,  required,  to  amend
or  change  the  actual  constitution  of  the  society,  it  is  a
matter  of  political  choice  with  the  majority  for  the  time
being,  and  not  of  right  on  the  part  of  the  minority.

^  328.  It  is  a  matter  of  fact,  therefore,  in  the  history
of  our  own  forms  of  government,  that  they  have  been
formed  without  the  consent,  express  or  implied,  of  the
whole  people ;  and  that,  although  firmly  established,  they
owe  their  existence  and  authority  to  the  simple  will  of
the  majority  of  the  qualified  voters.  There  is  not  prob-
ably a  single  state  in  the  Union,  whose  constitution  has
not  been  adopted  against  the  opinions  and  wishes  of

vol.  i.  38


298  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

a  laro-e  minority,  even  of  the  qualified  voters  ;  and  it
is  notorious,  that  some  of  them  have  been  adopted  by
a  small  majority  of  votes. How,  then,  can  we  assert
with  truth,  that  even  in  our  free  constitutions  the  gov-
ernment is  founded  in  fact  on  the  assent  of  the  whole
people,  when  many  of  them  have  not  been  permitted
to  express  any  opinion,  and  many  have  expressed  a
decided  dissent  1  In  what  manner  are  we  to  prove,  that
every  citizen  of  the  state  has  contracted  with  all  the
other  citizens,  that  such  constitution  shall  be  a  binding
compact  between  them,  with  mutual  obligations  to  ob-
serve and  keep  it,  against  such  positive  dissent  ? If  it
be  said,  that  by  entering  into  the  society  an  assent  is
necessarily  implied  to  submit  to  the  majority,  how  is  it
proved,  that  a  majority  of  all  the  people  of  all  ages  and
sexes  were  ever  asked  to  assent,  or  did  assent  to  such
a  proposition  1 And  as  to  persons  subsequently  born,
and  subjected  by  birth  to  such  society,  where  is  the
record  of  such  assent  in  point  of  law  or  fact  ?  l

§  329.  In  respect  to  the  American  revolution  itself,
it  is  notorious,  that  it  was  brought  about  against  the
wishes  and  resistance  of  a  formidable  minority  of  the
people  ;  and  that  the  declaration  of  independence  nev-
er had  the  universal  assent  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
country.  So,  that  this  great  and  glorious  change  in  the
organization  of  our  government  owes  its  whole  author-
ity to  the  efforts  of  a  triumphant  majority.  And  the  dis-
sent on  the  part  of  the  minority  was  deemed  in  many
cases  a  crime,  carrying  along  with  it  the  penalty  of  con-
fiscation, forfeiture,  and  personal,  and  even  capital  pun-
ishment ;  and  in  its  mildest  form  was  deemed  an
unwarrantable  outrage  upon  the  public  rights,  and  a
total  disregard  of  the  duties  of  patriotism.

1  See  1  Hume's  Essays,  Essay  12.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTIONS  299

^  330.  The  (ruth  is,  thai  til*1  majority  of  every  or-
ganized society  has  always  claimed,  and  exercised  the
right  to  govern  the  \\  hole  of  that  society,  in  the  manner
pointed  out  by  the  fundamental  laws,  which  from  time
to  time  have  existed  iii  such  society.1  Every  revolution,
at  least  when  not  produced  by  positive  force,  has  been
founded  upon  the  authority  of  such  majority.  And  the
right  results  from  the  very  necessities  of  our  nature;
for  universal  consent  can  never  be  practically  required
or  obtained.  The  minority  are  bound,  whether  they
have  assented  or  not ;  for  the  plain  reason,  that  op-
posite wills  in  the  same  society,  on  the  same  subjects,
cannot  prevail  at  the  same  time ;  and,  as  society  is  in-
stituted for  the  general  safety  and  happiness,  in  a  con-
flict of  opinion  the  majority  must  have  a  right  to  accom-
plish that  object  by  the  means,  which  they  deem  ade-
quate for  the  end.  The  majority  may,  indeed,  decide,
how  far  they  will  respect  the  rights  or  claims  of  the
minority ;  and  how  far  they  will,  from  policy  or  princi-
ple, insist  upon  or  absolve  them  from  obedience.  But
this  is  a  matter,  on  whicli -^decide j|  for  itself,  according
to  4te-  own  notions  of  justice  or  convenience.  In  a  gen-
eral sense  the  will  of  the  majority  of  ther  people  is  ab-
solute and  sovereign,  limited  only  by  -rts-  means  and
power  to  make -&*  will  effectual.2  The  declaration  of
independence  (which,  it  is  historically  known,  was  not
the  act  of  the  whole  American  people)  puts  the  doc-

i  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  L68 ;  Id.  172,  173:  Burke's  Appeal
from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs.

2  Mr.  Dane,  in  his  Appendix  to  the  ninth  volume  of  his  Ahridgment,
has  examined  this  subject  very  much  at  large.  See,  especially,  pages
37  to  43.  Mr.  Locke,  the  most  strenuous  asserter  of  liberty  and  of  the
original  compact  of  society,  contends  resolutely  for  this  power  of  the
majority  to  bind  the  minority,  as  a  noeossary  condition  in  the  original
formation  of  society.  Locke  on  Government,  B.  2,  ch.  8,  from  §  95  to
§  100.


300 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

trine  on  its  true  grounds.  Men  are  endowed,  it  de-
clares, with  certain  unalienable  rights,  and  among  these
are  life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness.  To  se-
cure these  rights,  governments  are  instituted  among
men,  deriving  their  just  powers  from  the  consent  of  the
governed.  Whenever  any  form  of  government  becomes
destructive  of  these  ends,  it  is  the  right  of  the  people
(plainly  intending,  the  majority  of  the  people)  to  alter,
or  to  abolish  it,  and  to  institute  a  new  government,  lay-
ing its  foundation  on  such  principles,  and  organizing  its
powers  in  such  forms,  as  to  them  shall  ^eem  most  likely
to  effect  their  safety  and  happiness.

^  331.  But  whatever  may  be  the  true  doctrine,  as  to
the  nature  of  the  original  compact  of  society,  or  of  the
subsequent  institution  and  organization  of  governments
consequent  thereon,  it  is  a  very  unjustifiable  course  of
reasoning  to  connect  with  the  theory  all  the  ordinary
doctrines  applicable  to  municipal  contracts  between
individuals,  or  to  public  conventions  between  nations.
We  have  already  seen,  that  the  theory  itself  is  subject
to  many  qualifications  ;  but  whether  true  or  not,  it  is
impossible,  with  a  just  regard  to  the  objects  and  inter-
ests of  society,  or  the  nature  of  compacts  of  government,
to  subject  them  to  the  same  constructions  and  condi-
tions, as  belong  to  positive  obligations,  created  between
independent  parties,  contemplating  a  distinct  and  per-
sonal responsibility.  One  of  the  first  elementary  prin-
ciples of  all  contracts  is,  to  interpret  them  according  to
the  intentions  and  objects  of  the  parties.  They  are  not
to  be  so  construed,  as  to  subvert  the  obvious  objects,  for
which  they  were  made  ;  or  to  lead  to  results  wholly  be-
side the  apparent  intentions  of  those,  who  framed  them.1

l  It  was  the  consideration  of  the  consequences  deducible  from  the
theorv  of  an  original  subsisting  compact  between  the  people,  upon  the


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  301

§  332.  Admitting,  therefore,  for  the  sake  of  argu-
ment, that  the  institution  of  a  government  is  to  be
deemed,  in  the  restricted  sense  already  suggested,  an
original  compact  or  contract  between  each  citizen  and
the  whole  community,  is  it  to  be  construed,  as  a  con-
tinuing contract  after  its  adoption,  so  as  to  involve  the
notion  of  there  being  still  distinct  and  independent  par-
ties to  the  instrument,  capable,  and  entitled,  as  matter
of  right,  to  judge  and  act  upon  its  construction,  accord-
ing to  their  own  views  of  its  import  and  obligations  1  to
resist  the  enforcement  of  the  powers  delegated  to  the
government  at  the  good  pleasure  of  each  1  to  dissolve
all  connexion  with  it,  whenever  there  is  a  supposed
breach  of  it  on  the  other  side?1  These  are  momen-
tous questions,  and  go  to  the  very  foundation  of  every
government  founded  on  the  voluntary  choice  of  the
people ;  and  they  should  be  seriously  investigated,  be-
fore we  admit  the  conclusions,  which  may  be  drawn
from  one  aspect  of  them.2

first  formation  of  civil  societies  and  governments,  that  induced  Doctor
Paley  to  reject  it.  He  supposed,  that,  if  admitted,  its  fundamental  prin-
ciples were  still  disputable  and  uncertain  ;  that,  if  founded  on  compact,
the  form  of  government,  however  absurd  or  inconvenient,  was  still  obli-
gatory ;  and  that  every  violation  of  the  compact  involved  a  right  of  re-
bellion and  a  dissolution  of  the  government.*  Mr.  Wilson  (afterwards
Mr.  Justice  Wilson)  urged  the  same  objection  very  forcibly  in  the  Penn-
sylvania Convention  for  adopting  the  constitution.  3  Elliot's  Debates,
28(5,  287,  288.  Mr,  Hume  considers  the  true  reason  for  obedience  to
government  to  be,  not  a  contract  or  promise  to  obey  ;  but  the  fact,  that
society  could  not  otherwise  subsist  f

1  9  Dane's  Abridg.  ch.  187,  art.  20,  §  13,  p,  589.

2  Mr.  Woodeson  (Elements  of  Jurisp.  p.  22,)  says,  "  However  the  histo-
rical fact  may  be  of  a  social  compact,  government  ought  to  be,  and  is
generally  considered  as  founded  on  consent,  tacit  or  express,  or  a  real,

*  Paley's  Moral  Philosophy,  1?.  6,  cli.  3.  But  see  Burke's  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolu-
tion, ante,  p.  293,  294.

|  1  Hume's  Essays,  Es^ay  L2.


302 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  IT.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

^  333.  Take,  for  instance,  the  constitution  of  Massa-
chusetts, which  in  its  preamble  contains  the  declaration
already  quoted,  that  government  "is  a  social  compact,
by  which  the  whole  people  covenants  with  each  citizen,
and  each  citizen  with  the  whole  government ;"  are  we
to  construe  that  compact,  after  the  adoption  of  the  con-
stitution, as  still  a  contract,  in  which  each  citizen  is  still
a  distinct  party,  entitled  to  his  remedy  for  any  breach
of  its  obligations,  and  authorized  to  separate  himself
from  the  whole  society,  and  to  throw  off  all  allegiance,
whenever  he supposes,  that  any  of  the  fundamental
principles  of  that  compact  are  infringed,  or  misconstru-
ed? Did  the  people  intend,  that  it  should  be  thus  in
the  power  of  any  individual  to  dissolve  the  whole  gov-
ernment at  his  pleasure,  or  to  absolve  himself  from  all
obligations  and  duties  thereto,  at  his  choice,  or  upon  his
own  interpretation  of  the  instrument  1 If  such  a  power
exists,  where  is  the  permanence  or  security  of  the  govern-
ment 1  In  what  manner  are  the  rights  and  property  of  the
citizens  to  be  maintained  or  enforced  ? Where  are  the
duties  of  allegiance  or  obedience  ?  May  one  withdraw  his
consent  to-day,  and  re-assert  it  to-morrow  ? May  one
claim  the  protection  and  assistance  of  the  laws  and  insti-
tutions to-day,  and  to-morrow  repudiate  them  1 May
one  declare  war  against  all  the  others  for  a  supposed


or  quasi  compact.  This  theory  is  a  material  basis  of  political  rights  ;
and  as  a  theoretical  point,  is  not  difficult  to  be  maintained,  &c.  &c.  Not
that  such  consent  is  subsequently  revokable  at  the  will,  even  of  all  the
subjects  of  the  state,  for  that  would  be  making  a  part  of  the  community
equal  in  power  to  the  whole  originally,  and  superior  to  the  rulers  thereof
after  their  establishment."  However  questionable  this  latter  position
may  be,  (and  it  is  open  to  many  objections,*)  it  is  certain,  that  a  right  of
the  minority  to  withdraw  from  the  government,  and  to  overthrow  its  pow-
ers, has  no  foundation  in  any  just  reasoning.

*  Fee  1  Wilson's  Lectures,  417,  413,419,  420.


CH.  III.]  NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  303

infringement  of  the  constitution?  If  he  may,  then  <  ;  ch
one  has  the  same  right  in  relation  to  all  others ;  and
anarchy  and  confusion,  and  not  order  and  good  govern-
ment and  obedience,  are  the  ingredients,  which  are
mainly  at  work  in  all  free  institutions,  founded  upon  the
will,  and  choice,  and  compact  of  the  people.  The  ex-
istence of  the  government,  and  its  peace,  and  its  vital
interests  will,  under  such  circumstances,  be  at  the  mercy
and  even  at  the  caprice  of  a  single  individual.  It  would
not  only  be  vain,  but  unjust  to  punish  him  for  disturb-
ing society,  when  it  is  but  by  a  just  exercise  of  the
original  rights  reserved  to  him  by  the  compact.  The
maxim,  that  in  every  government  the  will  of  the  major-
ity shall,  and  ought  to  govern  the  rest,  would  be  thus
subverted ;  and  society  would,  in  effect,  be  reduced  to
its  original  elements.  The  association  would  be  tempo-
rary and  fugitive,  like  those  voluntary  meetings  among
barbarous  and  savage  communities,  where  each  acts  for
himself,  and  submits  only,  while  it  is  his  pleasure.

§  334.  It  can  readily  be  understood,  in  what  manner
contracts,  entered  into  by  private  persons,  are  to  be
construed,  and  enforced  under  the  regular  operations  of
an  organized  government.  Under  such  circumstances,
if  a  breach  is  insisted  on  by  either  side,  the  proper  re-
dress is  administered  by  the  sovereign  power,  through
the  medium  of  its  delegated  functionaries,  and  usually
by  the  judicial  department,  according  to  the  principles
established  by  the  laws,  which  compose  the  jurispru-
dence of  that  country.  In  such  a  case  no  person  sup-
poses, that  each  party  is  at  liberty  to  insist  absolutely
and  positively  upon  his  own  construction,  and  to  redress
himself  accordingly  by  force  or  by  fraud.  He  is  com-
pellable to  submit  the  decision  to  others,  not  chosen  by
himself,  but  appointed  by  the  government,  to  secure


304  ] CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

the  rights,  and  redress  the  wrongs  of  the  whole  com-
munity. In  such  cases  the  doctrine  prevails,  inter  leges
silent  arma.  But  the  reverse  maxim  would  prevail  upon
the  doctrine,  of  which  we  are  speaking,  inter  arma  si-
lent leges.  It  is  plain,  that  such  a  resort  is  not  contem-
plated by  any  of  our  forms  of  government,  by  a  suit  of
one  citizen  against  the  whole  lor  a  redress  of  his  griev-
ances, or  for  a  specific  performance  of  the  obligations  of
the  constitution.  He  may  have,  and  doubtless  in  our
forms  of  administering  justice  has,  a  complete  protec-
tion of  his  rights  secured  by  the  constitution,  when  they
are  invaded  by  any  other  citizen.  But  that  is  in  a  suit
by  one  citizen  against  another ;  and  not  against  the  body
politic,  upon  the  notion  of  contract.

^  335.  It  is  easy,  also,  to  understand,  how  compacts
between  independent  nations  are  to  be  construed,  and
violations  of  them  redressed.  Nations,  in  their  sove-
reign character,  are  all  upon  an  equality ;  and  do  not
acknowledge  any  superior,  by  whose  decrees  they  are
bound,  or  to  whose  opinions  they  are  obedient.
Whenever,  therefore,  any  differences  arise  between
them,  as  to  the  interpretation  of  a  treaty,  or  of  the
breach  of  its  terms,  there  is  no  common  arbiter,  whom
they  are  bound  to  acknowledge,  having  authority  to
decide  them.  There  are  but  three  modes,  in  which
these  differences  can  be  adjusted ;  first,  by  new  nego-
tiations, embracing  and  settling  the  matters  in  dispute  ;
secondly,  by  referring  the  same  to  some  common  arbi-
tor,  pro  hac  vice,  whom  they  invest  with  such  power ;
or  thirdly,  by  a  resort  to  arms,  which  is  the  ultima
ratio  regum,  or  the  last  appeal  between  sovereigns.

^  336.  It  seems  equally  plain,  that  in  our  forms  of
government,  the  constitution  cannot  contemplate  either
of  these modes  of  interpretation  or  redress. Each


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  305

citizen  is  not  supposed  to  enter  into  the  compact,  as  a
sovereign  with  all  the  others  as  sovereign,  retaining  an
independent  and  coequal  authority  to  judge,  and  de-
cide for  himself.  He  has  no  authority  reserved  to
institute  new  negotiations  ;  or  to  suspend  the  operations
of  the  constitution,  or  to  compel  the  reference  to  a
common  arbiter ;  or  to  declare  war  against  the  com-
munity, to  which  he  belongs.

^  337.  No  such  claim  has  ever  (at  least  to  our
knowledge)  been  asserted  by  any  jurist  or  statesman,
in  respect  to  any  of  our  state  constitutions.  The
understanding  is  general,  if  not  universal,  that,  having
been  adopted  by  the  majority  of  the  people,  the  con-
stitution of  the  state  binds  the  whole  community  pro-
prio  vigore ;  and  is  unalterable,  unless  by  the  consent
of  the  majority  of  the  people,  or  at  least  of  the  qualified
voters  of  the  state,  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the
constitution,  or  otherwise  provided  for  by  the  majority.
No  right  exists,  or  is  supposed  to  exist,  on  the  part  of
any  town,  or  county,  or  other  organized  body  within
the  state,  short  of  a  majority  of  the  whole  people  of  the
state,  to  alter,  suspend,  resist,  or  dissolve  the  opera-
tions of  that  constitution,  or  to  withdraw  themselves
from  its  jurisdiction.  Much  less  is  the  compact  sup-
posed liable  to  interruption,  or  suspension,  or  dissolu-
tion, at  the  will  of  any  private  citizen  upon  his  own
notion  of  its  obligations,  or  of  any  infringements  of
them  by  the  constituted  authorities.1  The  only  re-
dress for  any  such  infringements,  and  the  only  guar-
anty of  individual  rights  and  property,  are  understood
to  consist  in  the  peaceable  appeal  to  the  proper  tri-
bunals constituted  by  the  government  for  such  pur-


i  Dane's  App.  §  14,  p.  25,  26.

vol.  i.  39


306  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

poses  ;  or  if  these  should  fail,  by  the  ultimate  appeal  to
the  good  sense,  and  integrity,  and  justice  of  the  major-
ity of  the  people.  And  this,  according  to  Mr.  Locke,
is  the  true  sense  of  the  original  compact,  by  which
every  individual  has  surrendered  to  the  majority  of  the
society  the  right  permanently  to  control,  and  direct  the
operations  of  government  therein.1

^  338.  The  true  view  to  be  taken  of  our  state  con-
stitutions is,  that  they  are  forms  of  government,  or-
dained and  established  by  the  people  in  their  original
sovereign  capacity  to  promote  their  own happiness,
and  permanently  to  secure  their  rights,  property,  inde-
pendence, and  common  welfare. The language  of
nearly  all  these  state  constitutions  is,  that  the  people
do  ordain  and  establish  this  constitution  ; and  where
these  terms  are  not  expressly  used,  they  are  necessa-
rily implied  in  the  very  substance  of  the  frame  of  gov-
ernment.2 They  may  be  deemed  compacts,  (though
not  generally  declared  so  on  their  face,)  in  the  sense  of
their  being  founded  on  the  voluntary  consent  or  agree-
ment of  a  majority  of  the  qualified  voters  of  the  state.
But  they  are  not  treated  as  contracts  and  conventions
between independent individuals and communities,
having  no  common  umpire.3 The  language  of  these
instruments  is  not  the  usual  or  appropriate  language
for  mere  matters  resting,  and  forever  to  rest  in  con-


i  Locke  on  Government,  B.  2,  ch.  8,  §  95  to  100 ;  ch.  19,  §  212,  220,
226,240,243;  1  Wilson's  Law  Lectures,  310,  384,  417,  418.  — Mr.
Dane  (App.  p.  32)  says,  that  if  there  be  any  compact,  it  is  a  compact  to
make  a  constitution ;  and  that  done,  the  agreement  is  at  an  end.  It
then  becomes  an  executed  contract,  and,  according  to  the  intent  of  the
parties,  a  fundamental  law.

2  Dane's  App.  VS  1<;,  17,  p.  29,  30  ;  Id.  §  14,  p.  2S,  26.

3  Heinecc.  Elem.  Juris.  Natur.  L.  2,  ch.  6,  §  109  to  115.  (2  Turnbull,
Hein.p.  95,  &c.)


CH.  III.]  NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTI'l  I I  [OK.  307

tract  In  general  the  import  is,  thai  the  people  "  ordain
and  establish,"  thai  is,  in  (heir  sovereign  capacity,
meel  and  declare,  whal  shall  he  the  fundamental  Law
for  the  government  of  themselves  and  their  posterity.
Even  in  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts,  which,
more  than  any  other,  wears  the  air  of  contract,  the
compact  is  declared  to  be  a  "mere  constitution  of  civil
government,"  and  the  people  "do  agree  on,  ordain,
and  establish  the  following  declaration  of  rights,  and
frame  of  government,  as  the  constitution  of  govern-
ment." In  this  very  bill  of  rights,  the  people  are  de-
clared "  to  have  the  sole  and  exclusive  right  of  govern-
ing themselves,  as  a  free,  sovereign,  and  independent
state  "  ;  and  that  "  they  have  an  incontestible,  unalien-
able, and  indefeasible  right  to  institute  government,
and  to  reform,  alter,  or  totally  change  the  same,
when  their  protection,  safety,  prosperity,  and  happi-
ness require  it."  It  is,  and  accordingly  has  always  been,
treated  as  a  fundamental  law,  and  not  as  a  mere  con-
tract of  government,  during  the  good  pleasure  of  all  the
persons,  who  were  originally  bound  by  it,  or  assented
to  it.1

^  339.  A  constitution  is  in  fact  a  fundamental  law  or
basis  of  government,  and  falls  strictly  within  the  defini-
tion of  law,  as  given  by  Mr.  Justice  Blackstone. It  is  a

i  Mr.  Justice  Chase,  in  Ware  v.  IhjUon,  3  Dall.  R.  1!>0,  1  Condensed
R.!>!>,  1 12,  declares  the  constitution  of  a  state  to  be  the  fundamental
law  of  the  state.  —  Mr.  Dane  lias  with  great  force  said,  that  a  constitu-
tion is  a  thing  constituted,  an  instrument  ordained  and  established.  If
a  committee  frame  a  constitution  for  a  state,  and  the  people  thereof
meet  in  their  several  counties,  and  ratify  it,  it  is  a  constitution  ordained
and  established,  and  not  a  compact,  or  contract  among  the  counties.  So,
if  they  meet  in  several  towns  and  ratify  it,  it  is  not  a  compact  among
them.  A  compact  among  states  is  a  confederation,  and  is  always  so
named,  (as  was  the  old  confederation,)  and  never  a  constitution.
9  Dane's  Abridgment,  ch.  187,  art.  20,  §  15,  p.  590.


308 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

rule  of  action,  prescribed  by  the  supreme  power  in  a  state,
regulating  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  whole  commu-
nity. It  is  a  rule,  as  contradistinguished  from  a  tem-
porary or  sudden  order ;  permanent,  uniform,  and  uni-
versal. It  is  also  called  a  rule,  to  distinguish  it  from  a
compact,  or  agreement ;  for  a  compact  (he  adds)  is  a
promise  proceeding  from  us  ;  law  is  a  command  directed
to  us.  The  language  of  a  compact  is,  I  will,  or  will
not  do  this  ;  that  of  a  law  is,  Thou  shalt,  or  shalt  not
do  it.1  "  In  compacts  we  ourselves  determine  and
promise,  what  shall  be  done,  before  we  are  obliged  to
do  it.  In  laws,  we  are  obliged  to  act  without  our-
selves determining,  or  promising  any  thing  at  all." 2  It
is  a  rule  prescribed ;  that  is,  it  is  laid  down,  promul-
gated, and  established.  It  is  prescribed  by  the
supreme  power  in  a  state,  that  is,  among  us,  by  the
people,  or  a  majority  of  them  in  their  original  sove-
reign capacity.  Like  the  ordinary  municipal  laws,  it
may  be  founded  upon  our  consent,  or  that  of  our  rep-
resentatives ;  but  it  derives  its  ultimate  obligatory
force,  as  a  law,  and  not  as  a  compact.

^  340.  And  it  is  in  this  light,  that  the  language  of
the  constitution  of  the  United  States  manifestly  con-
templates it ;  for  it  declares  (article  6th),  that  this  con-
stitution and  the  laws,  &x.  and  treaties  made  under  the
authority  of  the  United  States,  "shall  be  the  supreme
law  of  the  land."  This  (as  has  been  justly  observed
by  the  Federalist)  results  from  the  very  nature  of  polit-
ical institutions.  A  law,  by  the  very  meaning  of  the
terms,  includes  supremacy.3 If  individuals enter  into

i  1  Black.  Comm.  38,  44,  45.  See  also  Burlamaqui,  Part  1,  ch.  8,  p.  48,
§  3,  4,  5.

2  1  Black.  Comm.  45.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  33. See  also,  No.  15.


BOOK  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  309

a  state  of  society,  the  laws  of  that  society  must  be  the
supreme  regulator  of  their  conduct.  If  a  number  of
political  societies  enter  into  a  larger  political  society;
the  laws,  which  the  latter  may  enact,  pursuant  to  the
powers  entrusted  to  it  by  its  constitution,  must  be
supreme  over  those  societies,  and  the  individuals,  of
whom  they  are  composed.  It  would  otherwise  be  a
mere  treaty,  dependent  on  the  good  faith  of  the  par-
ties, and  not  a  government,  which  is  only  another  word
for  political  power  and  supremacy.1  A  state  constitu-
tion is  then  in  a  just  and  appropriate  sense,  not  only  a
law,  but  a  supreme  law,  for  the  government  of  the
whole  people,  within  the  range  of  the  powers  actually
contemplated,  and  the  rights  secured  by  it.  It  would,
indeed,  be  an  extraordinary  use  of  language  to  con-
sider a  declaration  of  rights  in  a  constitution,  and  espe-
cially of  rights,  which  it  proclaims  to  be  "unalienable
and  indefeasible,"  to  be  a  matter  of  contract,  and  rest-
ing on  such  a  basis,  rather  than  a  solemn  recognition
and  admission  of  those  rights,  arising  from  the  law  of
nature,  and  the  gift  of  Providence,  and  incapable  of
beins;  transferred  or  surrendered.2


i  The  Federalist,  No.  33.

2  Mr.  Adams,  in  his  Oration  on  the  4th  of  July,  1831,  uses  the  follow-
ing language  :  "  In  the  constitution  of  this  commonwealth  [Massachu-
setts] it  is  declared,  that  the  body  politic  is  formed  by  a  voluntary  associ-
ation of  individuals.  That  it  is  a  social  compact,  &c.  The  body  politic
of  the  United  States  was  formed  by  a  voluntary  association  of  the  peo-
ple of  the  United  Colonies.  The  Declaration  of  Independence  was  a
social  compact,  by  which  the  whole  people  covenanted  with  each  citizen
of  the  united  colonies,  and  each  citizen  with  the  whole  people,  that
the  united  colonies  were,  and  of  right  ought  to  be,  free  and  indepen-
dent states.  To  this  compact,  union  was  as  vital,  as  freedom  and  inde-
pendence. From  the  hour  of  that  independence,  no  one  of  the  states,
whose  people  were  parties  to  it,  could,  without  a  violation  of  that  prim-
itive compact,  secede,  or  separate  from  the  rest.  Each  was  pledged  to
all ;  and  all  were  pledged  to  each  other  by  a  concert  of  soul,  without


310  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

^341.  The  resolution  of  the  convention  of  the  peers
and  commons  in  1688,  which  deprived  King  James  the
Second  of  the  throne  of  England,  may  perhaps  be
thought  by  some  persons  to  justify  the  doctrine  of  an
original  compact  of  government  in  the  sense  of  those,
who  deem  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  a  trea-
ty or  league  between  the  states,  and  resting  merely  in
contract.  It  is  in  the  following  words :  "  Resolved,
that  King  James  the  Second,  having  endeavoured  to
subvert  the  constitution  of  the  kingdom  by  breaking  the
original  contract  between  king  and  people  ;  and  by  the
advice  of  Jesuits  and  other  wicked  persons  having  vio-
lated the  fundamental  laws,  and  withdrawn  himself  out
of  the  kingdom,  hath  abdicated  the  government,  and
that  the  throne  is  thereby  become  vacant."  l

§  342.  It  is  well  known,  that,  there  was  a  most  seri-
ous difference  of  opinion  between  the  house  of  peers
and  the  house  of  commons  upon  the  language  of  this  res-
olution, and  especially  upon  that  part,  which  declared  the
abdication  and  vacancy  of  the  throne.  In  consequence
of  which  a  free  conference  was  held  by  committees  of

limitation  of  time,  in  the  presence  of  Almighty  God,  and  proclaimed  to
all  mankind.  The  colonies  were  not  declared  to  he  sovereign  states.
The  term  '  sovereign '  is  not  even  to  be  found  in  the  Declaration."
Again  —  "Our  Declaration  of  Independence,  our  confederation,  our
constitution  of  the  United  States,  and  all  our  state  constitutions,  with-
out a  single  exception,  have  been  voluntary  compacts,  deriving  all  their
authority  from  the  free  consent  of  the  parties  to  them."  And  he  pro-
ceeds to  state,  that  the  modern  doctrine  of  nullification  of  the  laws  of
the  Union,  by  a  single  state,  is  a  solecism  of  language,  and  imports  self-
contradiction  ;  and  goes  to  the  destruction  of  the  government,  and  the
Union.  It  is  plain,  from  the  whole  reasoning  of  Mr.  Adams,  that  when
he  speaks  of  the  constitution  as  a  compact,  he  means  no  more,  than  that
it  is  a  voluntary  and  solemn  consent  of  the  people  to  adopt  it,  as  a  form
of  government ;  and  not  a  treaty  obligation  to  be  abrogated  at  will  by  a
single  state.

i  1  Black.  Comm.  211,  222.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION".  311

both  houses,  in  which  the  most  animated  debates  took
place  between  some  of  the  mosl  distinguished  men  in
the  kingdom.  But  the  commons  adhering  to  theirvote,
the  lords  finally  acceded  to  it.  'The  whole  debate  is
preserved  ;  and  the  reasoning  on  each  side  is  given  at
large.1  In  the  course  of  the  debate  aotice  was  frequent-
ly taken  of  the  expression  of  breaking  the  original  con-
tract between  king  and  people.  The  Bishop  of  Ely
said,  "I  may  say,  that  this  breaking  the  original  con-
tract is  a  language,  that  hath  not  been  long  used  in  this
place,  nor  known  in  any  of  our  law  books  or  public
records.  It  is  sprung  up,  but  as  taken  from  some  late
authors,  and  those  none  of  the  best  received  ;  and  the
very  phrase  might  bear  a  great  debate,  if  that  were  now
to  be  spoken  to."  —  "  The  making  of  new  laws  being
as  much  a  part  of  the  original  compact,  as  the  observing
old  ones,  or  any  thing  else,  we  are  obliged  to  pursue
those  laws,  till  altered  by  the  legislative  power,  which,
singly  or  jointly,  without  the  royal  assent,  I  suppose  we
do  not  pretend  to."  —  "  We  must  think  sure  that  meant
of  the  compact,  that  was  made  at  first  time,  when  the
government  was  first  instituted,  and  the  conditions,  that
each  part  of  the  government  should  observe  on  their
part ;  of  which  this  was  most  fundamental,  that  king,
lords,  and  commons  in  parliament  assembled  shall  have
the  power  of  making  new  laws  and  altering  of  old
ones."  2  Sir  George  Treby  said,  "  We  arc  gone  too  far,
when  we  offer  to  inquire  into  the  original  contract,
whether  any  such  thing  is  known,  or  understood  in  our
law  or  constitution,  and  whether  it  be  new  language
among  us." First,  it  is  a  phrase  used  by  the  learned


1  Parliamentary  Debates,  1688,  edit.  1742,  p.  203  et  seq.

2  Id.  p.  217, 218.


312 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

Mr.  Hooker  in  his  book  of  Ecclesiastical  Polity,  whom  I
mention  as  a  valuable  authority,  &,c.  "But  I  have  yet  a
greater  authority  than  this  to  influence  this  matter,  and
that  is  your  lordship's  own,  who  have  agreed  to  all  the
vote,  but  this  word,  abdicated,  and  the  vacancy  of  the
throne."  He  then  supposes  the  king  to  say,  "  The  title
of  kingship  I  hold  by  original  contract,  and  the  funda-
mental constitutions  of  the  government,  and  my  suc-
cession to,  and  possession  of  the  crown  on  these  terms
is  a  part  of  that  contract.  This  part  of  the  contract  I
am  weary  of,"  &X.1  The  Earl  of  Nottingham  said,
"  I  know  no  laws,  as  laws,  but  what  are  fundamental
constitutions,  as  the  laws  are  necessary  so  far  to  sup-
port the  foundation." 2  Sir  Thomas  Lee  said,  "  The
contract  was  to  settle  the  constitution,  as  to  the  legis-
lature ;  and  it  is  true,  that  it  is  a  part  of  the  contract,
the  making  of  laws,  and  that  those  laws  should  oblige
all  sides  when  made.  But  yet  not  so  as  to  exclude
this  original  constitution  in  all  governments,  that  com-
mence by  compact,  that  there  should  be  a  power  in
the  states  to  make  provision  in  all  times,  and  upon  all
occasions  for  extraordinary  cases  of  necessity,  such  as
ours  now  is."3  Sir  George  Treby  again  said,  "The
laws  made  are  certainly  part  of  the  original  contract,
and  by  the  laws  made,  &c.  we  are  tied  up  to  keep  in
the  hereditary  line,"  &c.4  Mr.  Sergeant  Holt  (after-
wards Lord  Chief  Justice)  said,  "  The  government  and
magistracy  are  all  under  a  trust,  and  any  acting
contrary  to  that  trust  is  a  renouncing  of  the  trust,  though
it  be  not  a  renouncing  by  formal  deed.  For  it  is  a
plain  declaration  by  act  and  deed,  though  not  in  writing,


i  Parliamentary  Debates,  1688,  edit.  1742,  p.  221,  223,  224.
a  Id.  p.  225, 226.  3  Id.  246.  4  Id.  249.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  313

thai  he,  who  hath  the  trust,  acting  contrary,  is  a  dis-
claimer of  the  trust."1  Mr.  Sergeaht  Maynard  said,
"The  constitution,  notwithstanding  the  vacancy,  is  the
same.  The  laws,  thai  are  the  foundations  and  rules  of
that  constitution,  are  the  same.  Bui  it'  there  be  in  any
instance  a  breach  of  that  constitution,  that  will  be  an
abdication,  and  that  abdication  will  confer  a  vacancy."2
Lord  Nottingham  said,  ''Acting  againsl  a  man's  trust
(says  Mr.  Sergeant  Holt)  is  a  renunciation  of  that  trust.
J  agree,  it  is  a  violation  of  his  trust  to  act  contrary  to  it.
And  he  is  accountable  for  that  violation  to  answer,  what
the  trust  suffers  out  of  his  own  estate.  But  I  deny  it
to  be  presently  a  renunciation  of  the  trust,  and  that
such  a  one  is  no  longer  a  trustee." 3

§  343.  Now  it  is  apparent  from  the  whole  reasoning  of
all  the  parties,  that  they  were  not  considering,  how  far
the  original  institution  of  government  was  founded  in
compact,  that  is,  how  far  society  itself  was  founded
upon  a  social  compact.  It  was  not  a  question  brought  into
discussion,  whether  each  of  the  people  contracted  with
the  whole  people,  or  each  department  of  the  govern-
ment with  all  others,  or  each  organized  community
within  the  realm  with  all  others,  that  there  should  be  a
frame  of  government,  which  should  form  a  treaty  be-
tween them,  of  which  each  was  to  judge  for  himself,  and
from  which  each  was  at  liberty  to  withdraw  at  his  pleas-
ure, whenever  he  or  they  supposed  it  broken.  All  of
the  speakers  on  all  sides  were  agreed,  that  the  consti-
tution was  not  gone  ;  that  it  remained  in  full  force,  and
obligatory  upon  the  whole  people,  including  the  laws
made  under  it,  notwithstanding  the  violations  by  the


i  Parliamentary  Debates,  1688,  edit.  1742,  p.  213.

2  Id.  p.  213,  214.  3  Id.  220.

vol.  i.  40


314 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U. STATES. [BOOK  III.

^  344.  The  real  point  before  them  was  upon  a  con-
tract of  a  very  different  sort,  a  contract,  by  which  the
king  upon  taking  upon  himself  the  royal  office  under-
took, and  bound  himself  to  the  whole  people  to  govern
them  according  to  the  laws  and  constitution  of  the  gov-
ernment. It  was,  then,  deemed  a  contract  on  his  part
singly  with  the  whole  people,  they  constituting  an  ag-
gregate body  on  the  other  part. It  was  a  contract  or
pledge  by  the  executive,  called  upon  to  assume  an  hered-
itary, kingly  authority,  to  govern  according  to  the  rules
prescribed  by  the  form  of  government,  already  institut-
ed by  the  people. The  constitution  of  government
and  its  limitations  of  authority  were  supposed  to  be
fixed  (no  matter  whether  in fiction  only,  or  in  fact)
antecedently  to  his  being  chosen  to  the  kingly  office.
We  can  readily  understand,  how  such  a  contract  may
be  formed,  and  continue  even  to  exist. It  was  actually
made  with  William  the  Third,  a  few  days  afterwards  ;
it  has  been  recently  made  in  France  by  King  Louis
Philippe,  upon  the  expulsion  of the  old  line  of  the
Bourbons. But  in  both  these  cases  the  constitution  of
government  was supposed to exist independent  of,
and  antecedent  to,  this  contract. There  was  a  mere
call  of  a  particular  party  to  the  throne,  already  estab-
lished in  the  government,  upon  certain  fundamental  con-
ditions, which,  if  violated  by  the  incumbent,  he  broke
his  contract,  and  forfeited  his  right  to  the  crown. But
the  constitution  of  government  remained,  and  the  only
point  left  was  to  supply  the  vacancy  by  a  new  choice.1
^  345.  Even  in  this  case  a  part  of  the  people  did  not
undertake  to  declare  the  compact  violated,  or  the  throne
vacant. The  declaration  was  made  by  the  peers  in


i  1  Black.  Comm.  212,213.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF THE CONSTITUTION.  315

their  own  right,  and  by  the  commons  by  their  repre-
sentatives, both  being  assembled  in  convention  express^
ly  to  meet  the  exigency.  "For,"  says  Blackston,e,
"whenever  a  question  arises  between  the  society  at
large,  vud  any  magistrate  vested  with  powers  originally
delegated  by  that  society,  it  must  be  decided  by  the
voice  of  that  society  itself.  There  is  not  upon  earth
any  other  tribunal  to  resort  to."1

§  346.  This  was  precisely  the  view  entertained  by
the  great  revolutionary  whigs  in  1688.  They  did  not
declare  the  government  dissolved,  because  the  king  had
violated  the  fundamental  laws  and  obligations  of  the
constitution.  But  they  declared,  that  those  acts
amounted  to  a  renunciation  and  abdication  of  the  gov-
ernment by  him  ;  and  that  the  throne  was  vacant,  and
must  be  supplied  by  a  new  choice.  The  original  con-
tract with  him  was  gone.  He  had  repudiated  it ;  and
lost  all  rights  under  it.  But  these  violations  did  not
dissolve  the  social  organization,  or  vary  the  existing  con-
stitution and  laws,  or  justify  any  of  the  subjects  in
renouncing  their  own  allegiance  to  the  government ;  but
only  to  King  James." 2  In  short,  the  government  was
no  more  dissolved,  than  our  own  would  be,  if  the  presi-
dent of  the  United  States  should  violate  his  constitu-
tional duties,  and,  upon  an  impeachment  and  trial,
should  be  removed  from  office.

§  347.  There  is  no  analogy  whatsoever  between  that
case,  and  the  government  of  the  United  States,  or  the
social  compact,  or  original  constitution  of  government

i  1  Black.  Coram.  211.

2  1  Black.  Coram.  212,213.  —  The  same  doctrines  were  avowed  by

the  great  whig  leaders  of  the  house  of  commons  on  the  trial  of  Doctor
Sacheverill,  in  1?0!>.  Mr.  Burke,  in  his  Appeal  from  the  New  to  the
Old  Whigs,  has  given  a  summary  of  the  reasoning,  and  supported  it  by
copious  extracts  from  the  trial.


316 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

adopted  by  a  people.  If  there  were  any  analogy,  it  would
follow,  that  every  violation  of  the  constituti  >n  of  the
United  States  by  any  department  of  the  government
would  amount  to  a  renunciation  by  the  incumbent  or
incumbents  of  all  rights  and  powers  conferred  on  that
department  by  the  constitution,  ipso  facto,  leaving  a
vacancy  to  be  filled  up  by  a  new  choice  ;  a  doctrine,  that
has  never  yet  been  broached,  and  indeed  is  utterly
unmaintainable,  unless  that  violation  is  ascertained  in
some  mode  known  to  the  constitution,  and  a  removal
takes  place  accordingly.  For  otherwise  such  a  violation
by  any  functionary  of  the  government  would  amount  to  a
renunciation  of  the  constitution  by  all  the  people  of  the
United  States,  and  thus  produce  a  dissolution  of  the
government  eo  instanti;  a  doctrine  so  extravagant,  and  so
subversive  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  people,  and
so  utterly  at  war  with  all  principles  of  common  sense
and  common  justice,  that  it  could  never  find  its  way
into  public  favour  by  any  ingenuity  of  reasoning,  or  any
vagaries  of  theory.

§  348.  In  short,  it  never  entered  into  the  heads  of
the  great  men,  who  accomplished  the  glorious  revolu-
tion of  1688,  that  a  constitution  of  government,  howev-
er originating,  whether  in  positive  compact,  or  in  silent
assent  and  acquiescence,  after  it  was  adopted  by  the
people,  remained  a  mere  contract  or  treaty,  open  to
question  by  all,  and  to  be  annihilated  at  the  will  of  any  of
them  for  any  supposed  or  real  violations  of  its  provisions.
They  supposed,  that  from  the  moment  it  became  a  con-
stitution, it  ceased  to  be  a  compact,  and  became  a  fun-
damental law  of  absolute  paramount  obligation,  until
changed  by  the  whole  people  in  the  manner  prescribed
by  its  own  rules,  or  by  the  implied  resulting  power,
belonging  to  the  people  in  all  cases  of  necessity  to  pro-


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE CONSTITUTION.  317

vide  for  their  own  safety.  Their  reasoning  was  ad-
dressed, not  to  the  constitution,  but  to  the  functionaries,
who  were  called  to  administer  it. They  deemed,  thai

the  constitution  was  immortal,  and  could  not  be  for-
feited ;  for  it  was  prescribed  by  and  for  the  benefit  of
the  people.  But  they  deemed,  and  wisely  deemed,
that  magistracy  is  a  trust,  a  solemn  public  trust ;  and  he,
who  violates  his  duties,  forfeits  his  own  right  to  office,
but  cannot  forfeit  the  rights  of  the  people.

^  349.  The  subject  has  been,  thus  far,  considered
chiefly  in  reference  to  the  point,  how  far  government
is  to  be  considered  as  a  compact,  in  the  sense  of  a  con-
tract, as  contradistinguished  from  an  act  of  solemn
acknowledgment  or  assent ;  and  howr  far  our  state  con-
stitutions are  to  be  deemed  such  contracts,  rather  than
fundamental  laws,  prescribed  by  the  sovereign  power.
The  conclusion,  to  which  we  have  arrived,  is,  that  a  state
constitution  is  no  farther  to  be  deemed  a  compact,  than
that  it  is  a  matter  of  consent  by  the  people,  binding
them  to  obedience  to  its  requisitions ;  and  that  its  pro-
per character  is  that  of  a  fundamental  law,  prescribed
by  the  will  of  the  majority  of  the  people  of  the  state,
(who  are  entitled  to  prescribe  it,)  for  the  government
and  regulation  of,  the  whole  people.1  It  binds  them,  as
a  supreme  tfatttpset; ordained  by  the  sovereign  power,


l  It  is  in  this  sense,  that  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Jay  is  to  be  understood  in
his  opinion  in  Chisholm  v.  Georgia,  (2  Dall.  R.  II!':  S.C.  Peters's  Cond.
R.  635,  668,)  when  he  says,  "every  state  constitution  is  a  compact,
made  by  and  between  the  citizens  of  the  state  to  govern  themselves  in  a
certain  manner  ;  and  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  is  likewise  a
compact,  made  by  the  people  of  the  United  States  to  govern  themselves,
as  to  general  objects,  in  a  certain  manner."  The  context  abundantly
shows,  that  he  considered  it  a  fundamental  law  of  government  ;  and  that
its  powers  did  not  rest  on  mere  treaty  ;  hut  were  supreme,  and  were  to
be  construed  by  the  judicial  department ;  and  that  the  states  were  bound
to  obey.


318 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

and  not  merely  as  a  voluntary  contract,  entered  into  by
parties  capable  of  contracting,  and  binding  themselves
by  such  terms,  as  they  choose  to  select.1  If  this  be  a
correct  view  of  the  subject,  it  will  enable  us  to  enter
upon  the  other  parts  of  the  proposed  discussion  with
principles  to  guide  us  in  the  illustration  of  the  contro-
versy.

§  350.  In  what  light,  then,  is  the  constitution  of  the
United  States  to  be  regarded?  Is  it  a  mere  compact,
treaty,  or  confederation  of  the  states  composing  the
Union,  or  of  the  people  thereof,  whereby  each  of  the
several  states,  and  the  people  thereof,  have  respectively
bound  themselves  to  each  other?  Or  is  it  a  form  of
government,  which,  having  been  ratified  by  a  majority
of  the  people  in  all  the  states,  is  obligatory  upon  them,
as  the  prescribed  rule  of  conduct  of  the  sovereign
power,  to  the  extent  of  its  provisions  1

^  351.  Let  us  consider,  in  the  first  place,  whether  it
is  to  be  deemed  a  compact  ?  By  this,  we  do  not  mean
an  act  of  solemn  assent  by  the  people  to  it,  as  a  form  of
government,  (of  which  there  is  no  room  for  doubt ;)  but
a  contract  imposing  mutual  obligations,  and  contem-
plating the  permanent  subsistence  of  parties  having  an
independent  right  to  construe,  control,  and  judge  of  its
obligations.  If  in  this  latter  sense  it  is  to  be  deemed  a
compact,  it  must  be,  either  because  it  contains  on  its
face  stipulations  to  that  effect,  or  because  it  is  necessa-
rily implied  from  the  nature  and  objects  of  a  frame  of
government.

^  352.  There  is  nowhere  found  upon  the  face  of  the
constitution  any  clause,  intimating  it  to  be  a  compact,  or
in  anywise  providing for  its  interpretation,  as such.

l  Heinecc.  Elem.  Juris.  Natur.  L.  2,  ch.  6,  §  109  to  112;  2  Turn-
bull's  Heinecc.  p.  95,  &c.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  319

On  the  contrary,  the  preamble  emphatically  speaks  of
it,  as  a  solemn  ordinance  and  establishmenl  of  govern-
ment. The  language  is,  "  We,  the  people  of.the  Unit-
oil  Slates,  do  ordain  and  establish  this  constitution  for
the  United  States  of  America."  The  people  do  ordain
and  establish,  not  contrac!  and  stipulate  with  each  other.1
The  people  of  the  United  States,  not  the  distinct  people
of  &  particular  state  with  the  people  of  the  other  states.
The  people  ordain  and  establish  a  "constitution"  not  a
"confederation"  The  distinction  between  a  constitu-
tion and  a  confederation  is  well  known  and  understood.
The  latter,  or  at  least  a  pure  confederation,  is  a  mere
treaty  or  league  between  independent  states,  and  binds
no  longer,  than  during  the  good  pleasure  of  each.2  It
rests  forever  in  articles  of  compact,  where  each  is,  or
may  be  the  supreme  judge  of  its  own  rights  and  duties.
The  former  is  a  permanent  form  of  government,  where
the  powers,  once  given,  are  irrevocable,  and  cannot  be
resumed  or  withdrawn  at  pleasure.  Whether  formed
by  a  single  people,  or  by  different  societies  of  people,

1  The  AvorJs  "  ordain  and  establish  "  are  also  found  in  the  3d  article
of  the  constitution.  "  The  judicial  power  shall  be  vested  in  one  supreme
court,  and  in  such  inferior  courts,  as  the  congress  may  from  time  to  time
ordain  and  establish.''''  How  is  this  to  be  done  by  congress  ?  Plainly  by
a  law;  and  when  ordained  ami  established,  is  such  a  law  a  contract  or
compact  between  the  legislature  and  the  people,  or  the  court,  or  the  dif-
ferent departments  of  the  government?  No.  It  is  neither  more  nor
less  than  a  law,  made  by  competent  authority,  upon  an  assent  or  agreement
of  minds.  \n  Martin  v.  Hunter,  (I  Wheat.  El.  304,  324,  the  Supreme
Court  said,  "The  constitution  of  the  United  States  was  ordained  and  es-
tablished, not  by  the  states  in  their  sovereign  capacities,  but  emphatically,
as  the  preamble  of  the  constitution  declares,  '  by  the  people  of  the  Tint-
ed States.'"  To  the  same  effect  is  the  reasoning  of  Mr.  Chief  Justice
Marshall,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court  in  JFCulloch  v.  Maryland,
(4  Wheaton,  316,  402  to  405,  already  cited.)

2  The  Federalist,  No.  0,  15,  17,  18,  33;  Webster's  Speeches,  1830;
Dane's  App.  §  2,  p.  11,  §  14,  p.  25,  &c. ;  Id.  §  10,  p.  21  ;  Mr.  xMartin's
Letter,  3  Elliot,  53;  1  Tuckers  Black.  Comm.  App.  146.


V


320  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

in  their  political  capacity,  a  constitution,  though  origin-
ating in  consent,  becomes,  when  ratified,  obligatory,  as
a  fundamental  ordinance  or  law.1  The  constitution  of
a  confederated  republic,  that  is,  of  a  national  republic
formed  of  several  states,  is,  or  at  least  may  be,  not  less
an  irrevokable  form  of  government,  than  the  constitu-
tion of  a  state  formed  and  ratified  by  the  aggregate  of
the  several  counties  of  the  state.2

§  353.  If  it  had  been  the  design  of  the  framers  of  the
constitution  or  of  the  people,  who  ratified  it,  to  consider
it  a  mere  confederation,  resting  on  treaty  stipulations,  it
is  difficult  to  conceive,  that  the  appropriate  terms  should
not  have  been  found  in  it.  The  United  States  were
no  strangers  to  compacts  of  this  nature.3  They  had
subsisted  to  a  limited  extent  before  the  revolution.  The
articles  of  confederation,  though  in  some  few  respects
national,  were  mainly  of  a  pure  federative  character,
and  were  treated  as  stipulations  between  states  for
many  purposes  independent  and  sovereign.4  And  yet
(as  has  been  already  seen)  it  was  deemed  a  political
heresy  to  maintain,  that  under  it  any  state  had  a  right

1  1  Wilson's  Lectures,  417.

2  See  The  Federalist,  No.  9 ;  Id.  No.  15,  16 ;  Id.  No.  33;  Id.  No.  39.

3  New-fingland  Confederacy  of  1G43;  3  Kent.  Coram.  190,  191,  192;
Rawle  on  Const.  Introduct.  p.  24,  25.  —  In  the  ordinance  of  1787,  for  the
o-overnment  of  the  territory  northwest  of  the  Ohio,  certain  articles  were
expressly  declared  to  be  "  articles  of  compact  between  the  original  states,
[i.  e.  the  United  States,]  and  the  people  and  states  [states  in  futuro,  for
none  were  then  in  being]  in  the  said  territory."  But  to  guard  against
any  possible  difficulty,  it  was  declared,  that  these  articles  should  "  forever
remain  unalterable,  unless  by  common  consent."  So,  that  though  a  corn-
pact  neither  party  was  at  liberty  to  withdraw  from  it  at  its  pleasure,  or
to  absolve  itself  from  its  obligations.  Why  was  not  the  constitution  of
the  United  states  declared  to  be  articles  of  compact  if  that  was  the  in-
tention of  the  framers  ?

4  The  Federalist,  No.  J  5,  22,  39,  40,  43;  Ogdtn  v.  Gibbons,  9  Whea-
ton's  R.  1,  187.


CH.  III.]  NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  321

to  withdraw  from  it  at  pleasure,  and  repeal  its  opera-
tion; and  that  «a  party  to  the  compact  had  a  right  to

revoke  that  compact.1  The  only  places,  where  the
terms,  confederation  or  compact,  are  found  in  the  consti-
tution, apply  to  subjects  of  an  entirely  different  nature,
and  manifestly  in  contradistinction  to  constitution.  Thus,
in  the  tenth  section  of  the  first  article  it  is  declared,  that
"  no  state  shall  enter  into  any  treaty,  alliance,  or  con-
federation ; "  "  no  state  shall,  without  the  consent  of
congress,  Slc.  enter  into  any  agreement  or  compact  with
another  state,  or  with  a  foreign  power."  Again,  in  the
sixth  article  it  is  declared,  that  "  all  debts  contracted,
and  engagements  entered  into,  before  the  adoption  of
this  constitution,  shall  be  as  valid  against  the  United
States  under  this  constitution,  as  under  the  confedera-
tion" Again,  in  the  tenth  amendment  it  is  declared,
that  "  the  powers  not  delegated  by  the  constitution,  nor
prohibited  by  it  to  the  states,  are  reserved  to  the  states
respectively,  or  to  the  people."  A  contract  can  in  no
just  sense  be  called  a  delegation  of  powers.

§  354.  But  that,  which  would  seem  conclusive  on
the  subject,  (as  has  been  already  stated,)  is,  the  very
language  of  the  constitution  itself,  declaring  it  to  be  a
supreme  fundamental  law,  and  to  be  of  judicial  obliga-
tion, and  recognition  in  the  administration  of  justice.
"  This  constitution,"  says  the  sixth  article,  "  and  the
laws  of  the  United  States,  which  shall  be  made  in  pur-
suance thereof,  and  all  treaties  made,  or  which  shall  be
made  under  the  authority  of  the  United  States,  shall  he
the  supreme  laic  of  the  land;  and  the  judges  in  every
state  shall  be  bound  thereby,  any  thing  in  the  constitu-
tion or  laws  of  any  state  to  the  contrary  notvvithstand-


i  The  Federalist,  No.  22  ;  Id.  No.  43.
VOL.  I.  11


322 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

ing."  If  it  is  the  supreme  law,  how  can  the  people  of
any  state,  either  by  any  form  of  its  own  constitution,  or
laws,  or  other  proceedings,  repeal,  or  abrogate,  or  sus-
pend it?

^  355.  But,  if  the  language  of  the  constitution  were
less  explicit  and  irresistible,  no  other  inference  could
be  correctly  deduced  from  a  view  of  the  nature  and
objects  of  the  instrument.  The  design  is  to  establish  a
form  of  government.  This,  of  itself,  imports  legal  obli-
gation, permanence,  ;and  uncontrollability  by  any,  but
the  authorities  authorized  to  alter,  or  abolish  it.  The
object  was  to  secure  the  blessings  of  liberty  to  the
people,  and  to  their  posterity.  The  avowed  intention
was  to  supercede  the  old  confederation,  and  substitute
in  its  place  a  new  form  of  government.  We  have  seen,
that  the  inefficiency  of  the  old  confederation  forced  the
states  to  surrender  the  league  then  existing,  and  to
establish  a  national  constitution.1  The  convention  also,
which  framed  the  constitution,  declared  this  in  the  let-
ter accompanying  it.  "  It  is  obviously  impracticable  in
the  federal  government  of  these  states,"  says  that  letter,
"  to  secure  all  rights  of  independent  sovereignty  to  each,
and  yet  provide  for  the  interest  and  safety  of  all.  In-
dividuals entering  into  society  must  give  up  a  share  of
liberty  to  preserve the  rest."2 "In  all  our  delibera-

1  The  very  first  resolution  adopted  by  the  convention  (six  states  to
two  states)  was  in  the  following  words  :  "  Resolved,  that  it  is  the  opin-
ion of  this  committee,  that  a  national  government  ought  to  be  established
of  a  supreme  legislative,  judiciary,  and  executive  ;"*  plainly  showing,
that  it  was  a  national  government,  not  a  compact,  which  they  were  about
to  establish  ;  a  supreme  legislative,  judiciary,  and  executive,  and  not  a
mere  treaty  for  the  exercise  of  dependent  powers  during  the  good  plea-
sure of  all  the  contracting  parties.

2  Journal  of  Convention,  p.  367,  368.

*  Journal  of  Convention,  p.  83,  134,  139,  207  ;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  49.  See  also  2  Pitkin's
History,  232.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  323

tions  on  this  subject,  we  kept  steadily  in  our  view  that,
which  appeared  to  us  the  greatest  interest  of  every
true  American,  the  consolidation  ofow  Union,  in  which
is  involved  our  prosperity,  felicity,  safety,  perhaps  our
national  existence."  Could  this  he  attained  consist-
ently with  the  notion  of  an  existing  treaty  or  confede-
racy, which  each  at  its  pleasure  was  at  liberty  to  dis-
solve ? 1

§  356.  It  is  also  historically  known,  that  one  of  the
objections  taken  by  the  opponents  of  the  constitution
was,  "  that  it  is  not  a  confederation  of  the  states,  but  a
government  of  individuals." 2  It  was,  nevertheless,  in
the  solemn  instruments  of  ratification  by  the  people  of
the  several  states,  assented  to,  as  a  constitution.  The
language  of  those  instruments  uniformly  is,  "  We,  &,c.
do  assent  to,  and  ratify  the  said  constitution"2.  The
forms  of  the  convention  of  Massachusetts  and  New-
Hampshire  are  somewhat  peculiar  in  their  language.
"The  convention,  <Slc.  acknowledging,  with  grateful
hearts,  the  goodness  of  the  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  Uni-

1  The  language  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Gibbons  v.  Ogdcn,{9  Wheat.
R.  1,  187,)  is  very  expressive  on  this  subject.

"  As  preliminary  to  the  very  able  discussions  ofthe  constitution,  which
we  have  heard  from  the  bar,  and  as  having  some  influence  on  its  con-
struction, reference  has  been  made  to  the  political  situation  of  these
states,  anterior  to  its  formation.  It  has  been  said,  that  they  were  sove-
reign, were  completely  independent,  and  were  connected  with  eacli
other  only  by  a  league.  This  is  true.  But,  when  these  allied  sove-
reigns converted  their  league  into  a  government,  when  they  converted
their  Congress  of  Ambassadors,  deputed  to  deliberate  on  their  common
concerns,  and  to  recommend  measures  of  general  utility,  into  a  legisla-
ture, empowered  to  enact  laws  on  the  most  interesting  subjects,  the
whole  character,  in  which  the  states  appear,  underwent  a  change,  the
extent  of  which  must  be  determined  by  a  fair  consideration  of  the  in-
strument, by  which  that  change  was  effected."

2  The  Federalist,  No.  38,  p.  247  ;  Id.  No.  39,  p.  256.

3  Seethe  forms  in  the  Journals  cf  the  Convention,  Sec  (1819),  p. 300  to
465.


324 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

verse  in  affording  the  people  of  the  United States,  in
the  course  of  his  providence,  an  opportunity,  delibe-
rately and  peaceably,  without  force  or  surprise,  of  en-
tering into  an  explicit  and  solemn  compact  with  each
other,  by  assenting  to,  and  ratifying  a  new  constitution,
&c.  do  assent  to,  and  ratify  the  said  constitution." 1
And  although  many  declarations  of  rights,  many  propo-
sitions of  amendments,  and  many  protestations  of  re-
served powers  are  to  be  found  accompanying  the  rati-
fications of  the  various  conventions,  sufficiently  evin-
cive of  the  extreme  caution  and  jealousy  of  those  bodies,
and  of  the  people  at  large,  it  is  remarkable,  that  there
is  nowhere  to  be  found  the  slightest  allusion  to  the  in-
strument, as  a  confederation  or  compact  of  states  in
their  sovereign  capacity,  and  no  reservation  of  any  right,
on  the  part  of  any  state,  to  dissolve  its  connexion,  or  to
abrogate  its  assent,  or  to  suspend  the  operations  of  the
constitution,  as  to  itself. On  the  contrary,  that  of  Vir-
ginia, which  speaks  most  pointedly  to  the  topic,  merely
declares,  "that  the  powers  granted  under  the  constitu-
tion, being  derived  from  the  people  of  the  United  States,
may  be  resumed  by  them  [not  by  any  one  of  the  states]
whenever  the  same  shall  be  perverted  to  their  injury
or  oppression." 2

^  357.  So  that  there  is  very  strong  negative  testi-
mony against  the  notion  of  its  being  a  compact  or  con-
federation, of  the  nature  of  which  we  have  spoken,
founded  upon  the  known  history  of  the  times,  and  the
acts  of  ratification,  as  well  as  upon  the  antecedent  arti-
cles of  confederation. The  latter  purported  on  their

i  Journals  of  the  Convention,  &c.  (1819),  p.  40J,  402,  412.

2  Id.  p.  41G.  —  Of  the  right  of  a  majority  of  the  whole  people  to  change
their  constitution,  at  will,  there  is  no  doubt.  See  1  Wilson's  Lectures,
418 ;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  165.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  325

bee  to  be  a  mere  confederacy.  The  language  of  the
third  article  was,  "The  said  states  hereb)  severally
enter  into  a  linn  league  of  friendship  with  each  other
for  their  common  defence,  &c.  binding  themselves  to
assist  each  other."  And  the  ratification  was  by  dele-
gates of  the  state  legislatures,  who  solemnly  plighted
and  engaged  the  faith  of  their  repective  constituents,
that  they  should  abide  by  the  determination  of  the
United  States  in  congress  assembled  on  all  questions,
which,  by  the  said  confederation,  are  submitted  to  them  ;
and  that  the  articles  thereof  should  be  inviolably  ob-
served by  the  states  they  respectively  represented.1

§  358.  It  is  not  unworthy  of  observation,  that  in  the
debates  of  the  various  conventions  called  to  examine
and  ratify  the  constitution,  this  subject  did  not  pass
without  discussion.  The  opponents,  on  many  occa-
sions, pressed  the  objection,  that  it  was  a  consolidated
government,  and  contrasted  it  with  the  confederation.2
None  of  its  advocates  pretended  to  deny,  that  its  de-
sign was  to  establish  a  national  government,  as  contra-
distinguished from  a  mere  league  or  treaty,  however
they  might  oppose  the  suggestions,  that  it  was  a  con-
solidation of  the  states.3 In  the  North  Carolina  de-


i  Articles  of  Confederation,  1781,  art.  13.

2  I  do  not  say,  that  the  manner  of  stating  the  objection  was  just,  but
the  fact  abundantly  appears  in  the  printed  debates.  For  instance,  in
the  Virginia  debates.  (2  Elliot's  Deb.  47,)  Mr.  Henry  said,  "That  this  is
a  consolidated  government  is  demonstrably  clear."  "  The  language  [is]
'We,  the  people,' instead  of,  'We,  the  statts?  States  are  the  character-
istics and  soul  of  a  confederation.  If  the  states  be  not  the  agents  of
this  compact,  it  must  be  one  great  consolidated  national  government  of
the  people  of  all  the  states."  The  like  suggestion  will  be  found  in  va-
rious places  in  Mr.  Elliot's  Debates  in  other  states.  See  1  Elliot's  De-
bates, 91,  92,110.  See  also,  3  Amer.  Museum,  422;  2  Amer.  Muse-
um, 540,  546  ;  Mr.  Martin's  Letter,  4  Elliot's  Debates,  p.  53.

3  3  Elliot's  Debates,  145,  257,  29J  ;  The  Federalist,  No.  32,  36,  39,
44,  45  ;  3  Amer.  Museum,  422,  424.


326 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

bates,  one  of  the  members  laid  it  down,  as  a  funda-
mental principle  of  every  safe  and  free  government,
that  "  a  government  is  a  compact  between  the  rulers
and  the  people."  This  was  most  strenuously  denied
on  the  other  side  by  gentlemen  of  great  eminence.
They  said,  "  A  compact  cannot  be  annulled,  but  by  the
consent  of  both  parties.  Therefore,  unless  the  rulers
are  guilty  of  oppression,  the  people,  on  the  principles
of  a  compact,  have  no  right  to  new-model  their  govern-
ment. This  is  held  to  be  the  principle  of  some  mo-
narchical governments  in  Europe.  Our  government  is
founded  on  much  nobler  principles.  The  people  are
known  with  certainty  to  have  originated  it  themselves.
Those  in  power  are  their  servants  and  agents.  And
the  people,  without  their  consent,  may  new-model  the
government,  whenever  they  think  proper,  not  merely
because  it  is  oppressively  exercised,  but  because  they
think  another  form  will  be  more  conducive  to  their
welfare." 1

§  359.  Nor  should  it  be  omitted,  that  in  the  most
elaborate  expositions  of  the  constitution  by  its  friends,
its  character,  as  a  permanent  form  of  government,  as  a
fundamental  law,  as  a  supreme  rule,  which  no  state  was
at  liberty  to  disregard,  suspend,  or  annul,  was  con-
stantly admitted,  and  insisted  on,  as  one  of  the  strong-
est reasons,  why  it  should  be  adopted  in  lieu  of  the
confederation.2 It  is  matter  of  surprise,  therefore,  that

1  Mr.  Iredell,  3  Elliot's  Debates,  24,  25  ;  Id.  200,  Mr.  McClure,  Id.
25;  Mr.  Spencer,  Id.  26,27;  Id.  139.  See  also  3  Elliot's  Debates.  156  ;
See  also  Chisholm  v.  Georgia,  3  Dall,  419;  2  Condensed  Rep.  635,  667,
668.  See  also  in  Penn.  Debates,  Mr.  Wilson's  denial,  that  the  constitu-
tion was  a  compact ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  286,  287.  See  also  McCulIoch
v.  Maryland,  4  Wheaton,  316,  404.

2  The  Federalist,  No.  15  to  20,  38,  39,  44  ;  North  Amer.  Review,
Oct.  1827,  p.  265,  266


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  327

a  learned  commentator  should  have  admitted  the  ri<z;ht

of  any  stale,  or  of  the  people  of  any  state,  without  the
consent  of  the  rest,  to  secede  from  the  Union  at  its  own
pleasure.1  The  people  of  the  United  States  have  a
right,  to  abolish,  or  alter  the  constitution  of  the  United
States  ;  but  that  the  people  of  a  single  state  have  such
a  right,  is  a  proposition  requiring  some  reasoning
beyond  the  suggestion,  that  it  is  implied  in  the  princi-
ples, on  which  our  political  systems  are  founded.2  It
seems,  indeed,  to  have  its  origin  in  the  notion  of  all
governments  being  founded  in  compact,  and  therefore
liable  to  be  dissolved  by  the  parties,  or  either  of  them  ;
a  notion,  which  it  has  been  our  purpose  to  question,  at
least  in  the  sense,  to  which  the  objection  applies.

^  360.  To  us  the  doctrine  of  Mr.  Dane  appears  far
better  founded,  that  "  the  constitution  of  the  United
States  is  not  a  compact  or  contract  agreed  to  by  two
or  more  parties,  to  be  construed  by  each  for  itself,  and
here  to  stop  for  the  want  of  a  common  arbiter  to  revise
the  construction  of  each  party  or  state.  But  that  it  is,
as  the  people  have  named  and  called  it,  truly  a  Consti-
tution ;  and  they  properly  said,  c  We,  the  people  of  the
United  States,  do  ordain  and  establish  this  constitution,'
and  not,  we,  the  people  of  each  state."3 Andthis  expo-

1  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  32,  p.  295,  296,  297,  302,  305.

2  Dane's  A  pp.  §  59,  60,  p.  69,  71.

3  Mr.  (afterwards  Mr.  Justice)  Wilson,  who  was  a  member  of  the
Federal  Convention,  uses,  in  the  Pennsylvania  Debates,  the  following
language  :  "  We  were  told,  &c.  that  the  convention  no  doubt  thought
they  were  forming  a  compact  or  contract  of  the  greatest  importance.  It
was  matter  of  surprise  to  see  the  great  leading  principles  of  this  system
still  so  very  much  misunderstood.  I  cannot  answer  for  what  every  mem-
ber thought ;  but  I  believe  it  cannot  be  said,  they  thought  they  were
making  a  contract,  because  I  cannot  discover  the  least  trace  of  a  com-
pact in  that  system.  There  can  be  no  compact,  unless  there  are  more  par-
ties than  one. It  is  a  new  doctrine,  that  one  can  make  a  compact  with


328 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

tion  has  been  sustained  by  opinions  of  some  of  our
most  eminent  statesmen  and  judges.1  It  was  truly
remarked  by  the  Federalist,2  that  the  constitution
was  the  result  neither  from  the  decision  of  a  ma-
jority of  the  people  of  the  union,  nor  from  that  of  a
majority  of  the  states.  It  resulted  from  the  unanimous
assent  of  the  several  states  that  are  parties  to  it,  dif-
fering no  otherwise  from  their  ordinary  assent,  than  its
being  expressed,  not  by  the  legislative  authority  but  by
that  of  the  people  themselves.

§'361.  But  if  the  constitution  could  in  the  sense,  to
to  which  we  have  alluded,  be  deemed  a  compact,  be-
tween whom  is  it  to  be  deemed  a  contract?  We  have
already  seen,  that  the  learned  commentator  on  Black-
stone,  deems  it  a  compact  with  several  aspects,  and
first  between  the  slates,  (as  contradistinguished  from
the  people  of  the  states)  by  which  the  several  states
have  bound  themselves  to  each  other,  and  to  the  fed-


hiraself.  '  The  convention  were  forming  contracts!  Avith  whom?  I
know  no  bargains,  that  were  there  made,  I  am  unable  to  conreive,  who
the  parties  could  be.  The  state  governments  make  a  bargain  with  each
other.  That  is  the  doctrine,  that  is  endeavoured  to  be  established  by
gentlemen  in  the  opposition  ;  their  state  sovereignties  wish  to  be  rep-
resented. But  far  other  were  the  ideas  of  the  convention.  This  is
not  a  government  founded  upon  compact.  It  is  founded  upon  the  power
of  the  people.  They  express  in  their  name  and  their  authority,
we,  the  people,  do  ordain  and  establish,"  &c.  3  Elliot's  Debates,
286,  287.  He  adds  (Id.  288)  "  This  system  is  not  a  compact  or  con-
tract. The  system  tells  you.  what  it  is  ;  it  is  an  ordinance  and  estab-
lishment of  the  people."  9  Dane's  Abridg.  ch  187,  art.  20,  §  15,
p.  589,  590;  Dane's  App.  §  10,  p.  21,  §  59,  p.  69.

i  See  Ware  v.  Hylton,  3  Dall.  199;  1  Cond.  Rep.  99,  112;  Chns-
holmv.  Georgia,  3  ball.  419;  2  Cond.  R.  668,  671  ;  Elliot's  Debates,
72;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  47;  Webster's  Speeches,  p.  410;  The  Fed-
eralist, No.  22,33,  39  ;  2  Amer.  Museum,  536,  546;  Virginia  Debates
in  1798,  on  the  Alien  Laws,  p.  Ill,  136,  138,  140;  North  Amer.  Rev.
Oct.  1830,  p.  437,  444.

2  No.  39.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  3'2<)

era]  government.1  The  Virginia  Resolutions  of  L798,
assert,  that  "  Virginia  views  the  powers  of  the  federal
government,  as  resulting  from  the  compact,  to  which,
the  states  are  parties"  This  declaration  was,  at  the
time,  matter  of  much  debate  and  difference  of  opinion
among  the  ablest  representatives  in  the  legislature.
But  when  it  was  subsequently  expounded  by  Mr.  Mad-
ison in  the  celebrated  Report  of  January,  1800,  after
admitting,  that  the  term  "states"  is  used  in  different
senses,  and  among  others,  that  it  sometimes  means  the
people  composing  a  political  society  in  their  highest
sovereign  capacity,  he  considers  the  resolution  unob-
jectionable, at  least  in  this  last  sense,  because  in  that
sense  the  constitution  was  submitted  to  the  "  states";
in  that  sense  the  "  states  "  ratified  it ;  and  in  that
sense  the  states  are  consequently  parties  to  the  com-
pact, from  which  the  powers  of  the  federal  government
result.2  And  that  is  the  sense,  in  which  he  considers
the  states  parties  in  his  still  later  and  more  deliberate
examinations.3

^  362.  This  viewr  of  the  subject  is,  however,  wholly
at  variance  with  that,  on  which  we  are  commenting ;
and  w-hich,  having  no  foundation  in  the  words  of  the
constitution,  is  altogether  a  gratuitous  assumption,  and
therefore  inadmissible.  It  is  no  more  true,  that  a  state
is  a  party  to  the  constitution,  as  such,  because  it  was
framed  by  delegates  chosen  by  the  states,  and  sub-
mitted by  the  legislatures  thereof  to  the  people  of  the
states  for  ratification,  and  that  the  states  are  necessary
agents  to  give  effect  to  some  of  its  provisions,  than  that

1  1  Tuck.  Black. Coinm.  169  ; Hayncs'g  Speech in  the Senate,  in
1830;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  315,  316.

2  Resolutions  of  1800,  p.  5,  6.

3  North  American  Review,  Oct.  1830,  p.  537,  544.

vol.  i.  42


330 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

for  the  same  reasons  the  governor,  or  senate,  or  house
of  representatives,  or  judges,  either  of  a  state  or  of
the  United  States,  are  parties  thereto.  No  state,  as
such,  that  is  the  body  politic,  as  it  was  actually  organ-
ized, had  any  power  to  establish  a  contract  for  the
establishment  of  any  new  government  over  the  people
thereof,  or  to  delegate  the  powers  of  government  in
whole,  or  in  part  to  any  other  sovereignty.  The  state
governments  were  framed  by  the  people  to  administer
the  state  constitutions,  such  as  they  were,  and  not  to
transfer  the  administration  thereof  to  any  other  per-
sons, or  sovereignty.  They  had  no  authority  to  enter
into  any  compact  or  contract  for  such  a  purpose.  It
is  no  where  given,  or  implied  in  the  state  constitutions ;
and  consequently,  if  actually  entered  into,  (as  it  was
not,)  would  have  had  no  obligatory  force.  The  people,
and  the  people  only,  in  their  original  sovereign  capacity,
had  a  right  to  change  their  form  of  government,  to
enter  into  a  compact,  and  to  transfer  any  sovereignty
to  the  national  government.1  And  the  states  never,  in
fact,  did  in  their  political  capacity,  as  contradistinguish-
ed from  the  people  thereof,  ratify  the  constitution.
They  were  not  called  upon  to  do  it  by  congress  ;  and
were  not  contemplated,  as  essential  to  give  validity
to  it.2


i  4  Wheaton,  404.

2  The  Federalist,  No.  39.  — In  confirmation  of  this  view,  we  may
quote  the  reasoning  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  McCulloch  v.
Maryland,  (4  Wheaton's  R.  316,)  in  answer  to  the  very  argument.
"  The  powers  of  the  general  government,  it  has  been  said,  are  delegated
by  the  states,  who  alone  are  truly  sovereign ;  and  must  be  exercised  in
subordination  to  the  states,  who  alone  possess  supreme  dominion.

"  It  would  be  difficult  to  sustain  this  proposition.  The  convention,
which  framed  the  constitution,  was  indeed  elected  by  the  state  legisla-
tures. But  the  instrument,  when  it  came  from  their  hands,  was  a  mere
proposal,  without  obligation,  or  pretensions  to  it. It  was  reported  to  the


CH. IU.] NATURE  OF  THJE  CONSTITUTION.  331

^  363.  The  doctrine,  then,  (hat  the  states  are  parties
is  a  gratuitous  assumption. In  the  language  of  a  most

then  existing  congress  of  the  United  States,  with  a  request,  that  it  might
1  be  submitted  to  a  convention  of  delegates,  chosen  in  each  state  by  the
people  thereof,  under  the  recommendation  of  its  legislature,  for  their
assent  and  ratification.'  This  mode  of  proceeding  was  adopted  ;  and
by  the  convention,  by  congress,  and  by  the  state  legislatures,  the  instru-
ment was  submitted  to  the  people.  They  acted  upon  it  in  the  only
manner,  in  which  they  can  act  safely,  effectively,  and  wisely,  on  such  a
subject,  by  assembling  in  convention.  It  is  true,  they  assembled  in
their  several  states  —  and  where  else  should  they  have  assembled?
No  political  dreamer  was  ever  wild  enough  to  think  of  breaking  down
the  lines,  which  separate  the  states,  and  of  compounding  the  American
people  into  one  common  mass.  Of  consequence,  when  they  act,  they
act  in  their  states.  But  the  measures  they  adopt  do  not,  on  that  ac-
count, cease  to  be  the  measures  of  the  people  themselves,  or  become
the  measures  of  the  state  governments.

"  From  these  conventions  the  constitution  derives  its  whole  author-
ity. The  government  proceeds  directly  from  the  people  ;  is  '  ordained
and  established '  in  the  name  of  the  people ;  and  is  declared  to  be  or-
dained, 'in  order  to  form  a  more  perfect  union,  establish  justice,  ensure
domestic  tranquillity,  and  secure  the  blessings  of  liberty  to  themselves
and  to  their  posterity.'  The  assent  of  the  states,  in  their  sovereign
capacity,  is  implied  in  calling  a  convention,  and  thus  submitting  that
instrument  to  the  people.  But  the  people  were  at  perfect  liberty  to
accept  or  reject  it ;  and  their  act  was  final.  It  required  not  the  affirm-
ance, and  could  not  be  negatived,  by  the  state  governments.  The  con-
stitution, when  thus  adopted,  was  of  complete  obligation,  and  bound  the
state  sovereignties.

"  It  has  been  said,  that  the  people  had  already  surrendered  all  their
powers  to  the  state  sovereignties,  and  had  nothing  more  to  give.  But,
surely,  the  question,  whether  they  may  resume  and  modify  the  powers
granted  to  government,  does  not  remain  to  be  settled  in  this  country.
Much  more  might  the  legitimacy  of  the  general  government  be  doubt-
ed, had  it  been  created  by  the  states.  The  powers  delegated  to  the
state  sovereignties  were  to  be  exercised  by  themselves,  not  by  a  dis-
tinct and  independent  sovereignty,  created  by  themselves.  To  the
formation  of  a  league,  such  as  was  the  confederation,  the  state  sove-
reignties were  certainly  competent.  But  when,  '  in  order  to  form  a
more  perfect  union,'  it  was  deemed  necessary  to  change  this  alliance
into  an  effective  government,  possessing  great  and  sovereign  powers,
and  acting  directly  on  the  peopje,  the  necessity  of  referring  it  to  the
people,  and  of  deriving  its  powers  directly  from  them,  was  felt  and
acknowledged  by  all.


332 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

distinguished  statesman,1  "  the  constitution  itself  in  its
very  front  refutes  that.  It  declares,  that  it  is  ordained
and  established  by  the  people  of  the  United  States.
So  far  from  saying,  that  it  is  established  by  the  govern-
ments of  the  several  states,  it  does  not  even  say,  that  it
is  established  by  the  people  of  the  several  states.  But
it  pronounces,  that  it  is  established  by  the  people  of  the
United  States  in  the  aggregate.  Doubtless  the  people
of  the  several  states,  taken  collectively,  constitute  the
people  of  the  United  States.  But  it  is  in  this  their  col-
lective capacity,  it  is  as  all  the  people  of  the  United
States,  that  they  establish  the  constitution." 2

"The  government  of  the  Union,  then,  (whatever  may  be  the  influence
of  this  fact  on  the  case,)  is,  emphatically,  and  truly,  a  government  of
the  people.  In  form  and  in  substance  it  emanates  from  them.  Its  pow-
ers are  granted  by  them,  and  are  to  be  exercised  directly  on  them,  and
for  their  benefit.

"  This  government  is  acknowledged  by  all  to  be  one  of  enumerated
powers.  The  principle,  that  it  can  exercise  only  the  powers  granted  to
it,  would  seem  too  apparent  to  have  required  to  be  enforced  by  all  those
arguments,  which  its  enlightened  friends,  while  it  was  depending  be-
fore the  people,  found  it  necessary  to  urge.  That  principle  is  now
universally  admitted.  But  the  question  respecting  the  extent  of  the
powers  actually  granted,  is  perpetually  arising,  and  will  probably  con-
tinue to  arise,  as  long  as  our  system  shall  exist."

i  Webster's  Speeches,  J 8,30,  p.  431  ;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  326.

2  Mr.  Dane  reasons  to  the  same  etfect,  though  it  is  obvious,  that  he
could  not,  at  the  time,  have  had  any  knowledge  of  the  views  of  Mr.  Web-
ster.* He  adds,  "If  a  contract,  when  and  how  did  the  Union  become  a
party  to  it  ?  If  a  compact,  why  is  it  never  so  denominated,  but  often  and
invariably  in  the  instrument  itself,  and  in  its  amendments,  styled,  "  thii
constitution  ?  and  if  a  contract,  why  did  the  framers  and  people  call
it  the  supreme  law."  f  In  Martin  v.  Hunter,  (1  Wheat.  R.  304,  324,)  the
supreme  court  expressly  declared,  that  "  the  constitution  was  ordained
and  established,"  not  by  the  states  in  their  sovereign  capacity,  but  em-
phatically, as  the  preamble  of  the  constitution  declares,  "  by  the  people
of  the  United  States."

*  9  Dane's  Abridg.  ch.  189,  art.  20,  §  15,  p.  589,  590  j  Dane's  App.  40,  41,  42.
f  9Dane'i KbtiAg 590


OH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  333

^  364.  Bui  ifil  were  admitted,  that  the  constitution
is  a  compact  between  the  states,  "the  inferences  de-
duced from  it,"  as  has  hern  justly  observed  by  the
same  statesmen,1  " are  warranted  by  no  just  reason.
Because,  if  the  constitution  be  a  compact  between  the
states,  still  that  constitution  or  that  compact  has  estab-
lished a  government  with  certain  powers;  and  wheth-
er it  be  one  of  these  powers,  that  it  shall  construe  and
interpret  for  itself  the  terms'of  the  compact  in  doubtful
cases,  can  only  he  decided  by  looking  to  the  compact,
and  inquiring,  what  provisions  it  contains  on  that  point.
Without  any  inconsistency  with  natural  reason,  the
government  even  thus  created  might  be  trusted  with
this  power  of  construction.  The  extent  of  its  powers
must,  therefore,  be  sought  in  the  instrument  itself."
"  If  the  constitution  were  the  mere  creation  of  the  state
governments,  it  might  be  modified,  interpreted,  or  con-
strued according  to  their  pleasure.  But  even  in  that
case,  it  would  be  necessary,  that  they  should  agree.
One  alone  could  not  interpret  it  conclusively.  One
alone  could  not  construe  it.  One  alone  could  not  mod-
ify it."  "If  all  the  states  are  parties  to  it,  one  alone  can
have  no  right  to  fix  upon  it  her  own  peculiar  construc-
tion." 2


i  Webster's  Speeches,  4-.>!>  ; 1  Elliot's  Debates,  324.

2  Even  under  the  confederation,  which  was  confessedly,  in  many  re-
spects, a  mere  league  or  treaty,  though  in  other  respects  national,  con-
gress unanimously  resolved,  that  it  was  not  within  the  competency  of  any
state  to  pass  acts  for  interpreting,  explaining,  or  construing  a  national
treaty,  or  any  part  or  clause  of  it.  Yel  in  that  instrument  there  was  no
express  judicial  powers  given  to  the  general  government  to  construe  it.
It  was,  however,  deemed  an  irresistible  and  exclusive  authority  in  the
general  government,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  other  powers  given  to
them  ;  and  especially  from  the  power  to  make  war  and  peace,  and  to
form  treaties.  Journals  of  Congress,  April  13,  1787,  p.  32,  &c.  :  Rawle
on  Const.  App.  2.  p.  316,320.


334 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

§  365.  Then,  is  it  a  compact  between  the  people  of
the  several  states,  each  contracting  with  all  the  people
of  the  other  states  7 x  It  may  be  admitted,  as  was  the  ear-
ly exposition  of  its  advocates,  "  that  the  constitution  is
founded on the  assent  and ratification  of  the peo-
ple of  America,  given  by  deputies  elected  for  the  spe-
cial purpose  ;  but  that  this  assent  and  ratification  is  to
be  given  by  the  whole  people,  not  as  individuals,  com-
posing one  entire  nation,  but  as  composing  the  distinct
and  independent  states,  to  which  they  respectively  be-
long It  is  to  be  the  assent  and  ratification  of  the  sev-
eral states,  derived  from  the  supreme  authority  in  each
state,  the  authority  of  the  people  themselves. The  act,
therefore,  establishing  the  constitution  will  not  be  [is
not  to  be]  a  national,  but  a  federal  act."  2  "  It  may  also
be  admitted,"  in  the  language  of  one  of  its  most  enlight-
ened commentators,  that  "  it  was  formed,  not  by  the
governments  of  the  component  states,  as  the  federal
government,  for  which  it  was  substituted,  was  formed.
Nor  was  it  formed  by  a  majority  of  the  people  of  the
United  States,  as  a  single  community,  in  the  manner
of  a consolidated government. It was formed by
the  states,  that  is,  by  the  people  in  each  of  the  states
acting  in  their  highest  sovereign  capacity ;  and  formed
consequently  by  the  same  authority,  which  formed  the
state  constitutions." 3 But  this  would  not  necessarily

1  In  the  resolutions  passed  by  the  senate  of  South-Carolina,  in  Decem-
ber, 1827,  it  was  declared,  that  'lthe  constitution  of  the  United  States  is
a  compact  between  the  people  of  the  different  states  with  each  other,  as
separate  and  independent  sovereignties."  Mr.  Grimke  filed  a  protest
founded  on  different  views  of  it.  See  Grimke's  Address  and  Resolutions
in  1828,  (edition,  1829,  at  Charleston,)  where  his  exposition  of  the  con-
stitution is  given  at  large,  and  maintained  in  a  very  able  speech.

2  The  Federalist,  No.  39  ;  see  Sturgis  v.  Crow nins hid d,  4  Wheat.  R.

J  22,  193.

3  Mr.  Madison's  Letter  in  North  American  Review,  October,  1830,

p.  537,  538.


CH. III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  335

draw  after  it  the  conclusion,  that  it  was  to  be  deemed
a  compact, (in the  sense, to  which we have  so  (.lien
alluded, )l>y  which  each  slate  was  still,  alter  the  ratifica-
tion, to  act  upon  it,  as  a league  or  treaty,  and  to  with-
draw from  it  at  pleasure. A  government  may  origi-
nate in  the  voluntary  compact  or  assent  of  the  people  of
several  states,  or  of  a  people  never  before  united,  and
yet  when  adopted  and  ratified  by  them,  be  no  longer  a
matter  resting  in  compact ;  but  become  an  executed
government  or  constitution,  a  fundamental  law,  and  not
a  mere  league. But  the  difficulty  in  asserting  it  to  be  a
compact  between  the  people  of  each  state,  and  all  the
people  of  the  other  states  is,  that  the  constitution  itself
contains  no  such  expression,  and  no  such  designation  of
parties.1  We,  "  the  people  of  the  United  States,  &cc.  do
ordain,  and  establish  this  constitution"  is  the  language;
and  not  we,  the  people  of  each  state,  do  establish  this
compact  between  ourselves,  and  the  people  of  all  the
other  states.  We  are  obliged  to  depart  from  the  words  of
the  instrument,  to  sustain  the  other  interpretation  ;  an
interpretation,  which  can  serve  no  better  purpose,  than
to  confuse  the  mind  in  relation  to  a  subject  otherwise
clear. It  is  for  this  reason,  that  we  should  prefer  an
adherence  to  the  words  of  the  constitution,  and  to  the
judicial  exposition  of  these  words  according  to  their
plain  and  common  import.2

i  See  Dane's  App.  §  32,  33,  p.  41,  42,  4:}.

2  Chisholmv.  Gcorgia,2  Dall.  4 ID;  2  Cond.  Rep.  668,  < w  1  :  Martin  v.
Hunter,  1  Wheat.  11.  3i  4,  324  ;  Dane's  App.  p.  22,  24,  29,  30,  87,  39,  40,
41,42,43,51.

This  subject  is  considered  with  much  care  by  President  Monroe  in
his  Exposition,  accompanying  his  Message,  of  the  4th  of  .May,  IS22.  It
is  due  to  his  memory  to  insert  the  following  passage,  which  exhibits  his
notion  of  the  supremacy  of  the  Union.

"  The  constitution  of  the  United  States  being  ratified  by  the  people  of
the  several  states,  became,  of  necessity,  to  the  extent  of  its  powers,  the
paramount  authority  of  the  Union. On  sound  principles,  it  can  be  view-


336  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

§  366.  But  supposing,  that  it  were  to  be  deemed
such  a  compact  among  the  people  of  the  several  states,
let  us  see  what  the  enlightened  statesman,  who  vindi-

ed  in  no  other  light.  The  people,  the  highest  authority  known  to  our
system,  from  whom  all  our  institutions  spring,  and  on  whom  they  de-
pend, formed  it.  Had  the  people  of  the  several  states  thought  proper  to
incorporate  themselves  into  one  community  under  one  government,  they
might  have  done  it.  They  had  the  power,  and  there  was  nothing  then,
nor  is  there  any  thing  now,  should  they  be  so  disposed,  to  prevent  it.
They  wisely  stopped,  however,  at  a  certain  point,  extending  the  incor-
poration to  that  point,  making  the  national  government,  thus  far,  a  con-
solidated government,  and  preserving  the  state  governments,  without
that  limit,  perfectly  sovereign  aud  independent  of  the  national  govern-
ment. Had  the  people  of  the  several  states  incorporated  themselves  into
one  community,  they  must  have  remained  such  ;  their  constitution  be-
coming then,  like  the  constitutions  of  the  several  states,  incapable  of
change,  until  altered  by  the  will  of  the  majority.  In  the  institution  of  a
state  government  by  the  citizens  of  a  state,  a  compact  is  formed,  to
which  all  and  every  citizen  are  equal  parties.  They  are  also  the  sole
parties,  and  may  amend  it  at  pleasure.  In  the  institution  of  the  govern-
ment of  the  United  States,  by  the  citizens  of  every  state,  a  compact  was
formed  between  the  whole  American  people,  which  has  the  same
force,  and  partakes  of  all  the  qualities,  to  the  extent  of  its  powers,  as  a
compact  between  the  citizens  of  a  state,  in  the  formation  of  their  own
constitution.  It  cannot  be  altered,  except  by  those  who  formed  it,  or  in
the  mode  prescribed  by  the  parties  to  the  compact  itself.

"  This  constitution  was  adopted  for  the  purpose  of  remedying  all  the
defects  of  the  confederation  ;  and  in  this,  it  has  succeeded,  beyond  any
calculation,  that  could  have  been  formed  of  any  human  institution.  By
binding  the  states  together,  the  constitution  performs  the  great  office  of
the  confederation,  but  it  is  in  that  sense  only,  that  it  has  any  of  the  prop-
erties of  that  compact,  and  in  that  it  is  more  effectual,  to  the  purpose,  as
it  holds  them  together  by  a  much  stronger  bond,  and  in  all  other  respects,
in  which  the  confederation  failed,  the  constitution  has  been  blessed  with
complete  success.  The  confederation  was  a  compact  between  separate
and  independent  states  ;  the  execution  of  whose  articles,  in  the  powers
which  operated  internally,  depended  on  the  state  governments.  But  the
great  office  of  the  constitution,  by  incorporating  the  people  of  the  several
states,  to  the  extent  of  its  powers,  into  one  community,  and  enabling  it
to  act  directly  on  the  people,  was  to  annul  the  powers  of  the  state  gov-
ernments to  that  extent,  except  in  cases  where  they  were  concurrent,
and  to  preclude  their  agency  in  giving  effect  to  those  of  the  general
government.  The  government  of  the  United  States  relies  on  its  own
means  for  the  execution  of  its  powers,  as  the  state  governments  do  for


CH.  IIJ.J NATURE  OF  THE CONSTITUTION.  337

cates  that  opinion,  holds  as  the  appropriate  deduction
from  it.  "Being  thus  derived  (says  he)  from  the  same
source,  as  the  constitutions  of  the  states,  it  has,  within
each  state,  the  same  authority,  as  the  constitution  of  the
state  ;  and  is  as  much  a  constitution  within  the  strict
sense  of  the  term,  within  its  prescribed  sphere,  as  the
constitutions  of  the  states  arc,  within  their  respective
spheres.  But  with  this  obvious  and  essential  difference,
that  being  a  compact  among  the  states  in  their  highest
sovereign  capacity,  and  constituting  the  people  thereof
one  people  for  certain  purposes,  it  cannot  be  altered,  or
annulled  at  the  will  of  the  states  individually,  as  the
constitution  of  a  state  may  be  at  its  individual  will."  1

the  execution  of  theirs  ;  hoth  governments  having  a  common  origin,  or
sovereign,  the  people  ;  the  state  governments,  the  people  of  each  state,
the  national  government,  the  people  of  every  state  ;  and  heing  amenable
to  the  power,  which  created  it.  It  is  by  executing  its  functions  as  a  gov-
ernment, thus  originating  and  thus  acting,  that  the  constitution  of  the
United  States  holds  the  states  together,  and  performs  the  office  of  a
league.  It  is  owing  to  the  nature  of  its  powers,  and  the  high  source,  from
whence  they  are  derived,  the  people,  that  it  performs  that  office  better
than  the  confederation,  or  any  league,  which  ever  existed,  being  a  com-
pact, which  the  state  governments  did  not  form,  to  which  they  are  not  par-
ties, and  which  executes  its  own  powers  independently  of  them."

1  Mr.  Madison's  Letter,  North  American  Review,  Oct.  1830,  p.  538. —
Mr.  Paterson  (afterwards  Mr.  Justice  Paterson)  in  the  convention,
which  framed  the  constitution,  held  the  doctrine,  that  under  the  confed-
eration no  state  had  aright  to  withdraw  from  the  Union  without  the  con-
sent of  all.  "  The  confederation  (said  he)  is  in  the  nature  of  a  compact ;
and  can  any  state,  unless  by  the  consent  of  the  whole,  either  in  politics
or  law,  withdraw  their  powers  ?  Let  it  be  said  by  Pennsylvania  and  the
other  large  states,  that  they,  for  the  sake  of  peace,  assented  to  the  con-
federation ;  can  she  now  resume  her  original  right  without  the  consent
of  the  donee?"*  Mr.  Dane  unequivocally  holds  the  same  language  in
respect  to  the  constitution.  'k  It  is  clear  (says  he)  the  people  of  any  one
state  alone  never  can  take,  or  withdraw  power  from  the  United  States,
which  was  granted  to  it  by  all,  as  the  people  of  all  the  states  can  do
rightfully  in  a  justifiable  revolution,  or  as  the  people  can  do  in  the  man-
ner their  constitution  prescribes."  Dane's  App.  §  10,  p.  21.

*  Yates's  Debates,  4  Elliot's  Debates,  75.

vol.  i.  43


338  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

^  367.  The  other  branch  of  the  proposition,  we  have
been  considering,  is,  that  it  is  not  only  a  compact  be-
tween the  several  states,  and  the  people  thereof,  but
also  a  compact  between  the  states  and  the  federal  gov -
eminent;  and  e  convcrso  between  the  federal  govern-
ment, and  the  several  states,  and  every citizen  of  the
United  States.1 This  seems  to  be  a  doctrine  far  more
involved, and extraordinary, and incomprehensible,
than  any  part  of  the  preceding.  The  difficulties  have  not
escaped  the  observation  of  those,  by  whom  it  has  been
advanced. "  Although  (says  the  learned  commentator)
the  federal  government  can,  in  no  possible  view,  be  con-
sidered as  a  party  to  a  compact  made  anterior  to  its
existence ;  yet,  as  the  creature  of  that  compact,  it  must
be  bound  by  it  to  its  creators,  the  several  states  in  the
Union,  and  the  citizens  thereof."2 If  by  this,  no  more
were  meant  than  to  state,  that  the  federal  government
cannot  lawfully  exercise  any  powers,  except  those  con-
ferred on  it  by  the  constitution,  its  truth  could  not  ad-
mit of  dispute.  But  it  is  plain,  that  something  more  was
in  the  author's  mind.  At  the  same  time,  that  he  admits,
that  the  federal  government  could  not  be  a  party  to
the  compact  of  the  constitution  "  in  any  possible  view,"
he  still  seems  to  insist  upon  it,  as  a  compact,  by  which
the  federal  government  is  bound  to  the  several  states,
and  to  every  citizen  ;  that  is,  that  it  has  entered  into  a
contract  with  them  for  the  due  execution  of  its  duties.


The  ordinance  of  1787,  for  the  government  of  the  western  territory,
contains  (as  we  have  seen)  certain  articles  declared  to  be  "  articles  of
compact;"  but  they  are  also  declared  to  "remain  for  ever  unalterable,
except  by  common  consent."  So,  that  there  may  be  a  compact,  and  yet
by  the  stipulations  neither  party  may  be  at  liberty  to  withdraw  from  it,
or  absolve  itself  from  its  obligations. Ante,  p.  269.

i  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  169,  170.

2  ]  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  170.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  339

^  368.  And  a  doctrine  of  a  like  nature,  viz.  thai  the
federal  government  is  a  part}  to  the  compact,  seems
to  have  been  gravely  entertained  on  other  solemn  oc-
casions.1 The  difficulty  of  maintaining  it,  however,
seems  absolutely  insuperable.  The  federal  government
is  the  result  of  the  constitution,  or  (if  the  phrase  is
deemed  by  any  prison  more  appropriate) the  creature  o  '
the  compact.  How,  then,  can  it  be  a  party  to  that  com-
pact, to  which  it  owes  its  own  existence?2  How  can
it  be  said,  that  it  has  entered  into  a  contract,  when  at
the  time  it  had  no  capacity  to  contract ;  and  was  not
even  in  esse  ?  If  any  provision  was  made  for  the  gen-
eral government's  becoming  a  party,  and  entering  into
a  compact,  after  it  was  brought  into  existence,  where  is
that  provision  to  be  found  ?  It  is  not  to  be  found  in  the
constitution  itself.  Are  we  at  liberty  to  imply  such  a  pro-
vision, attaching  to  no  power  given  in  the  constitution  ?
This  would  be  to  push  the  doctrine  of  implication  to
an  extent  truly  alarming  ;  to  draw  inferences,  not  from
what  is,  but  from  what  is  not,  stated  in  the  instrument.
But,  if  any  such  implication  could  exist,  when  did  the
general  government  signify  its  assent  to  become  such
a  party  1  When  did  the  people  authorize  it  to  do  so  ?  3
Could  the  government  do  so,  without  the  express  au-
thority of  the  people  ?  These  are  questions,  which  are
more  easily  asked,  than  answered.

^  369.  In  short,  the  difficulties  attendant  upon  all
the  various  theories  under  consideration,  which  treat
the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  as  a  compact,
either  between  the  several  states,  or  between  the  people

i  Debate  in  the  Senate,  in  1830,  on  Mr.  Foot's  Resolution,  4  Elliot's
Debates,  315  to  331.

2  Webster's  Speeches,  429 ;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  324.

3  Dane's  App.  §  32.  p.  41 :  Id.  §  38,  p.  46.


340 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

of  the  several  states,  or  between  the  whole  people  of
the  United  States,  and  the  people  of  the  several  states,
or  between  each  citizen  of  all  the  states,  and  all  other
citizens,  are,  if  not  absolutely  insuperable,  so  serious,
and  so  wholly  founded  upon  mere  implication,  that  it
is  matter  of  surprise,  that  they  should  have  been  so  ex-
tensively adopted,  and  so  zealously  propagated.  These
theories,  too,  seem  mainly  urged  with  a  view  to  draw
conclusions,  which  are  at  war  with  the  known  powers,
and  reasonable  objects  of  the  constitution  ;  and  which,
if  successful,  would  reduce  the  government  to  a  mere
confederation. They  are  objectionable,  then,  in  every
way  ;  first,  because  they  are  not  justified  by  the  lan-
guage of  the  constitution  ;  secondly,  because  they  have
a  tendency  to  impair,  and  indeed  to  destroy,  its  express
powers  and  objects ;  and  thirdly,  because  they  involve
consequences,  which,  at  the  will  of  a  single  state,  may
* overthrow  the  constitution  itself.  One  of  the  fundamen-
tal rules  in  the  exposition  of  every  instrument  is,  so  to
construe  its  terms,  if  possible,  as  not  to  make  them  the
source  of  their  own  destruction,  or  to  make  them  utterly
void,  and  nugatory. And  if  this  be  generally  true,  with
how  much  more  force  does  the  rule  apply  to  a  consti-
tution of  government,  framed  for  the  general  good,  and
designed  for  perpetuity  1 Surely,  if  any  implications
are  to  be  made  beyond  its  terms,  they  are  implications
to  preserve,  and  not  to  destroy  it.1

1  The  following  strong  language  is  extracted  from  Instructions  given  to
some  Representatives  of  the  state  of  Virginia  by  their  constituents  in  1787,
with  reference  to  the  confederation  :  "  Government  without  coercion  is  a
proposition  at  once  so  absurd  and  self  contradictory,  that  the  idea  creates
a  confusion  of  the  understanding.  Tt  is  form  without  substance  ;  at  best  a
body  without  a  soul.  If  men  would  act  right,  governments  of  all  kinds
would  be  useless.  If  states  or  nations,  who  are  but  assemblages  of  men,
would  do  right,  there  would  be  no  wars  or  disorders  in  the  universe.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  341

§  370.  The  cardinal  conclusion,  for  which  this  doc-
trine of  a  compact  has  been,  with  so  much  ingenuity
and  ability,  forced  into  the  language  of  the  constitution,
(for  the  language  no  where  alludes  to  it,)  is  avowedly  to
establish,  that  in  construing  the  constitution,  there  is  no
common  umpire  ;  but  that  each  state,  nay  each  depart-
ment of  the  government  of  each  state,  is  the  supreme
judge  for  itself,  of  the  powers,  and  rights,  and  duties,  aris-
ing under  that  instrument.1  Thus,  it  has  been  solemn-
ly asserted  on  more  than  one  occasion,  by  some  of  the
state  legislatures,  that  there  is  no  common  arbiter,  or
tribunal,  authorized  to  decide  in  the  last  resort,  upon
the  powers  and  the  interpretation  of  the  constitution.
And  the  doctrine  has  been  recently  revived  with  ex-
traordinary zeal,  and  vindicated  with  uncommon  vig-
our.2 A  majority  of  the  states,  howrever,  have  never  as-
Bad  as  individuals  are,  states  are  worse.  Clothe  men  with  public  author-
ity, and  almost  universally  they  consider  themselves,  as  liberated  from
the  obligations  of  moral  rectitude,  because  they  are  no  longer  amenable
to  justice."  1  Amer.  Mus.  290.

1  Madison's  Virginia  Report,  January,  1800,  p.  6,  7,  8,  9;  Webster's
Speeches,  407  to  409,  410,  411,  419  to  421.

2  The  legislature  of  Virginia,  in  1829,  resolved,  that  there  is  no  com-
mon arbiter  to  construe  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  ;  the  consti-
tution being  a  federative  compact  between  sovereign  states,  each  state
has  a  right  to  construe  the  compact  for  itself."  Georgia  and  South-Car-
olina have  recently  maintained  the  same  doctrine  ;  and  it  has  been  as-
serted in  the  senate  of  the  United  States,  with  an  uncommon  display  of
eloquence  and  pertinacity*  It  is  not  a  little  remarkable,  that  in  1810
the  legislature  of  Virginia  thought  very  differently,  and  then  deemed  the
supreme  court  a  fit  and  impartial  tribunal. f  Pennsylvania  at  the  same
time,  though  she  did  not  deny  the  court  to  be,  under  the  constitution,  the
appropriate  tribunal,  was  desirous  of  substituting  some  other  arbiter.!
The  recent  resolutions  of  her  own  legislature  (in  March,  18^1)  show
that  she  now  approves  of  the  supreme  court,  as  the  true  and  common  ar-

*  9  Dane's  Abridg.  ch.  187,  art.  20,  §  13,  p.  589,  &c.  591 ; Dane's  App.  52  to  59,  67  to  7-2  ■
3  American  Annual  Register,  Local  Hist.  131.
t  North  American  Review,  October,  1830,  p.  509,  512  ;  6  Wheat.  R.  358.
X  Noith  American  Review,  id.  507,  508.


342 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

sented  to  this  doctrine  ;  and  it  has  been,  at  different
times,  resisted  by  the  legislatures  of  several  of  the  states,
in  the  most  formal  declarations.1

^  371.  But  if  it  were  admitted,  that  the  constitution
is  a  compact,  the  conclusion,  that  there  is  no  common
arbiter,  would  neither  be  a  necessary,  nor  natural  con-
clusion from  that  fact  standing  alone.  To  decide  upon
the  point,  it  would  still  behove  us  to  examine  the  very
terms  of  the  constitution,  and  the  delegation  of  powers
under  it.  It  would  be  perfectly  competent  even  for  con-
federated states  to  agree  upon,  and  delegate  authority
to  construe  the  compact  to  a  common  arbiter.  The
people  of  the  United  States  had  an  unquestionable  right
to  confide  this  power  to  the  government  of  the  United
States,  or  to  any  department  thereof,  if  they  chose  so

biter.  One  of  the  expositions  of  the  doctrine  is,  that  if  a  single  state  de-
nies a  power  to  exist  under  the  constitution,  that  power  is  [o  be  deemed
defunct,  unless  three-fourths  of  the  states  shall  afterwards  reinstate  that
power  by  an  amendment  to  the  constitution.*  What,  then,  is  to  be  done,
where  ten  states  resolve,  that  a  power  exists,  and  one,  that  it  does  not
exist  ?  See  Mr.  Vice-President  Calhoun's  Letter  of  28th  August,  1832,
to  Gov.  Hamilton.

1  Massachusetts  openly  opposed  it  in  the  resolutions  of  her  legislature
of  the  12th  of  February,  1799,  and  declared,  "  that  the  decision  of  all
cases  in  law  and  equity  arising  under  the  constitution  of  the  United
States,  and  the  construction  of  all  laws  made  in  pursuance  thereof,  are
exclusively  vested  by  the  people,  in  the  judicial  courts  of  the  United
States."  f  Six  other  states,  at  that  time,  seem  to  have  come  to  the  same
result.^  And  on  other  occasions,  a  larger  number  have  concurred  on  the
same  point.§  Similar  resolutions  have  been  passed  by  the  legislatures  of
Delaware  and  Connecticut  in  1831,  and  by  some  other  states.  How  is  it
possible,  for  a  moment,  to  reconcile  the  notion,  that  each  state  is  the
supreme  judge  for  itself  of  the  construction  of  the  constitution,  with  the
very  first  resolution  of  the  convention,  which  formed  the  constitution :
"  Resolved,  &c.  that  a  national  government  ought  to  be  established,
consisting  of  a  supreme,  legislative,  judiciary,  and  executive  ?  "  ||

*  4  Elliot's  Debates,  320,  321  t  Dane's  App.  58.

±  North  American  Review,  October,  1830,  p.  500.

§  Dane's  App.  67  ;  Id.  52  to  59.

||  Journal?  of  Convention,  83  ;  4  Elliot's  Deb.  49.


CH.  III.] NATURE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.  343

to  do.  The  question  is,  whether  they  have  done  it.  If
they  have,  it  becomes  obligatory  and  binding  upon  all
the  states.

^  372.  It  is  not,  then,  by  artificial  reasoning  founded
upon  theory,  but  upon  a  careful  survey  of  the  language
of  the  constitution  itself,  that  we  are  to  interpret  its
powers,  and  its  obligations.  We  are  to  treat  it,  as  it
purports  on  its  face  to  be,  as  a  constitution  of  gov-
ernment ;  and  we  are  to  reject  all  other  appellations,
and  definitions  of  it,  such,  as  that  it  is  a  compact,  espe-
cially as  they  may  mislead  us  into  false  constructions
and  glosses,  and  can  have  no  tendency  to  instruct  us  in
its  real  objects.


344  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.


CHAPTER  IV.

WHO IS  FINAL  JUDGE  OR  INTERPRETER  IN  CONSTITU-
TIONAL CONTROVERSIES.

^  373.  The  consideration  of  the  question,  whether
the  constitution  has  made  provision  for  any  common
arbiter  to  construe  its  powers  and  obligations,  would
properly  find  a  place  in  the  analysis  of  the  different
clauses  of  that  instrument.  But,  as  it  is  immediately
connected  with  the  subject  before  us,  it  seems  expedi-
ent in  this  place  to  give  it  a  deliberate  attention.1


1  The  point  was  very  strongly  argued,  and  much  considered,  in  the
case  of  Cohens  v.  Virginia,  in  the  Supreme  Court  in  1821,  (6  Wheat.
R.  264.)  The  whole  argument,  as  well  as  the  judgment,  deserves  an
attentive  reading.  The  result,  to  which  the  argument  against  the  exis-
tence of  a  common  arbiter  leads,  is  presented  in  a  very  forcible  manner
by  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Marshall,  in  pages  376,  377.

"  The  questions  presented  to  the  court  by  the  two  first  points  made  at
the  bar  are  of  great  magnitude,  and  may  be  truly  said  vitally  to  affect
the  Union.  They  exclude  the  inquiry,  whether  the  constitution  and  laws
of  the  United  States  have  been  violated  by  the  judgment,  which  the  plain-
tiffs in  error  seek  to  review  ;  and  maintain,  that,  admitting  such  violation,
it  is  not  in  the  power  of  the  government  to  apply  a  corrective.  They
maintain,  that  the  nation  does  not  possess  a  department  capable  of  re-
straining peaceably,  and  by  authority  of  law,  any  attempts,  which  maybe
made  by  a  part  against  the  legitimate  powers  of  the  whole  ;  and  that  the
government  is  reduced  to  the  alternative  of  submitting  to  such  attempts,
or  of  resisting  them  by  force.  They  maintain,  that  the  constitution  of
the  United  States  has  provided  no  tribunal  for  the  final  construction  of
itself,  or  of  the  laws  or  treaties  of  the  nation  ;  but  that  this  power  may
be  exercised  in  the  last  resort  by  the  courts  of  every  state  in  the  Union.
That  the  constitution,  laws,  and  treaties,  may  receive  as  many  con-
structions, as  there  are  states  ;  and  that  this  is  not  a  mischief,  or,  if  a
mischief,  is  irremediable.  These  abstract  propositions  are  to  be  deter-
mined ;  for  he,  who  demands  decision  without  permitting  inquiry,  affirms,
that  the  decision  he  asks  does  not  depend  on  inquiry.


CH. IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  345

^  374.  In  order  to  clear  the  question  of  all  minor
points,  which  might  embarrass  us  in  the  discussion,  it  is
necessary  to  suggest  a  few  preliminary  remarks.  The
constitution,  contemplating  the  grant  of  limited  powers,
and  distributing  them  among  various  functionaries,  and
the  state  governments,  and  their  functionaries,  being  also
clothed  with  limited  powers,  subordinate  to  those  grant-
ed to  the  general  government,  whenever  any  question
arises,  as  to  the  exercise  of  any  power  by  any  of  these
functionaries  under  the  state,  or  federal  government,  it
is  of  necessity,  that  such  functionaries  must,  in  the  first
instance,  decide  upon  the  constitutionality  of  the  exer-
cise of  such  power.1  It  may  arise  in  the  course  of  the
discharge  of  the  functions  of  any  one,  or  of  all,  of  the  great
departments  of  government,  the  executive,  the  legisla-
tive, and  the  judicial.  The  officers  of  each  of  these  de-
partments are  equally  bound  by  their  oaths  of  office  to
support  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  and  are
therefore  conscientiously  bound  to  abstain  from  all  acts,
which  are  inconsistent  with  it.  Whenever,  therefore,
they  are  required  to  act  in  a  case,  not  hitherto  settled
by  any  proper  authority,  these  functionaries  must,  in
the  first  instance,  decide,  each  for  himself,  whether,
consistently  with  the  constitution,  the  act  can  be  done.
If,  for  instance,  the  president  is  required  to  do  any  act,
he  is  not  only  authorized,  but  required,  to  decide  for
himself,  whether,  consistently  with  his  constitutional
duties,  he  can  do  the  act.2 So,  if  a  proposition  be  be-


"  If  such  be  the  constitution,  it  is  the  duty  of  this  court  to  bow  with
respectful  submission  to  its  provisions.  If  such  be  not  the  constitution,
it  is  equally  the  duty  of  ihis  court  to  say  so ;  and  to  perform  that  task,
which  the  American  people  have  assigned  to  the  judicial  department."

i  See  the  Federalist,  No.  33.

2  Mr.  Jefferson  carries  his  doctrine  much  farther,  and  holds,  that  each

vol.  i.  44


346  CONSTITUTION OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

fore  congress,  every  member  of  the  legislative  body  is
bound  to  examine,  and  decide  for  himself,  whether  the
bill  or  resolution  is  within  the  constitutional  reach  of
the  legislative  powers  confided  to  congress. And  in
many  cases  the  decisions  of  the  executive  and  legisla-
tive departments,  thus  made,  become  final  and  conclu-
sive, being  from  their  very  nature  and  character  incapa-
ble of  revision. 'Thus,  in  measures. exclusively  of  a
political,  legislative,  or  executive  character,  it  is  plain,
that  as  the supreme  authority,  as  to  these  questions,
belongs  to  the  legislative  and  executive  departments,
they  cannot  be  re-examined  elsewhere. Thus,  con-
gress having  the  power  to  declare  war,  to  levy  taxes,  to
appropriate  money,  to  regulate  intercourse  and  com-
merce with  foreign  nations, their  mode  of  executing
these  powers  can  never  become the  subject  of  re-
examination in  any  other  tribunal.  So  the  power  to  make
treaties  being  confided  to  the  president  and  senate,  when
a  treaty  is  properly  ratified,  it  becomes  the  law  of  the
land,  and  no  other  tribunal  can  gainsay  its  stipulations.
Yet  cases  may  readily  be  imagined,  in  which  a  tax  may
be  laid,  or  a  treaty  made,  upon  motives  and  grounds
wholly  beside  the  intention  of  the  constitution.1 The

department  of  government  has  an  exclusive  right,  independent  of  the
judiciary,  to  decide  for  itself,  as  to  the  true  construction  of  the  constitu-
tion. "  My  construction,"  says  he,  "is  very  different  from  that,  you
quote.  It  is,  that  each  department  of  the  government  is  truly  indepen-
dent of  the  others,  and  has  an  equal  right  to  decide  for  itself,  what  is  the
meaning  of  the  constitution  in  the  laws  submitted  to  its  action,  and
especially,  when  it  is  to  act  ultimately  and  without  appeal."  And  he
proceeds  to  give  examples,  in  which  he  disregarded,  when  president,  the
decisions  of  the  judiciary,  and  refers  to  the  alien  and  sedition  laws,
and  the  case  of  Marbury  v.  Madison,(l  Cranch,  137.)  4  Jefferson's  Cor-
resp.  316,  317.  See  also  4  Jefferson's  Corresp.  27;  Id.  75;  Id.  372,
374

i  See  4  Elliot's  Debates,  315  to  320.


CH. IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  341


remedy,  however,  in  such  cases  is  solely  by  an  appeal
to  the  people  at  the  elections  ;  or  by  the  salutar}  pow-
er of  amendment,  provided  l>\  the  constitution  itself.1

§  375.  But,  where  the  question  is  of  a  different  na-
ture, and  capable  of  judicial  inquiry  and  decision,  there
it  admits  of  a  very  different  consideration.  The  de-
cision then  made,  whether  in  favour,  or  against  the
constitutionality  of  the  act,  by  the  state,  or  by  the  na-
tional authority,  by  the  legislature,  or  by  the  executive,
being  capable,  in  its  own  nature,  of  being  brought  to
the  test  of  the  constitution,  is  subject  to  judicial  revision.
It  is  in  such  cases,  as  we  conceive,  that  there  is  a  final
and  common  arbiter  provided  by  the  constitution  itself,
to  whose  decisions  all  others  are  subordinate ;  and  that
arbiter  is  the  supreme  judicial  authority  of  the  courts

of  the  Union.2

§  376.  Let  us  examine  the  grounds,  on  which  this
doctrine  is  maintained.  The  constitution  declares,
(Art.  6,)  that  "  This  constitution,  and  the  laws  of  the
United  States,  which  shall  be  made  in  pursuance  there-
of, and  all  treaties,  &c.  shall  be  the  supreme  law  of  the


1  The  Federalist,  No.  44.  — Mr.  Madison,  in  the  Virginia  Report  of
Jan.  1800,  has  gone  into  a  consideration  of  this  point,  and  very  prop-
erly suggested,  that  there  maybe  infractions  of  the  constitution  not  with-
in the  reach  of  the  judicial  power,  or  capable  of  remedial  redress  through
the  instrumentality  of  courts  of  law.  But  we  cannot  agree  with  him,
that  in  such  cases,  each  state  may  take  the  construction  of  the  constitu-
tion into  its  own  hands,  and  decide  for  itself  in  the  last  resort;  much
less,  that  in  a  case  of  judicial  cognizance,  the  decision  is  not  binding  on
the  states. See  Report,  p.  6,  7,  8,  9.

2  Dane's  App.  §  44,  45,  p.  52  to  59.  —  It  affords  me  very  sincere
gratification  to  quote  the  following  passage  from  the  learned  Commenta-
ries of  Mr.  Chancellor  Kent,  than  whom  very  few  judges  in  our
country  are  more  profoundly  versed  in  constitutional  law.  After
enumerating  the  judicial  powers  in  the  constitution,  he  proceeds  to
observe: "The  propriety  and  fitness of  these  judicial  powers seem


348  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

land." It  also  declares,  (Art.  3,) that  "  The  judicial
power  shall  extend' to  all  cases  in  law  and  equity,  aris-
ing under  this  constitution, the  laws  of the  United
States  and  treaties  made,  and which  shall  be  made
under  their  authority." It  further  declares, (Art.  3,)
that  the  judicial  power  of  the  United  States  "  shall  be
vested  in  one  Supreme  Court,  and  in  such  inferior  courts,
as  the  congress  may,  from  time  to  time,  ordain  and  estab-
lish." Here,  then,  we  have  express,  and  determinate
provisions  upon  the  very  subject. Nothing  is  imperfect,
and  nothing  is  left  to  implication. The  constitution  is
the  supreme  law  ;  the  judicial  power  extends  to  all  cases
arising  in  law  and  equity  under  it ;  and  the  courts  of  the
United  States  are,  and,  in  the  last  resort,  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  United  States  is,  to  be  vested  with  this
judicial  power. No  man  can  doubt  or  deny,  that  the
power  to  construe  the  constitution  is  a  judicial  power.1
The  power  to  construe  a  treaty  is  clearly  so,  when  the
case  arises  in  judgment  in  a  controversy  between  indi-
viduals.2 The  like  principle  must  apply,  where the
meaning  of  the  constitution  arises  in  a  judicial  contro-
versy ;  for  it  is  an  appropriate  function  of  the  judiciary
to  construe  laws.3 If, then,  a  case  under  the  constitu-
te result,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  from  the  union  of  these  states
in  one  national  government,  and they  may  be  considered as requisite
to  its  existence. The  judicial  power  in  every  government  must  be
co-extensive  with  the  power  of  legislation. Were  there  no  power  to
interpret, pronounce, and execute the law7, the government wTould
either  perish  through  its  own  imbecility,  as  was  the  case  with  the  old
confederation,  or  other  powers  must  be  assumed  by  the  legislative  body
to  the  destruction  of  liberty." 1  Kent's  Comm.  (2d  ed.  p.  296,)  Lect.  14,
277.

i  4  Dane's  Abridg.  ch,  187,  art.  20,  §  15,  p.  590  ; Dane's  App.  §  42,
p.  49,  50 ;  §  44,  p.  52,  53 ;  1  Wilson's  Lectures,  461,  462,  4U'3.

2  See  Address  of  Congress,  Feb.  1787  ;  Journals  of  Congress,  p.  33  ;
Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  App.  2,  p.  316.

3  Bacon's  Abridgment,  Statute.  H.


CH.


IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  349


tion  docs  arise,  if  it  Is  capable  of  judicial  examination
and  decision,  we  sec,  that  the  very  tribunal  is  appoint-
ed to  make  the  decision.  The  only  point  left  open  for
controversy  is,  whether  such  decision,  when  made,  is
conclusive  and  binding  upon  the  states,  and  the  people
of  the  states.  The  reasons,  why  it  should  be  so  deem-
ed, Avill  now  be  submitted-.

^  377.  In  the  first  place,  the  judicial  power  of  the
United  States  rightfully  extending  to  all  such  cases,  its
judgment  becomes  ipso  facto  conclusive  between  the
parties  before  it,  in  respect  to  the*  points  decided,  un-
less  some  mode  be  pointed  out  by the  constitution,
in  which  that  judgment  may  be  revised. ]NTo such
mode  is  pointed  out. Congress  is  vested  with  ample
authority  to  provide  for  the  exercise  by  the  Supreme
Court  of  appellate  jurisdiction  from  the  decisions  of  all
inferior  tribunals,  whether  state  or  national,  in  cases
within  the  purview  of  the  judicial  power  of  the  United
States  ; but  no  mode  is  provided,  by  which  any  su-
perior tribunal  can  re-examine,  what  the  Supreme  Court
has  itself  decided. Ours  is  emphatically  a  government
of  laws,  and  not  of  men ;  and  judicial  decisions  of  the
highest  tribunal,  by  the  known  course  of  the  common
law,  are  considered,  as  establishing  the  true  construc-
tion of  the  laws,  which  are  brought  into  controversy
before  it. The  case  is  not  alone  considered  as  decided
and  settled ;  but  the  principles  of  the  decision  are  held,
as  precedents  and  authority,  to  bind  future  cases  of
the  same  nature. This  is  the  constant  practice  under
our  whole  system  of  jurisprudence. Our  ancestors
brought  it  with  them,  when  they  first  emigrated  to  this
country ;  and  it  is,  and  always  has  been  considered,  as
the  great  security  of  our  rights,  our  liberties,  and  our
property. It  is  on  this  account,  that  our  law  is  justly


350  CONSTITUTION OF  THE  U. STATES. [BOOK III.

deemed  certain,  and  founded  in  permanent  principles,
and  not  dependent  upon  the  caprice,  or  will  of  particu-
lar judges.  A  more  alarming  doctrine  could  not  be
promulgated  by  any  American  court,  than  that  it  was
at  liberty  to  disregard  all  former  rules  and  decisions,
and  to  decide  for  itself,  without  reference  to  the  settled
course  of  antecedent  principles.

§  378.  This  known  course  of  proceeding,  this  settled
habit  of  thinking,  this  conclusive  effect  of  judicial  adju-
dications, was  in  the  full  view  of  the  framers  of  the  con-
stitution. It  was  required,  and  enforced  in  every  state
in  the  Union  ;  and  a  departure  from  it  would  have  been
justly  deemed  an  approach  to  tyranny  and  arbitrary
power,  to  the  exercise  of  mere  discretion,  and  to  the
abandonment  of  all  the  just  checks  upon  judicial  author-
ity. It  would  seem  impossible,  then,  to  presume,  if
the  people  intended  to  introduce  a  new  rule  in  respect
to  the  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court,  and  to  limit  the
nature  and  operations  of  their  judgments  in  a  manner
wholly  unknown  to  the  common  law,  and  to  our  exist-
ing jurisprudence,  that  some  indication  of  that  intention
should  not  be  apparent  on  the  face  of  the  constitution.
We  find,  (Art.  4,)  that  the  constitution  has  declared,
that  full  faith  and  credit  shall  be  given  in  each  state  to
the  judicial  proceedings  of  every  other  state.  But
no  like  provision  has  been  made  in  respect  to  the  judg-
ments of  the  courts  of  the  United  States,  because  they
were  plainly  supposed  to  be  of  paramount  and  absolute
obligation  throughout  all  the  states.  If  the  judgments  of
the  Supreme  Court  upon  constitutional  questions  are
conclusive  and  binding  upon  the  citizens  at  large,  must
they  not  be  equally  conclusive  upon  the  states  ?  If  the
states  are  parties  to  that  instrument,  are  not  the  people
of  the  states  also  parties  ?


CH.  IV.]  PINAL  INTERPRETER.  351

§  379.  It  lias  been  said,  "thai  however  true  it  may  be,
that  the  judicial  department  is,  in  all  questions  submit-
ted to  it  by  the  forms  of  the  constitution,  tq  decide  in  the
last  resei-t,  this  resort,  must  necessarily  be  deemed  the
last  in  relation  to  the  other  departments  of  the  govern-
ment, not  in  relation  to  the  rights  of  the  parlies  la  the
constitutional  compact,  from  which  the  judicial,  as  well
as  the  other  departments hold their  delegated trusts.
On  any  other  hypothesis,  the  delegation  of  judicial  pow-
er would  annul  the  authority  delegating  it ;  and  the  con-
currence of  this  department  with  the  others  in  usurped
powers  might  subvert  for  ever,  and  beyond  the  possible
reach  of  any  rightful  remedy,  the  very  constitution,  which
all  were  instituted  to  preserve."  1 Now,  it  is  certainly
possible,  that  all  the  departments  of  a  government  may
conspire  to subvert  the  constitution  of  that  govern-
ment, by  which  they  are  created. But  if  they  should
so  conspire,  there  would  still  remain  an  adequate  reme-
dy to  redress  the  evil. In  the  first  place,  the  people,  by
the  exercise  of  the  elective  franchise,  can  easily  check
and  remedy  any dangerous,  palpable, and  deliberate
infraction  of  the  constitution  in  two  of  the  great  depart-
ments of  government ;  and,  in  the  third  department,  they
can  remove  the  judges,  by  impeachment,  for  any  corrupt
conspiracies. Besides  these  ordinary  remedies,  there
is  a  still  more  extensive  one,  embodied  in  the  form  of
the  constitution,  by  the  power  of  amending  it,  which  is
always  in  the  power  of  three  fourths  of  the  states. It
is  a  supposition  not  to  be endured  for  a  moment,  that
three  fourths  of  the  states  would  conspire  in  any  delib-
erate, dangerous,  and  palpable  breach  of  the  constitu-
tion. And  if  the  judicial department  alone should


1  Madison's  Virginia  Report,  Jan.  1800,  p.  B,  9.


352 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

attempt  any  usurpation,  congress,  in  its  legislative
capacity,  has  full  power  to  abrogate  the  injurious  effects
of  such  a  decision.  Practically  speaking,  therefore,  there
can  be  very  little  danger  of  any  such  usurpation  or
deliberate  breach.

§  380.  But  it  is  always  a  doubtful  mode  of  reason-
ing to  argue  from  the  possible  abuse  of  powers,  that
they  do  not  exist.1  Let  us  look  for  a  moment  at  the
consequences,  which  flow  from  the  doctrine  on  the
other  side.  There  are  now  twenty-four  states  in  the
Union,  and  each  has,  in  its  sovereign  capacity,  a  right
to  decide  for  itself  in  the  last  resort,  what  is  the  true
construction  of  the  constitution  ;  what  are  its  powers  ;
and  what  are  the  obligations  founded  on  it.  We  may,
then,  have,  in  the  free  exercise  of  that  right,  twenty-
four  honest,  but  different  expositions  of  every  power  in
that  constitution,  and  of  every  obligation  involved  in  it.
What  one  state  may  deny,  another  may  assert ;  what
one  may  assert  at  one  time,  it  may  deny  at  another
time.  This  is  not  mere  supposition.  It  has,  in  point
of  fact,  taken  place.  There  never  has  been  a  single
constitutional  question  agitated,  where  different  states,
if  they  have  expressed  any  opinion,  have  not  ex-
pressed different  opinions  ;  and  there  have  been,  and,
from  the  fluctuating  nature  of  legislative  bodies,  it  may
be  supposed,  that  there  will  continue  to  be,  cases,  in
which  the  same  state  will  at  different  times  hold  dif-
ferent opinions  on  the  same  question.  Massachusetts
at  one  time  thought  the  embargo  of  1807  unconstitu-
tional ;  at  another  a  majority,  from  the  change  of  par-
ties, was  as  decidedly  the  other  way.  Virginia,  in
1810,  thought  that  the  Supreme  Court  was  the  common

i  See  Anderson  v.  Dunn,  6  Wheaton's  R.  204,  232.


CH.  IV.]  FINAL INTERPRETER.  359

arbiter;  in  1829  she  thoughl  differently.1  What,  then,
is  to  become  of  the  constitution,  if  its  powers  are  thus
perpetually  to  be  the  subject  of  debate  and  controversy  ?
What  exposition  is  to  be  allowed  to  be  of  authority  ?
Is  the  exposition  of  one  state  to  be  of  authority  there,
and  the  reverse  to  be  of  authority  in  a  neighbouring
state,  entertaining  an  opposite  exposition  1  Then,
there  would  be  at  no  time  in  the  United  States  the
same  constitution  in  operation  over  the  whole  people.
Is  a  power,  which  is  doubted,  or  denied  by  a  single
state,  to  be  suspended  either  wholly,  or  in  that  state  ?
Then,  the  constitution  is  practically  gone,  as  a  uniform
system,  or  indeed,  as  any  system  at  all,  at  the  pleasure
of  any  state.  If  the  power  to  nullify  the  constitution
exists  in  a  single  state,  it  may  rightfully  exercise  it
at  its  pleasure.  Would  not  this  be  a  far  more  dangerous
and  mischievous  power,  than  a  power  granted  by  all
the  states  to  the  judiciary  to  construe  the  constitution?
Would  not  a  tribunal,  appointed  under  the  authority  of
all,  be  more  safe,  than  twenty-four  tribunals  acting  at
their  own  pleasure,  and  upon  no  common  principles  and
co-operation?  Suppose  congress  should  declare  war;
shall  one  state  have  power  to  suspend  it  ?  Suppose
congress  should  make  peace;  shall  one  state  have  power
to  involve  the  whole  country  in  war  ?  Suppose  the  pre-
sident and  senate  should  make  a  treaty  ;  shall  one  state
declare  it  a  nullity,  or  subject  the  whole  country  to  re-
prisals for  refusing  to  obey  it  ?  Yet,  if  every  state  may
for  itself  judge  of  its  obligations  under  the  constitution,
it  may  disobey  a  particular  law  or  treaty,  because  it
may  deem  it  an  unconstitutional exercise  of  power,


i  Dane's  App.  §  44,  45,  p.  52  to  50, §  54,  p.  66  ; 4 Elliot's  Debntos,
338,339.

VOL.  !.  45


354  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

although  every  other  state  shall  concur  in  a  contrary
opinion.  Suppose  congress  should  lay  a  tax  upon  im-
ports burthensome  to  a  particular  state,  or  for  purposes,
which  such  state  deems  unconstitutional,  and  yet  all
the  other  states  are  in  its  favour ;  is  the  law  laying  the
tax  to  become  a  nullity  ?  That  would  be  to  allow  one
state  to  withdraw  a  power  from  the  Union,  which  was
given  by  the  people  of  all  the  states.  That  would  be
to  make  the  general  government  the  servant  of  twenty-
four  masters,  of  different  wills  and  different  purposes,
and  yet  bound  to  obey  them  all.1

§  381.  The  argument,  therefore,  arising  from  a  pos-
sibility of  an  abuse  of  power,  is,  to  say  the  least  of  it,
quite  as  strong  the  other  way.  The  constitution  is  in
quite  as  perilous  a  state  from  the  power  of  overthrow-
ing.it  lodged  in  every  state  in  the  Union,  as  it  can  be
by.being  lodged  in  any  department  of  the  federal  gov-
ernment. There  is  this  difference,  however,  in  the
cases,  that  if  there  be  federal  usurpation,  it  may  be
checked  by  the  people  of  all  the  states  in  a  constitu-
tional way.  If  there  be  usurpation  by  a  single  state,  it
is,  upon  the  theory  we  are  considering,  irremediable.
Other  difficulties,  however,  attend  the  reasoning  we
are  considering.  When  it  is  said,  that  the  deci-
sion of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  last  resort  is  ob-
ligatory, and  final  "  in  relation  to  the  authorities  of  the
other  departments  of  the  government,"  is  it  meant  of
the  federal  government  only,  or  of  the  states  also  1  If
of  the  former  only,  then  the  constitution  is  no  longer
the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  although  all  the  state
functionaries  are  bound  by  an  oath  to  support  it.  If
of  the  latter  also,  then  it  is  obligatory  upon  the  state

1  Webster's  Speeches,  420 ;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  339.


CH.  IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  355

legislatures,  executives,  and  judiciaries.  It  binds
them  ;  and  yet  it  does  not  bind  the  people  of  the
states,  or  the  states  in  their  sovereign  capacity.  The
states  may  maintain  one  construction  of  it,  and  the
functionaries  of  the  state  are  bound  by  another.  If,  on
the  other  hand,  the  state  functionaries  are  to  follow
the  construction  of  the  state,  in  opposition  to  the  con-
struction of  the  Supreme  Court,  then  the  constitution,  as
actually  administered  by  the  different  functionaries,  is
different ;  and  the  duties  required  of  them  may  be
opposite,  and  in  collision  with  each  other.  If  such  a
state  of  things  is  the  just  result  of  the  reasoning,  may
it  not  justly  be  suspected,  that  the  reasoning  itself  is
unsound  1

§  382.  Again ;  it  is  a  part  of  this  argument,  that  the
judicial  interpretation  is  not  binding  "  in  relation  to  the
rights  of  the  parties  to  the  constitutional  compact.''
"  On  any  other  hypothesis  the  delegation  of  judicial
power  would  annul  the  authority  delegating  it."  Who
then  are  the  parties  to  this  contract?  Who  did  dele-
gate the  judicial  power  1  Let  the  instrument  answer
for  itself.  The  people  of  the  United  States  are  the
parties  to  the  constitution.  The  people  of  the  United
States  delegated  the  judicial  power.  It  was  not  a
delegation  by  the  people  of  one  state,  but  by  the  peo-
ple of  all  the  states.  Why  then  is  not  a  judicial  de-
cision binding  in  each  state,  until  all,  who  delegated  the
power,  in  some  constitutional  manner  concur  in  annul-
ling or  overruling  the  decision  ?  Where  shall  we  find
the  clause,  which  gives  the  power  to  each  state  to  con-
strue the  constitution  for  all;  and  thus  of  itself  to
supersede  in  its  own  favour  the  construction  of  all  the
rest?  Would  not  this  be  justly  deemed  a  delegation
of  judicial  power,  which would  annul the  authority


356 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

delegating  it  ?  *  Since  the  whole  people  of  the  United
States  have  concurred  in  establishing  the  constitution,
it  would  seem  most  consonant  with  reason  to  presume,
in  the  absence  of  all  contrary  stipulations,  that  they  did
not  mean,  that  its  obligatory  force  should  depend  upon
the  dictate  or  opinion  of  any  single  state.  Even  under
the  confederation,  (as  has  been  already  stated,)  it  was
unanimously  resolved  by  congress,  that  "  as  state  legis-
latures are  not  competent  to  the  making  of  such  com-
pacts or  treaties,  [with  foreign  states,]  so  neither  are
they  competent  in  that  capacity  authoritatively  to  decide
on,  or  ascertain  the  construction  and  sense  of  them."
And  the  reasoning,  by  which  this  opinion  is  supported,
seems  absolutely  unanswerable.2  If  this  was  true
under  such  an  instrument,  and  that  construction  was
avowed  before  the  whole  American  people,  and  brought
home  to  the  knowledge  of  the  state  legislatures,  how
can  we  avoid  the  inference,  that  under  the  constitu-
tion, where  an  express  judicial  power  in  cases  arising
under  the  constitution  was  provided  for,  the  people
must  have  understood  and  intended,  that  the  states
should  have  no  right  to  question,  or  control  such  judi-
cial interpretation  ?

^  383.  In  the  next  place,  as  the  judicial  power  ex-
tends to  all  cases  arising  under  the  constitution,  and
that  constitution  is  declared  to  be  the  supreme  law,
that  supremacy  would  naturally  be  construed  to  ex-

1  There  is  vast  force  in  the  reasoning  of  Mr.  Webster  on  this  sub-
ject, in  his  great  speech  on  Mr.  Foot's  Resolutions  in  the  senate,  in
1830,  which  well  deserves  the  attention  of  every  statesman  and  jurist.
See  4  Elliot's  Debates,  338,  339,  343,  344,  and  Webster's  Speeches,
p.  407,  408,  418,  419,  420  ;  Id.  430,  431,  432.

2  Journals  of  Congress,  April  13,  1787,  p.  32.  &c.  Rawle  on  the
Constitution,  A  pp.  2,  p.  310,  &c.


CH.  IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  357

tend,  not  only  over  the  citizens,  but  over  the  stales.1
This,  however,  is  not  left  to  implication,  for  it  is  de-
clared to  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  "  any  thing
in  the  constitution  or  laws  of  any  state  to  the  contrary
notwithstanding."  The  people  of  any  state  cannot,
then,  by  any  alteration  of  their  state  constitution,  de-
stroy, or  impair  that  supremacy.  How,  then,  can  they
do  it  in  any  other  less  direct  manner?  Now,  it  is  the
proper  function  of  the  judicial  department  to  interpret
laws,  and  by  the  very  terms  of  the  constitution  to  inter-
pret the  supreme  law.  Its  interpretation,  then,  becomes
obligatory  and  conclusive  upon  all  the  departments  of
the  federal  government,  and  upon  the  whole  people,
so  far  as  their  rights  and  duties  are  derived  from,  or
affected  by  that  constitution.  If  then  all  the  depart-
ments of  the  national  government  may  rightfully  exercise
all  the  powers,  which  the  judicial  department  has,  by
its  interpretation,  declared  to  be  granted  by  the  consti-
tution ;  and  are  prohibited  from  exercising  those,  which
are  thus  declared  not  to  be  granted  by  it,  would  it  not
be  a  solecism  to  hold,  notwithstanding,  that  such  right-
ful exercise  should  not  be  deemed  the  supreme  law  of
the  land,  and  such  prohibited  powers  should  still  be  deem-
ed granted?  It  would  seem  repugnant  to  the  first  no-
tions of  justice,  that  in  respect  to  the  same  instrument  of
government,  different  powers,  and  duties,  and  obliga-
tions should  arise,  and  different  rules  should  prevail,
at  the  same  time  among  the  governed,  from  a  right  of
interpreting  the  same  words  (manifestly  used  in  one
sense  only)  in  different,  nay,  in  opposite  senses.  If
there  ever  was  a  case,  in  which  uniformity  of  interpre-
tation might  well  be  deemed  a  necessary  postulate,  it

'  The  Federalist,  No.  33.


358 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

would  seem  to  be  that  of  a  fundamental  law  of  a  gov-
ernment. It  might  otherwise  follow,  that  the  same
individual,  as  a  magistrate,  might  be  bound  by  one  rule,
and  in  his  private  capacity  by  another,  at  the  very  same
moment.

§  384.  There  would  be  neither  wisdom  nor  policy
in  such  a  doctrine  ;  and  it  would  deliver  over  the  con-
stitution to  interminable  doubts,  founded  upon  the
fluctuating  opinions  and  characters  of  those,  who  should,
from  time  to  time,  be  called  to  administer  it.  Such  a
constitution  could,  in  no  just  sense,  be  deemed  a  law,
much  less  a  supreme  or  fundamental  law.  It  would
have  none  of  the  certainty  or  universality,  which  are
the  proper  attributes  of  such  a  sovereign  rule.  It
would  entail  upon  us  all  the  miserable  servitude,  which
has  been  deprecated,  as  the  result  of  vague  and  uncer-
tain jurisprudence.  Misera  est  servitus,  uhi  jus  est
vagum  aut  incertum.  It  would  subject  us  to  constant
dissensions,  and  perhaps  to  civil  broils,  from  the  perpet-
ually recurring  conflicts  upon  constitutional  questions.
On  the  other  hand,  the  worst,  that  could  happen  from  a
wrong  decision  of  the  judicial  department,  would  be,
that  it  might  require  the  interposition  of  congress,  or,  in
the  last  resort,  of  the  amendatory  power  of  the  states,
to  redress  the  grievance.

§  385.  We  find  the  power  to  construe  the  constitu-
tion expressly  confided  to  the  judicial  department,
without  any  limitation  or  qualification,  as  to  its  conclu-
siveness. Who,  then,  is  at  liberty,  by  general  implica-
tions, not  from  the  terms  of  the  instrument,  but  from
mere  theory,  and  assumed  reservations  of  sovereign
right,  to  insert  such  a  limitation  or  qualification  1  We
find,  that  to  produce  uniformity  of  interpretation,  and
to preserve the  constitution,  as  a  perpetual  bond  of


CH.  IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  359

union,  a  supreme  arbiter  or  authority  of  construing  is,
if  not  absolutely  indispensable,  at  least,  of  the  highest
possible  practical  utility  and  importance.  Who,  then,
is  at  liberty  to  reason  down  the  terms  of  the  constitu-
tion, so  as  to  exclude  their  natural  force  and  operation?
§  386.  We  find,  that  it  is  the  known  course  of  the
judicial  department  of  the  several  states  to  decide  in
the  last  resort  upon  all  constitutional  questions  arising
in  judgment ;  and  that  this  has  always  been  maintained
as  a  rightful  exercise  of  authority,  and  conclusive  upon
the  whole  state.1  As  such,  it  has  been  constantly
approved  by  the  people,  and  never  withdrawn  from
the  courts  by  any  amendment  of  their  constitutions,
when  the  people  have  been  called  to  revise  them.  We
find,  that  the  people  of  the  several  states  have  con-
stantly relied  upon  this  last  judicial  appeal,  as  the  bul-
wark of  their  state  rights  and  liberties  ;  and  that  it  is
in  perfect  consonance  with  the  whole  structure  of  the
jurisprudence  of  the  common  law.  Under  such  cir-
cumstances, is  it  not  most  natural  to  presume,  that  the
same  rule  wras  intended  to  be  applied  to  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United  States  ?  And  when  we  find,  that
the  judicial  department  of  the  United  States  is  actually
entrusted  with  a  like  powrer,  is  it  not  an  irresistible  pre-
sumption, that  it  had  the  same  object,  and  was  to  have
the  same  universally  conclusive  effect  ?  Even  under
the  confederation,  an  instrument  framed  with  infinitely
more  jealousy  and  deference  for  state  rights,  the  judg-
ments of  the  judicial  department  appointed  to  decide
controversies  between  states  was  declared  to  be  final
and  conclusive  ; and  the appellate power  in  other

i  2  Elliot's  Debates,  248,  328,  329,  395  ; Grimke's  Speech  in  1828,
p.  25,  &c. ;  Dane's  App.  §  44,  45,  p.  52  to  59 ;  Id.  §  48,  p.  62.


360 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

cases  was  held  to  overrule  all  state  decisions  and  state
legislation.1

^  387.  If,  then,  reasoning  from  the  terms  of  the  con-
stitution, and  the  known  principles  of  our  jurisprudence,
the  appropriate  conclusion  is,  that  the  judicial  depart-
ment of  the  United  States  is,  in  the  last  resort,  the  final
expositor  of  the  constitution,  as  to  all  questions  of  a  ju-
dicial nature;  let  us  see,  in  the  next  place,  how  far  this
reasoning  acquires  confirmation  from  the  past  history
of  the  constitution,  and  the  practice  under  it.

§  388.  That  this  view  of  the  constitution  was  taken
by  its  framers  and  friends,  and  was  submitted  to  the
people  before  its  adoption,  is  positively  certain.  The
Federalist 2  says,  "  Under  the  national  government,  trea-
ties and  articles  of  treaties,  as  well  as  the  law  of  na-
tions, will  always  be  expounded  in  one  sense,  and  ex-
ecuted in  the  same  manner  ;  whereas,  adjudications  on
the  same  points  and  questions  in  thirteen  states,  or
three  or  four  confederacies,  will  not  always  accord,  or
be  consistent ;  and  that  as  well  from  the  variety  of  in-
dependent courts  and  judges  appointed  by  different  and
independent  governments,  as  from  the  different  local
laws,  which  may  affect  and  influence  them.  The  wis-
dom of  the  convention  in  committing  such  questions  to
the  jurisdiction  and  judgment  of  courts  appointed  by,
and  responsible  only  to,  one  national  government,  can-
not be  too  much  commended."  Again,  referring  to  the
objection  taken,  that  the  government  .was  national,  and
not  a  confederacy  of  sovereign  states,  and  after  stating,
that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  national  government  extend-
ed to  certain  enumerated  objects  only,  and  left  the  resi-


i  Dane's  App.  §  52,  p.  05 ; Penhallow  v.  Doane,  o  Dall.  54  ;  Jour-
nals of  Congress,  1779,  vol.  5,  p.  86  to  90  ;  4  Cranch,  2.
2  The  Federalist.  No  3


CH. IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  361

due  to  the  several  states,  it  proceeds  to  say  i1  "It  is
true,  that  in  controversies  between  the  two  jurisdictions
(state  and  national)  the  tribunal,  which  is  ultimately  to
decide,  is  to  be  established  under  the  general  govern-
ment. But  this  does  not  change  the  principle  of  the
case.  The  decision  is  to  be  impartially  made  accord-
ing to  the  rules  of  the  constitution,  and  all  the  usual  and
most  effectual  precautions  are  taken  to  secure  this  im-
partiality. Some  such  tribunal  is  clearly  essential  to
prevent  an  appeal  to  the  sword,  and  a  dissolution  of  the
compact.  And  that  it  ought  to  be  established  under
the  general,  rather  than  under  the  local  governments,
or,  to  speak  more  properly,  that  it  could  be  safely  es-
tablished under  the  first  alone,  is  a  position  not  likely
to  be  combated."  2

$j  389.  The  subject  is  still  more  elaborately  consid-
ered in  another  number,3  which  treats  of  the  judicial
department  in  relation  to  the  extent  of  its  powers.  It
is  there  said,  that  there  ought  always  to  be  a  constitu-
tional method  of  giving  efficacy  to  constitutional  provis-
ions ;  that  if  there  are  such  things  as  political  axioms,
the  propriety  of  the  judicial  department  of  a  govern-
ment being  co-extensive  with  its  legislature,  may  be
ranked  among  the  number ; 4  that  the  mere  necessity  of
uniformity  in  the  interpretation  of  the  national  lawT  de-
cides the  question ;  that  thirteen  independent  courts  of
final  jurisdiction  over  the  same  causes  is  a  hydra  of
government,  from  which  nothing  but  contradiction  and
confusion  can  proceed  ;  that  controversies  between  the

i  The  Federalist,  No. 39.

2  See  also  The  Federalist,  No.  33.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  SO.

4  The  same  remarks  will  be  found  pressed  with  ^reat  force  by  Mr.
Chief  Justice  Marshall,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court  in  Cohens
v.  Virginia,  (6  Wheat.  264,_384.)

vol.  i.  46


362  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

nation  and  its  members  can  only  be  properly  referred
to  the  national  tribunal ;  that  the  peace  of  the  whole
ought  not  to  be  left  at  the  disposal  of  a  part ;  and  that
whatever  practices  may  have  a  tendency  to  disturb  the
harmony  of  the  states,  are  proper  objects  of  federal  su-
perintendence and  control.1

§  390.  The  same  doctrine  was  constantly  avowed  in
the  state  conventions,  called  to  ratify  the  constitution.
With  some  persons  it  formed  a  strong  objection  to  the
constitution ;  with  others  it  was  deemed  vital  to  its  ex-

i  In  The  Federalist,  No.  78  and  82,  the  same  course  of  reasoning
is  pursued,  and  the  final  nature  of  the  appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  Su-
preme Court  is  largely  insisted  on.  In  the  Convention  of  Connecticut.
Mr.  Ellsworth  (afterwards  Chief  Justice  of  the  United  States)  used  the
following  language  :  "This  constitution  defines  the  extent  of  the  powers
of  the  general  government.  If  the  general  legislature  should  at  any
time  overleap  their  limits,  the  judicial  department  is  the  constitutional
check.  If  the  United  States  go  beyond  their  powers  ;  if  they  make  a
law,  which  the  constitution  does  not  authorize,  it  is  void  ;  and  the  judi-
cial'power,  the  natio  ml  judges,  who,  to  secure  their  impartiality,  are  to
be  made  independent,  will  declare  it  void.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the
states  go  beyond  their  limits  ;  if  they  make  a  law,  which  is  a  usurpation
upon  the  general  government,  the  law  is  void,  and  upright  and  indepen-
dent judges  will  declare  it.  Still  however,  if  the  United  States  and  the
individual  states  will  quarrel  ;  if  they  want  to  fight,  they  may  do  it,  and
no  frame  of  government  can  possibly  prevent  it."  In  the  debates  in  the
South  Carolina  legislature,  when  the  subject  of  calling  a  convention  to
ratify  or  reject  the  constitution  was  before  them  *  Mr.  Charles  Pinckney
(one  of  the  members  of  the  convention)  avowed  the  doctrine  in  the
strongest  terms.  "  That  a  supreme  federal  jurisdiction  was  indispensa-
ble," said  he,  "cannot  be  denied.  It  is  equally  true,  that  in  order  to  en-
sure the  administration  of  justice,  it  was  necessary  to  give  all  the  powers,
original  as  well  as  appellate,  the  constitution  has  enumerated.  Without
it  we  could  not  expect  a  due  observance  of  treaties;  that  the  state  ju-
diciaries would  confine  themselves  within  their  proper  sphere  ;  or  that  a
general  sense  of  jusUee  would  pervade  the  Union,  &c.  That  to  ensure
these,  extensive  authorities  were  necessary  :  particularly  so,  were  they  in  a
tribunal,  constituted  as  this  is,  whose  duty  it  would  be,  not  only  to  de-
cide all  national  questions,  which  should  arise  within  the  Union;  but  to
control  and  keep  the  state  judiciaries  within  their  proper  limits,  when-
ever they  should  attempt  to  interfere  with  the  power."

*  Debates  in  1733,  printed  by  A.  E.  Miller,  1831,  Charleston,  p.  7.


CH. IV.]  FIJVAL  INTERPRETER.  363

istence  and  value.1  So,  that  it  is  indisputable,  that  the
constitution  was  adopted  under  a  full  knowledge  of  this
exposition  of  its  grant  of  power  to  the  judicial  depart-
ment.2

^  391.  This  is  not  all.  The  constitution  has  now
been  in  full  operation  more  than  forty  years  ;  and  during
this  period  the  Supreme  Court  has  constantly  exercised
this  power  of  final  interpretation  in  relation,  not  only  to
the  constitution,  and  laws  of  the  Union,  but  in  relation
to  state  acts  and  state  constitutions  and  laws,  so  far  as
they  affected  the  constitution,  and  laws,  and  treaties  of
the  United  States.3  Their  decisions  upon  these  grave
questions  have  never  been  repudiated,  or  impaired  by
congre^.4  No  state  has  ever  deliberately  or  forcibly
r  *s  sted  the  execution  of  the  judgments  founded  upon

1  It  would  occupy  too  much  space  to  quote  the  passages  at  large.
Take  for  an  instance,  in  the  Virginia  debates,  Mr.  Madison's  remarks.
'*  It  may  be  a  misfortune,  that  in  organizing  any  government,  the  expli-
cation of  its  authority  should  be  left  to  any  of  its  co-ordinate  branches.
There  is  no  example  in  any  country,  where  it  is  otherwise.  There  is
no  new  policy  in  submitting  it  to  the  judiciary  of  the  United  States."
2  Elliot's  Debates,  390.  See  also  Id.  380,  383,  395,  400,  404,  418.  See
also  North  Carolina  Debates,  3  Elliot's  Debates,  125,  127,  128,  130,  133,
134,  13  ,  141,  142,  143  ;  Pennsylvania  Debates,  3  Elliot's  Debates,  280,
313.  Mr.  Luther  Martin,  in  his  letter  to  the  Maryland  Convention,  said  :
"  By  the  third  article  the  judicial  power  is  vested  in  one  Supreme  Court,
&c.  These  courts,  and  these  only,  will  have  a  right  to  decide  upon  the
laws  of  the  United  States,  and  all  questions  arising  upon  their  construc-
tion, &c.  Whether,  therefore,  any  laws,  &c.  of  congress,  or  acts  of  its
president,  &c.  are  contrary  to,  or  warranted  by  the  constitution,  rests
only  with  the  judges,  who  are  appointed  by  congress  to  determine  ;  hy
vthose  determinations  every  state  is  bound.''1  3  Elliot's  Debates,  44,  45  ;
Yates's  Minutes,  &c. See  also  The  Federalist,  No.  78.

2  See  Mr.  Pinckney's  Observations  cited  in  Grimke's  Speech  in  1828,
p.  86,  87.

3  Dane's  App.  §  44,  p  53,  54,  55  ;  Grimke's  Speech,  1828,  p.  34  to  42.

4  In  the  debates  in  the  first  congress  organized  under  the  constitution,
the  same  doctrine  was  openly  avowed,  as  indeed  it  has  constantly  been
by  the  majority  of  congress  at  all  subsequent  periods.  See  1  Lloyd's
Debates,  219  to  590 ;  2  Lloyd's  Debates,  284  to  327.


364  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III,

them  ;  and  the  highest  state  tribunals  have,  with  scarcely
a  single  exception,  acquiesced  in,  and,  in  most  instan-
ces, assisted  in  executing  them.1  During  the  same  pe-
riod, eleven  states  have  been  admitted  into  the  Union,
under  a  full  persuasion,  that  the  same  power  would  be
exerted  over  them.  Many  of  the  states  have,  at  differ-
ent times  within  the  same  period,  been  called  upon  to
consider,  and  examine  the  grounds,  on  which  the  doc-
trine has  been  maintained,  at  the  solicitation  of  other
states,  which  felt,  that  it  operated  injuriously,  or  might
operate  injuriously  upon  their  interests.  A  great  ma-
jority of  the  states,  which  have  been  thus  called  upon  in
their  legislative  capacities  to  express  opinions,  have
maintained  the  correctness  of  the  doctrine,  and  the
beneficial  effects  of  the  power,  as  a  bond  of  union,  in
terms  of  the  most  unequivocal  nature.2 Whenever  any

1  Chief  Justice  M'Kean,  in  Comviomvcalth  v.  Cobbett,  (3  Dall.  473,)
seems  to  have  adopted  a  modified  doctrine,  and  to  have  held,  that  the
Supreme  Court  was  not  the  common  arbiter;  but  if  not,  the  only  remedy
was,  not  by  a  state  deciding  for  itself,  as  in  case  of  a  treaty  between  inde-
pendent governments,  but  by  a  constitutional  amendment  by  the  states.
But  see,  on  the  other  hand,  the  opinion  of  Chief  Justice  Spencer,  in  An-
drews v.  Montgomery,  19  Johns.  R.  164.

2  Massachusetts,  in  her  Resolve  of  February  12,  1799,  (p.  57,)  in
answer  to  the  Resolutions  of  Virginia  of  1798,  declared,  "  that  the  decis-
ion of  all  cases  in  law  and  equity,  arising  under  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  and  the  construction  of  all  laws  made  in  pursuance  there-
of, are  exclusively  vested  by  the  people  in  the  judicial  courts  of  the
United  States  ;"  and  "  that  the  people  in  that  solemn  compact,  which  is
declared  to  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  have  not  constituted  the
state  legislatures  the  judges  of  the  acts  or  measures  of  the  federal  gov-
ernment, but  have  confided  to  them  the  power  of  proposing  such  amend-
ments," &c. ;  and  "  that  by  this  construction  of  the  constitution,  an  ami-
cable and  dispassionate  remedy  is  pointed  out  for  any  evil,  which  expe-
rience may  prove  to  exist,  and  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  the  United
States  may  be  preserved  without  interruption."  See  also  Dane's  App.
§  44,  p.  5G ;  Id.  80.  Mr.  Webster's  Speech  in  the  Senate,  in  1830,  con-
tains an  admirable  exposition  of  the  same  doctrines.  Webster's  Speeches,
410,  419,420,421.  In  June,  1821,  the  House  of  Representatives  of  New-
Hampshire  passed certain  resolutions.  (172  yeas to  9 nays,)  drawn


CH.  IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  365

amendment  has  been  proposed  to  change  the  tribunal,
and  substitute  another  common  umpire  or  interpreter,
it  has  rarely  received  the  concurrence  of  more  than  two
or  three  states,  and  has  been  uniformly  rejected  by  a
great  majority,  either  silently,  or  by  an  express  dissent.
And  instances  have  occurred,  in  which  the  legislature
of  the  same  state  has,  at  different  times,  avowed  oppo-
site opinions,  approving  at  one  time,  what  it  had  denied,
or  at  least  questioned  at  another.  So,  that  it  may  be
asserted  with  entire  confidence,  that  for  forty  years
three  fourths  of  all  the  states  composing  the  Union  have
expressly  assented  to,  or  silently  approved,  this  con-
struction of  the  constitution,  and  have  resisted  every
effort  to  restrict,  or  alter  it.  A  weight  of  public  opin-
ion among  the  people  for  suchaperiod,  uniformly  thrown
into  one  scale  so  strongly,  and  so  decisively,  in  the
midst  of  all  the  extraordinary  changes  of  parties,  the
events  of  peace  and  of  war,  and  the  trying  conflicts  of
public  policy  and  state  interests,  is  perhaps  unexampled
in  the  history  of  all  other  free  governments.1 It  affords,

up  (as  is  understood)  by  one  of  her  most  distinguished  statesmen,  as-
serting-the  same  doctrines.  Delaware,  in  January,  1831,  and  Connecti-
cut and  Massachusetts  held  the  same,  in  May,  1831.

1  Virginia  and  Kentucky  denied  the  power  in  1793  and  1800;  Mas-
sachusetts, Delaware,  Rhode-Island,  New- York,  Connecticut,  New-
Hampshire,  and  Vermont  disapproved  of  the  Virginia  resolutions,  and
passed  counter  resolutions.  (North  American  Review,  October,  J 830,
p.  500.)  No  other  state  appears  to  have  approved  the  Virginia  resolu-
tions. (Ibid.)  In  1810  Pennsylvania  proposed  the  appointment  of  an-
other tribunal  than  the  Supreme  Court  to  determine  disputes  between
the  general  and  state  governments.  Virginia,  on  that  occasion,  affirm-
ed, that  the  Supreme  Court  was  the  proper  tribunal ;  and  in  that  opinion
New-Hampshire,  Vermont,  North-Carolina,  Maryland,  Georgia,  Ten-
nessee, Kentucky,  and  New-Jersey  concurred  ;  and  no  one  state  approv-
ed of  the  amendment.  (North  American  Review,  October,  1830,  p.  507
to  512  ;  Dane's  App.  §  55,  p.  67  ;  G  Wheat.  R.  358,  note.)  Recently,  in
March,  1831,  Pennsylvania  has  resolved,  that  the  25th  section  of  the
judiciary  act  of  1789,  ch.*20,  which  gives  the  Supreme  Court  appellate


366 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

as  satisfactory  a  testimony  in  favour  of  the  just  and  safe
operation  of  the  system,  as  can  well  be  imagined  ;  and,
as  a  commentary  upon  the  constitution  itself,  it  is  as
absolutely  conclusive,  as  any  ever  can  be,  and  affords
the  only  escape  from  the  occurrence  of  civil  conflicts,
and  the  delivery  over  of  the  subject  to  interminable
disoutes.1


jurisdiction  from  state  courts  on  constitutional  questions,  is  authorized
by  the  constitution,  and  sanctioned  by  experience,  and  also  all  other
laws  empowering  the  federal  judiciary  to  maintain  the  supreme  laws.

1  Upon  this  subject  the  speech  of  Mr.  Webster  in  the  Senate,  in  1830,
presents  the  whole  argument  in  a  very  condensed  and  powerful  form.
The  following  passage  is  selected,  as  peculiarly  appropriate  :  "  The
people,  then,  sir,  erected  this  government.  They  gave  it  a  constitution,
and  in  that  constitution  they  have  enumerated  the  powers,  which  they
bestow  on  it.  They  have  made  it  a  limited  government.  They  have
defined  its  authority.  They  have  restrained  it  to  the  exercise  of  such
powers,  as  are  granted  ;  and  all  others,  they  declare,  are  reserved  to  the
states,  or  the  people.  But,  sir,  they  have  not  stopped  here.  If  they  had,
they  would  have  accomplished  but  half  their  work.  No  definition
can  be  so  clear,  as  to  avoid  possibility  of  doubt;  no  limitation  so  pre-
cise, as  to  exclude  all  uncertainty.  Who,  then,  shall  construe  this
grant  of  the  people  ?  Who  shall  interpret  their  will,  where  it  may  be
supposed  they  have  left  it  doubtful  ?  With  whom  do  they  repose  this
ultimate  right  of  deciding  on  the  powers  of  the  government?  Sir,  they
have  settled  all  this  in  the  fullest  manner.  They  have  left  it,  with  the
government  itself,  in  its  appropriate  branches.  Sir,  the  very  chief  end,
the  main  design,  for  which  the  whole  constitution  was  framed  and
adopted,  was  to  establish  a  government,  that  should  not  be  obliged  to
act  through  state  agency,  or  depend  on  state  opinion  and  state  discre-
tion. The  people  had  had  quite  enough  of  that  kind  of  government,
under  the  confederacy.  Under  that  system,  the  legal  action  —  the  ap-
plication of  law  to  individuals,  belonged  exclusively  to  the  states.  Con-
gress could  only  recommend  —  their  acts  were  not  of  binding  force,  till
the  states  had  adopted  and  sanctioned  them.  Are  we  in  that  condition
still?  Are  we  yet  at  the  mercy  of  state  discretion,  and  state  construc-
tion? Sir,  if  we  are,  then  vain  will  be  our  attempt  to  maintain  the  con-
stitution, under  which  we  sit.

"  But,  sir,  the  people  have  wisely  provided,  in  the  constitution  itself,  a
proper,  suitable  mode  and  tribunal  for  settling  questions  of  constitutional
law.  There  are,  in  the  constitution,  grants  of  powers  to  Congress  ;  and
restrictions  on  these  powers.  There  are,  also,  prohibitions  on  the  states.
Some  authority  must,  therefore,  necessarily  exist,  having  the'ultimate


CH.  IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  367

^  392.  In  this  review  of  the  power  of  the  judicial
department,  upon  a  question  of  its  supremacy  in  the  in-
terpretation of  the  constitution,  it  has  not  been  thought

jurisdiction  to  fix  and  ascertain  the  interpretation  of  those  grants,  re-
strictions, and  prohibitions.  The  constitution  has  itself  pointed  out,  or-
dained, and  established  that  authority.  How  has  it  accomplished  this
great  and  essential  end  ?  By  declaring,  sir,  that'/Ae  constitution  and
the  laws  of  tin  United  States,  made  in  pursuance  thereof,  shall  be  tht  eu-
preme  law  of  tin  land,  any  thing  in  the  constitution  or  laws  of  any  state  to
the  contrary  notwithstanding.1

"This,  sir,  was  the  first  great  step.  By  this,  the  supremacy  of  the
constitution  and  laws  of  the  United  States  is  declared.  The  people  so
will  it.  No  state  law  is  to  be  valid,  which  comes  in  conflict  with  the
constitution,  or  any  law  of  the  United  States  passed  in  pursuance  of  it.
But  who  shall  decide  this  question  of  interference  ?  To  whom  lies  the
last  appeal  ?  This,  sir,  the  constitution  itself  decides,  also,  by  declaring,
1  that  the  judicial  power  shall  extend  to  all  cases  arising  under  the  consti-
tution and  laws  of  the  United  States:  These  two  provisions,  sir,  cover
the  whole  ground.  They  arc,  in  truth,  the  keystone  ofthe  arch.  With
these,  it  is  a  constitution  ;  without  them,  it  is  a  confederacy.  In  pursu-
ance of  these  clear  and  express  provisions,  congress  established,  at  its
very  first  session,  in  the  judicial  act,  a  mode  for  carrying  them  into  full
effect,  and  for  bringing  all  questions  of  constitutional  power  to  the  final
decision  ofthe  Supreme  Court.  It  then,  sir,  became  a  government.  It
then  had  the  means  of  self-protection  ;  and,  but  for  this,  it  would,  in  all
probability,  have  been  now  among  things,  which  are  past.  Having  con-
stituted the  government,  and  declared  its  powers,  the  people  have  fur-
ther said,  that  since  somebody  must  decide  on  the  extent  of  these  pow-
ers, the  government  shall  itself  decide  ;  subject,  always,  like  other  pop-
ular governments,  to  its  responsibility  to  the  people.  And  now,  sir,  I
repeat,  how  is  it,  that  a  state  legislature  acquires  any  power  to  interfere  ?
Who,  or  what,  gives  them  the  right  to  say  to  the  people,  '  We,  who  are
your  agents  and  servants  for  one  purpose,  will  undertake  to  decide,  that
your  other  agents  and  servants,  appointed  by  you  for  another  purpose,
have  transcended  tiie  authority  you  gave  them!  '  The  reply  would  be,
I  think,  not  impertinent  —  '  Who  made  you  a  judge  over  another's  ser-
vants: To  their  <>wn  masters  they  stand  or  fall.'

"Sir,  I  deny  this  power  of  state  legislatures  altogether.  It  cannot
stand  the  test  of  examination.  Gentlemen  may  say,  that  in  an  extreme
case,  a  state  government  might  protect  the  people  from  intolerable  op-
pression. Sir,  in  such  a  case,  the  people  might  protect  themselves,  with-
out the  aid  ofthe  state  governments.  Such  a  case  warrants  revolution.
It  must  make,  when  it  comes,  a  law  for  itself.  A  nullifying  act  of  a  state
legislature  cannot  alter  the  case,  nor  make  resistance  any  more  lawful.


368 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

necessary  to  rely  on  the  deliberate  judgments  of  that  de-
partment in  affirmance  of  it.  But  it  may  be  proper  to
add,  that  the  judicial  department  has  not  only  con-
stantly exercised  this  right  of  interpretation  in  the  last
resort ;  but  its  whole  course  of  reasonings  and  opera-
tions has  proceeded  upon  the  ground,  that,  once  made,
the  interpretation  was  conclusive,  as  well  upon  the  states,
as  the  people.1

In  maintaining  these  sentiments,  sir,  I  am  but  asserting  the  rights  of  the
people.  I  state  what  they  have  declared,  and  insist  on  their  right  to
declare  it.  They  have  chosen  to  repose  this  power  in  the  general  gov-
ernment, and  I  think  it  my  duty  to  support  it,  like  other  constitutional


powers  "


See  also  1  Wilson's  Law  Lectures,  461,  4G2.  — It  is  truly  surprising,
that  Mr.  Vice-President  Calhoun,  in  his  Letter  of  the  28th  of  August,
1832,  to  Governor  Hamilton,  (published  while  the  present  work  was
passing  through  the  press,)  should  have  thought,  that  a  proposition
merely  offered  in  the  convention,  and  referred  to  a  committee  for  their
consideration,  that  "  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court  shall  be  ex-
tended to  all  controversies  between  the  United  States  and  an  individual
state,  or  the  United  States  and  the  citizens  of  an  individual  state,"  *  should,
in  connexion  with  others,  giving  a  negative  on  state  laws,  establish  the
conclusion,  that  the  convention,  which  framed  the  constitution,  was  oppos-
ed to  granting  the  power  to  the  general  government,  in  any  form,  to  exer-
cise any  control  whatever  over  a  state  by  force,  veto,  or  judicial  process,
or  in  any  other  form.  This  clause  for  conferring  jurisdiction  on  the
Supreme  Court  in  controversies  between  the  United  States  and  the  states,
must,  like  the  other  controversies  between  states,  or  between  individu-
als, referred  to  the  judicial  power,  have  been  intended  to  apply  exclu-
sively to  suits  of  a  civil  nature,  respecting  property,  debts,  contracts,  or
other  claims  by  the  United  States  against  a  state  ;  and  not  to  the  decis-
ion of  constitutional  questions  in  the  abstract.  At  a  subsequent  period
of  the  convention,  the  judicial  power  was  expressly  extended  to  all  cases
arising  under  the  constitution,  laws,  and  treaties  of  the  United  States,  and
to  all  controversies,  to  which  the  United  States  should  be  a  party ,f  thus
covering  the  whole  ground  of  a  right  to  decide  constitutional  questions
of  a  judicial  nature.  And  this,  as  the  Federalist  informs  us,  was  the
substitute  for  a  negative  upon  state  laws,  and  the  only  one,  which  was
deemed  safe  or  efficient. The  Federalist,  No.  80.

i  Martin  v.  Hunter,  1  Wheat.  R.  304,  334,  &c.  342  to  348  ;  Cohens  v.
The  State  of  Virginia,  6  Wheat.  11.  2o4,  370,  377  to  392;  Id.  413  to

*  Journal  of  Convention,  20th  Aug.  p.  2(J5.  j  Journal  of  Convention,  27th  Aug.  p.  298.


CH.  IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  369

^  393.  But  it  may  be  asked,  as  it  has  been  asked,
what  is  to  be  the  remedy,  if  there  be  any  misconstruc-
tion of  the  constitution  on  the  part  of  the  government

42>);  Bank  of  Hamilton  v.  Dudley,  2  Pcters's  R.  524  ;  Ware  v.  Hyllon,
3  Dall.  199  ;  1  Cond.  R.  99,  112.  The  language  of  Mr.  Chief  Justice
Marshall,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court  in  Cohens  v.  Virginia,
(6  Wheat.  384  to  390,)  presents  the  argument  in  favour  of  the  juris-
diction of  the  judicial  department  in  a  very  forcible  manner.  "  While
weighing  arguments  drawn  from  the  nature  of  government,  and
from  the  general  spirit  of  an  instrument,  and  urged  for  the  purpose
of  narrowing  the  construction,  which  the  words  of  that  instrument  seem
to  require,  it  is  proper  to  place  in  the  opposite  scale  those  principles,
drawn  from  the  same  sources,  which  go  to  sustain  the  words  in  their  full
operation  and  natural  import.  One  of  these,  which  has  been  pressed
with  great  force  by  the  counsel  for  the  plaintiffs  in  error,  is,  that  the  ju-
dicial power  of  every  well  constituted  government  must  be  co-extensive
with  the  legislative,  and  must  be  capable  of  deciding  every  judicial
question,  which  grows  out  of  the  constitution  and  laws.

"  If  any  proposition  may  be  considered  as  a  political  axiom,  this,  we
think,  may  be  so  considered.  In  reasoning  upon  it,  as  an  abstract  ques-
tion, there  would,  probably,  exist  no  contrariety  of  opinion  respecting  it.
Every  argument,  proving  the  necessity  of  the  department,  proves  also
the  propriety  of  giving  this  extent  to  it.  We  do  not  mean  to  say,  that
the  jurisdiction  of  the  courts  of  the  Union  should  be  construed  to  be  co-
extensive with  the  legislative,  merely  because  it  is  fit,  that  it  should  be
so  ;  but  we  mean  to  say,  that  this  fitness  furnishes  an  argument  in  con-
struing the  constitution,  which  ought  never  to  be  overlooked,  and  which
is  most  especially  entitled  to  consideration,  when  we  are  inquiring,
whether  the  words  of  the  instrument,  which  purport  to  establish  this
principle,  shall  be  contracted  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  it.

"The  mischievous  consequences  of  the  construction,  contended  for  on
the  part  of  Virginia,  are  also  entitled  to  great  consideration.  It  would
prostrate,  it  has  been  said,  the  government  and  its  laws  at  the  feet  of
every  state  in  the  Union.  And  would  not  this  be  its  effect?  What
power  of  the  government  could  be  executed  by  its  own  means,  in  any
state  disposed  to  resist  its  execution  by  a  course  of  legislation?  The
laws  must  be  executed  by  individuals  acting  within  the  several  states.
If  these  individuals  may  be  exposed  to  penalties,  and  if  the  courts  of  the
Union  cannot  correct  the  judgments,  by  which  these  penalties  may  be
enforced,  the  course  of  the  government  may  be,  at  any  time,  arrested  by
the  will  of  one  of  its  members.  Each  member  will  possess  a  veto  on  the
will  of  the  whole.

"  The  answer,  which  has  been  given  to  this  argument,  does  not  deny
its  truth,  but  insists,  that  confidence  is  reposed,  and  may  be  safely  re-

vol.  i.  47


370 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

of  the  United  States,  or  its  functionaries,  and  any  pow-
ers exercised  by  them,  not  warranted  by  its  true  mean-
ing ? To  this  question  a  general  answer  may  be  given

posed,  in  the  state  institutions  ;  and  that,  if  they  shall  ever  become  so
insane,  or  so  wicked,  as  to  seek  the  destruction  of  the  government,  they
may  accomplish  their  object  by  refusing  to  perform  the  functions  assign-
ed to  them.

"  We  readily  concur  with  the  counsel  for  the  defendant  in  the  decla-
ration, that  the  cases,  which  have  been  put,  of  direct  legislative  resist-
ance for  the  purpose  of  opposing  the  acknowledged  powers  of  the  gov-
ernment, are  extreme  cases,  and  in  the  hope,  that  they  will  never  occur  ;
but  we  cannot  help  believing,  that  a  general  conviction  of  the  total  in-
capacity ot  the  government  to  protect  itself  and  its  laws  in  such  cases,
would  contribute  in  no  inconsiderable  degree  to  their  occurrence.

"Let  it  be  admitted,  that  the  cases,  which  have  been  put,  are  extreme
and  improbable,  yet  there  are  gradations  of  opposition  to  the  laws,  far
short  of  those  cases,  which  might  have  a  baneful  influence  on  the  affairs
of  the  nation. Different  states  may  entertain  different  opinions  on  the
true  construction  of  the  constitutional  powers  of  congress. We  know,
that  at  one  time,  the  assumption  of  the  debts,  contracted  by  the  several
states  during  the  war  of  our  revolution,  was  deemed  unconstitutional  by
some  of  them. We  know,  too,  that  at  other  times,  certain  taxes,  impos-
ed by  congress,  have  been  pronounced  unconstitutional. Other  laws
have  been  questioned  partially,  while  they  were  supported  by  the  great
majority  of  the  American  people. We  have  no  assurance,  that  we  shall
be  less  divided,  than  we  have  been. States  may  legislate  in  conformity
to  their  opinions,  and  may  enforce  those  opinions  by  penalties. It  would
be  hazarding  too  much  to  assert,  that  the  judicatures  of  the  states  will
be  exempt  from  the  prejudices,  by  which  the  legislatures  and  people  are
influenced,  and  will  constitute perfectly  impartial  tribunals. In  many
states  the  judges  are  dependent  for  office  and  for  salary  on  the  will  of
the  legislature. The  constitution  of  the  United  States  furnishes  no  se-
curity against  the  universal  adoption  of  this  principle. When  we  ob-
serve the  importance,  which  that  constitution  attaches  to  the  indepen-
dence of  judges,  we  are  the  less  inclined  to  suppose,  that  it  can  have
intended  to  leave  these  constitutional  questions  to  tribunals,  where  this
independence  may  not  exist,  in  all  eases  where  a  state  shall  prosecute
an  individual,  who  claims  the  protection  of  an  act  of  congress. These
prosecutions  may  take  place,  even  without  a  legislative  act. A  person,
making  a  seizure  under  an  act  of  congress,  may  be  indicted  as  a  tres-
passer, if  force  has  been  employed,  and  of  this  a  jury  may  judge. How
extensive  may  be  the  mischief,  if  the  first  decisions  in  such  cases  should
be  final !

"These  collisions  may  take  place  in  times  of  no  extraordinary  com-


CH.  IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  371

in  the  words  of  its  early  expositors :  "  The  same,  as  it"
the  state  legislatures  should  violate  their  respective  con-
stitutional authorities."  In  the  first  instance,  if  this  should

motion.  But  a  constitution  is  framed  for  ages  to  come,  and  is  designed
to  approach  immortality,  as  nearly  as  human  institutions  can  approach
it.  Its  course  cannot  always  be  tranquil.  It  is  exposed  to  storms  and
tempests,  and  its  framcrs  must  be  unwise  statesmen  indeed,  if  they  have
not  provided  it,  as  far  as  its  nature  will  permit,  with  the  means  of  self-
preservation  from  the  perils  it  may  be  destined  to  encounter.  No  gov-
ernment ought  to  be  so  defective  in  its  organization,  as  not  to  contain
within  itself  the  means  of  securing  the  execution  of  its  own  laws  against
other  dangers,  than  those  which  occur  every  day.  Courts  of  justice  are
the  means  most  usually  employed  ;  and  it  is  reasonable  to  expect,  that
a  government  should  repose  on  its  own  courts,  rather  than  on  others.
There  is  certainly  nothing  in  the  circumstances,  under  which  our  consti-
tution was  formed  ;  nothing  in  the  history  of  the  times,  which  would  jus-
tify the  opinion,  that  the  confidence  reposed  in  the  states  was  so  impli-
cit, as  to  leave  in  them  and  their  tribunals  the  power  of  resisting  or  de-
feating, in  the  form  of  law,  the  legitimate  measures  of  the  Union.  The
requisitions  of  congress,  under  the  confederation,  were  as  constitution-
ally obligatory,  as  the  laws  enacted  by  the  present  congress.  That
they  were  habitually  disregarded,  is  a  fact  of  universal  notoriety.  With
the  knowledge  of  this  fact,  and  under  its  full  pressure,  a  convention  was
assembled  to  change  the  system.  Is  it  so  improbable,  that  they  should
confer  on  the  judicial  department  the  power  of  construing  the  constitu-
tion and  laws  of  the  Union  in  every  case,  in  the  last  resort,  and  of  pre-
serving them  from  all  violation  from  every  quarter,  so  far  as  judicial  de-
cisions can  preserve  them,  that  this  improbability  should  essentially  af-
fect the  construction  of  the  new  system  ?  We  are  told,  and  we  are
truly  told,  that  the  great  change,  which  is  to  give  efficacy  to  the  present
system,  is  its  ability  to  act  on  individuals  directly,  instead  of  acting
through  the  instrumentality  of  state  governments.  But,  ought  not  this
ability,  in  reason  and  sound  policy,  to  be  applied  directly  to  the  protec-
tion of  individuals  employed  in  the  execution  of  the  laws,  as  well  as  to
their  coercion?  Your  laws  reach  the  individual  without  the  aid  of  any
other  power ;  why  may  they  not  protect  him  from  punishment  for  per-
forming his  duty  in  executing  them  ?

"  The  counsel  for  Virginia  endeavour  to  obviate  the  force  of  these  ar-
guments by  saying,  that  the  dangers  they  suggest,  if  not  imaginary,  are
inevitable  ;  that  the  constitution  can  make  no  provision  against  them  ;
and  that,  therefore,  in  construing  that  instrument,  they  ought  to  be  ex-
cluded from  our  consideration.  This  state  of  things,  they  say,  cannot
arise,  until  there  shall  be  a  disposition  so  hostile  to  the  present  political
system,  as  to  produce  a  determination  to  destroy  it ;  and,  when  that  de-


372  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

be  by  congress,  "the  success  of  the  usurpation  will  de-
pend on  the  executive  and  judiciary  departments,  which
are  to  expound,  and  give  effect  to  the  legislative  acts ;
and,  in  the  last  resort,  a  remedy  must  be  obtained  from
the  people,  who  can,  by  the  election  of  more  faithful
representatives,  annul  the acts  of  the  usurpers. The

termination  shall  be  produced,  its  effects  will  not  be  restrained  by  parch-
ment stipulations.  The  fate  of  the  constitution  will  not  then  depend  on
judicial  decisions.  But,  should  no  appeal  be  made  to  force,  the  states
can  put  an  end  to  the  government  by  refusing  to  act.  They  have  only
not  to  elect  senators,  and  it  expires  without  a  struggle.

"  It  is  very  true,  that,  whenever  hostility  to  the  existing  system  shall
become  universal,  it  will  be  also  irresistible.  The  people  made  the  con-
stitution, and  the  people  can  unmake  it.  It  is  the  creature  of  their  will,
and  lives  only  by  their  will.  But  this  supreme  and  irresistible  power  to
make,  or  to  unmake,  resides  only  in  the  whole  body  of  the  people  ;  not
in  any  sub-division  of  them.  The  attempt  of  any  of  the  parts  to  exer-
cise it  is  usurpation,  and  ought  to  be  repelled  by  those,  to  whom  the
people  have  delegated  their  power  of  repelling  it.

"  The  acknowledged  inability  of  the  government,  then,  to  sustain  itself
against  the  public  will,  and,  by  force  or  otherwise,  to  control  the  whole
nation,  is  no  sound  argument  in  support  of  its  constitutional  inability  to
preserve  itself  against  a  section  of  the  nation  acting  in  opposition  to  the
general  will.

"  It  is  true,  that  if  all  the  states,  or  a  majority  of  them,  refuse  to  elect
senators,  the  legislative  powers  of  the  Union  will  be  suspended.  But  if
any  one  state  shall  refuse  to  elect  them,  the  senate  will  not,  on  that  ac-
count, be  the  less  capable  of  performing  all  its  functions.  The  argu-
ment founded  on  this  fact  would  seem  rather  to  prove  the  subordination
of  the  parts  to  the  whole,  than  the  complete  independence  of  any  one  of
them.  The  framers  of  the  constitution  were,  indeed,  unable  to  make
any  provisions,  which  should  protect  that  instrument  against  a  general
combination  of  the  states,  or  of  the  people,  for  its  destruction;  and,  con-
scious of  this  inability,  they  have  not  made  the  attempt.  But  they  were
able  to  provide  against  the  operation  of  measures  adopted  in  any  one
state,  whose  tendency  might  be  to  arrest  the  execution  of  the  laws,  and
this  it  was  the  part  of  true  wisdom  to  attempt.  We  think  they  have  at-
tempted it."

See  also  MCvlloch  v.  Maryland,  (4  Wheat.  316,  405,  406.)  See  also
the  reasoning  of  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Jay,  in  Chisholm  v.  Georgia,  (2  Dall.
419,  S.  C.  2  Peters's  Cond.  R.  635,  670  to  675.)  Osbornv.Bank  of  the  Uni-
ted States,  (9  Wheat.  738,  818,  819 ;)  and  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  (9  Wheat.  1,
210.)


CH.  IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  373

truth  is,  that  this  ultimate  redress  may  be  more  confid-
ed in  against  unconstitutional  acts  of  the  federal,  than
of  the  state  legislatures,  for  (his  plain  reason,  that,  as
every  act  of  the  former  will  be  an  invasion  of  the  rights
of  the  latter,  these  will  ever  be  ready  to  mark  the  in-
novation, to  sound  the  alarm  to  the  people,  and  to  ex-
ert their  local  influence  in  effecting  a  change  of  federal
representatives.  There  being  no  such  intermediate
body  between  the  state  legislatures  and  the  people,  in-
terested in  watching  the  conduct  of  the  former,  viola-
tions of  the  state  constitution  are  more  likely  to  remain
unnoticed  and  unredressed."  1

^  394.  In  the  next  place,  if  the  usurpation  should  be  by
the  president,  an  adequate  check  may  be  generally  found,
not  only  in  the  elective  franchise,  but  also  in  the  con-
trolling power  of  congress,  in  its  legislative  or  impeaching
capacity,  and  in  an  appeal  to  the  judicial  department.
In  the  next  place,  if  the  usurpation  should  be  by  the  judi-
ciary, and  arise  from  corrupt  motives,  the  power  of  im-
peachment would  remove  the  offenders ;  and  in  most  oth-
er cases  the  legislative  and  executive  authorities  could  in-
terpose an  efficient  barrier.  A  declaratory  or  prohibitory
law  would,  in  many  cases,  be  a  complete  remedy.  We
have,  also,  so  far  at  least  as  a  conscientious  sense  of  the
obligations  of  duty,  sanctioned  by  an  oath  of  office,  and  an
indissoluble  responsibility  to  the  people  for  the  exercise
and  abuse  of  power,  on  the  part  of  different  departments
of  the  government,  can  influence  human  minds,  some
additional  guards  against  known  and  deliberate  usurpa-
tions ;  for  both  are  provided  for  in  the  constitution  itself.
"The  wisdom  and  the  discretion  of  congress,  (it  has
been  justly  observed,)  their  identity  with  the  people,

1  The  Federalist,  No.  44  ;  1  Wilson's  Law  Lectures,  461, 462 ;  Dane's
App.  §  58,  p.  68.


374  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

and  the  influence,  which  their  constituents  possess  at
elections,  are,  in  this,  as  in  many  other  instances,  as,  for
example,  that  of  declaring  war,  the  sole  restraints  ;  on
this  they  have  relied,  to  secure  them  from  abuse.  They
are  the  restraints,  on  which  the  people  must  often  solely
rely  in  all  representative  governments."  *

§  395.  But  in  the  next  place,  (and  it  is  that,  which
would  furnish  a  case  of  most  difficulty  and  danger,
though  it  may  fairly  be  presumed  to  be  of  rare  occur-
rence,) if  the  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial  depart-
ments should  all  concur  in  a  gross  usurpation,  there  is
still  a  peaceable  remedy  provided  by  the  constitution.
It  is  by  the  power  of  amendment,  which  may  always
be  applied  at  the  will  of  three  fourths  of  the  states.
If,  therefore,  there  should  be  a  corrupt  co-operation
of  three  fourths  of  the  states  for  permanent  usurpa-
tion, (a  case  not  to  be  supposed,  or  if  supposed,  it
differs  not  at  all  in  principle  or  redress  from  the  case  of
a  majority  of  a  state  or  nation  having  the  same  intent,)
the  case  is  certainly  irremediable  under  any  known
forms  of  the  constitution.  The  states  may  now  by  a
constitutional  amendment,  with  few  limitations,  change
the  whole  structure  and  powers  of  the  government,  and
thus  legalize  any  present  excess  of  power.  And  the
general  right  of  a  society  in  other  cases  to  change  the
government  at  the  will  of  a  majority  of  the  whole  peo-
ple, in  any  manner,  that  may  suit  its  pleasure,  is  undis-
puted, and  seems  indisputable.  If  there  be  any  remedy
at  all  for  the  minority  in  such  cases,  it  is  a  remedy
never  provided  for  by  human  institutions. It  is  by  a

i  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  9  Wheat.  R.  1,  197.—  See  also,  on  the  same  sub-
ject, the  observations  of  Mr.  Justice  Johnson  in  delivering  the  opinion  of
the  court,  in  Anderson  v.  Dunn,  6  Wheat.  R.  204,  220.


CH.  IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  375

resort  to  the  ultimate  right  of  all  human  beings  in  ex-
treme cases  to  resisl  oppression,  and  to  apply  force
against  ruinous  injustice.1

§  396.  As  a  lit  conclusion  to  this  part  of  these  com-
mentaries, we  cannot  do  better  than  to  refer  to  a  confirm-
atory view,  which  has  been  recently  presented  to  the  pub-
lic by  one  of  the  framers  of  the  constitution,  who  is  now,  it
is  believed,  the  only  surviving  member  of  the  federal  con-
vention, and  who,  by  his  early  as  well  as  his  later  labours,
has  entitled  himself  to  the  gratitude  of  his  country,  as
one  of  its  truest  patriots,  and  most  enlightened  friends.
Venerable;  as  he  now  is,  from  age  and  character,  and
absolved  from  all  those  political  connexions,  which  may
influence  the  judgment,  and  mislead  the  mind,  he  speaks
from  his  retirement  in  a  voice,  which  cannot  be  disre-
garded, when  it  instructs  us  by  its  profound  reasoning,
or  admonishes  us  of  our  dangers  by  its  searching  ap-
peals. However  particular  passages  may  seem  open
to  criticism,  the  general  structure  of  the  argument  stands
on  immovable  foundations,  and  can  scarcely  perish,  but
with  the  constitution,  which  it  seeks  to  uphold.2

i  See  Webster's  Speeches,  p.  408,  401) ;  1  Black.  Comm.  161,  1G2.
See  also  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  73  to  75.

2  Reference  is  here  made  to  Mr.  Madison's  Letter,  dated  August,
1830,  to  Mr.  Edward  Everett,  published  in  the  North  American  Review
for  October,  1830. The following  extract  is  taken  from  p.  537,  et  seq.

"In  order  to  understand  the  true  character  of  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  the  error,  not  uncommon,  must  be  avoided,  of  viewing-  it
through  the  medium,  either  of  a  consolidated  government,  or  of  a  con-
federated government,  whilst  it  is  neither  the  one,  nor  the  other;  but  a
mixture  of  both.  And  having,  in  no  model,  the  similitudes  and  analo-
gies applicable  to  other  systems  of  government,  it  must,  more  than  any
other,  be  its  own  interpreter  according  to  its  text  and  the  facts  of  the
case.

"  From  these  it  will  be  seen,  that  the  characteristic  peculiarities  of
the  constitution  are,  1,  the  mode  of  its  formation ;  2,  the  division  of  the
supreme  powers  of  government  between  the  states  in  their  united  capaci-
ty, and  the  states  in  their  individual  capacities.


376  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

"1.  It  was  formed,  not  by  the  governments  of  the  component  states,
as  the  federal  government,  for  which  it  was  substituted  was  formed.
Nor  was  it  formed  by  a  majority  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  as  a
single  community,  in  the  manner  of  a  consolidated  government.

"  It  was  formed  by  the  states,  that  is,  by  the  people  in  each  of  the
states,  acting  in  their  highest  sovereign  capacity;  and  formed  conse-
quently, by  the  same  authority,  which  formed  the  state  constitutions.

"Being  thus  derived  from  the  same  source  as  the  constitutions  of  the
states,  it  has,  within  each  state,  the  same  authority,  as  the  constitution
of  the  state;  and  is  as  much  a  constitution,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the
term,  within  its  prescribed  sphere,  as  the  constitutions  of  the  states  are,
within  their  respective  spheres:  but  with  this  obvious  and  essential  dif-
ference, that  being  a  compact  among  the  states  in  their  highest  sover-
eign capacity,  and  constituting  the  people  thereof  one  people  for  certain
purposes,  it  cannot  be  altered,  or  annulled  at  the  will  of  the  states  indi-
vidually, as  the  constitution  of  a  state  may  be  at  its  individual  will.

"2.  And  that  it  divides  the  supreme  powers  of  government,  between
the  government  of  the  United  States,  and  the  governments  of  the  indi-
vidual states,  is  stamped  on  the  face  of  the  instrument ;  the  powers  of
war  and  of  taxation,  of  commerce  and  of  treaties,  and  other  enumerated
powers  vested  in  the  government  of  the  United  States,  being  of  as  high
and  sovereign  a  character,  as  any  of  the  powers  reserved  to  the  state
governments.

"  Nor  is  the  government  of  the  United  States,  created  by  the  consti-
tution, less  a  government  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term,  within  the
sphere  of  its  powers,  than  the  governments  created  by  the  constitutions
of  the  states  are,  within  their  several  spheres.  It  is,  like  them,  organized
into  legislative,  executive,  and  judiciary  departments.  It  operates,  like
them,  directly  on  persons  and  things.  And,  like  them,  it  has  at  com-
mand a  physical  force  for  executing  the  powers  committed  to  it.  The
concurrent  operation  in  certain  cases  is  one  of  the  features  marking  the
peculiarity  of  the  system.

"Between -these  different  constitutional  governments,  the  one  operat-
ing in  all  the  states,  the  others  operating  separately  in  each,  with  the
aggregate  powers  of  government  divided  between  them,  it  could  not
escape  attention,  that  controversies  would  arise  concerning  the  bounda-
ries of  jurisdiction;  and  that  some  provision  ought  to  be  made  for  such
occurrences.  A  political  system,  that  does  not  provide  for  a  peaceable
and  authoritative  termination  of  occurring  controversies,  would  not  be
more  than  the  shadow  of  a  government ;  the  object  and  end  of  a  real
government  being,  the  substitution  of  law  and  order  for  uncertainty,
confusion,  and  violence.

"  That  to  have  left  a  final  decision,  in  such  cases,  to  each  of  the
states,  then  thirteen,  and  already  twenty-four,  could  not  fail  to  make
the  constitution  and  laws  of  the  United  States  different  in  different
states,  was  obvious  ;  and  not  less  obvious,  that  this  diversity  of  indepen-


CH. IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  377

dent  decisions  must  altogether  distract  the  government  of  the  onion,  and
speedily  put  an  end  to  the  union  itself.  A  uniform  authority  of  the  la  w#,
is  in  itself  a  vital  principle. Some  of  the  most  important  laws  could  not

be  partially  executed.  They  must  be  executed  in  all  the  states,  or  they
could  be  duly  executed  in  Done. An  impost,  or  an  excise,  tor  example,

if  not  in  force  in  some  states,  would  be  defeated  in  others.  It  is  well
known,  that  this  was  among  the  lessons  of  experience,  which  had  a  pri-
mary influence  in  bringing  about  the  existing  constitution.  A  loss  of
its  general  authority  would  moreover  revive  the  exasperating  questions
between  the  states  holding  ports  for  foreign  commerce,  and  the  adjoin-
ing states  without  them ;  to  which  are  now  added,  all  the  inland  states,
necessarily  carrying  on  their  foreign  commerce  through  other  states.

u  To  have  made  the  decisions  under  the  authority  of  the  individual
states,  co-ordinate,  in  all  cases,  with  decisions  under  the  authority  of
the  United  States,  would  unavoidably  produce  collisions  incompatible
with  the  peace  of  society,  and  with  that  regular  and  efficient  administra-
tion, which  is  of  the  essence  of  free  governments.  Scenes  could  not  be
avoided,  in  which  a  ministerial  officer  of  the  United  States,  and  the  cor-
respondent officer  of  an  individual  state,  would  have  rencounters  in
executing  conflicting  decrees  ;  the  result  of  which  would  depend  on  the
comparative  force  of  the  local  posses  attending  them  ;  and  that,  a  casu-
alty depending  on  the  political  opinions  and  party  feelings  in  different
states.

"To  have  referred  every  clashing  decision,  under  the  two  authorities,
for  a  final  decision,  to  the  states  as  parties  to  the  constitution,  would  be
attended  with  delays,  with  inconveniencies,  and  with  expenses,  amount-
ing to  a  prohibition  of  the  expedient ;  not  to  mention  its  tendency  to  im-
pair the  salutary  veneration  for  a  system  requiring  such  frequent  inter-
positions, nor  the  delicate  questions,  which  might  present  themselves
as  to  the  form  of  stating  the  appeal,  and  as  to  the  quorum  for  decid-
ing it.

"  To  have  trusted  to  negotiation  for  adjusting  disputes  between  the
government  of  the  United  States  and  the  state  governments,  as  between
independent  and  separate  sovereignties,  would  have  lost  sight  altogether
of  a  constitution  and  government  for  the  Union  ;  and  opened  a  direct
road  from  a  failure  of  that  resort,  to  the  ultima  ratio  between  nations
wholly  independent  of,  and  alien  to  each  other.  If  the  idea  had  its
origin  in  the  process  of  adjustment  between  separate  branches  of  the
same  government,  the  analogy  entirely  fails.  In  the  case  of  disputes
between  independent  parts  of  the  same  government,  neither  part  being
able  to  consummate  its  will,  nor  the  government  to  proceed  without  a
concurrence  of  the  parts,  necessity  brings  about  an  accommodation.  In
disputes  between  a  state  government,  and  the  government  of  the  United
States,  the  case  is  practically,  as  well  as  theoretically  different :  eacli
party  possessing  all  the  departments  of  an  organized  government,  legisla-
tive, executive,  and  judiciary  :  and  having  each  a  physical  force  to  support

vol.  i.  48


378 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

its  pretensions.  Although  the  issue  of  negotiation  might  sometimes
avoid  this  extremity,  how  often  would  it  happen  among  so  many  states,
that  an  unaccommodating  spirit  in  some  would  render  that  resource  una-
vailing ?  A  contrary  supposition  would  not  accord  with  a  knowledge  of
human  nature,  or  the  evidence  of  our  own  political  history.

"The  constitution,  not  relying  on  any  of  the  preceding  modifications,
for  its  safe  and  successful  operation,  has  expressly  declared,  on  the  one
hand,  1,  '  that  the  constitution,  and  the  laws  made  in  pusuance  thereof,
and  all  treaties  made  under  the  authority  of  the  United  States,  shall  be
the  supreme  law  of  the  land  ;  2,  that  the  judges  of  every  state  shall  be
bound  thereby,  any  thing  in  the  constitution  and  laws  of  any  state  to
the  contrary  notwithstanding;  3,  that  the  judicial  power  of  the  United
States  shall  extend  to  all  cases  in  law  and  equity  arising  under  the  con-
stitution, the  laws  of  the  United  States,  and  treaties  made  under  their
authority,  &c.'

"  On  the  other  hand,  as  a  security  of  the  rights  and  powers  of  the
states,  in  their  individual  capacities,  against  an  undue  preponderance  of
the  powers  granted  to  the  government  over  them  in  their  united  capaci-
ty, the  constitution  has  relied  on,  (l,)the  responsibility  of  the  senators
and  representatives  in  the  legislature  of  the  United  States  to  the  legis-
latures and  people  of  the  states  ;  (2,)  the  responsibility  of  the  president
to  the  people  of  the  United  States  ;  and  (3,)  the  liability  of  the  executive
and  judicial  functionaries  of  the  United  States  to  impeachment  by  the
representatives  of  the  people  of  the  states,  in  one  branch  of  the  legisla-
ture of  the  United  States,  and  trial  by  the  representatives  of  the  states,
in  the  other  branch  :  the  state  functionaries,  legislative,  executive,  and
judicial,  being,  at  the  same  time,  in  their  appointment  and  responsibility,
altogether  independent  of  the  agency  or  authority  of  the  United
States.

"  How  far  this  structure  of  the  government  of  the  United  States  is
adequate  and  safe  for  its  objects,  time  alone  can  absolutely  determine.
Experience  seems  to  have  shewn,  that  whatever  may  grow  out  of  future
stages  of  our  national  career,  there  is,  as  yet,  a  sufficient  control,  in  the
popular  will,  over  the  executive  and  legislative  departments  of  the  gov-
ernment. When  the  alien  and  sedition  laws  were  passed,  in  contraven-
tion to  the  opinions  and  feelings  of  the  community,  the  first  elections,
that  ensued,  put  an  end  to  them.  And  whatever  may  have  been  the  char-
acter of  other  acts,  in  the  judgment  of  many  of  us,  it  is  but  true,  that  they
have  generally  accorded  with  the  views  of  the  majority  of  the  states  and
of  the  people.  At  the  present  day  it  seems  well  understood,  that  the  laws,
which  have  created  most  dissatisfaction,  have  had  a  like  sanction  with-
out doors  :  and  that,  whether  continued,  varied,  or  repealed,  a  like  proof
will  be  given  of  the  sympathy  and  responsibility  of  the  representative
body  to  the  constituent  body.  Indeed,  the  gre;it  complaint  now  is,
against  the  results  of  this  sympathy  and  responsibility  in  the  legislative
policy  of  the  nation.


CH.  IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  .^79

11  With  respect  to  the  judicial  power  of  the  United  States,  and  the

authority  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  relation  to  the  boundary  of  jurisdic-
tion between  the  federal  and  the  state  governments,  I  may  be  permitted
to  refer  to  the  thirty-ninth  number  of  the  Federalist  for  the  light,  in
which  the  subject  was  regarded  by  its  writer  at  the  period,  when  the
constitution  was  depending ;  audit  is  believed,  that  the  same  was  the
prevailing  view  then  taken  of  it;  that  the  same  view  has  continued  to
prevail ;  and  that  it  does  so  at  this  time,  notwithstanding  the  eminent  ex-
ceptions to  it.

"But  it  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  concession  of  this  power  to  the
Supreme  Court,  in  cases  falling  within  the  course  of  its  functions,  to
maintain,  that  the  power  has  not  always  heen  rightly  exercised.  To  say
nothing  of  the  period,  happily  a  short  one,  when  judges  in  their  seats  did
not  abstain  from  intemperate  and  party  harangues,  equally  at  variance
with  their  duty  and  their  dignity  ;  there  have  been  occasional  decisions
from  the  bench,  which  have  incurred  serious  and  extensive  disapproba-
tion. Still  it  would  seem,  that,  with  but  few  exceptions,  the  course  of
the  judiciary  has  been  hitherto  sustained  by  the  prominent  sense  of  the
nation.

"Those  who  have  denied,  or  doubted  the  supremacy  of  the  judicial
power  of  the  United  States,  and  denounce  at  the  same  time  a  nullifying
power  in  a  state,  seem  not  to  have  sufficiently  adverted  to  the  utter  ineffi-
ciency of  a  supremacy  in  a  law  of  the  land,  without  a  supremacy  in  the
exposition  and  execution  of  the  law  :  nor  to  the  destruction  of  all  equi-
poise between  the  federal  government  and  the  state  governments,  if>
whilst  the  functionaries  of  the  federal  government  are  directly  or  indirect-
ly elected  by,  and  responsible  to  the  states,  and  the  functionaries  of  the
states  are  in  their  appointment  and  responsibility  wholly  independent  of
the  United  States,  no  constitutional  control  of  any  sort  belonged  to  the
United  States  over  the  states.  Under  such  an  organization,  it  is  evident.
that  it  would  be  in  the  power  of  the  states,  individually,  to  pass  unau-
thorized laws,  and  to  carry  them  into  complete  effect,  any  thing  in  the
constitution  and  laws  of  the  United  States  to  the  contrary  notwithstand-
ing. This  would  be  a  nullifying  power  in  its  plenary  character;  and
whether  it  had  its  final  effect,  through  the  legislative,  executive,  or  judi-
ciary organ  of  the  state,  would  be  equally  fatal  to  the  constituted  relation
between  the  two  governments.

"  Should  the  provisions  of  the  constitution  as  here  reviewed,  be  found
not  to  secure  the  government  and  rights  of  the  states,  against  usurpa-
tions and  abuses  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  the  final  resort  within
the  purview  of  the  constitution,  lies  in  an  amendment  of  the  constitution]
according  to  a  process  applicable  by  the  states.

"  And  in  the  event  of  a  failure  of  every  constitutional  resort,  and  an
accumulation  of  usurpations  and  abuses,  rendering  passive  obedience
and  non-resistance  a  greater  evil,  than  resistance  and  revolution,  there
can  remain but  one resort,  the  last  of  all  ; an  appeal from  the  can-


380  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

celled  obligations  of  the  constitutional  compact,  to  original  rights  and
the  law  of  self-preservation.  This  is  the  ultima  ratio  under  all  govern  •
ments,  whether  consolidated,  confederated,  or  a  compound  of  both  ;  and
it  cannot  be  doubted,  that  a  single  member  of  the  Union,  in  the  extrem-
ity supposed,  but  in  that  only,  would  have  a  right,  as  an  extra  and  ultra
constitutional  right,  to  make  the  appeal.

"This  brings  us  to  the  expedient  lately  advanced,  which  claims  for
a  single  state  a  right  to  appeal  against  an  exercise  of  power  by  the  gov-
ernment of  the  United  States,  decided  by  the  state  to  be  unconstitutional,
to  the  parties  to  the  constitutional  compact;  the  decision  of  the  state  to
have  the  effect  of  nullifying  the  act  of  the  government  of  the  United
States,  unless  the  decision  of  the  state  be  reversed  by  three  fourths  of
the  parties.

"The  distinguished  names  and  high  authorities,  which  appear  to  have
asserted,  and  given  a  practical  scope  to  this  doctrine,  entitle  it  to  a  re-
spect, which  it  might  be  difficult  otherwise  to  feel  for  it.

"  If  the  doctrine  were  to  be  understood  as  requiring  the  three  fourths
of  the  states  to  sustain,  instead  of  that  proportion  to  reverse  the  decision
of  the  appealing  state,  the  decision  to  be  without  effect  during  the  ap-
peal, il  would  be  sufficient  to  remark,  that  this  extra-constitutional  course
might  well  give  way  to  that  marked  out  by  the  constitution,  which
authorizes  two  thirds  of  the  states  to  institute,  and  three  fourths  to
effectuate  an  amendment  of  tli3  constitution,  establishing  a  permanent
rule  of  the  highest  authority,  in  place  of  an  irregular  precedent  of  con-
struction only.

"  But  it  is  understood,  that  the  nullifying  doctrine  imports,  that  the
decision  of  the  state  is  to  be  presumed  valid,  and  that  it  overrules  the
law  of  the  United  States,  unless  overruled  by  three  fourths  of  the
states.

"Can  more  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  the  inadmissibility  of  such  a
doctrine,  than,  that  it  puts  it  in  the  power  of  the  smallest  fraction  over
one  fourth  of  the  United  States,  that  is,  of  seven  states  out  of  twenty-
four,  to  give  the  law,  and  even  the  constitution  to  seventeen  states,  each
of  the  seventeen  having,  as  parties  to  the  constitution,  an  equal  right
with  each  of  the  seven,  to  expound  it,  and  to  insict  on  the  exposition?
That  the  seven  might,  in  particular  instances  b'e  right,  and  the  seven-
teen wrong,  is  more  than  possible.  But  to  establish  a  positive  and  per-
manent rule  giving  such  a  power,  to  such  a  minority,  over  such  a  ma-
jority, would  overturn  the  first  principle  of  free  government,  and  in
practice  necessarily  overturn  the  government  itself.

"  It  is  to  be  recollected,  that  the  constitution  was  proposed  to  the  peo-
ple of  the  states  as  a  to/ioZe,  and  unanimously  adopted  by  the  states  as  a
whole,  it  being  a  part  of  the  constitution,  that  not  less  than  three  fourths
of  the  states  should  be  competent  to  make  any  alteration  in  what  had
been  unanimously  agreed  to.  So  great  is  the  caution  on  this  point,  that
in  two  cases  where  peculiar  interests  were  at  stake,  a  proportion  even


CH.  IV.]  FINAL  INTERPRETER.  381

of  three  fourths  is  distrusted,  and  unanimity  required  to  make  an  alter-
ation.

"  When  the  constitution  was  adopted  as  a  whole,  it  is  certain,  that
there  were  many  parts,  which,  if  separately  proposed,  would  have  been
promptly  rejected.  It.  is  far  from  impossible,  that  every  part  of  a  con-
stitution might  be  rejected  by  a  majority,  and  yet  taken  together  as  a
whole,  be  unanimously  accepted.  Free  constitutions  will  rarely,  if  ever,
be  formed,  without  reciprocal  concessions;  without  articles  conditioned
on,  and  balancing  each  other.  Is  there  a  constitution  of  a  single  state
out  of  the  twenty-four,  that  would  hear  the  experiment  of  having  its
component  parts  submitted  to  the  people,  and  separately  decided  on?

"  What  the  fate  of  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  would  he,  if
a  small  proportion  of  the  states  could  expunge  parts  of  it  particularly
valued  by  a  large  majority,  can  have  but  one  answer.

"  The  difficulty  is  not  removed  by  limiting  the  doctrine  to  cases  of
construction.  How  many  cases  of  that  sort,  involving  cardinal  provi-
sions of  the  constitution,  have  occurred?  How  many  now  exist?
How  many  may  hereafter  spring  up?  How  many  might  be  ingeniously
created,  if  entitled  to  the  privilege  of  a  decision  in  the  mode  proposed  ?

"  Is  it  certain,  that  the  principle  of  that  mode  would  not  reach  further
than  is  contemplated  ?  If  a  single  state  can,  of  right,  require  three
fourths  of  its  co-states  to  overrule  its  exposition  of  the  constitution,  be-
cause that  proportion  is  authorized  to  amend  it,  would  the  plea  he  less
plausible,  that,  as  the  constitution  was  unanimously  established,  it  ought
to  be  unanimously  expounded  ?

u  The  reply  to  all  such  suggestions^  seems  to  be  unavoidable  and  irre-
sistible ;  that  the  constitution  is  a  compact ;  that  its  text  is  to  be  ex-
pounded, according  to  the  provisions  for  expounding  it  —  making  a  part
of  the  compact ;  and  that  none  of  the  parties  can  rightfully  renounce
the  expounding  provision  more  than  any  other  part.  When  such  a  right
accrues,  as  may  accrue,  it  must  grow  out  of  abuses  of  the  compact  re-
leasing the  sufferers  from  their  fealty  to  it."


382  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

CHAPTER  V.

RULES  OF INTERPRETATION.

^397.  In  our  future  commentaries  upon  the  consti-
tution we  shall  treat  it,  then,  as  it  is  denominated  in  the
instrument  itself,  as  a  constitution  of  government,
ordained  and  established  by  the  people  of  the  United
States  for  themselves  and  their  posterity.1  They  have
declared  it  the  supreme  law  of  the  land.  They  have
made  it  a  limited  government.  They  have  defined  its
authority.  They  have  restrained  it  to  the  exercise
of  certain  powers,  and  reserved  all  others  to  the  states
or  to  the  people.  It  is  a  popular  government.
Those  who  administer  it  are  responsible  to  the  people.
It  is  as  popular,  and  just  as  much  emanating  from  the
people,  as  the  state  governments.  It  is  created  for  one
purpose  ;  the  state  governments  for  another.  It  may
be  altered,  and  amended,  and  abolished  at  the  will  of
the  people.  In  short,  it  was  made  by  the  people,  made
for  the  people,  and  is  responsible  to  the  people.2

1  "The  government  of  the  Union,"  says  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Marshall,
in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court  in  JlcCulloch  v.  Maryland,  4
Wheat.  316,  "  is  emphatically  and  truly  a  government  of  the  people.
It  emanates  from  them ;  its  powers  are  granted  by  them,  and  are  to  be
exercised  directly  on  them  and  for  their  benefit."  Id.  404,  405  ;  see  also
Cohens  v.  Virginia,  6  Wheat.  R.  264,  413,  414.

"The  government  of  the  United  States  was  erected,"  says  Mr.  Chan-
cellor Kent,  with  equal  force  and  accuracy,  "by  the  free  voice  and  the
joint  will  of  the  people  of  America  for  their  common  defence  and  gen-
eral welfare." 1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect.  10,  p.  189.

2  I  have  used  the  expressive  words  of  Mr.  Webster,  deeming  them  as
exact  as  any  that  could  be  used.  See  Webster's  Speeches,  p,  410,  418,
419  ;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  338,  343.


CH. V.]  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.  383

§  398.  In  this  view  of  the  matter,  let  us  now  proceed  to
consider  the  rules,  by  which  it  ought  to  be  interpreted  ;
for,  if  these  rules  are  correctly  laid  down,  it  will  save  us
from  many  embarrassments  in  examining  and  defining
its  powers.  Much  of  the  difficulty,  which  has  arisen
in  all  the  public  discussions  on  this  subject,  has  had  its
origin  in  the  want  of  some  uniform  rules  of  interpreta-
tion, expressly  or  tacitly  agreed  on  by  the  disputants.
Very  different  doctrines  on  this  point  have  been  adopt-
ed by  different  commentators ;  and  not  unfrequently
very  different  language  held  by  the  same  parties  at
different  periods.  In  short,  the  rules  of  interpretation
have  often  been  shifted  to  suit  the  emergency  ;  and  the
passions  and  prejudices  of  the  day,  or  the  favour  and
odium  of  a  particular  measure,  have  not  unfrequently
furnished  a  mode  of  argument,  which  would,  on  the  one
hand,  leave  the  constitution  crippled  and  inanimate,  or,
on  other  hand,  give  it  an  extent  and  elasticity,  subver-
sive of  all  rational  boundaries.

§  399.  Let  us,  then,  endeavour  to  ascertain,  what  are
the  true  rules  of  interpretation  applicable  to  the  consti-
tution ;  so  that  we  may  have  some  fixed  standard,  by
which  to  measure  its  powers,  and  limit  its  prohibitions,
and  guard  its  obligations,  and  enforce  its  securities  of
our  rights  and  liberties.

^  400.  I.  The  first  and  fundamental  rule  in  the
interpretation  of  all  instruments  is,  to  construe  them
according  to  the  sense  of  the  terms,  and  the  intention
of  the  parties.  Mr.  Justice  Blackstone  has  remarked,
that  the  intention  of  a  law  is  to  be  gathered  from  the
words,  the  context,  the  subject-matter,  the  effects  and
consequence,  or  the  reason  and  spirit  of  the  law.1 He

i  ]  Black.  Comm.  59,  GO.  See  also  Ayliffe's  Pandects,  B.  1,  tit.  4,
p.  25,  &c.  ;  1  Domat.  Prelim.  Book,  p.  9;  Id.  Treatise  on  Laws,  cli.  12,
p.  74.


384 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

goes  on  to  justify  the  remark  by  stating,  that  words  are
generally  to  be  understood  in  their  usual  and  most
known  signification,  not  so  much  regarding  the  pro-
priety of  grammar,  as  their  general  and  popular  use ;
that  if  words  happen  to  be  dubious,  their  meaning  may
be  established  by  the  context,  or  by  comparing  them
with  other  words  and  sentences  in  the  same  instru-
ment ;  that  illustrations  may  be  further  derived  from
the  subject-matter,  with  reference  to  which  the  expres-
sions are  used  ;  that  the  effect  and  consequence  of  a
particular  construction  is  to  be  examined,  because,  if  a
literal  meaning  would  involve  a  manifest  absurdity,  it
ought  not  to  be  adopted ;  and  that  the  reason  and
spirit  of  the  law,  or  the  causes,  which  led  to  its  enact-
ment, are  often  the  best  exponents  of  the  words,  and
limit  their  application. 1

^401.  Where  the  words  are  plain  and  clear,  and
the  sense  distinct  and  perfect  arising  on  them,  there  is
generally  no  necessity  to  have  recourse  to  other  means
of  interpretation.  It  is  only,  when  there  is  some  ambi-
guity or  doubt  arising  from  other  sources,  that  inter-
pretation has  its  proper  office.  There  may  be  obscu-
rity, as  to  the  meaning,  from  the  doubtful  character  of  the
words  used,  from  other  clauses  in  the  same  instrument,
or  from  an  incongruity  or  repugnancy  between  the
words,  and  the  apparent  intention  derived  from  the  whole
structure  of  the  instrument,  or  its  avowed  object.  In
all  such  cases  interpretation  becomes  indispensable.

1  Id.  See  also  Woodes.  Elem.  of  Jurisp.  p.  36.  —  Rules  of  a  similar
nature  will  be  found  laid  down  in  Vattel,  B.  2,  ch.  17,  from  §  262  to
310,  with  more  ample  illustrations  and  more  various  qualifications.  But
not  a  few  of  his  rules  appear  to  me  to  want  accuracy  and  soundness.
Bacon's  Abridg.  title,  Statute  I.  contains  an  excellent  summary  of  the
rules  for  construing  statutes.  Domat,  also,  contains  many  valuable  rules
in  respect  to  interpretation.  See  his  Treatise  on  Laws,  ch.  12,  p.  74?
&c.  and  Preliminary  Discourse,  tit.  J,  §  2,  p.  6  to  16.


CH. V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION'.  385

§  402.  Rutherforth1  has  divided  interpretation  into
three  kinds,  literal,  rational,  and  mixed.  The  first  is,
where  we  collect  the  intention  of  the  part)  from  his  words
only,  as  they  lie  before  us.  The  second  is,  where  his
words  do  not  express  that  intention  perfectly,  but
exceed  it,  or  fall  short  of  it,  and  we  are  to  collect  it
from  probable  or  rational  conjectures  only.  The  third
is,  where  the  words,  though  they  do  express  the  inten-
tion, when  they  are  rightly  understood,  are  themselves
of  doubtful  meaning,  and  we  are  bound  to  have
recourse  to  the  like  conjectures  to  find  out  in  what
sense  they  are  used.  In  literal  interpretation  the  rule
observed  is,  to  follow  that  sense  in  respect  both  of  the
words,  and  of  the  construction  of  them,  which  is  agree-
able to  common  use,  without  attending  to  etymological
fancies  or  grammatical  refinements.  In  mixed  inter-
pretation, which  supposes  the  words  to  admit  of  two
or  more  senses,  each  of  which  is  agreeable  to  common
usage,  we  are  obliged  to  collect  the  sense,  partly  from
the  words,  and  partly  from  conjecture  of  the  intention.
The  rules  then  adopted  are,  to  construe  the  words  ac-
cording to  the  subject  matter,  in  such  a  sense  as  to  pro-
duce a  reasonable  effect,  and  with  reference  to  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  particular  transaction.  Light  may  also
be  obtained  in  such  cases  from  contemporary  facts,  or
expositions,  from  antecedent  mischiefs,  from  known
habits,  manners,  and  institutions,  and  from  other
sources  almost  innumerable,  which  may  justly  affect  the
judgment  in  drawing  a  fit  conclusion  in  the  particular
case.

§  403.  Interpretation  also  may  be  strict  or  large  ;
though  we  do  not  always  mean  the  same  thing,  when

i  Book  2,  ch.  7,  §  3.

vol.  i.  49


386 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

we  speak  of  a  strict  or  large  interpretation. When
common  usage  has  given  two  senses  to  the  same  word,
one  of  which  is  more  confined,  or  includes  fewer  par-
ticulars than  the  other,  the  former  is  called  its  strict
sense,  and  the  latter,  which  is  more  comprehensive  or
includes  more  particulars,  is  called  its  large  sense. If
we  find  such  a  word  in  a  law,  and  we  take  it  in  its
more  confined  sense,  we  are  said  to  interpret  it  strictly.
If  we  take  it  in  its  more  comprehensive  sense,  we  are
said  to  interpret  it  largely. But  whether  we  do  the
one  or  the  other,  we  still  keep  to  the  letter  of  the  law.
But strict and large interpretation are frequently
opposed to each other  in  a  different sense. The
words  of  a  law  may sometimes  express  the  meaning
of  the  legislator  imperfectly. They  may,  in  their  com-
mon acceptation,  include  either  more  or  less  than  his
intention. And  as,  on  the  one  hand,  we  call  it  a  strict
interpretation,  where  we  contend,  that  the  letter  is  to
be  adhered  to  precisely ; so,  on  the  other  hand,  we
call  it  a  large  interpretation,  where  we  contend,  that
the  words  ought  to  be  taken  in  such  a  sense,  as  com-
mon usage  will  not  fully  justify  ;  or  that  the  meaning
of  the  legislator  is  something  different  from  what  his
words in any  usage  would  import. In  this  sense  a
large interpretation is synonymous with what has
before  been  called  a  rational interpretation. And  a
strict  interpretation,  in  this  sense,  includes  both  literal
and  mixed  interpretation ; and  may,  as  contradistin-
guished from  the  former,  be  called  a  close,  in  opposi-
tion to  a  free  or  liberal  interpretation.1


l  The  foregoing  remarks  are  borrowed  almost  in  terms  from  Ruther-
forth's  Institutes  of  Natural  Law  (B.  2,  ch.  7,  §  4  to  11),  which  contain
a  very  lucid  exposition  of  the  general  rules  of  interpretation.  The
whole  chapter  deserves  an  attentive  perusal.


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  3H7

§  404.  These  elementary  explanations  furnish  little
room  for  controversy ;  but  they  may  nevertheles  aid  us
in  making  a  closer  practical  application,  when  we
arrive  at  more  definite  rules.

§  405.  II.  In  construing  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  we  are,  in  the  first  instance,  to  consider,
what  are  its  nature  and  objects,  its  scope  and  design,
as  apparent  from  the  structure  of  the  instrument,  view-
ed as  a  whole,  and  also  viewed  in  its  component  parts.
Where  its  words  are  plain,  clear,  and  determinate,
they  require  no  interpretation ;  and  it  should,  there-
fore, be  admitted,  if  at  all,  with  great  caution,  and  only
from  necessity,  either  to  escape  some  absurd  conse-
quence, or  to  guard  against  some  fatal  evil.  Where
the  words  admit  of  two  senses,  each  of  which  is  con-
formable to  common  usage,  that  sense  is  to  be  adopted,
which,  without  departing  from  the  literal  import  of  the
words,  best  harmonizes  with  the  nature  and  objects,
the  scope  and  design  of  the  instrument.  Where  the
words  are  unambiguous,  but  the  provision  may  cover
more  or  less  ground  according  to  the  intention,  which
is  yet  subject  to  conjecture  ;  or  where  it  may  include
in  its  general  terms  more  or  less,  than  might  seem
dictated  by  the  general  design,  as  that  may  be  gathered
from  other  parts  of  the  instrument,  there  is  much  more
room  for  controversy  ;  and  the  argument  from  incon-
venience will  probably  have  different  influences  upon
different  minds.  Whenever  such  questions  arise,  they
will  probably  be  settled,  each  upon  its  own  peculiar
grounds  ;  and  whenever  it  is  a  question  of  power,  it
should  be  approached  with  infinite  caution,  and  affirm-
ed only  upon  the  most  persuasive  reasons.  In  exam-
ining the  constitution,  the  antecedent  situation  of  the
country,  and  its  institutions,  the  existence  and  opera-


388 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

tions  of  the  state  governments,  the  powers  and  opera-
tions of  the  confederation,  in  short  all  the  circumstan-
ces, which  had  a  tendency  to  produce,  or  to  obstruct
its  formation  and  ratification,  deserve  a  careful  atten-
tion. Much,  also,  may  be  gathered  from  contempo-
rary history,  and  contemporary  interpretation,  to  aid  us
in  just  conclusions.1

^  406.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  contemporary
interpretation  must  be  resorted  to  with  much  qualifi-
cation and  reserve.  In  the  first  place,  the  private
interpretation  of  any  particular  man,  or  body  of  men,
must  manifestly  be  open  to  much  observation.  The
constitution  was  adopted  by  the  people  of  the  United
States  ;  and  it  was  submitted  to  the  whole  upon  a  just
survey  of  its  provisions,  as  they  stood  in  the  text  itself.
In  different  states  and  in  different  conventions,  differ-
ent and  very  opposite  objections  are  known  to  have
prevailed;  and  might  well  be  presumed  to  prevail.
Opposite  interpretations,  and  different  explanations
of  different  provisions,  may  well  be  presumed  to
have  been  presented  in  different  bodies,  to  remove  local
objections,  or  to  win  local  favour.  And  there  can  be
no  certainty,  either  that  the  different  state  conventions
in  ratifying  the  constitution,  gave  the  same  uniform
interpretation  to  its  language,  or  that,  even  in  a  single

l  The  value  of  contemporary  interpretation  is  much  insisted  on  by
the  Supreme  Court,  in  Stuart  v.  Laird,  2  Cranch,  299.  309,  in  Martin  v.
Hunter,  1  Wheat.  R.  304,  and  in  Cohens  v.  Virginia,  6  Wheat.  R.  2G4,
418  to  421.  There  are  several  instances,  however,  in  which  the  contem-
porary interpretations  by  some  of  the  most  distinguished  founders  of  the
constitution  have  been  overruled.  One  of  the  most  striking  is  to  be
found  in  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  suability  of  a  state  by
any  citizen  of  another  state  ;*  and  another  in  the  decision  by  the  Ex-
ecutive and  the  Senate,  that  the  consent  of  the  latter  is  not  necessary
to  removals  from  office,  although  it  is  for  appointments.!

* Chisholm  v.  Georgia,  2  Dall.  419.  f  The  Federalist,  No.  77.


CH.  V.]  RULES OF  INTERPRETATION.  389

state  convention,  the  same  reasoning  prevailed  with  a
majority,  much  less  with  the  whole  of  the  supporter.,  of
it. In  the  interpretation  of  a  slate  statute,  no  man  is
insensible  of  the  extreme danger  of  resorting  to  the
opinions  of  those,  who  framed  it,  or  those  who  passed
it. Its  terms  may  have  differently  impressed  different
minds. Some  may  have  implied  limitations  and  ob-
jects, which  others  would  have  rejected. Some  may
have  taken  a  cursory  view  of  its  enactments,  and  others
have studied them  with  profound attention. Some
may  have  been  governed  by a  temporary interest  or
excitement, and have acted upon that exposition,
which  most favoured  their  present views. Others
may  have  seen  lurking  beneath  its text, what  com-
mended it  to  their  judgment  against  even  present  inter-
ests. Some  may have interpreted its language
strictly  and  closely ; others  from  a  different  habit  of
thinking  may  have  given  it  a  large  and  liberal  meaning.
It  is  not  to  be  presumed,  that,  even  in  the  convention,
which  framed  the  constitution,  from  the  causes  above-
mentioned,  and  other  causes,  the  clauses  were  always
understood  in  the  same  sense,  or  had  precisely  the
same  extent  of  operation. Every  member  necessarily
judged  for  himself;  and  the  judgment  of  no  one  could,
or  ought  to  be,  conclusive  upon  that  of  others. The
known  diversity  of  construction  of  different  parts  of  it,
as  well  of  the  mass  of  its  powers,  in  the  different  state
conventions  ; the  total  silence  upon  many  objections,
which  have  since  been  started  ;  and  the  strong  reliance
upon  others,  which  have  since  been  universally  aban-
doned, add  weight  to  these  suggestions. Nothing  but
the  text  itself  was  adopted  by  the  people. And  it
would  certainly  be  a  most  extravagant  doctrine  to  give
to  any  commentary  then  made,  and,  a  fortiori,  to  any


390 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

commentary  since  made  under  a  very  different  posture
of  feeling  and  opinion,  an  authority,  which  should
operate  an  absolute  limit  upon  the  text,  or  should
supersede  its  natural  and  just  interpretation.

^  407.  Contemporary  construction  is  properly  resort-
ed to,  to  illustrate,  and  confirm  the  text,  to  explain  a  doubt-
ful phrase,  or  to  expound  an  obscure  clause  ;  and  in  pro-
portion to  the  uniformity  and  universality  of  that  con-
struction, and  the  known  ability  and  talents  of  those,  by
whom  it  was  given,  is  the  credit,  to  which  it  is  entitled.
It  can  never  abrogate  the  text ;  it  can  never  fritter  away
its  obvious  sense ;  it  can  never  narrow  down  its  true
limitations  ;  it  can  never  enlarge  its  natural  boundaries.  *


1  Mr.  Jefferson  has  laid  down  two  rules,  which  he  deems  perfect  can-
ons for  the  interpretation  of  the  constitution .*  The  first  is,  "  The  cap-
ital and  leading  object  of  the  constitution  was,  to  leave  with  the  states
all  authorities,  which  respected  their  own  citizens  only,  and  to  transfer
to  the  United  States  those,  which  respected  citizens  of  foreign  or  other
states ;  to  make  us  several  as  to  ourselves,  but  one  as  to  ail  others.  In
the  latter  case,  then,  constructions  should  lean  to  the  general  jurisdic-
tion, if  the  words  will  bear  it ;  and  in  favour  of  the  states  in  the  former,  if
possible,  to  be  so  construed."  Now,  the  very  theory,  on  which  this  canon
is  founded,  is  contradicted  by  the  provisions  of  the  constitution  itself.  In
many  instances  authorities  and  powers  are  given,  which  respect  citi-
zens of  the  respective  states,  without  reference  to  foreigners,  or  the  citi-
zens of  other  states.f  But  if  this  general  theory  were  true,  it  would
furnish  no  just  rule  of  interpretation,  since  a  particular  clause  might
form  an  exception  to  it ;  and,  indeed,  every  clause  ought,  at  all  events,
to  be  construed  according  to  its  fair  intent  and  objects,  as  disclosed  in
its  language.  What  sort  of  a  rule  is  that,  which,  without  regard  to  the
intent  or  objects  of  a  particular  clause,  insists,  that  it  shall,  if  possible,
(not  if  reasonable)  be  construed  in  favour  of  the  states,  simply  because
it  respects  their  citizens  ?  The  second  canon  is,  "  On  every  question  of
construction  [we  should]  carry  ourselves  back  to  the  time,  when  the
constitution  was  adopted  ;  recollect  the  spirit  manifested  in  the  debates;
and  instead  of  trying,  what  meaning  may  be  squeezed  out  of  the  text,
or  invented  against  it,  conform  to  the  probable  one,  in  which  it  was
passed." Now,  who  does  not  see  the  utter  looseness,  and  incoherence

*  4  Jefferson's  Corresp.  373  ;  Id.  391,  392  ;  Id.  396.
t  4  Jefferson's  Corresp.  391,  392,  396.


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  391

We  shall  have  abundant  reason  hereafter  to  observe,
when  we  enter  upon  the  analysis  of  the  particular
clauses  of  the  constitution,  how  many  loose  interpreta-

of  this  canon. How  arc  we  to  know,  what  was  thought  of  particular
clauses  of  the  constitution  at  the  time  of  its  adoption  ? In  many  cases,
no  printed  debates  give  any  account  of  any  construction  ;  and  where  any
is  given,  different  persons  held  different  doctrines. Whose  is  to  pre-
vail ? Besides  ;  of  all  the  state  conventions,  the  debates  of  five  only  are
preserved,  and  these  very  imperfectly. What  is  to be  done,  as  to  the
other  eight  states  ? What  is  to  be  done,  as  to  the  eleven  new  states,
which  have  come  into  the  Union  under  constructions,  which  have  been
established,  against  what  some persons  may deem  the  meaning  of  the
framersofit? How  are  we to  arrive  at  what  is  the  most  probable
meaning? Are  Mr.  Hamilton,  and  Mr.  Madison,  and  Mr.  Jay,  the  ex-
pounders in  the  Federalist,  to  be  followed. Or  are  others  of  a  different
opinion  to  guide  us  ? Are  we  to  be  governed  by  the  opinions  of  a  few,
now  dead,  who  have  left  them  on  record  ? Or  by  those  of  a  few  now
living,  simply  because  they  were  actors  in  those  days,  (constituting  not
one  in  a  thousand  of  those,  who  were  called  to  deliberate  upon  the  con-
stitution, and  not  one  in  ten  thousand  of  those,  who  were in  favour  or
against  it,  among  the  people)  ? Or  are  we  to  be  governed  by  the  opin-
ions of  those,  who  constituted  a  majority  of  those,  who  were  called  to
act  on  that  occasion,  either  as  framers  of,  or  voters  upon,  the  constitu-
tion? If  by  the  latter,  in  what  manner  can  we know  those  opinions?
Are  we  to  be  governed  by  the  sense  of  a  majority  of  a  particular  state,
or  of  all  of  the  United  States  ? If  so,  how  are  we  to  ascertain,  what  that
sense  was  ? Is  the  sense  of  the  constitution  to  be  ascertained,  not  by
its  own  text,  but  by  the  "probable  meaning  "  to  be  gathered  by  conjec-
tures from  scattered  documents,  from  private  papers,  from  the  table  talk
of  some  statesmen,  or  the  jealous  exaggerations  of  others  ? Is  the  con-
stitution of  the  United  States  to  be  the  only  instrument,  which  is  not  to
be  interpreted  by  what  is  written,  but  by  probable guesses,  aside  from
the  text?  What  would  be  said  of  interpreting  a  statute  of  a  state  legis-
lature, by  endeavouring  to  find  out,  from  private  sources, the  objects
and  opinions  of  every  member; how every  one  thought; what he
wished; how  he  interpreted  it? Suppose  different  persons had  dif-
ferent opinions,  what  is  to  be  done  ? Suppose different  persons  are
not  agreed,  as  to  "  the  probable  meaning"  of  the  framers  or  of  the  peo-
ple, what  interpretation  is  to  be  followed  ? These,  and  many  questions
of  the  same  sort,  might  be  asked. It  is  obvious,  that  there  can  be  no
security  to  the  people  in  any  constitution  of  government,  if  they  are  not
to  judge  of  it  by  the  fair  meaning  of  the  words  of  the  text ;  but  the  words
are  to  be  bent  and  broken  by  the  "  probable  meaning  "  of  persons,  whom


392  CONSTITUTION OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

tions,  and  plausible  conjectures  were  hazarded  at  an
early  period,  which  have  since  silently  died  away,  and
are  now  retained  in  no  living  memory,  as  a  topic  either
of  praise  or  blame,  of  alarm  or  of  congratulation.

§  408.  And,  after  all,  the  most  unexceptionable
source  of  collateral  interpretation  is  from  the  practical
exposition  of  the  government  itself  in  its  various  de-
partments upon  particular  questions  discussed,  and  set-
tled upon  their  own  single  merits.  These  approach
the  nearest  in  their  own  nature  to  judicial  expositions  ;
and  have  the  same  general  recommendation,  that  be-
longs to  the  latter.  They  are  decided  upon  solemn
argument,  pro  re  natd,  upon  a  doubt  raised,  upon  a  lis
mota,  upon  a  deep  sense  of  their  importance  and  diffi-
culty, in  the  face  of  the  nation,  with  a  view  to  present
action,  in  the  midst  of  jealous  interests,  and  by  men
capable  of  urging,  or  repelling  the  grounds  of  argument,
from  their  exquisite  genius,  their  comprehensive  learn-
ing, or  their  deep  meditation  upon  the  absorbing
topic.  How  light,  compared  with  these  means  of
instruction,  are  the  private  lucubrations  of  the
closet,  or  the  retired  speculations  of  ingenious  minds,
intent  on  theory,  or  general  views,  and  unused  to  en-
counter a  practical  difficulty  at  every  step !

§  409.  But  to  return  to  the  rules  of  interpretation
arising  ex  directo from  the  text  of  the  constitution.


they  never  knew,  and  whose  opinions,  and  means  of  information,  may
be  no  better  than  their  own?  The  people  adopted  the  constitution  ac-
cording to  the  words  of  the  text  in  their  reasonable  interpretation,  and
not  according  to  the  private  interpretation  of  any  particular  men.  The
opinions  of  the  latter  may  sometimes  aid  us  in  arriving  at  just  results  ;
but  they  can  never  be  conclusive.  The  Federalist  denied,  that  the  presi-
dent could  remove  a  public  officer  without  the  consent  of  the  senate.
The  first  congress  affirmed  his  right  by  a  mere  majority.  Which  is-
to  be  followed  ?


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  393

And  first  the  rules  to  be  drawn  from  the  nature  of  the
instrument.  (1.)  It  is  to  be  construed,  as  a  frame,  or
fundamental  law  of  government,  established  by  the
people  of  the  United  States,  according  to  their  own
free  pleasure  and  sovereign  will.  In  this  respect  it  is
in  no  wise  distinguishable  from  the  constitutions  of  the
state  governments.  Each  of  them  is  established  by
the  people  for  their  own  purposes,  and  each  is  founded
on  their  supreme  authority.  The  powers,  which  are
conferred,  the  restrictions,  which  are  imposed,  the
authorities,  which  are  exercised,  the  organization  and
distribution  thereof,  which  are  provided,  are  in  each
case  for  the  same  object,  the  common  benefit  of  the
governed,  and  not  for  the  profit  or  dignity  of  the
rulers.

^  410.  And  yet  it  has  been  a  very  common  mode  of
interpretation  to  insist  upon  a  diversity  of  rules  in  con-
struing the  state  constitutions,  and  that  of  the  general
government.  Thus,  in  the  Commentaries  of  Mr  Tucker
upon  Blackstone,  we  find  it  laid  down,  as  if  it  were  an
incontrovertible  doctrine  in  regard  to  the  constitution  of
the  United  States,  that  "  as  federal,  it  is  to  be  construed
strictly,  in  all  cases,  where  the  antecedent  rights  of  a
state  may  be  drawn  in  question.  As  a  social  compact,
it  ought  likewise  "  to  receive  the  same  strict  construc-
tion, wherever  the  right  of  personal  liberty,  of  personal
security,  or  of  private  property  may  become  the  object
of  dispute ;  because  every  person,  w7hose  liberty  or
property  was  thereby  rendered  subject  to  the  new
government,  was  antecedently  a  member  of  a  civil  soci-
ety, to  whose  regulations  he  had  submitted  himself,  and
under  whose  authority  and  protection  he  still  remains,

vol.  i.  50


394 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

in  all  cases  not  expressly  submitted  to  the  new  govern-
ment." l

§411. We  here  see, that  the  whole  reasoning  is
founded,  not  on  the  notion,  that  the  rights  of  the  people
are  concerned,  but  the  rights  of  the  states. And  by
strict  construction  is  obviously  meant  the  most  limited
sense  belonging  to  the  words. And  the  learned  author
relies,  for  the  support  of  his  reasoning,  upon  some  rules
laid  down  by  Vattel  in  relation to  the  interpretation  of
treaties  in  relation  to  odious  things. It  would  seem,
then,  that  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  is  to  be
deemed  an  odious  instrument. And  why,  it  may  be
asked  ? Was  it  not  framed  for  the  good  of  the  people,
and  by  the  people  ?  One  of  the  sections  of  Yattel,  which
is  relied  on, states this  proposition,2 "  That  whatever
tends  to  change  the  present  state  of  things,  is  also  to  be
ranked  in  the  class  of  odious  things."  Is  it  not  most  man-
ifest, that  this  proposition  is,  or  at  least  may  be,  in  many
cases,  fundamentally  wrong?  If  a  people  free  themselves
from  a  despotism, is  it to  be  said,  that  the  change  of
government  is  odious,  and  ought  to  be  construed  strictly?
What, upon such a principle,  is  to  become  of  the
American  Revolution  ;  and  of  our  state  governments,
and  state  constitutions? Suppose  a  well-ordered  gov-
ernment arises  out  of  a  state  of  disorder  and  anarchy,
is such a government to be considered odious  ?
Another section 3  adds, "  Since odious things are
those,  whose  restriction  tends  more  certainly  to  equity
than  their extension,  and  since  we  ought  to  pursue
that  line,  which  is  most  conformable  to  equity,  when
the  will  of  the  legislature  or  of  the  contracting  parties
is  not  exactly  known,  we should,  where  there  is  a

i  1  Tuckers  Black.  Comm.  App.  151. 2  B.  2,  §  305.  3  §  508.


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  395

question  of  odious  things,  interpret  the  terms  in  the
most  limited  sense.  We  may  even,  to  a  certain  de-
gree, adopt  a  figurative  meaning  in  order  to  avert  the
oppressive  consequences  of  the  proper  and  literal
sense,  or  any  thing  of  an  odious  nature,  which  it  would
involve."  Does  not  this  section  contain  most  lax  and
unsatisfactory  ingredients  for  interpretation  ?  Who  is
to  decide,  whether  it  is  most  conformable  to  equity  to
extend,  or  to  restrict  the  sense  1  Who  is  to  decide,
whether  the  provision  is  odious  ?  According  to  this  rule,
the  most  opposite  interpretations  of  the  same  words
wTould  be  equally  correct,  according  as  the  interpreta-
tor  should  deem  it  odious  or  salutary.  Nay,  the  words
are  to  be  deserted,  and  a  figurative  sense  adopted,
whenever  he  deems  it  advisable,  looking  to  the  odious
nature  or  consequence  of  the  common  sense.  He,
who  believes  the  general  government  founded  in  wis-
dom, and  sound  policy,  and  the  public  safety,  may  ex-
tend the  words.  He,  who  deems  it  odious,  or  the
state  governments  the  truest  protection  of  all  our  rights,
must  limit  the  words  to  the  narrowest  meaning.

§  412.  The  twelfth  amendment  to  the  constitution
is  also  relied  on  by  the  same  author,  which  declares,
"  that  the  powers  not  delegated  to  the  United  States
by  the  constitution,  nor  prohibited  by  it  to  the  states,
are  reserved  to  the  states  respectively,  or  to  the  people."
He  evidently  supposes,  that  this  means  "  in  all  cases
not  expressly  submitted  to  the  new  government  " ;  yet
the  word  "  expressly "  is  no  where  found  in  the
amendment.  But  we  are  not  considering,  whether
any  powers  can  be  implied  ;  the  only  point  now  before
us  is,  how  the  express  powers  are  to  be  construed.
Are  they  to  be  construed  strictly,  that  is,  in  their  most
limited  sense? Or  are  they  to  receive  a  fair  and  reason-


396 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

able  construction,  according  to  the  plain  meaning  of  the
terms  and  the  objects,  for  which  they  are  used  ?

§  413.  When  it  is  said,  that  the  constitution  of  the
United  States  should  be  construed  strictly,  viewed  as
a  social  compact,  whenever  it  touches  the  rights  of
property,  or  of  personal  security,  or  liberty,  the  rule  is
equally  applicable  to  the  state  constitutions  in  the  like
cases.  The  principle,  upon  which  this  interpretation
rests,  if  it  has  any  foundation,  must  be,  that  the  people
ought  not  to  be  presumed  to  yield  up  their  rights  of
property  or  liberty,  beyond  what  is  the  clear  sense  of
the  language  and  the  objects  of  the  constitution.  All
governments  are  founded  on  a  surrender  of  some  nat-
ural rights,  and  impose  some  restrictions.  We  may
not  be  at  liberty  to  extend  the  grants  of  power  beyond
the  fair  meaning  of  the  words  in  any  such  case ;  but
that  is  not  the  question  here  under  discussion.  It  is,
how  we  are  to  construe  the  words  as  used,  whether  in
the  most  confined,  or  in  the  more  liberal  sense  properly
belonging  to  them.  Now,  in  construing  a  grant,
or  surrender  of  powers  by  the  people  to  a  monarch,
for  his  own  benefit  or  use,  it  is  not  only  natural,  but
just,  to  presume,  as  in  all  other  cases  of  grants,  that
the  parties  had  not  in  view  any  large  sense  of  the  terms,
because  the  objects  were  a  derogation  permanently
from  their  rights  and  interests.  But  in  construing  a
constitution  of  government,  framed  by  the  people  for
their  own  benefit  and  protection,  for  the  preservation
of  their  rights,  and  property,  and  liberty;  where  the  del-
egated powers  are  not,  and  cannot  be  used  for  the  ben-
efit of  their  rulers,  who  are  but  their  temporary  ser-
vants and  agents;  but  are  intended  solely  for  the  bene-
fit of  the  people,  no  such  presumption  of  an  intention
to  use  the  words  in  the  most  restricted  sense  necessa-


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  397

lily  arises.  The  strict,  or  the  more  extended  sense,  both
being  within  the  letter,  may  be  fairly  held  to  he  within
their  intention,  as  either  shall  besl  promote  the  very  ob-
jects of  the  people  in  the  grant ;  as  either  shall  best  pro-
mote or  secure  their  rights,  property,  or  liberty.  The
words  are  not,  indeed,  to  be  stretched  beyond  their
fair  sense  ;  but  within  that  range,  the  rule  of  interpre-
tation must  be  taken,  which  best  follows  out  the  appa-
rent intention.1  This  is  the  mode  (it  is  believed)  uni-
versally adopted  in  construing  the  state  constitutions.
It  has  its  origin  in  common  sense.  And  it  never  can  be
a  matter  of  just  jealousy ;  because  the  rulers  can  have  no
permanent  interest  in  a  free  government,  distinct  from
that  of  the  people,  of  whom  they  are  a  part,  and  to  whom
they  are  responsible.  Why  the  same  reasoning  should
not  apply  to  the  government  of  the  United  States,  it  is
not  very  easy  to  conjecture.

^  414.  But  it  is  said,  that  the  state  governments  be-
ing already  in  existence,  and  the  people  subjected  to
them,  their  obedience  to  the  new  government  may  en-
danger their  obedience  to  the  states,  or  involve  them  in
a  conflict  of  authority,  and  thus  produce  inconvenience.
In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  true,  in  a  just  sense,  (if  we
are  rio-ht  in  our  view  of  the  constitution  of  the  United
States,)  that  such  a  conflict  can  ultimately  exist.  For  if
the  powers  of  the  general  government  are  of  paramount
and  supreme  obligation,  if  they  constitute  the  supreme
law  of  the  land,  no  conflict,  as  to  obedience,  can  be
found.  Whenever  the  question  arises,  as  to  whom  obe-
dience is  due,  it  is  to  be  judicially  settled ;  and  being
settled,  it  regulates,  at  once,  the  rights  and  duties  of  all
the  citizens.


i  Rawlc  on  tlie  Constitution,  ch.  1,  p.  31.


398 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

^415.  In  the  next  place,  the  powers  given  by  the
people  to  the  general  government  are  not  necessarily
carved  out  of  the  powers  already  confided  by  them  to
the  state  governments.  They  may  be  such,  as  they  orig-
inally reserved  to  themselves.  And,  if  they  are  not,  the
authority  of  the  people,  in  their  sovereign  capacity,  to
withdraw  power  from  their  state  functionaries,  and  to
confide  it  to  the  functionaries  of  the  general  govern-
ment, cannot  be  doubted  or  denied.1  If  they  withdraw
the  power  from  the  state  functionaries,  it  must  be  pre-
sumed to  be,  because  they  deem  it  more  useful  for
themselves,  more  for  the  common  benefit,  and  common
protection,  than  to  leave  it,  where  it  has  been  hitherto
deposited.  Why  should  a  power  in  the  hands  of  one
functionary  be  differently  construed  in  the  hands  of
another  functionary,  if,  in  each  case,  the  same  object  is
in  view,  the  safety  of  the  people  ?  The  state  govern-
ments have  no  right  to  assume,  that  the  power  is  more
safe  or  more  useful  with  them,  than  with  the  general
government  ;  that  they  have  a  higher  capacity  and  a
more  honest  desire  to  preserve  the  rights  and  liberties
of  the  people,  than  the  general  government  ;  that  there
is  no  danger  in  trusting  them ;  but  that  all  the  peril  and
all  the  oppression  impend  on  the  other  side.  The  peo-
ple have  not  so  said,  or  thought ;  and  they  have  the  ex-
clusive right  to  judge  for  themselves  on  the  subject.
They  avow,  that  the  constitution  of  the  United  States
was  adopted  by  them,  "  in  order  to  form  a  more  per-
fect union,  establish  justice,  ensure  domestic  tranquil-
lity, provide  for  the  common  defence,  promote  the  gen-
eral welfare,  and  secure  the  blessings  of  liberty  to  them-
selves and  their  posterity." It  would  be  a  mockery  to

i  Martin  x.  Hunter,  J  Wheat  R.  304,  325.


ill.  V.]  RULKS  OP  [INTERPRETATION.  399

ask,  if  these  are  odious  objects,  [f  these  require  every
grant  of  power,  withdrawn  from  the  state  governments,
to  be  deemed  strictissimi  juris,  and  construed  in  the
most  limited  sense,  even  if  ii  should  defeat  these;  ob-
jects. What  peculiar  sanctity  have  the  state  govern-
ments in  the  eyes  of  the  people  beyond  these  objects  ?
Are  they  not  framed  for  the  same  general  ends?  Was
not  the  very  inability  of  the  state  governments  suitably
to  provide  for  our  national  wants,  and  national  inde-
pendence, and  national  protection,  the  very  groundwork
of  the  whole  system  ?

^416.  If  this  be  the  true  view  of  the  subject,  the
constitution  of  the  United  States  is  to  receive  as  favour-
able a  construction,  as  those  of  the  states.  Neither  is
to  be  construed  alone ;  but  each  with  a  reference  to
the  other.  Each  belongs  to  the  same  system  of  govern-
ment ;  each  is  limited  in  its  powers ;  and  within  the
scope  of  its  powers  each  is  supreme.  Each,  by  the  the-
ory of  our  government,  is  essential  to  the  existence  and
due  preservation  of  the  powers  and  obligations  of  the
other.  The  destruction  of  either  would  be  equally  ca-
lamitous, since  it  would  involve  the  ruin  of  that  beauti-
ful fabric  of  balanced  government,  which  has  been  rear-
ed with  so  much  care  and  wisdom,  and  in  which  the
people  have  reposed  their  confidence,  as  the  truest  safe-
guard of  their  civil,  religious,  and  political  liberties.  The
exact  limits  of  the  powers  confided  by  the  people  to
each,  may  not  always  be  capable,  from  the  inherent
dilliculty  of  the  subject,  of  being  defined,  or  ascertain-
ed in  all  cases  with  perfect  certainty.1  But  the  lines
are  generally  marked  out  with  sufficient  broadness  and
clearness  ;  and  in  the  progress  of  the  developement  of

1  The  Federalist,  No.  37.


400  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

the  peculiar  functions  of  each,  the  part  of  true  wisdom
would  seem  to  be,  to  leave  in  every  practicable  direc-
tion a  wide,  if  not  an  unmeasured,  distance  between  the
actual  exercise  of  the  sovereignty  of  each.  In  every
complicated  machine  slight  causes  may  disturb  the
operations  ;  and  it  is  often  more  easy  to  detect  the  de-
fects, than  to  apply  a  safe  and  adequate  remedy.

§  417.  The  language  of  the  Supreme  Court,  in  the
case  of  Martin  v.  Hunter,1  seems  peculiarly  appropriate
to  this  part  of  our  subject.  "  The  constitution  of  the
United  States,"  say  the  court,  "  was  ordained  and  es-
tablished, not  by  the  states  in  their  sovereign  capacities,
but  emphatically,  as  the  preample  of  the  constitution
declares,  by  the  people  of  the  United  States.2  There
can  be  no  doubt,  that  it  was  competent  to  the  people
to  invest  the  general  government  with  all  the  powers,
which  they  might  deem  proper  and  necessary  ;  to  ex-
tend or  restrain  those  powers  according  to  their  own
good  pleasure  ;  and  to  give  them  a  paramount  and  su-
preme authority.  As  little  doubt  can  there  be,  that  the
people  had  a  right  to  prohibit  to  the  states  the  exercise
of  any  powers,  which  were  in  their  judgment  incom-
patible with  the  objects  of  the  general  compact ;  to
make  the  powers  of  the  state  governments,  in  given
cases,  subordinate  to  those  of  the  nation ;  or  to  reserve
to  themselves  those  sovereign  authorities,  which  they
might  not  choose  to  delegate  to  either.  The  constitu-
tion was  not,  therefore,  necessarily  carved  out  of  exist-
ing state  sovereignties,  nor  a  surrender  of  powers  al-
ready existing  in  state  institutions. For  the  powers  of

i  1  Wheat.  R.  304 ;  S.  C.  3  Petcrs's  Cond.  R.  ~u~>.

2  This  is  still  more  forcibly  stated  by  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Marshall  in
delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court  in  McCulloch  v.  Maryland,  in  a  pas-
sage already  cited.  4  Wheat.  R.  316,  402  to  405.


CH.  V.]  RULES OF  INTERPRETATION.  401

the  state  governments  depend  upon  their  own  consti-
tutions ;  and  the  people  of  evevy  state  had  a  right  to
modify  or  restrain  them  according  to  their  own  views
of  policy  or  principle.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  perfect-
ly clear,  that  the  sovereign  powers,  vested  in  the  state
governments  by  their  respective  constitutions,  remain-
ed unaltered  and  unimpaired,  except  so  far  as  they
were  granted  to  the  government  of  the  United  States."
These  deductions  do  not  rest  upon  general  reason,
plain  and  obvious  as  they  seem  to  be.  They  have  been
positively  recognised  by  one  of  the  articles  in  amend-
ment of  the  constitution,  which  declares,  that  "  the  pow-
ers not  delegated  to  the  United  States  by  the  constitu-
tion, nor  prohibited  by  it  to  the  states,  are  reserved  to
the  states  respectively,  or  to  the  people"  l

"  The  government,  then,  of  the  United  States,  can
claim  no  powers,  which  are  not  granted  to  it  by  the
constitution ;  and  the  powers  actually  granted  must  be
such,  as  are  expressly  given,  or  given  by  necessary  im-
plication. On  the  other  hand,  this  instrument,  like  eve-
ry other  grant,  is  to  have  a  reasonable  construction  ac-
cording to  the  import  of  its  terms.  And  where  a  pow-
er is  expressly  given  in  general  terms,  it  is  not  to  be
restrained  to  particular  cases,  unless  that  construction
grow  out  of  the  context  expressly,  or  by  necessary  im-
plication. The  words  are  to  be  taken  in  their  natural
and  obvious  sense,  and  not  in  a  sense  unreasonably  re-
stricted or  enlarged."

§418.  A  still  more  striking  response  to  the  argu-
ment for  a  strict  construction  of  the  constitution  will  be
found  in  the  language  of  the  court,  in  the  case  of  Gib-
bons  v.  Ogden,  (9  Wheat.  1,  &c.)  Mr.  Chief  Jus!  ice
Marshall,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court,  says,

i  See  also  McCulloch  v.  Maryland,  4  Wheat.  R.  316,  402  to  40(3.
VOL.  I.  51


402 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

"This  instrument  contains  an  enumeration  of  pow-
ers expressly  granted  by  the  people  to  their  govern-
ment. It  has  been  said,  that  these  powers  ought  to  be
construed  strictly.  But  why  ought  they  to  be  so  con-
strued ?  Is  there  one  sentence  in  the  constitution,  •
which  gives  countenance  to  this  rule  ?  In  the  last  of
the  enumerated  powers,  that,  which  grants  expressly
the  means  for  carrying  all  others  into  execution,  con-
gress is  authorized  "  to  make  all  laws,  which  shall  be
necessary  and  proper  "  for  the  purpose.  But  this  lim-
itation on  the  means,  which  may  be  used,  is  not  extend-
ed to  the  powers,  which  are  conferred  ;  nor  is  there
one  sentence  in  the  constitution,  which  has  been  point-
ed out  by  the  gentlemen  of  the  bar,  or  which  we  have
been  able  to  discern,  that  prescribes  this  rule.  We  do
not,  therefore,  think  ourselves  justified  in  adopting  it.
What  do  gentlemen  mean  by  a  strict  construe  don  ?
If  they  contend  only  against  that  enlarged  construction,
which  would  extend  words  beyond  their  natural  and
obvious  import,  we  might  question  the  application  of
the  terms,  but  should  not  controvert  the  principle.  If
they  contend  for  that  narrow  construction,  which,  in
support  of  some  theory  not.  to  be  found  in  the  constitu-
tion, would  deny  to  the  government  those  powers,
wdiich  the  words  of  the  grant,  as  usually  understood,
import,  and  which  are  consistent  with  the  general  views
and  objects  of  the  instrument  ;  for  that  narrow  con-
struction, which  would  cripple  the  government,  and
render  it  unequal  to  the  objects,  for  which  it  is  declared
to  be  instituted,  and  to  which  the  powers  given,  as
fairly  understood,  render  it  competent ;  then  we  can-
not perceive  the  propriety  of  this  strict  construction,
nor  adopt  it  as  the  rule,  by  which  the  constitution  is  to
be  expounded. As  men,  whose  intentions  require  no


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  403

concealment,  generally  employ  the  words,  which  most
directly  and  aptly  express  the  ideas  they  intend  to  con-
vey ;  the  enlightened  patriots,  who  framed  our  consti-
tution, and  the  people,  who  adopted  it,  must  be  under-
stood to  have  employed  words  in  their  natural  sense,
and  to  have  intended,  what  they  have  said.  It,  from  the
imperfection  of  human  language,  there  should  be  seri-
ous doubts  respecting  the  extent  of  any  given  power,
it  is  a  well  settled  rule,  that  the  objects,  for  which  it  was
given,  especially,  when  those  objects  are  expressed  in
the  instrument  itself,  should  have  great  influence  in  the
construction.  We  know  of  no  reason  for  excluding  this
rule  from  the  present  case.  The  grant  does  not  convey
power,  which  might  be  beneficial  to  the  grantor,  if  re-
tained by  himself,  or  which  can  enure  solely  to  the  ben-
efit of  the  grantee  ;  but  is  an  investment  of  power  for
the  general  advantage,  in  the  hands  of  agents  selected
for  that  purpose  ;  which  power  can  never  be  exercised
by  the  people  themselves,  but  must  be  placed  in  the
hands  of  agents,  or  lie  dormant.  We  know  of  no  rule
for  construing  the  extent  of  such  powers,  other  than  is
given  by  the  language  of  the  instrument,  which  confers
them,  taken  in  connexion  with  the  purposes,  for  which
they  were  conferred.5' 1

i  See  also  Id,  222,  and  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Marshall's  opinion  in  Ogden
v.  Saunders,  12  Wheat.  R.  332.

It  has  been  remarked  by  President  J.  Q.  Adams,  that  "it  is  a  circum-
stance, which  will  not  escape  the  observation  of  a  philosophical  histo-
rian, that  the  constructive  powers  of  the  national  government  have  been
stretched  to  their  extremest  tension  by  that  party  when  in  power,  which
has  been  most  tenderly  scrupulous  of  the  state  sovereignty,  when  un-
invested with  the  authority  of  the  union  themselves."  He  adds,  "  Of
these  inconsistencies,  our  two  great  parties  can  have  little  to  say  in  re-
proof of  each  other."  Without  inquiring  into  the  justice  of  the  remark
in  general,  it  may  be  truly  stated,  that  the  Embargo  of  1807,  and  the
admission  of  Louisiana  into  the  Union,  are  very  striking  illustrations  of
the  application  of  constructive  powers.


404 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

^419.  IV.  From  the  foregoing  considerations  we  de-
duce the  conclusion,  that  as  a  frame  or  fundamental  law
of  government,  (2.)  The  constitution  of  the  United
States  is  to  receive  a  reasonable  interpretation  of  its
language,  and  its  powers,  keeping  in  view  the  objects
and  purposes,  for  which  those  powers  were  conferred.
By  a  reasonable  interpretation,  we  mean,  that  in  case
the  words  are  susceptible  of  two  different  senses,  the
one  strict,  the  other  more  enlarged,  that  should  be  adopt-
ed, which  is  most  consonant  with  the  apparent  objects
and  intent  of  the  constitution  ;  that,  which  will  give  it
efficacy  and  force,  as  a  government,  rather  than  that,
which  will  impair  its  operations,  and  reduce  it  to  a  state
of  imbecility.  Of  course  we  do  not  mean,  that  the
words  for  this  purpose  are  to  be  strained  beyond  their
common  and  natural  sense ;  but  keeping  within  that
limit,  the  exposition  is  to  have  a  fair  and  just  latitude,
so  as  on  the  one  hand  to  avoid  obvious  mischief,  and
on  the  other  hand  to  promote  the  public  good.1

§  420.  This  consideration  is  of  great  importance  in
construing  a  frame  of  government ;  and  a  fortiori  a
frame  of  government,  the  free  and  voluntary  insti-
tution of  the  people  for  their  common  benefit,  secu-
rity, and  happiness.  It  is  wholly  unlike  the  case  of
a  municipal  charter,  or  a  private  grant,  in  respect  both
to  its  means  and  its  ends.  When  a  person  makes  a
private  grant  of  a  particular  thing,  or  of  a  license  to  do
a  thing,  or  of  an  easement  for  the  exclusive  benefit  of
the  grantee,  we  naturally  confine  the  terms,  however
general,  to  the  objects  clearly  in  the  view  of  the  parties.
But  even  in  such  cases,  doubtful  words,  within  the
scope  of  those  objects,  are  construed  most  favourably

i  See  Ogden  v.  Saunders,  12  Wheat.  R.  332,  Opinion  of  Mr.  Chief
Justice  Marshall.


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  405

for  the  grantee ;  because,  though  in  derogation  of  the
rights  of  the  grantor,  they  are  promotive  of  the  general
rights  secured  to  the  grantee. But,  where  the  granl

enures,  solely  and  exclusively,  for  the  benefit  of  tin;
grantor  himself,  no  one  would  deny  the  propriety  of
giving  to  the  words  of  the  grant  a  benign  and  liberal
interpretation.  In  cases,  however,  of  private  grants,
the  objects  generally  are  few  ;  they  are  certain  ;  they
are  limited  ;  they  neither  require,  nor  look  to  a  variety
of  means  or  changes,  which  are  to  control,  or  modify
either  the  end,  or  the  means.

§  421.  In  regard  also  to  municipal  charters,  or  public
grants,  similar  considerations  usually  apply. They  are
generally  deemed  restrictive  of  the  royal  or  public  pre-
rogative, or  of  the  common  rights  secured  by  the  ac-
tual organization  of  the  government  to  other  individu-
als, or  communities. They  are  supposed  to  be  procur-
ed, not  so  much  for  public  good,  as  for  private  or  local
convenience.  They  are  supposed  to  arise  from  person-
al solicitation,  upon  general  suggestions,  and  not  ex
certd  causa,  or  ex  mero  motu  of  the  king,  or  government
itself. Hence,  such  charters  are  often  required  by  the
municipal  jurisprudence  to  be  construed  strictly,  be-
cause they  yield  something,  which  is  common,  for  the
benefit  of  a  few. And  yet,  where  it  is  apparent,  that
they  proceed  upon  greater  or  broader  motives,  a  liberal
exposition  is  not  only  indulged,  but  is  encouraged,  if  it
manifestly  promotes  the  public  good.1 So  that  we  see
that  even  in  these  cases,  common  sense often  dic-
tates a  departure  from  a  narrow  and  strict  construc-
tion of  the  terms,  though  the  ordinary  rules  of  mere
municipal  law  may  not  have  favoured  it.


iSee  Gibbons  v.  Cgden,  9  Wheat.  R.  1,189.


406 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U. STATES. [BOOK  III.

^  422.  But  a  constitution  of  government,  founded  by
the  people  for  themselves  and  their  posterity,  and  for
objects  of  the  most  momentous  nature,  for  perpetual
union,  for  the  establishment  of  justice,  for  the  general
welfare,  and  for  a  perpetuation  of  the  blessings  of  liber-
ty, necessarily  requires,  that  every  interpretation  of  its
powers  should  have  a  constant  reference  to  these  ob-
jects. No  interpretation  of  the  words,  in  which  those
powers  are  granted,  can  be  a  sound  one,  which  nar-
rows down  their  ordinary  import,  so  as  to  defeat  those
objects.  That  would  be  to  destroy  the  spirit,  and  to
cramp  the  letter.  It  has  been  justly  observed,  that
"  the  constitution  unavoidably  deals  in  general  language.
It  did  not  suit  the  purposes  of  the  people,  in  fram-
ing this  great  charter  of  our  liberties,  to  provide  for
minute  specification  of  its  powers,  or  to  declare  the
means,  by  which  those  powers  should  be  carried  into
execution.  It  was  foreseen,  that  it  would  be  a  perilous,
and  difficult,  if  not  an  impracticable  task.  The  instru-
ment was  not  intended  to  provide  merely  for  the  exi-
gencies of  a  few  years ;  but  was  to  endure  through  a  long
lapse  of  ages,  the  events  of  which  were  locked  up  in
the  inscrutable  purposes  of  Providence.  It  could  not
be  foreseen,  what  new  changes  and  modifications  of
power  might  be  indispensable  to  effectuate  the  general
objects  of  the  charter ;  and  restrictions  and  specifica-
tions, which  at  the  present  might  seem  salutary,  might
in  the  end  prove  the  overthrow  of  the  system  itself.
Hence  its  powers  are  expressed  in  general  terms,  leav-
ing the  legislature,  from  time  to  time,  to  adopt  its  own
means  to  effectuate  legitimate  objects,  and  to  mould
and  model  the  exercise  of  its  powers,  as  its  own  wis-
dom and  the  public  interests  should  require."  1 Lan-

i  Hunter  v.  Martin,  1  Wheat.  R.  304,  326,  327  ;  S.  C.  3  Peters's  Cond.
R.  575,  583.


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  107

guage  to  the  same  effect  will  be  found  in  other  judg-
ments of  the  same  tribunal.1

^  423.  If,  then,  we  are  to  give  a  reasonable  con-
struction to  this  instrument,  as  a  constitution  of  govern-
ment established  for  the  common  good,  we  must  threw
aside  all  notions  of  subjecting  it  to  a  strict  interpreta-
tion, as  if  it  were  subversive  of  the  great,  interests  of
society,  or  derogated  from  the  inherent  sovereignty  of
the  people.  And  this  will  naturally  lead  us  to  some
other  rules  properly  belonging  to  the  subject.

^  424.  V.  Where  the  power  is  granted  in  general
terms,  the  power  is  to  be  construed,  as  co-extensive
with  the  terms,  unless  some  clear  restriction  upon  it
is  deducible  from  the  context.  We  do  not  mean  to
assert,  that  it  is  necessary,  that  such  restriction  should
be  expressly  found  in  the  context.  It  will  be  sufficient,
if  it  arise  by  necessary  implication.  But  it  is  not  suffi-
cient to  show,  that  there  was,  or  might  have  been,  a
sound  or  probable  motive  to  restrict  it.  A  restriction
founded  on  conjecture  is  wholly  inadmissible.  The
reason  is  obvious  :  the  text  was  adopted  by  the  people
in  its  obvious,  and  general  sense.  We  have  no  means
of  knowing,  that  any  particular  gloss,  short  of  this  sense,
was  either  contemplated,  or  approved  by  the  people  ;
and  such  a  gloss  might,  though  satisfactory  in  one  state,
have  been  the  very  ground  of  objection  in  another.  It
might  have  formed  a  motive  to  reject  it  in  one,  and  to
adopt  it  in  another.  The  sense  of  a  part  of  the  people
has  no  title  to  be  deemed  the  sense  of  the  whole.
Motives  of  state  policy,  or  state  interest,  may  properly
have  influence  in  the  question  of  ratifying  it ;  but  the
constitution  itself  must  be  expounded,  as  it  stands  ;  and

i  See  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  9  Wheat.  R.  1, 187,  &c.  222,  &c.


408  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III,

not  as  that  policy,  or  that  interest  may  seem  now  to
dictate.  We  are  to  construe,  and  not  to  frame  the  in-
strument.1

^  425.  VI.  A  power,  given  in  general  terms,  is  not
to  be  restricted  to  particular  cases,  merely  because  it
may  be susceptible  of  abuse,  and,  if  abused,  may  lead
to  mischievous  consequences. This  argument  is  often
used  in  public  debate  ;  and  in  its  common  aspect  ad-
dresses itself  so  much  to  popular  fears  and  prejudices,
that  it  insensibly  acquires  a  weight  in  the  public  mind,
to  which  it  is  no  wise  entitled. The  argument  ab  in-
convenienti  is sufficiently  open  to  question,  from  the
laxity  of  application,  as  well  as  of  opinion,  to  which  it
leads. But  the  argument  from  a  possible  abuse  of  a
power  against  its  existence  or  use,  is,  in  its  nature,  not
only  perilous,  but,  in  respect  to  governments,  would
shake  their  very  foundation. Every  form  of  govern-
ment unavoidably  includes  a  grant  of  some  discretiona-
ry powers. It  would  be  wholly  imbecile  without  them.
It  is  impossible  to  foresee  all  the  exigencies,  which
may  arise  in  the  progress  of  events,  connected  with  the
rights,  duties,  and  operations  of  a  government. If  they
could  be  foreseen,  it  would  be  impossible  ab  ante  to
provide  for  them. The  means  must  be  subject  to  per-
petual modification,  and  change  ;  they  must  be  adapt-
ed to  the  existing  manners,  habits,  and  institutions  of
society,  which  are  never  stationary  ;  to  the  pressure  of
dangers,  or  necessities  ;  to  the  ends  in  view  ;  to  gen-
eral and  permanent  operations,  as  well  as  to  fugitive
and  extraordinary  emergencies. In  short,  if  the  whole
society  is  not  to  be  revolutionized  at  every  critical  pe-
riod, and  remodeled  in  every  generation,  there  must  be

l  See  Slurgis  v.  Crowninshield,  4  Wheat.  R.  112,202.


CH.  V.]  RULES OF  INTERPRETATION.  409

left  to  those,  who  administer  the  government,  a  very
large  mass  of  discretionary  powers,  capable  of  greater
or  less  actual  expansion  according  to  circumstances,
and  sufficiently  flexible  not  to  involve  the  nation  in
utter  destruction  from  the  rigid  limitations  imposed
upon  it  by  an  improvident  jealousy.  Every  power,
however  limited,  as  well  as  broad,  is  in  its  own  nature
susceptible  of  abuse.  No  constitution  can  provide  per-
fect guards  against  it.  Confidence  must  be  reposed
some  where  ;  and  in  free  governments,  the  ordinary
securities  against  abuse  are  found  in  the  responsibility
of  rulers  to  the  people,  and  in  the  just  exercise  of  their
elective  franchise ;  and  ultimately  in  the  sovereign  pow-
er of  change  belonging  to  them,  in  cases  requiring  ex-
traordinary remedies.  Few  cases  are  to  be  supposed,
in  which  a  power,  however  general,  will  be  exerted
for  the  permanent  oppression  of  the  people.1  And  yet,
cases  may  easily  be  put,  in  which  a  limitation  upon  such
a  power  might  be  found  in  practice  to  work  mischief ;
to  incite  foreign  aggression  ;  or  encourage  domestic  dis-
order. The  power  of  taxation,  for  instance,  may  be
carried  to  a  ruinous  excess  ;  and  yet,  a  limitation  upon
that  power  might,  in  a  given  case,  involve  the  destruc-
tion of  the  independence  of  the  country.

§  426.  VII.  On  the  other  hand,  a  rule  of  equal  im-
portance is,  not  to  enlarge  the  construction  of  a  given

1  Mr.  Justice  Johnson,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court  in  .in-
derson  v.  Dunn,  ((}  Wlieat.  204,  226,)  uses  the  following  expressive  lan-
guage :  "  The  idea  is  Utopian,  that  government  can  exist  without  leav-
ing the  exercise  of  discretion  some  where.  Public  security  against  the
abuse  of  such  discretion  must  rest  on  responsibility,  and  stated  appeals
to  public  approbation.  Where  all  power  is  derived  from  the  people,  and
public  functionaries  at  short  intervals  deposit  it  at  the  feet  of  the  people,
to  be  resumed  again  only  at  their  own  wills,  individual  fears  may  be
alarmed  by  the  monsters  of  imagination,  but  individual  liberty  can  be  in
little  danger."

vol.  i.  52


410 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

power  beyond  the  fair  scope  of  its  terms,  merely  be-
cause the  restriction  is  inconvenient,  impolitic,  or  even
mischievous.1  If  it  be  mischievous,  the  power  of  re-
dressing the  evil  lies  with  the  people  by  an  exercise  of
the  power  of  amendment.  If  they  do  not  choose  to  ap-
ply the  remedy,  it  may  fairly  be  presumed,  that  the
mischief  is  less  than  what  would  arise  from  a  further
extension  of  the  power ;  or  that  it  is  the  least  of  two
evils.  Nor  should  it  ever  be  lost  sight  of,  that  the  gov-
ernment of  the  United  States  is  one  of  limited  and
enumerated  powers  ;  and  that  a  departure  from  the
true  import  and  sense  of  its  powers  is,  pro  tanto,  the
establishment  of  a  new  constitution.  It  is  doing  for  the
people,  what  they  have  not  chosen  to  do  for  themselves.
It  is  usurping  the  functions  of  a  legislator,  and  desert-
ing those  of  an  expounder  of  the  law.  Arguments
drawn  from  impolicy  or  inconvenience  ought  here  to
be  of  no  weight.  The  only  sound  principle  is  to  de-
clare, ita  lex  scripta  est,  to  follow,  and  to  obey.  Nor,  if
a  principle  so  just  and  conclusive  could  be  overlooked,
could  there  well  be  found  a  more  unsafe  guide  in  prac-
tice, than  mere  policy  and  convenience.  Men  on  such
subjects  complexionally  differ  from  each  other.  The
same  men  differ  from  themselves  at  different  times.
Temporary  delusions,  prejudices,  excitements,  and  ob-
jects have  irresistible  influence  in  mere  questions  of
policy.  And  the  policy  of  one  age  may  ill  suit  the  wish-
es, or  the  policy  of  another.  The  constitution  is  not  to
be  subject  to  such  fluctuations.  It  is  to  have  a  fixed,
uniform,  permanent  construction.  It  should  be,  so  far
at  least  as  human  infirmity  will  allow,  not  dependent
upon  the  passions  or  parties  of  particular  times,  but  the
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.

i  See  United  States  v.  Fisher,  2  Cranch,  358 ;  S.  C.  Peters's  Cond.
R.421.


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  411

§  427.  It  has  been  observed  with  great  correctness,
that  although  the  spirit  of  an  instrument,  especially  of
a  constitution, is  to  be  respected  not  less  than  its  letter;
yet  the  spirit  is  to  be  collected  chielly  from  the  letter.
It  would  be  dangerous  in  the  extreme,  to  infer  from
extrinsic  circumstances,  that  a  case,  for  which  the  words
of  an  instrument  expressly  provide,  shall  be  exempted
from  its  operation.  Where  words  conflict  with  each
other,  where  the  different  clauses  of  an  instrument  bear
upon  each  other,  and  would  be  inconsistent,  unless  the
natural  and  common  import  of  words  be  varied,  con-
struction becomes  necessary,  and  a  departure  from  the
obvious  meaning  of  words  is  justifiable.  But  if,  in  any
case,  the  plain  meaning  of  a  provision,  not  contradicted
by  any  other  provision  in  the  same  instrument,  is  to  be
disregarded,  because  we  believe  the  framers  of  that  in-
strument could  not  intend  what  they  say,  it  must  be
one,  where  the  absurdity  and  injustice  of  applying  the
provision  to  the  case  would  be  so  monstrous,  that  all
mankind  would,  without  hesitation,  unite  in  rejecting
the  application.1  This  language  has  reference  to  a  case
where  the  words  of  a  constitutional  provision  are  sought
to  be  restricted.  But  it  appears  with  equal  force  where
they  are  sought  to  be  enlarged.

^  428.  VIII.  No  construction  of  a  given  power  is  to
be  allowed,  which  plainly  defeats,  or  impairs  its  avow-
ed objects.  If,  therefore,  the  words  are  fairly  suscepti-
ble of  two  interpretations,  according  to  their  common
sense  and  use,  the  one  of  which  would  defeat  one,  or
all  of  the  objects,  for  which  it  was  obviously  given,  and
the  other  of  which  would  preserve  and  promote  all,  the
former  interpretation  ought  to  be  rejected,  and  the  lat-


l  Stunris  v.  Crowninshield,  4  Wheat.  R.  1*22,  202.


412  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

ter  be  held  the  true  interpretation.  This  rule  results
from  the  dictates  of  mere  common  sense;  for  every  in-
strument ought  to  be  so  construed,  nt  magis  valeat,  quam
pereat.1  For  instance,  the  constitution  confers  on  con-
gress the  power  to  declare  war.  Now  the  word  de-
clare has  several  senses.  It  may  mean  to  proclaim,
or  publish.  But  no  person  would  imagine,  that  this  was
the  whole  sense,  in  which  the  word  is  used  in  this  con-
nexion. It  should  be  interpreted  in  the  sense,  in  which
the  phrase  is  used  among  nations,  when  applied  to  such
a  subject  matter.  A  power  to  declare  war  is  a  power
to  make,  and  carry  on  war.  It  is  not  a  mere  power  to
make  known  an  existing  thing,  but  to  give  life  and
effect  to  the  thing  itself.2  The  true  doctrine  has  been
expressed  by  the  Supreme  Court :  "  If  from  the  imper-
fection of  human  language  there  should  be  any  serious
doubts  respecting  the  extent  of  any  given  power,  the
objects,  for  which  it  was  given,  especially  when  those
objects  are  expressed  in  the  instrument  itself,  should
have  great  influence  in  the  construction." 3

^  429.  IX.  Where  a  power  is  remedial  in  its  nature,
there  is  much  reason  to  contend,  that  it  ought  to  be
construed  liberally.  That  was  the  doctrine  of  Mr.  Chief
Justice  Jay,  in  Chisholm  v.  Georgia  ;4  and  it  is  generally
adopted  in  the  interpretation  of  laws.5  But  this  liber-
ality of  exposition  is  clearly  inadmissible,  if  it  extends
beyond  the  just  and  ordinary  sense  of  the  terms.

^  430.  X.  In  the  interpretation  of  a  power,  all  the
ordinary  and  appropriate  means  to  execute  it  are  to  be

1  See  Bacon's  Abridg.  Statute  I  ;  Vattel,  B.  2,  ch.  17,  §  277  to  285,
299  to  302.

2  See  Bets  v.  Tingey,  4  Dall.  R.  37  ;  S.  C.  1  Peters's  Cond.  R.  221.

3  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  9  Wlieat.  R.  1,  188,  1S9.

4  2  Dall.  R.  119  ;  S.  C.  2  Cond.  R.  635,  652.

5  Bacon's  Abrido-.  Statute  T.  8


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  413

deemed  a  part  of  die  power  itself.  This  results  from
the  very  nature-  and  design  of  a  constitution.  In  giving
the  power,  it  does  not  intend  to  limit  it  to  any  one
mode  of  exercising  it,  exclusive  of  all  others.  It  must
be  obvious,  (as  has  been  already  suggested,)  that  the
means  of  carrying  into  effect  the  objects  of  a  power
may,  nay,  must  be  varied,  in  order  to  adapt  themselves
to  the  exigencies  of  the  nation  at  different  times.1  A
mode  efficacious  and  useful  in  one  age,  or  under  one
posture  of  circumstances,  may  be  wholly  vain,  or
even  mischievous  at  another  time.  Government  pre-
supposes the  existence  of  a  perpetual  mutability  in
its  own  operations  on  those,  who  are  its  subjects  ;  and
a  perpetual  flexibility  in  adapting  itself  to  their  wants,
their  interests,  their  habits,  their  occupations,  and  their
infirmities.2


1  The  Federalist;  No.  44.

2  The  reasoning  of  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Marshall  on  this  subject,  in
JlPCulloch  v.  Maryland,  (4  Wheat.  316,)  is  so  cogent  and  satisfactory,
that  we  shall  venture  to  cite  it  at  large.  After  having  remarked,  that
words  have  various  senses,  and  that  what  is  the  true  construction  of  any-
used  in  the  constitution  must  depend  upon  the  subject,  the  context,  and
the  intentions  of  the  people,  to  be  gathered  from  the  instrument,  he  pro-
ceeds thus  :

"  The  subject  is  the  execution  of  those  great  powers,  on  which  the
welfare  of  a  nation  essentially  depends.  It  must  have  been  the  intention
of  those,  who  gave  these  powers,  to  insure,  as  far  as  human  prudence
could  insure,  their  beneficial  execution.  This  could  not  be  done  by  con-
fiding the  choice  of  means  to  such  narrow  limits,  as  not  to  leave  it  in  the
power  of  congress  to  adopt  any,  which  might  be  appropriate,  and  which
were  conducive  to  the  end.  This  provision  is  made  in  a  constitution  in-
tended to  endure  for  ages  to  come,  and,  consequently,  to  be  adapted  to
the  various  crises  of  human  affairs.  To  have  prescribed  the  means,  by
which  government  should,  in  all  future  time,  execute  its  powers,  would
have  been  to  change  entirely  the  character  of  the  instrument,  and  give
it  the  properties  of  a  legal  code.  It  would  have  been  an  unwise  attempt
to  provide,  by  immutable  rules,  for  exigencies,  which,  if  foreseen  at  all,
must  have  been  seen  dimly,  and  which  can  be  best  provided  for,  as  they
occur. To  have  declared,  that  the  best  means  shall  not  be  used,  but


414  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

§  431.  Besides;  if  the  power  only  is  given,  without
pointing  out  the  means,  how  are  we  to  ascertain,  that
any  one  means,  rather  than  another,  -is  exclusively  with-
in its  scope  ? The  same  course  of  reasoning,  which

those  alone,  without  which  the  power  given  would  be  nugatory,  would
have  been  to  deprive  the  legislature  of  the  capacity  to  avail  itself  of  ex-
perience, to  exercise  its  reason,  and  to  accommodate  its  legislation  to
circumstances.  If  we  apply  this  principle  of  construction  to  any  of  the
powers  of  the  government,  we  shall  find  it  so  pernicious  in  its  operation,
that  we  shall  be  compelled  to  discard  it.  The  powers  vested  in  congress
may  certainly  be  carried  into  execution,  without  prescribing  an  oath  of
office.  The  power  to  exact  this  security  for  the  faithful  performance  of
duty  is  not  given,  nor  is  it  indispensably  necessary.  The  different  de-
partments may  be  established  ;  taxes  may  be  imposed  and  collected  ;
armies  and  navies  may  be  raised  and  maintained ;  and  money  may  be
borrowed,  without  requiring  an  oath  of  office.  It  might  be  argued,  with
as  much  plausibility,  as  other  incidental  powers  have  been  assailed,  that
the  convention  was  not  unmindful  of  this  subject.  The  oath,  which  might
be  exacted  —  that  of  fidelity  to  the  constitution  —  is  prescribed,  and  no
other  can  be  required.  Yet,  he  would  be  charged  with  insanity,  who
should  contend,  that  the  legislature  might  not  superadd,  to  the  oath
directed  by  the  constitution,  such  other  oath  of  office,  as  its  wisdom
might  suggest.

"  So,  with  respect  to  the  whole  penal  code  of  the  United  States  :
whence  arises  the  power  to  punish,  in  cases  not  prescribed  by  the  con-
stitution ?  All  admit,  that  the  government  may  legitimately,  punish  any
violation  of  its  laws  ;  and  yet,  this  is  not  among  the  enumerated  powers
of  congress.  The  right  to  enforce  the  observance  of  law,  by  punishing
its  infraction,  might  be  denied  with  the  more  plausibility,  because  it  is
expressly  given  in  some  cases.  Congress  is  empowered  'to  provide  for
,  the  punishment  of  counterfeiting  the  securities  and  current  coin  of  the
United  States,'  and '  to  define  and  punish  piracies  and  felonies  commit-
ted on  the  high  seas,  and  offences  against  the  law  of  nations.'  The  sev-
eral powers  of  congress  may  exist,  in  a  very  imperfect  state  to  be  sure,
but  they  may  exist,  and  be  carried  into  execution,  although  no  punish-
ment should  be  inflicted  in  cases,  where  the  right  to  punish  is  not  ex-
pressly given.

"  Take,  for  example,  the  power  '  to  establish  post  offices  and  post
roads.'  This  power  is  executed  by  the  single  act  of  making  the  estab-
lishment. But,  from  this  has  been  inferred  the  power,  and  duty  of  car-
rying the  mail  along  the  post  road,  from  one  post  office  to  another.  And,
from  this  implied  power  has  again  been  inferred  the  right  to  punish
those,  who  steal  letters  from  the  post  office,  or  rob  the  mail. It  may  be


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  415

would  deny  a  choice  of  means  to  execute  the  power,
would  reduce  the  power  itself  to  a  nullity.  For,  as  it
never  could  be  demonstrated,  that  any  one  mode  in
particular  was  intended,  and  to  be  exclusively  employ-
ed ;  and,  as  it  might  be  demonstrated,  that  other  means
might  be  employed,  the  question,  whether  the  power
were  rightfully  put  into  exercise,  would  for  ever  be
subject  to  doubt  and  controversy.1  If  one  means  is
adopted  to  give  it  effect,  and  is  within  its  scope,  be-
cause it  is  appropriate,  how  are  we  to  escape  from  the
argument,  that  another,  falling  within  the  same  pre-
dicament, is  equally  within  its  scope  1  If  each  is  equal-
ly appropriate,  how  is  the  choice  to  be  made  between
them  ?  If  one  is  selected,  how  does  that  exclude  all
others  ?  If  one  is  more  appropriate  at  one  time,  and
another  at  another  time,  where  is  the  restriction  to  be
found,  which  allows  the  one,  and  denies  the  other  1 A

said,  with  some  plausibility,  that  the  right  to  carry  the  mail,  and  to  pun-
ish those,  who  rob  it,  is  not  indispensably  necessary  to  the  establishment
of  a  post  office,  and  post  road.  This  right  is  indeed  essential  to  the  ben-
eficial exercise  of  the  power,  but  not  indispensably  necessary  to  its  ex-
istence. So,  of  the  punishment  of  the  crimes  of  stealing-  or  falsifying  a
record,  or  process  of  a  court  of  the  United  States,  or  of  perjury  in  such
court.  To  punish  these  offences  is  certainly  conducive  to  the  due  ad-
ministration of  justice.  But  courts  may  exist,  and  may  decide  the  causes
brought  before  them,  though  such  crimes  escape  punishment

"  The  baneful  influence  of  this  narrow  construction,  on  all  the  opera-
tions of  the  government,  and  the  absolute  impracticability  of  maintain-
ing it  without  rendering  the  government  incompetent  to  its  great  ob-
jects, might  be  illustrated  by  numerous  examples  drawn  from  the  consti-
tution, and  from  our  laws.  The  good  sense  of  the  public  has  pronounced
without  hesitation,  that  the  power  of  punishment  appertains  to  sovereign-
ty, and  maybe  exercised,  whenever  the  sovereign  has  a  right  to  act,  as  in-
cidental to  his  constitutional  powers.  It  is  a  means  for  carrying  into
execution  all  sovereign  powers,  and  may  be  used,  although  not  indis-
pensably necessary.  It  is  a  right  incidental  to  the  power,  and  conducive
to  its  beneficial  exercise."

1  See  United  States  v.  Fisher,  2  Cranch,  358 ;  S.  C.  1  Peters's  Cond.
R.  421,  429.


416  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

power  granted  in  a  frame  of  government  is  not  contem-
plated to  be  exhausted  in  a  single  exertion  of  it,  or  uno
flatu.  It  is  intended  for  free  and  permanent  exercise  ;
and  if  the  discretion  of  the  functionaries,  who  are  to
exercise  it,  is  not  limited,  that  discretion,  especially,  as
those  functionaries  must  necessarily  change,  must  be  co-
extensive with  the  power  itself.  Take,  for  instance,  the
power  to  make  war.  In  one  age,  this  would  authorize
the  purchase  and  employment  of  the  weapons  then  ordi-
narily used  for  this  purpose.  But  suppose  these  weapons
are  wholly  laid  aside,  and  others  substituted,  more  effi-
cient and  powerful ;  is  the  government  prohibited  from
employing  the  new  modes  of  offence  and  defence  ?
Surely  not.  The  invention  of  gunpowder  superseded
the  old  modes  of  warfare,  and  may  perhaps,  by  fu-
ture inventions,  be  superseded  in  its  turn.  No  one  can
seriously  doubt,  that  the  new  modes  would  be  within
the  scope  of  the  power  to  make  war,  if  they  were  ap-
propriate to  the  end.  It  would,  indeed,  be  a  most  ex-
traordinary mode  of  interpretation  of  the  constitution,
to  give  such  a  restrictive  meaning  to  its  powers,  as
should  obstruct  their  fair  operation.  A  power  being
given,  it  is  the  interest  of  the  nation  to  facilitate  its  ex-
ecution. It  can  never  be  their  interest,  and  cannot  be
presumed  to  be  their  intention,  to  clog  and  embarrass
its  execution,  by  withholding  the  most  appropriate
means.  There  can  be  no  reasonable  ground  for  pre-
ferring that  construction,  which  would  render  the  op-
erations of  the  government  difficult,  hazardous,  and  ex-
pensive ;  or  for  imputing  to  the  framers  of  the  consti-
tution a  design  to  impede  the  exercise  of  its  powers,
by  withholding  a  choice  of 'means.1

i  JVCulloch  v.  Maryland,  4  Wheat.  R.  316,  408.


CH. V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  417

§  432.  In  the  practical  application  of  government,
then,  the  public  functionaries  must  be  left  at  liberty  to
exercise  the  powers,  with  which  the  people  by  the  con-
stitution and  laws  have  entrusted  them.  They  must
have  a  wide  discretion,  as  to  the  choice  of  means  ;  and
the  only  limitation  upon  that  discretion  would  seem  to
be,  that  the  means  are  appropriate  to  the  end.  And
this  must  naturally  admit  of  considerable  latitude  ;  for
the  relation  between  the  action  and  the  end  (as  has  been
justly  remarked)  is  not  always  so  direct  and  palpable,
as  to  strike  the  eye  of  every  observer.1  If  the  end  be
legitimate  and  within  the  scope  of  the  constitution,  all
the  means,  which  are  appropriate,  and  which  are  plainly
adapted  to  that  end,  and  which  are  not  prohibited,  may
be  constitutionally  employed  to  carry  it  into  effect.2
When,  then,  it  is  asked,  who  is  to  judge  of  the  necessity
and  propriety  of  the  laws  to  be  passed  for  executing
the  powers  of  the  Union,  the  true  answer  is,  that  the
national  government,  like  every  other,  must  judge  in
the  first  instance  of  the  proper  exercise  of  its  powers ;
and  its  constituents  in  the  last.  If  the  means  are  within
the  reach  of  the  power,  no  other  department  can  in-
quire into  the  policy  or  convenience  of  the  use  of  them.
If  there  be  an  excess  by  overleaping  the  just  boundary
of  the  power,  the  judiciary  may  generally  afford  the
proper  relief;  and  in  the  last  resort  the  people,  by
adopting  such  measures  to  redress  it,  as  the  exigency
may  suggest,  and  prudence  may  dictate.3

1  See  the  remarks  of  Mr.  Justice  Johnson,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of
the  court  in  .Anderson  v.  Dunnt  6  Wheat.  R.  204,  2"2<i ;  United  States  v.
Fisher,  2  Crancli.  356;  S.  C.  1  Peters's  Cond.  R.  421,  420.

2  MCxdloch  v.  Man/land,!  Wheat.  R.  316,  409,410,  421,  423  ;  United
States  v.  Fisher,  2  Cranch,  358 ;  S.  C.  1  Peters's  Cond.  R.  421.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  33,  44  ;  JWCidloch  v.  Maryland,  4  Wheat  R.
310,  423.

vol.  i.  53


418  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

§  433.  XL  And  this  leads  us  to  remark,  in  the  next
place,  that  in  the  interpretation  of  the  constitution  there
is  no  solid  objection  to  implied  powers.1  Had  the  fac-
ulties of  man  been  competent  to  the  framing  of  a  sys-
tem o^  government,  which  would  leave  nothing  to  im-
plication, it  cannot  be  doubted,  that  the  effort  would
have  been  made  by  the  framers  of  our  constitution.
The  fact,  however,  is  otherwise.  There  is  not  in  the
whole  of  that  admirable  instrument  a  grant  of  powrers,
which  does  not  draw  after  it  others,  not  expressed,  but
vital  to  their  exercise ;  not  substantive  and  independent,
indeed,  but  auxiliary  and  subordinate.2  There  is  no
phrase  in  it,  which,  like  the  articles  of  confederation,3
excludes  incidental  and  implied  powers,  and  which  re-
quires, that  every  thing  granted  shall  be  expressly  and
minutely  described.  Even  the  tenth  amendment,  which
was  framed  for  the  purpose  of  quieting  the  excessive
jealousies,  which  had  been  excited,  omits  the  word
"  expressly,"  (which  was  contained  in  the  articles  of
confederation,)  and  declares  only,  that "  the  powers,  not
delegated  to  the  United  States,  nor  prohibited  by  it  to
the  states,  are  reserved  to  the  states  respectively,  or  to
the  people ; "  thus  leaving  the  question,  whether  the
particular  power,  which  may  become  the  subject  of
contest,  has  been  delegated  to  the  one  government,  or
prohibited  to  the  other,  to  depend  upon  a  fair  construe  -

1  In  the  discussions,  as  to  the  constitutionality  of  the  Bank  of  the
United  States,  in  the  cabinet  of  President  Washington,  upon  the  original
establishment  of  the  Bank,  there  was  a  large  range  of  argument,  pro
el  contra,  in  respect  to  implied  powers.  The  reader  will  find  a  summary
of  the  leading  views  on  each  side  in  the  fifth  volume  of  Marshall's  Life
of  Washington,  App.  p.  3,  note  3,  &c. ;  4  Jefferson's  Corresp.  523  to
526  ;  and  in  Hamilton's  Argument  on  Constitutionality  of  Bank,  1  Ham-
ilton's Works,  111  to  155.

2  Anderson  v.  Dunn,  6  Wheat.  204,  220.

3  Article  2.


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  4 1 9

tion  of  the  whole  instrument.  The  men,  who  drew
and  adopted  this  amendment,  had  experienced  the  em-
barrassments, resulting  from  the  insertion  of  this  word
in  the  articles  of  confederation,  and  probably  omitted  it
to  avoid  those  embarrassments.  A  constitution,  to  con-
tain an  accurate  detail  of  all  the  subdivisions,  of  which
its  great  powers  will  admit,  and  of  all  the  means,  by
which  these  may  be  carried  into  execution,  would  par-
take of  the  prolixity  of  a  legal  code,  and  could  scarcely
be  embraced  by  the  human  mind.  It  would  probably
never  be  understood  by  the  public.  Its  nature,  there-
fore, requires,  that  only  its  great  outlines  should  be
marked,  its  important  objects  designated,  and  the  mi-
nor ingredients,  which  compose  those  objects,  be  de-
duced from  the  nature  of  those  objects  themselves.
That  this  idea  was  entertained  by  the  framers  of  the
American  constitution,  is  not  only  to  be  inferred  from
the  nature  of  the  instrument,  but  from  the  language.
Why,  else,  were  some  of  the  limitations,  found  in  the
ninth  section  of  the  first  article,  introduced  ?  It  is  also,
in  some  degree,  warranted,  by  their  having  omitted  to
use  any  restrictive  term,  which  might  prevent  its  re-
ceiving a  fair  and  just  interpretation.  In  considering
this  point,  we  should  never  forget,  that  it  is  a  constitu-
tion we  are  expounding.1

^  434.  The  reasoning  of  the  Federalist  is  to  the  same
effect.  Every  power,  which  is  the  means  of  carrying
into  effect  a  given  power,  is  implied  from  the  very  na-
ture of  the  original  grant.  It  is  a  necessary  and  una-
voidable implication  from  the  act  of  constituting  a  gov-
ernment, and  vesting  it  with  certain  specified  powers.
What  is  a  power,  but  the  ability  or  faculty  of  doing  a

1  Per  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Marshall,  in  JSVCullochx.McmjlandA  Wheat.
R.  316,  406,407,  421.


420  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

thing  ?  What  is  the  ability  to  do  a  thing,  but  the  power
of  employing  the  means  necessary  to  its  execution?
What  is  a  legislative  power,  but  a  power  of  making
laws  1  What  are  the  means  to  execute  a  legislative
power,  but  laws  1 *  No  axiom,  indeed,  is  more  clearly
established  in  law  or  in  reason,  than  that,  where  the  end
is  required,  the  means  are  authorized.  Whenever  a
general  power  to  do  a  thing  is  given,  every  particular
power  necessary  for  doing  it  is  included.  In  every
new  application  of  a  general  power,  the  particular  pow-
er, which  are  the  means  of  attaining  the  object  of  the
general  power,  must  always  necessarily  vary  with  that
object ;  and  be  often  properly  varied,  whilst  the  object
remains  the  same.?  Even  under  the  confederation,
where  the  delegation  of  authority  was  confined  to  ex-
press powers,  the  Federalist  remarks,  that  it  would  be
easy  to  show,  that  no  important  power  delegated  by  the
articles  of  confederation  had  been,  or  could  be,  executed
by  congress,  without  recurring  more  or  less  to  the  doc-
trine of  construction  or  implication ! 3

^435.  XII.  Another  point,  in  regard  to  the  interpre-
tation of  the  constitution,  requires  us  to  advert  to  the
rules  applicable  to  cases  of  concurrent  and  exclusive
powers.  In  what  cases  are  the  powers  given  to  the
general  government  exclusive,  and  in  what  cases  may
the  states  maintain  a  concurrent  exercise  1  Upon  this
subject  we  have  an  elaborate  exposition  by  the  authors
of  the  Federalist ; 4  and  as  it  involves  some  of  the  most
delicate  questions  growing  out  of  the  constitution,  and
those,  in  which  a  conflict  with  the  states  is  most  likely
to  arise,  we  cannot  do  better  than  to  quote  the  reason-


i  The  Federalist,  No.  33.  2  The  Federalist,  No.  44.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  44.  4  The  Federalist,  No.  32.


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  V2\

^436.  "An  entire  consolidation  of  the  states  into
one  complete  national  sovereignty,  would  imply  an  en-
tire subordination  of  the  parts;  and whatever  powers

might  remain  in  them,  would  be  altogether  dependent
on  the  general  will.  But.  as  the  plan  of  the  convention
aims  only  at  a  partial  union  or  consolidation,  the  state
governments  would  clearly  retain  all  the  rights  of  sove-
reignty, which  they  before  had,  and  which  were  not,
by  that  act,  exclusively  delegated  to  the  United  States.
This  exclusive  delegation,  or  rather  this  alienation  of
state  sovereignty,  would  only  exist  in  three  cases:
where  the  constitution  in  express  terms  granted  an  ex-
clusive authority  to  the  Union ;  where  it  granted,  in
one  instance,  an  authority  to  the  Union,  and  in  another,
prohibited  the  states  from  exercising  the  like  authority ;
and  where  it  granted  an  authority  to  the  Union,  to  which
a  similar  authority  in  the  states  would  be  absolutely  and
totally  contradictory  and  repugnant.  I  use  these  terms
to  distinguish  this  last  case  from  another,  which  might
appear  to  resemble  it ;  but  which  would,  in  fact,  be
essentially  different :  I  mean,  where  the  exercise  of  a
concurrent  jurisdiction  might  be  productive  of  occa-
sional interferences  in  the  policy  of  any  branch  of  ad-
ministration, but  would  not  imply  any  direct  contradic-
tion or  repugnancy  in  point  of  constitutional  authority.
These  three  cases  of  exclusive  jurisdiction  in  the  fede-
ral government,  may  be  exemplified  by  the  following
instances.  The  last  clause  but  one  in  the  eighth  sec-
tion of  the  first  article,  provides  expressly,  that  congress
shall  exercise  '  exclusive  legislation '  over  the  district  to
be  appropriated  as  the  seat  of  government.  This  an-
swers to  the  first  case.  The  first  clause  of  the  same
section  empowers  congress  '  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,
duties,  imposts,  and  excises ; '  and  the  second  clause  of


422  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U. STATES. [BOOK  III.

the  tenth  section  of  the  same  article  declares,  that  'no
state  shall,  without  the  consent  of  congress,  lay  any  im-
posts or  duties  on  imports  or  exports,  except  for  the
purpose  of  executing  its  inspection  laws.'  Hence  would
result  an  exclusive  power  in  the  Union  to  lay  duties  on
imports  and  exports,  with  the  particular  exception  men-
tioned. But  this  power  is  abridged  by  another  clause,
which  declares,  that  no  tax  or  duty  shall  be  laid  on  arti-
cles exported  from  any  state ;  in  consequence  of  which
qualification,  it  now  only  extends  to  the  duties  on  im-
ports. This  answers  to  the  second  case.  The  third
will  be  found  in  that  clause,  which  declares,  that  con-
gress shall  have  power  '  to  establish  an  uniform  rule  of
naturalization  throughout  the  United  States.'  This
must  necessarily  be  exclusive  ;  because,  if  each  state
had  power  to  prescribe  a  distinct  rule,  there  could  be
no  uniform  rule"  The  correctness  of  these  rules  of
interpretation  has  never  been  controverted  ;  and  they
have  been  often  recognised  by  the  Supreme  Court.1

^  437.  The  two  first  rules  are  so  completely  self-
evident,  that  every  attempt  to  illustrate  them  would  be
vain,  if  it  had  not  a  tendency  to  perplex  and  confuse.
The  last  rule,  viz.  that  which  declares,  that  the  power
is  exclusive  in  the  national  government,  where  an  author-
ity is  granted  to  the  Union,  to  which  a  similar  authority
in  the  states  would  be  absolutely  and  totally  contradic-
tory and  repugnant,  is  that  alone,  which  may  be  thought
to  require  comment.  This  rule  seems,  in  its  own  nature,
as  little  susceptible  of  doubt,  as  the  others  in  reference
to  the  constitution.  For,  since  the  constitution  has  de-
clared, that  the  constitution  and  laws,  and  treaties  in


i  See  Houston  v.  Moore,  5  Wheat.  R.  1,  22,  '24,  48;  Ogdenv.  Gihbons,
9  Wheat.  R.  1,  198,  210,  228,  235 ;  Sturgis  v.  Crowninshield,  4  Wrheat.
1  .  122,  192,  193;  Ogden  v.  Saunders,  12  Wheat.  1,  275,  307,  322,  &34,
335.


CH.  IV.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  423

pursuance  of  it  shall  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land  ;
it  would  be  absurd  to  say,  that  a  state  law,  repugnant
to  it,  might  have  concurrent  operation  and  validity  ;  and
especially,  as  it  is  expressly  added,  any  thing  in  the
constitution  or  laws  of  any  state  to  the  contrary  not-
withstanding. The  repugnancy,  then,  being  made  out,
it  follows,  that  the  state  law  is  just  as  much  void,  as
though  it  had  been  expressly  declared  to  be  void;  or
the  power  in  congress  had  been  expressly  declared  to
be  exclusive.  Every  power  given  to  congress  is
by  the  constitution  necessarily  supreme ;  and  if,  from
its  nature,  or  from  the  words  of  the  grant,  it  is  appa-
rently intended  to  be  exclusive,  it  is  as  much  so,  as  if
the  states  were  expressly  forbidden  to  exercise  it.1

§  438.  The  principal  difficulty  lies,  not  so  much  in
the  rule,  as  in  its  application  to  particular  cases. Here,
the  field  for  discussion  is  wide,  and  the  argument  upon
construction  is  susceptible  of  great  modifications,  and  of
very  various  force. But  unless,  from  the  nature  of  the
power,  or  from the  obvious  results  of  its  operations,
a  repugnancy  must  exist,  so  as  to  lead  to  a  neces-
sary conclusion,  that  the  power  was  intended  to  be  ex-
clusive, the  true  rule  of  interpretation  is,  that  the  power
is  merely  concurrent. Thus,  for  instance,  an  affirma-
tive power  in  congress  to  lay  taxes,  is  not  necessarily
incompatible  with  a  like  power  in the  States. Both
may  exist  without  Interference  ;  and  if  any  interference
should  arise  in  a  particular  case,  the  question  of  su-
premacy would  turn,  not  upon  the  nature  of  the  power,
but  upon  supremacy  of  right  in  the  exercise  of  the  powT-
er  in  that  case.2 In  our  complex  system,  presenting


i  Sturgis  v.  Crowninshivld,  4  Wheat.  R.  122,  192,193;  Gibbons  v.
Ogden,  9  Wheat.  R.  1,  198,  &c.

2  The  Federalist,  No.  32;  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  9  Wheat.  R.  1,  198,  199
to  205  ;  McCullochv.  Maryland,  4  Wheat,  R.  316,  425.


424  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  111.

the  rare  and  difficult  scheme  of  one  general  government,
whose  action  extends  over  the  whole,  but  which  pos-
sesses only  enumerated  powers,  and  of  numerous  state
governments,  which  retain  and  exercise  many  powers
not  delegated  to  the  Union,  contests  respecting  power
must  arise.  Were  it  even  otherwise,  the  measures  tak-
en by  the  respective  governments  to  execute  their  ac-
knowledged powers  would  be  often  of  the  same  de-
scription, and  might  sometimes  interfere.  This,  how-
ever, does  not  prove,  that  the  one  is  exercising,  or  has
a  right  to  exercise,  the  powers  of  the  other.1

^  439.  And  this  leads  us  to  remark,  that  in  the  exer-
cise of  concurrent  powers,  if  there  be  a  conflict  be-
tween the  laws  of  the  Union  and  the  laws  of  the  states,
the  former  being  supreme,  the  latter  must  of  course
yield.  The  possibility,  nay  the  probability,  of  such  a
conflict  was  foreseen  by  the  framers  of  the  constitution,
and  was  accordingly  expressly  provided  for.  If  a  state
passes  a  law  inconsistent  with  the  constitution  of  the
United  States  it  is  a  mere  nullity.  If  it  passes  a  law
clearly  within  its  own  constitutional  powers,  still  if  it
conflicts  with  the  exercise  of  a  power  given  to  congress,
to  the  extent  of  the  interference  its  operation  is  sus-
pended ;  for,  in  a  conflict  ol  laws,  that  which  is  supreme
must  govern.  Therefore,  it  has  often  been  adjudged,
that  if  a  state  law  is  in  conflict  with  a  treaty,  or  an  act
of  congress,  it  becomes  'ipso  facto  inoperative  to  the
extent  of  the  conflict.2

1  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  9  Wheat.  R.  1,  205.  —  Mr.  Chancellor  Kent  has
given  this  whole  subject  of  exclusive  and  concurrent  power  a  thorough
examination  ;  and  the  result  will  be  found  most  ably  stated  in  his  learned
Commentaries,  Lecture  18.  1  Kent.  Comm.  3(34  to  379,  2d  edit.  p.  387
to  405.

2  Warev.  Hylton,  3  Dall.  199,  S.  C.  1,  Conden.  R.  99,  112,  127,  128,
129  ;  Gibbons  v.  Ogdtn,  9  Wheat.  R.  1,  210,  211  ;  McCulloch  v.  Manj-
land,  4  Wheat.  It.  310,  405,  406,  425  to  436  ;  Houston  v.  Moore.  5  Wheat.


CH.  V.]  RULES OF INTERPRETATION,  \1^)

§  440.  From  this  greal  rule,  that  the  constitution  and
laws,  made  in  pursuance  thereof,  are  supreme  ;  and  that
they  control  the  constitutions  and  laws  of  the  states,  and
cannot  be  controlled  by  them,  from  this,  which  maybe
deemed  an  axiom,  other  auxiliary  corollaries  may  be
deduced.  In  the  first  place,  that,  if  a  power  is  given  to
create  a  thing,  it  implies  a  power  to  preserve  it.  Sec-
ondly, that  a  power  to  destroy,  if  wielded  by  a  differ-
ent hand,  is  hostile  to  and  incompatible  with  this  pow-
er to  create  and  preserve.  Thirdly,  that  where  this
repugnancy  exists,  the  authority,  which  is  supreme,
must  control,  and  not  yield  to  that,  over  which  it  is
supreme.1  Consequently,  the  inferior  power  becomes
a  nullity.2

^441.  But  a  question  of  a  still  more  delicate  nature
may  arise  ;  and  that  is,  how  far  in  the  exercise  of  a  con-
current power,  the  actual  legislation  of  congress  super-
sedes the  state  legislation,  or  suspends  its  operation
over  the  subject  matter.  Are  the  state  laws  inoperative
only  to  the  extent  of  the  actual  conflict  ;  or  does  the
legislation  of  congress  suspend  the  legislative  power  of
the  states  over  the  subject  matter  ?  To  such  an  inqui-
ry, probably,  no  universal  answer  could  be  given.  It
may  depend  upon  the  nature  of  the  power,  the  effect
of  the  actual  exercise,  and  the  extent  of  the  subject
matter.

§  442.  This  may,  perhaps,  be  best  illustrated  by  put-
ting a  case,  which  has  been  reasoned  out  by  a  very
learned  judge,  in  his  own  words : 3 "  Congress  has

R.  1,  22,  24,  49,  51,  53,  56; Slurbs  v.  Crowninshictd,  2  Wheat.  R.  1,
190,  196;  Golden  v.  Prince,  3  Wash.  C.  C.  R.  313,  321 ;  The  Federalist,
No.  32  ;  Brown  v.  Maryland,  12  Wheat.  R.  419,  449.
i  MCulloh v.Maryland, 4  Wheat.  R.316,426.

2  Sturgis  v.  Crowninshield,  4  Wheat  R.  1,  193.

3  Mr.  Justice Washington,  Houston  v.  Moore,  5  Wheat.  R.  1,  21,  22,
VOL.  I.  54


426  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.


5  J


power,"  says  he,  "  to  provide  for  organizing,  arming
and  disciplining  the  militia ;  and  it  is  presumable,  that
the  framers  of  the  constitution  contemplated  a  full  exer-
cise of  all  these  powers.  Nevertheless,  if  congress  had
declined  to  exercise  them,  it  was  competent  to  the
state  governments  to  provide  for  organizing,  arming,
and  disciplining  their  respective  militia  in  such  manner,
as  they  might  think  proper.  But  congress  has  provid-
ed for  these  subjects  in  the  way,  which  that  body  must
have  supposed  the  best  calculated  to  promote  the  gen-
eral welfare,  and  to  provide  for  the  national  defence.  Af-
ter this,  can  the  state  governments  enter  upon  the  same
ground,  provide  for  the  same  objects,  as  they  may
think  proper,  and  punish,  in  their  own  way,  violations
of  the  laws  they  have  so  enacted  ?  The  affirmative  of
this  question  is  asserted  by  counsel,  &c.  who  contend,
that  unless  such  state  laws  are  in  direct  contradiction
to  those  of  the  United  States,  they  are  not  repugnant  to
the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  —  From  this  doc-
trine I  must,  for  one,  be  permitted  to  dissent.  The
two  laws  may  not  be  in  such  absolute  opposition  to  each
other,  as  to  render  the  one  incapable  of  execution  with-
out violating  the  injunctions  of  the  other ;  and  yet  the
will  of  the  one  legislature  may  be  in  direct  collision  with
that  of  the  other.  This  will  is  to  be  discovered,  as  well
by  what  the  legislature  has  not  declared,  as  by  what
they  have  expressed.  Congress,  for  example,  have
declared,  that  the  punishment  for  disobedience  of  the
act  of  congress  shall  be  a  certain  fine.  If  that  provided
by  the  state  legislature  for  the  same  offence  be  a  simi-
lar fine  with  the  addition  of  imprisonment  or  death,  the
latter  law  would  not  prevent  the  former  from  being
carried  into  execution,  and  may  be  said,  therefore,  not
to  be  repugnant  to  it. But  surely  the  will  of  Congress


CH.  V.]  RULES  OK I.NTLiKI'HKTATION.  Vll

is  nevertheless  thwarted  and  Opposed."  l  He  adds,  "  I
consider  it  a  novel  and  unconstitutional  doctrine,  thai  in

cases,  where  the  state  governments  have  a  concurrent
power  of  legislation  with  the  national  government,  they
may  legislate  upon  any  subject,  on  which  congress  lias
acted,  provided  the  two  laws  are  not  in  terms,  or  in
their  operation  contradictory  and  repugnant  to  each
other."2

§  443.  Another  illustration  may  be  drawn  from  the
opinion  of  the  court  in  another  highly  important  case.
One  question  was,  whether  the  power  of  congress  to
establish  uniform  laws  on  the  subject  of  bankruptcies
was  exclusive,  or  concurrent  with  the  states.  "  It  does
not  appear,"  it  was  then  said,  "to  be  a  violent  construction
of  the  constitution,  and  is  certainly  a  convenient  one,  to
consider  the  power  of  the  states  as  existing  over  such
cases,  as  the  laws  of  the  Union  may  not  reach.  Be  this
as  it  may,  the  power  of  congress  may  be  exercised,  or
declined,  as  the  wisdom  of  that  body  shall  decide.  If,
in  the  opinion  of  congress,  uniform  laws  concerning
bankruptcies  ought  not  to  be  established,  it  does  not
follow,  that  partial  laws  may  not  exist,  or  that  state  leg-
islation on  the  subject  must  cease.  It  is  not  the  mere
existence  of  the  power,  but  its  exercise,  which  is  in-
compatible with  the  exercise  of  the  same  power  by  the
states.  It  is  not  the  right  to  establish  these  uniform
laws  ;  but  their  actual  establishment,  which  is  inconsis-
tent with  the  partial  acts  of  the  states.  If  the  right  of
the  states  to  pass  a  bankrupt  law  is  not  taken  away  by
the  mere  grant  of  that  power  to  congress,  it  cannot  be
extinguished.  It  can  only  be  suspended  by  the  enact-
ment of  a  general  bankrupt  law. The  repeal  of  that

i  5  Wheat  R.  p.  22.

a  Id.  24. See  also  Golden  v.  Prince,  3  Wash.  C.  C.  R.  313,  324,  &c.


428  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

law  cannot,  it  is  true,  confer  the  power  on  the  states ;
but  it  removes  a  disability  to  its  exercise,  which  was
created  by  the  act  of  congress"  *

It  is  not  our  intention  to  comment  on  these  cases ;
but  to  offer  them  as  examples  of  reasoning  in  favour
and  against  the  exclusive  power,  where  a  positive  re-
pugnancy cannot  be  predicated.

§  444.  It  has  been  sometimes  argued,  that  when  a
power  is  granted  to  congress  to  legislate  in  specific
cases,  for  purposes  growing  out  of  the  Union,  the  nat-
ural conclusion  is,  that  the  power  is  designed  to  be
exclusive ;  that  the  power  is  to  be  exercised  for  the
good  of  the  whole  by  the  will  of  the  whole,  and  consist-
ently with  the  interests  of  the  whole  ;  and  that  these
objects  can  no  where  be  so  clearly  seen,  or  so  thor-
oughly weighed,  as  in  congress,  where  the  whole  nation
is  represented.  But  the  argument  proves  too  much ;
and  pursued  to  its  full  extent,  it  would  establish,  that  all
the  powers  granted  to  congress  are  exclusive,  unless
where  concurrent  authority  is  expressly  reserved  to  the
states.2  For  instance,  upon  this  reasoning  the  power
of  taxation  in  congress  would  annul  the  whole  power  of
taxation  of  the  states  ;  and  thus  operate  a  virtual  disso-
lution of  their  sovereignty.  Such  a  pretension  has  been
constantly  disclaimed.

i  Sturgisv  Crowninshield,  4  Wheat.  R.  122,  ]95,  196.  See  also  Gib-
bons v.  Ogden,  9  Wheat.  R.  1,  197,  227,  235,  23S  ;  Houston  v  Moore,
5  Wheat.  R.  34,  49,  52,  54,  55.  —  This  opinion,  that  the  power  to  pass
bankrupt  laws  is  not  exclusive,  has  not  been  unanimously  adopted  by  the
Supreme  Court.  Mr.  Justice  Washington  maintained  at  all  times  an
opposite  opinion ;  and  his  opinion  is  known  to  have  been  adopted  by  at
least  one  other  of  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court.  The  reasons,  on
which  Mr.  J.Washington's  opinion  is  founded,  will  be  found  at  large  in
the  case  of  Golden  v.  Prince,  3  Wash.  C.  C.  R.  313,  322,  &c.  See  also
Ogden  v.  Saunders,  12  Wheat.  R.  213,  264,  265,  and  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,
9  Wheat.  R.  1,209,226,  238.

2  Houston  v.  Moore,  5  Wheat.  R.  1,  49,  55,  56.


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF INTERPRETATION.  429

§  445.  On  the  other  hand,  it  lias  been  maintained
with  great  pertinacity,  that  the  slates  possess  concur-
rent authority  with  congress  in  all  cases,  where  thepow-

er  is  not  expressly  declared  to  he  exclusive,  or  expressly
prohibited  to  the  states  ;  and  itj  in  the  exercise  of  aeon-
current  power,  a  conflict  arises,  there  is  no  reason,  why
each  should  not  be  deemed  equally  rightful.1  .But  it  is
plain,  that  this  reasoning  goes  to  the  direct  overthrow
of  the  principle  of  supremacy  ;  and,  if  admitted,  it
would  enable  the  subordinate  sovereignty  to  annul  the
powers  of  the  superior.  There  is  a  plain  repugnance
in  conferring  on  one  government  a  power  to  control
the  constitutional  measures  of  another,  which  other,
with  respect  to  these  very  measures,  is  declared  to
be  supreme  over  that,  which  exerts  the  control.2  For
instance,  the  states  have  acknowledgedly  a  concurrent
power  of  taxation.  But  it  is  wholly  inadmissible  to
allow  that  power  to  be  exerted  over  any  instrument
employed  by  the  general  government  to  execute  its
own  powers  ;  for  such  a  power  to  tax  involves  a
power  to  destroy  ;  and  this  power  to  destroy  may  de-
feat, and  render  useless  the  power  to  create.3  Thus  a
state  may  not  tax  the  mail,  the  mint,  patent  rights,  cus-
tom-house papers,  or  judicial  process  of  the  courts  of
the  United  States.4  And  yet  there  is  no  clause  in  the
constitution,  which  prohibits  the  states  from  exercising
the  power ;  nor  any  exclusive  grant  to  the  United
States.  The  apparent  repugnancy  creates,  by  implica-
tion, the  prohibition.  So  congress,  by  the  constitution,
possess  power  to  provide  for  governing  such  part  of

i See  Gibbons  v.  O^den,  9  Wheat.  R.  1,  197,  210  ; JWCulloh  v.  Ma-
ryland, 4  Wheat.  R.  316,  527.

2  MCulloh  v  Maryland,  4  Wheat.  R.  316,  431.

3  Ibid.  4  id.  432.


430  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

the  militia,  as  may  be  employed  in  the  service  of  the
United  States.  Yet  it  is  not  said,  that  such  power  of
government  is  exclusive.  But  it  results  from  the  na-
ture of  the  power.  No  person  would  contend,  that  a
state  militia,  while  in  the  actual  service  and  employment
of  the  United  States,  might  yet  be,  at  the  same  time,
governed  and  controlled  by  the  laws  of  the  state.  The
very  nature  of  military  operations  would,  in  such  case,
require  unity  of  command  and  direction.  And  the  ar-
gument from  inconvenience  would  be  absolutely  irre-
sistible to  establish  an  implied  prohibition.1  On  the
other  hand,  congress  have  power  to  provide  for  organiz-
ing, arming,  and  disciplining  the  militia  ;  but  if  congress
should  make  no  such  provision,  there  seems  no  reason,
why  the  states  may  not  organize,  arm,  and  discipline  their
own  militia.  No  necessary  incompatibility  would  exist
in  the  nature  of  the  power ;  though,  when  exercised  by
congress,  the  authority  of  the  states  must  necessarily
yield.  And,  here,  the  argument  from  inconvenience
wrould  be  very  persuasive  the  other  way.  For  the
power  to  organize,  arm,  and  discipline  the  militia,  in  the
absence  of  congressional  legislation,  would  seem  indis-
pensable for  the  defence  and  security  of  the  states.2
Again,  congress  have  power  to  call  forth  the  militia  to
execute  the  laws  of  the  Union,  to  suppress  insurrections,
and  repel  invasions.  But  there  does  not  seem  any
incompatibility  in  the  states  calling  out  their  own  militia
as  auxiliaries  for  the  same  purpose.3

§  446.  In  considering,  then,  this  subject,  it  would  be
impracticable  to  lay  down  any  universal  rule,  as  to  what
powers  are,  by  implication,  exclusive  in  the  general

1  Houston  v.  Moore,  5  Wheat.  R.  1,  53.

2  Houston  v  Moore,  5  Wheat.  R.  50,  51,  52.

3  Id.  54,  55.


CH. V.]  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.  |3 ]

government,  or  concurrent  in  the  states;  and  in  rela-
tion to  the  latter,  what  restrictions  cither  on  the  power
itself,  or  on  the  actual  exercise  of  the  power,  arise  by
implication,  hi  some  cases,  as  we  have  seen,  there
may  exist  a  concurrent  power,  and  yet  restrictions  up-
on it  must  exist  in  regard  to  objects.  In  other  cases,
the  actual  operations  of  the  power  only  are  suspended
or  controlled,  when  there  arises  a  conflict  with  the
actual  operations  of  the  Union.  Every  question  of  this
sort  must  be  decided  by  itself  upon  its  own  circum-
stances and  reasons.  Because  the  power  to  regulate
commerce,  from  its  nature  and  objects,  is  exclusive,  it
does  not  follow,  that  the  power  to  pass  bankrupt  laws
also  is  exclusive.1

^  447.  We  may,  however,  lay  down  some  few  rules,
deducible  from  what  has  been  already  said,  in  respect
to  cases  of  implied  prohibitions  upon  the  existence  or
exercise  of  powers  by  the  states,  as  guides  to  aid  our
inquiries.  (1.)  Wherever  the  power  given  to  the  gen-
eral government  requires,  that,  to  be  efficacious  and
adequate  to  its  end,  it  should  be  exclusive,  there  arises
a  just  implication  for  deeming  it  exclusive.  Whether
exercised,  or  not,  in  such  a  case  makes  no  difference.
(2.)  Wherever  the  power  in  its  own  nature  is  not  in-
compatible with  a  concurrent  power  in  the  states,  either
in  its  nature  or  exercise,  there  the  power  belongs  to
the  states.  (3.)  But  in  such  a  case,  the  concurrency
of  the  power  may  admit  of  restrictions  or  qualifications
in  its  nature,  or  exercise.  In  its  nature,  when  it  is  ca-
pable from  its  general  character  of  being  applied  to  ob-
jects or  purposes,  which  would  control,  defeat,  or  de-


2  Sturgis  v.  Cromunshield,  4  Wheat.  122,  195,  197,  199; Gibbons  v.
Ogden,  9  Wheat.  R.  1,  196,  197,  209.


432  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

stroy  the  powers  of  the  general  government.  In  its
exercise,  when  there  arises  a  conflict  in  the  actual  laws
and  regulations  made  in  pursuance  of  the  power  by
the  general  and  state  governments.  In  the  former  case
there  is  a  qualification  engrafted  upon  the  generality  of
the  power,  excluding  its  application  to  such  objects  and
purposes.  In  the  latter,  there  is  (at  least  generally)  a
qualification,  not  upon  the  power  itself,  but  only  upon
its  exercise,  to  the  extent  of  the  actual  conflict  in  the
operations  of  each.  (4.)  In  cases  of  implied  limitations
or  prohibitions  of  power,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  show  a
possible,  or  potential  inconvenience.  There  must  be  a
plain  incompatibility,  a  direct  repugnancy,  or  an  extreme
practical  inconvenience,  leading  irresistibly  to  the  same
conclusion.  (5.)  If  such  incompatibility,  repugnancy,
or  extreme  inconvenience  would  result,  it  is  no  answer,
that  in  the  actual  exercise  of  the  powTer,  each  party
may,  if  it  chooses,  avoid  a  positive  interference  with  the
other.  The  objection  lies  to  the  power  itself,  and  not
to  the  exercise  of  it.  If  it  exist,  it  may  be  applied  to
the  extent  of  controlling,  defeating,  or  destroying  the
other.  It  can  never  be  presumed,  that  the  framers  of
the  constitution,  declared  to  be  supreme,  could  intend
to  put  its  powers  at  hazard  upon  the  good  wishes,  or
good  intentions,  or  discretion  of  the  states  in  the  exer-
cise of  their  acknowledged  powers.  (6.)  Where  no
such  repugnancy,  incompatibility,  or  extreme  inconve-
nience would  result,  then  the  power  in  the  states  is  re-
strained, not  in  its  nature,  but  in  its  operations,  and  then
only  to  the  extent  of  the  actual  interference.  In  fact,
it  is  obvious,  that  the  same  means  may  often  be  applied
to  carry  into  operation  different  powers.  And  a  state
may  use  the  same  means  to  effectuate  an  acknowledg-
ed power  in  itself,  which  congress  may  apply  for  an-


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  433

oilier  purpose  in  the  acknowledged  exercise  of  a  very
different  power.  Congress  may  make  that  a  regulation
of  commerce,  which  a  state  may  employ  as  a  guard  for
its  internal  policy,  or  to  preserve  the  public  health  or

peace,  or  to  promote  its  own  peculiar  interests.1  These
rules  seem  clearly  deduciblc  from  the  nature  of  the  in-
strument ;  and  they  are  confirmed  by  the  positive  in-
junctions of  the  tenth  amendment  of  the  constitution.

^  448.  XIII.  Another  rule  of  interpretation  deserves
consideration  in  regard  to  the  constitution.  There  are
certain  maxims,  which  have  found  their  way,  not  only
into  judicial  discussions,  but  into  the  business  of  com-
mon life,  as  founded  in  common  sense,  and  common
convenience.  Thus,  it  is  often  said,  that  in  an  instru-
ment a  specification  of  particulars  is  an  exclusion  of
generals ;  or  the  expression  of  one  thing  is  the  exclu-
sion of  another.  Lord  Bacon's  remark,  "  that,  as  ex-
ception strengthens  the  force  of  a  law  in  cases  not  ex-
cepted, so  enumeration  weakens  it  in  cases  not  enume-
rated," has  been  perpetually  referred  to,  as  a  fine  illus-
tration. These  maxims,  rightly  understood,  and  rightly
applied,  undoubtedly  furnish  safe  guides  to  assist  us  in
the  task  of  exposition.  But  they  are  susceptible  of  be-
ing applied,  and  indeed  are  often  ingeniously  applied,  to
the  sub  version  of  the  text,  and  the  objects  of  the  instru-
ment. Thus,  it  has  been  suggested,  that  an  affirmative
provision  in  a  particular  case  excludes  the  existence  of
the  like  provision  in  every  other  case ;  and  a  negative
provision  in  a  particular  case  admits  the  existence  of
the  same  thing  in  every  other  case.2  Both  of  these
deductions  are,  or  rather  may  be,  unfounded  in  solid


1  See  Gibbons  v.  Ogdcn,  0  Wheat.  R.  1,  203,  to  210.

2  See  The  Federalist,  No.  83,  84.

vol.  i.  55


434  CONSTITUTION OF  THE U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

reasoning.1  Thus,  it  was  objected  to  the  constitution,
that,  having  provided  for  the  trial  by  jury  in  criminal
cases,  there  was  an  implied  exclusion  of  it  in  civil  cases.
As  if  there  was  not  an  essential  difference  between
silence  and  abolition,  between  a  positive  adoption  of  it  in
one  class  of  cases,  and  a  discretionary  right  (it  being
clearly  within  the  reach  of  the  judicial  powers  confided
to  the  Union)  to  adopt,  or  reject  it  in  all  or  any  other
cases.2  One  might  with  just  as  much  propriety  hold,
that,  because  congress  has  power  "  to  declare  war,"
but  no  power  is  expressly  given  to  make  peace,  the
latter  is  excluded ;  or  that,  because  it  is  declared,  that
"  no  bill  of  attainder,  or  ex  post  facto  law  shall  be  pass-
ed" by  congress,  therefore  congress  possess  in  all
other  cases  the  right  to  pass  any  laws.  The  truth  is,
that  in  order  to  ascertain,  how  far  an  affirmative  or  neg-
ative provision  excludes,  or  implies  others,  we  must  look
to  the  nature  of  the  provision,  the  subject  matter,  the
objects,  and  the  scope  of  the  instrument.  These,  and
these  only,  can  properly  determine  the  rule  of  construc-
tion. There  can  be  no  doubt,  that  an  affirmative  grant
of  powers  in  many  cases  will  imply  an  exclusion  of  all
others.  As,  for  instance,  the  constitution  declares,  that
the  powers  of  congress  shall  extend  to  certain  enume-
rated cases.  This  specification  of  particulars  evidently
excludes  all  pretensions  to  a  general  legislative  au-
thority. Why  ?  Because  an  affirmative  grant  of  special
powers  would  be  absurd,  as  well  as  useless,  if  a  general
authority  were  intended.3  In  relation,  then,  to  such  a
subject  as  a  constitution,  the  natural  and  obvious  sense

1  Cohens  v.  Virginia,  6  Wheat.  R.  395  to  401.

2  The  Federalist,  No.  83.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  83. See  Vattel,  B.  2,  ch 17,  §  282.


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  43d

of  its  provisions,  apart  from  any  technical  or  artificial

rules,  is  the  true  criterion  of  construction.1

§  449.  XIV.  Another  rule  of  interpretation  of  the
constitution,  suggested  by  the  foregoing,  is,  that  the  nat-
ural import  of  a  single  clause  is  not  to  be  narrowed,  so
as  to  exclude  implied  powers  resulting  from  its  charac-
ter, simply  because  there  is  another  clause,  which  enu-
merates certain  powers,  which  might  otherwise  be
deemed  implied  powers  within  its  scope ;  for  in  such
cases  we  are  not,  as  a  matter  of  course,  to  assume,  that
the  affirmative  specification  excludes  all  other  implica-
tions. This  rule  has  been  put  in  a  clear  and  just  light
by  one  of  our  most  distinguished  statesmen ;  and  his
illustration  will  be  more  satisfactory,  perhaps,  than  any
other,  which  can  be  offered.  "  The  constitution,"  says
he,  "  vests  in  congress,  expressly,  the  power  to  lay  and
collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  and  the
power  to  regulate  trade.  That  the  former  power,  if
not  particularly  expressed,  w^ould  have  been  included
in  the  latter,  as  one  of  the  objects  of  a  general  power
to  regulate  trade,  is  not  necessarily  impugned  by  its
being  so  expressed.  Examples  of  this  sort  cannot
sometimes  be  easily  avoided,  and  are  to  be  seen  else-
where in  the  constitution.^  Thus,  the  power  'to  define
and  punish  offences  against  the  law  of  nations '  includes
the  power,  afterwards  particularly  expressed,  '  to  make
rules  concerning  captures,'  &c.  from  offending  neutrals.
So,  also,  a  power  '  to  coin  money '  would,  doubtless,
include  that  of '  regulating  its  value,'  had  not  the  latter
power  been  expressly  inserted.  The  term  taxes,  if
standing  alone,  would  certainly  have  included  '  duties,
imposts,  and  excises.'  In  another  clause  it  is  said,  '  no
tax  or  duty  shall  be  laid  on  exports.' Here  the  two

a  The  Federalist,  No.  83.


436  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

terms  are  used  as  synonymous.  And  in  another  clause,
where  it  is  said  '  no  state  shall  lay  any  imposts  or  du-
ties,' <Scc.  the  terms  imposts  and  duties  are  synonymous.
Pleonasms,  tautologies,  and  the  promiscuous  use  of
terms  and  phrases,  differing  in  their  shades  of  meaning,
(always  to  be  expounded  with  reference  to  the  context,
and  under  the  control  of  the  general  character  and
scope  of  the  instrument,  in  which  they  are  found,)  are
to  be  ascribed,  sometimes  to  the  purposes  of  greater
caution,  sometimes  to  the  imperfection  of  language,  and
sometimes  to  the  imperfection  of  man  himself.  In  this
view  of  the  subject  it  was  quite  natural,  however  cer-
tainly the  power  to  regulate  trade  might  include  a  power
to  impose  duties  on  it,  not  to  omit  it  in  a  clause  enu-
merating the  several  modes  of  revenue  authorized  by
the  construction.  In  few  cases  could  the  [rule],  ex  ma-
jori  cautela,  occur  with  more  claim  to  respect,"  1

§  450.  We  may  close  this  view  of  some  of  the  more
important  rules  to  be  employed  in  the  interpretation  of
the  constitution,  by  adverting  to  a  few  belonging  to
mere  verbal  criticism,  which  are  indeed  but  corollaries
from  what  has  been  said,  and  have  been  already  allud-
ed to  ;  but  which,  at  the  same  time,  it  may  be  of  some
use  again  distinctly  to  enunciate.

^  451.  XV.  In  the  first  place,  then,  every  word  em-
ployed in  the  constitution  is  to  be  expounded  in  its
plain,  obvious,  and  common  sense,  unless  the  context
furnishes  some  ground  to  control,  qualify,  or  enlarge  it.
Constitutions  are  not  designed  for  metaphysical  or  logi-
cal subtleties,  for  niceties  of  expression,  for  critical
propriety,  for  elaborate  shades  of  meaning,  or  for  the
exercise  of  philosophical  acuteness,  or  judicial  research.

I  Mr.  Madison's  Letter  to  Mr.  Cabell,  18th  September,  1828.


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  YM

They  arc  instruments  of  a  practical  nature,  rounded  on
the  common  business  of  human  life,  adapted  to  common
wants,  designed  for  common  use,  and  fitted  for  com-
mon understandings..  The  people;  make  them;  the
people  adopt  them ;  the  people  must  be  supposed  to
read  them,  with  the  help  of  common  sense  ;  and  cannot
be  presumed  to  admit  in  them  any  recondite  meaning,
or  any  extraordinary  gloss.

§  452.  XVI.  But,  in  the  next  place,  words,  from  the
necessary  imperfection  of  all  human  language,  acquire
different  shades  of  meaning,  each  of  which  is  equally
appropriate, and  equally  legitimate  ;  each  of  which  re-
cedes in  a  wider  or  narrower  degree  from  the  others,
according  to  circumstances  ;  and  each  of  which  receives
from  its  general  use  some  indefiniteness and  obscu-
rity, as  to  its exact  boundary  and  extent.1 We  are,
indeed,  often  driven  to  multiply  commentaries  from  the
vagueness  of  words  in  themselves ;  and  perhaps  still
more  often  from  the  different  manner,  in  which  different
minds  are  accustomed  to  employ  them. They  expand
or  contract,  not  only  from  the  conventional  modifica-
tions introduced  by  the  changes  of  society ;  but  also
from  the  more  loose  or  more  exact  uses,  to  which  men
of  different  talents,  acquirements,  and  tastes,  from  choice
or  necessity  apply  them. No  person  can  fail  to  remark
the  gradual  deflections  in  the  meaning  of  words  from
one  age  to  another;  and  so  constantly  is  this  process
going  on,  that  the  daily  language  of  life  in  one  genera-
tion sometimes  requires  the  aid  of  a  glossary  in  another.
It  has  been  justly  remarked,2  that  no  language  is  so  co-
pious, as  to  supply  words  and  phrases  for  every  com-
plex idea ;  or  so  correct,  as  not  to  include  many,  equiv-

i  See  Vattel,  B.  2,  ch.  17,  §  262,  §  299.
2  The  Federalist,  No.  37.


438 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

ocally  denoting  different  ideas.  Hence  it  must  happen,
that  however  accurately  objects  may  be  discriminated
in  themselves,  and  however  accurately  the  discrimina-
tion may  be  considered,  the  definition  of  them  may  be
rendered  inaccurate  by  the  inaccuracy  of  the  terms,  in
which  it  is  delivered.  We  must  resort  then  to  the  con-
text, and  shape  the  particular  meaning,  so  as  to  make
it  fit  that  of  the  connecting  words,  and  agree  with  the
subject  matter.

^  453.  XVII.  In  the  next  place,  where  technical
words  are  used,  the  technical  meaning  is  to  be  applied
to  them,  unless  it  is  repelled  by  the  context.1  But  the
same  word  often  possesses  a  technical,  and  a  common
sense.  In  such  a  case  the  latter  is  to  be  preferred,
unless  some  attendant  circumstance  points  clearly  to  the
former.  No  one  would  doubt,  when  the  constitution  has
declared,  that  "  the  privilege  of  the  wTrit  of  habeas  cor-
pus shall  not  be  suspended,  unless"  under  peculiar  cir-
cumstances, that  it  referred,  not  to  every  sort  of  writ,
which  has  acquired  that  name ;  but  to  that,  which  has
been  emphatically  so  called,  on  account  of  its  remedial
power  to  free  a  party  from  arbitrary  imprisonment.2
So,  again,  when  it  declares,  that  in  suits  at  common  law,
&,c.  the  right  of  trial  by  jury  shall  be  preserved,  though
the  phrase  "  common  law  "  admits  of  different  meanings,
no  one  can  doubt,  that  it  is  used  in  a  technical  sense.
When,  again,  it  declares,  that  congress  shall  have  power
to  provide  a  navy,  we  readily  comprehend,  that  autho-
rity is  given  to  construct,  prepare,  or  in  any  other  man-
ner to  obtain  a  navy.  But  when  congress  is  further
authorized  to  provide  for  calling  forth  the  militia,  we

i  See  Vattel,  B.  2,  ch.  17,  §  27G,  277.

2  Ex  parte  Bollman  fy  Swartout,  4  Crunch,  75  ;  S.  C.  2  Peters's  Cond.
E.  33,


CH.


V.]  RULES  or  INTERPRETATION.  499


perceive  at  once,  that  the  word  "provide"  is  used  in  a
somewhat  different  sense.

§  454. XVIII.  And  this  leads  us to  remark,  in  the
next  place,  that  it  is  by no  means  a  correct  rule  of

interpretation  to  construe the  same word in  the  same
sense,  wherever  it  occurs  in  the  same  instrument. It
does  not  follow,  either  logically  or  grammatically,  that
because  a  word  is found  in  one  connexion  in  the  con-
stitution,  with a  definite  sense, therefore  the same
sense  is  to  be  adopted  in  every  other  connexion,  in
which  it  occurs.1 This  would  be  to  suppose,  that  the
framers  weighed  only  the  force  of  single  words,  as  phi-
lologists or  critics,  and  not  whole  clauses  and  objects,
as  statesmen,  and  practical  reasoners. And  yet  noth-
ing has  been  more  common,  than  to  subject  the  con-
stitution  to this narrow and mischievous criticism.
Men  of  ingenious and  subtle  minds, who seek for
symmetry  and  harmony  in  language,  having  found  in
the  constitution  a  word  used  in  some  sense,  which
falls  in  with  their  favourite  theory  of  interpreting  it,
have  made  that  the  standard,  by  which  to  measure  its
use  in  every  other  part  of  the  instrument. They  have
thus  stretched  it,  as  it  were,  on  the  bed  of  Procrustes,
lopping  off'  its  meaning,  when  it  seemed  too  large  for
their purposes, and  extending  it,  when  it  seemed  too
short. They  have  thus  distorted  it  to  the  most  unnat-
ural shapes,  and  crippled,  where  they  have  sought  only
to  adjust  its  proportions  according  to  their  own  opin-
ions. It  was  very  justly  observed  by  Mr.  Chief  Jus-
tice Marshall,  in  The  Cherokee  Nation  v. The  State  of
Georgia,2  that  "  it  has  been  said, that  the  same  words
have  not  necessarily  the  same  meaning  attached to

i  Vattel,  B.  2,  ch.  17,  §  261.  2  5  peters's  Rep.  J,  19.


440 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

them,  when  found  in  different  parts  of  the  same  instru-
ment. Their  meaning  is  controlled  by  the  context.
This  is  undoubtedly  true.  In  common  language,  the
same  word  has  various  meanings  ;  and  the  peculiar
sense,  in  which  it  is  used  in  any  sentence,  is  to  be  de*
termined  by  the  context."  A  very  easy  example  of
this  sort  will  be  found  in  the  use  of  the  word  "  estab-
lish," which  is  tbund  in  various  places  in  the  con-
stitution. Thus,  in  the  preamble,  one  object  of  the
constitution  is  avowed  to  be  "to  establish  justice,"
which  seems  here  to  mean  to  settle  firmly,  to  fix
unalterably,  or  rather,  perhaps,  as  justice,  abstractedly
considered,  must  be  considered  as  forever  fixed  and
unalterable,  to  dispense  or  administer  justice.  Again,
the  constitution  declares,  that  congress  shall  have
power  "  to  establish  an  uniform  rule  of  naturalization,
and  uniform  laws  on  the  subject  of  bankruptcies,"
where  it  is  manifestly  used  as  equivalent  to  make,  or
form,  and  not  to  fix  or  settle  unalterably  and  forever.
Again,  "  congress  shall  have  power  to  establish  post-
offices  and  post-roads,"  where  the  appropriate  sense
would  seem  to  be  to  create,  to  found,  and  to  regulate,
not  so  much  with  a  view  to  permanence  of  form,  as  to
convenience  of  action.  Again,  it  is  declared,  that
"  congress  shall  make  no  law  respecting  an  establish-
ment of  religion,"  which  seems  to  prohibit  any  laws,
which  shall  recognise,  found,  confirm,  or  patronize  any
particular  religion,  or  form  of  religion,  whether  perma-
nent or  temporary,  whether  already  existing,  or  to
arise  in  future.  In  this  clause,  establishment  seems
equivalent  in  meaning  to  settlement,  recognition,  or
support.  And  again,  in  the  preamble,  it  is  said,  "  We,
the  people,  Slc.  do  ordain  and  establish  this  constitution,"
&,c.  where  the  most  appropriate  sense  seems  to  be  to


CH.  V.]  RULES  OF  INTERPRETATION.  Ill

create,  to  ratify,  and  to  confirm.  So,  the  word  "state"
will  be  found  used  in  the  constitution  in  all  the  various
senses,  to  which  we  have  before  alluded.  It  some-
times means,  the  separate  sections  of  territory  occu-
pied by  the  political  societies  within  each ;  sometimes
the  particular  governments  established  by  these  socie-
ties ;  sometimes  these  societies  as  organized  into  these
particular  governments ;  and  lastly,  sometimes  the  peo-
ple composing  these  political  societies  in  their  highest
sovereign  capacity.1

§  455.  XIX.  But  the  most  important  rule,  in  cases
of  this  nature,  is,  that  a  constitution  of  government
does  not,  and  cannot,  from  its  nature,  depend  in  any
great  degree  upon  mere  verbal  criticism,  or  upon  the
import  of  single  words.  Such  criticism  may  not  be
wholly  without  use ;  it  may  sometimes  illustrate,  or
unfold  the  appropriate  sense  ;  but  unless  it  stands  well
with  the  context  and  subject-matter,  it  must  yield  to
the  latter.  While,  then,  we  may  well  resort  to  the
meaning  of  single  words  to  assist  our  inquiries,  we
should  never  forget,  that  it  is  an  instrument  of  gov-
ernment we  are  to  construe ;  and,  as  has  been  already
stated,  that  must  be  the  truest  exposition,  which  best
harmonizes  with  its  design,  its  objects,  and  its  general
structure.2

§  456.  The  remark  of  Mr.  Burke  may,  with  a  very
slight  change  of  phrase  be  addressed  as  an  admonition
to  all  those,  who  are  called  upon  to  frame,  or  to  inter-
pret a  constitution.  Government  is  a  practical  thing
made  for  the  happiness  of  mankind,  and  not  to  furnish
out  a  spectacle  of  uniformity  to  gratify  the  schemes  of

1  Mr.  Madison's  Virginia  Report,  7  January,  1800,  p.  5;  ante,  §  208,
p.  193.
a  See  Vattel,  B.  2,  eh.  17,  §  285,  286.

vol.  i.  56


442  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

visionary  politicians.  The  business  of  those,  who  are
called  to  administer  it,  is  to  rule,  and  not  to  wrangle.
It  would  be  a  poor  compensation,  that  one  had  tri-
umphed in  a  dispute,  whilst  we  had  lost  an  empire  ; 1
that  we  had  frittered  down  a  power,  and  at  the  same
time  had  destroyed  the  republic.

i  Burke's  Letter  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Bristol  in  1777.


CH.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  443


CHAPTER  VI.

THE  PREAMBLE.

^  457.  Having  disposed  of  these  preliminary  in-
quiries, we  are  now  arrived  at  that  part  of  our  labours,
which  involves  a  commentary  upon  the  actual  provi-
sions of  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  It  is
proposed  to  take  up  the  successive  clauses  in  the  order
in  which  they  stand  in  the  instrument  itself,  so  that  the
exposition  may  naturally  flow  from  the  terms  of  the
text.

§  458.  We  begin  then  with  the  preamble  of  the
constitution. It  is  in  the  following  words  :

"  We,  the  people  of  the  United  States,  in  order
"to  form  a  more  perfect  union,  establish  justice,  insure
"domestic  tranquillity,  provide  for  the  common  defence,
"promote  the  general  welfare,  and  secure  the  blessings
"of  liberty  to  ourselves  and  our  posterity,  do  ordain  and
"establish  this  constitution  for  the  United  States  of
"America."

§  459.  The  importance  of  examining  the  preamble,
for  the  purpose  of  expounding  the  language  of  a  stat-
ute, has  been  long  felt,  and  universally  conceded  in  all
juridical  discussions.  It  is  an  admitted  maxim  in  the
ordinary  course  of  the  administration  of  justice,  that
the  preamble  of  a  statute  is  a  key  to  open  the  mind  of
the  makers,  as  to  the  mischiefs,  which  are  to  be  reme-
died, and  the  objects,  which  are  to  be  accomplished  by
the  provisions  of  the  statute.  We  find  it  laid  down  in
some  of  our  earliest  authorities  in  the  common  law ;
and  civilians  are  accustomed  to  a  similar  expression,


444 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

cessante  legis  pr&mio,  cessat  et  ipsa  lex.1  Probably  it
has  a  foundation  in  'the  exposition  of  every  code  of
written  law,  from  the  universal  principle  of  interpreta-
tion, that  the  will  and  intention  of  the  legislature  is  to
be  regarded  and  followed.  It  is  properly  resorted  to,
where  doubts  or  ambiguities  arise  upon  the  words  of
the  enacting  part ;  for  if  they  are  clear  and  unambigu-
ous, there  seems  little  room  for  interpretation,  except
in  cases  leading  to  an  obvious  absurdity,  or  to  a  direct
overthrow  of  the  intention  expressed  in  the  preamble.

§  460.  There  does  not  seem  any  reason  why,  in  a
fundamental  law  or  constitution  of  government,  an
equal  attention  should  not  be  given  to  the  intention  of
the  framers,  as  stated  in  the  preamble.  And  accord-
ingly we  find,  that  it  has  been  constantly  referred
to  by  statesmen  and  jurists  to  aid  them  in  the  expo-
sition of  its  provisions.2

§  461.  The  language  of  the  preamble  of  the  consti-
tution was  probably  in  a  good  measure  drawn  from
that  of  the  third  article  of  the  confederation,  which  de-
clared, that  "  The  said  states  hereby  severally  enter
into  a  firm  league  of  friendship  with  each  other,  for  their
common  defence,  the  security  of  their  liberties,  and
their  mutual  and  general  welfare.  And  we  accordingly
find,  that  the  first  resolution  proposed,  in  the  conven-
tion which  framed  the  constitution,  was,  that  the  arti-
cles of  the  confederation  ought  to  be  so  corrected  and
enlarged,  as  to  accomplish  the  objects  proposed  by
their  institution,  namely,  common  defence,  security  of
liberty,  and  general  welfare.3

i  Bac.  Abridg.  Statute  L;  2  Plovvden  R.  369;  1  Inst.  79.

2  See  Chisholmv.  Georgia,  Chief  Justice  Jay's  opinion,  2  Dull.  419:
2  Cond.  Rep.  635,  671.

3  Journal  of  Convention,  67  ;  Id.  83.


CH.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  445

§  462.  And,  here,  we  must  guard  ourselves  against
an  error,  which  is too  often  allowed  to  creep  into
the discussions upon this subject. The preamble
never  can  be  resorted  to,  to  enlarge  the  powers  con-
fided to  the  general  government,  or  any  of  its  departments.
It cannot confer any power  per  se ; it  can never
amount,  by  implication, to an enlargement of any
power  expressly  given. It  can  never  be  the  legitimate
source  of  any  implied  power,  when  otherwise  with-
drawn from  the  constitution. Its  true  office  is  to  ex-
pound the  nature,  and  extent,  and  application  of  the
powers  actually  conferred  by  the  constitution,  and  not
substantively  to  create  them. For  example,  the  pream-
ble declares  one  object  to  be,  "  to  provide  for  the  com-
mon defence." No  one  can  doubt,  that  this  does  not
enlarge  the  powers  of  congress  to  pass  any  measures,
which  they  may  deem  useful  for  the  common  defence.1
But  suppose  the  terms  of  a  given  power  admit  of  two
constructions,  the  one  more  restrictive,  the  other  more
liberal,  and  each  of  them  is  consistent  with  the  words,
but  is,  and  ought  to  be,  governed  by  the  intent  of  the
power  ;  if  one  would  promote,  and  the  other  defeat  the
common defence, ought not the former, upon the
soundest  principles  of  interpretation  to  be  adopted  1
Are  we  at  liberty,  upon  any  principles  of  reason,  or
common  sense,  to  adopt  a  restrictive  meaning,  which
will  defeat  an  avowed  object  of  the  constitution,  when
another  equally  natural  and  more  appropriate  to  the
object  is  before  us  1 Would  not this  be  to  destroy
an  instrument  by  a  measure  of  its  words,  which  that
instrument  itself  repudiates  ?


i  Yet,  strangely  enough,  this  objection  was  urged  very  vehemently
against  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  2(J3,  300.


446 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

§  463.  We  have  already  had  occasion,  in  considering
the  nature  of  the  constitution,  to  dwell  upon  the  terms,
in  which  the  preamble  is  conceived,  and  the  proper
conclusion  deducible  from  it.  It  is  an  act  of  the  people,
and  not  of  the  states  in  their  political  capacities.1  It  is
an  ordinance  or  establishment  of  government  and  not
a  compact,  though  originating  in  consent ;  and  it  binds
as  a  fundamental  law  promulgated  by  the  sovereign
authority,  and  not  as  a  compact  or  treaty  entered  into
and  in  fieri,  between  each  and  all  the  citizens  of  the
United  States,  as  distinct  parties.  The  language  is,
"  We,  the  people  of  the  United  States,"  not,  We,  the
states,  "  do  ordain  and  establish ; "  not,  do  contract
and  enter  into  a  treaty  with  each  other ;  "  this  constitu-
tion for  the  United  States  of  America,"  not  this  treaty
between  the  several  states.  And  it  is,  therefore,  an
unwarrantable  assumption,  not  to  call  it  a  most  extrava-
gant stretch  of  interpretation,  wholly  at  variance  with
the  language,  to  substitute  other  words  and  other
senses  for  the  words  and  senses  incorporated,  in  this
solemn  manner,  into  the  substance  of  the  instrument
itself.  We  have  the  strongest  assurances,  that  this
preamble  was  not  adopted  as  a  mere  formulary  ;  but  as
a  solemn  promulgation  of  a  fundamental  fact,  vital  to  the
character  and  operations  of  the  government.  The
obvious  object  was  to  substitute  a  government  of  the
people,  for  a  confederacy  of  states  ;  a  constitution  for  a
compact.2 The  difficulties  arising  from  this  source

i  See  2  Lloyd's  Debates,  1789,  p.  178,  180,  181.

2  By  a  constitution,  is  to  be  understood  (says  Mr.  Justice  Wilson)  a
supreme  law,  made  and  ratified  by  those,  in  whom  the  sovereign  power
of  the  state  reside?,  which  prescribes  the  manner,  in  which  that  sovereign
power  wills  that  the  government  should  be  instituted  and  administered.*

It  contributed  not  a  little  to  the  infirmities  of  the  articles  of  the  confed-
eration, that  it  never  had  a  ratification  by  the  people.  The  Federal-
ist, 22.

*  1  Wilson's  Lect.  417.


€11.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  1  17

were  not  slight ;  for  a  notion  commonly  enough,  how-
ever incorrectly,  prevailed,  that,  as  it  was  ratified  by  the

states  only,  the  states  respectively,  at  their  pleasure,
might  repeal  it  ;  and  this,  of  itself,  proved  the  necessity
of  laying  the  foundations  of  a  national  government
deeper  than  in  the  mere  sanction  of  delegated  power.
The  convention  determined,  that  the  fabric  of  American
empire  ought  to  rest  and  should  rest  on  the  solid  basis
of  the  consent  of  the  people.  The  streams  of  national
power  ought  to  flow  and  should  flow  immediately  from
the  highest  original  fountain  of  all  legitimate  authority.1
And,  accordingly,  the  advocates  of  the  constitution  so
treated  it  in  their  reasoning  in  favour  of  its  adoption.
"  The  constitution,"  said  the  Federalist,  "  is  to  be  found-
ed on  the  assent  and  ratification  of  the  people  of  Ameri-
ca, given  by  deputies  elected  for  that  purpose ;  but  this
assent  and  ratification  is  to  be  given  by  the  people,  not
as  individuals  composing  a  whole  nation,  but  as  com-
posing the  distinct  and  independent  states,  to  which
they  belong."  2  And  the  uniform  doctrine  of  the  high-
est judicial  authority  has  accordingly  been,  that  it  was
the  act  of  the  people,  and  not  of  the  states  ;  and  that  it
bound  the  latter,  as  subordinate  to  the  people.  "  Let  us
turn,"  said  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Jay,  "  to  the  constitution.
The  people  therein  declare,  that  their  design  in  establish-
ing it  comprehended  six  objects:  (1.)  To  form  a  more
perfect  union  ;  (2.)  to  establish  justice  ;  (3.)  to  insure
domestic  tranquillity  ;  (4.)  to  provide  for  the  common
defence  ;  (5.)  to  promote  the  general  welfare  ;  (6.)  to
secure  the  blessings  of  liberty  to  themselves  and  their
posterity. It  would,"  he  added,  "  be  pleasing  and  useful

i  The  Federalist,  No.  22  ; sue  also  No.  43 ; 4  Elliot's  Debates,  75 ;
ante,  p.  248.

2  The  Federalist,  No.  39 :  Id.  No.  84.


443 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

to  consider  and  trace  the  relations,  which  each  of  these
objects  bears  to  the  others ;  and  to  show,  that,  collec-
tively, they  comprise  every  thing  requisite,  with  the
blessing  of  Divine  Providence,  to  render  a  people  pros-
perous and  happy."  l  In  Hunter  v.  Martin,  (1  Wheat.
R.  305,  324,)  the  Supreme  Court  say,  (as  we  have
seen,)  "  the  constitution  of  the,United  States  was  ordain-
ed and  established,  not  by  the  states  in  their  sovereign
capacities,  but  emphatically,  as  the  preamble  of  the  con-
stitution declares,  by  the  people  of  the  United  States  ;"
and  language  still  more  expressive  will  be  found  used
on  other  solemn  occasions.2

^  464.  But  this  point  has  been  so  much  dwelt  upon
in  the  discussion  of  other  topics,3  that  it  is  wholly
unnecessary  to  pursue  it  further.  It  does,  however,
deserve  notice,  that  this  phraseology  was  a  matter  of
much  critical  debate  in  some  of  the  conventions  called
to  ratify  the  constitution.  On  the  one  hand,  it  was
pressed,  as  a  subject  of  just  alarm  to  the  states,  that  the
people  were  substituted  for  the  states ;  that  this  would
involve  a  destruction  of  the  states  in  one  consolidated
national  government ;  and  would  terminate  in  the  sub-
version of  the  public  liberties.  On  the  other  hand,  it
was  urged,  as  the  only  safe  course  for  the  preserva-
tion of  the  Union  and  the  liberties  of  the  people,  that
the  government  should  emanate  from  the  people,  and
not  from  the  states  ;  that  it  should  not  be,  like  the  con-
federation, a  mere  treaty,  operating  by  requisitions  on
the  states  ;  and  that  the  people,  for  whose  benefit  it

1  Chisholm  v. Georgia,  2  Dall.  419  ;  2  Cond.  R.  p.  635,  671.

2  Sec  M'Cidloh  v.  Maryland,  4  Wheat.  R.  316,  404,  405  -^Cohens  v.
Virginia,  6  Wheat.  R.  264,  413,  414  ;  see  also  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect.  10,
p.  189.

3  Ante,  p.  318  to  322.


CH.  VI.]  THE PREAMBLE.  449

was  framed,  ought  to  have  the  sole  and  exclusive;  right
to  ratify,  amend,  and  control  its  provisions.1

§  465.  At  this  distance  of  time,  after  all  the  passions
and  interests,  which  then  agitated  the  country  have
passed  away,  it  cannot  but  be  matter  of  surprise,  that  it
should  have  been  urged,  as  a  solid  objection  to  a  gov-
ernment intended  tor  the  benefit  of  the  people,  and  to
operate  directly  on  them,  that  it  was  required  to  be  rati-
fied by  them,  and  not  by  bodies  politic  created  by  them
for  other  purposes,  and  having  no  implied  authority  to
act  on  the  subject.

§  466.  The  constitution  having  been  in  operation
more  than  forty  years,  and  being  generally  approved,  it
may,  at  first  sight,  seem  unnecessary  to  enter  upon  any
examination  of  the  manner  and  extent,  to  which  it  is
calculated  to  accomplish  the  objects  proposed  in  the
preamble,  or  the  importance  of  those  objects,  not  merely
to  the  whole,  in  a  national  view,  but  also  to  the  indi-
vidual states.  Attempts  have,  however,  been  made  at
different  times,  in  different  parts  of  the  Union,  to  stir
up  a  disaffection  to  the  theory,  as  well  as  the  actual  ex-
ercise of  the  powers  of  the  general  government ;  to
doubt  its  advantages  ;  to  exaggerate  the  unavoidable
inequalities  of  its  operations  ;  to  accustom  the  minds  of
the  people  to  contemplate  the  consequences  of  a  divi-
sion, as  fraught  with  no  dangerous  evils  ; and  thus  to


1  The  debates  in  the  Virginia  Convention  are  very  pointed  on  this
subject.  Mr.  Henry,  in  an  especial  manner,  urged  these  objections
against  it  in  a  very  forcible  manner  ;  (2  Elliot's  Virginia  Debates,  47,
61,  131  ; )  and  lie  was  replied  to,  and  the  preamble  vindicated  with  great
ability  by  Mr.  Randolph,  Mr.  Pendleton,  Mr.  Lee,  Mr.  Nicholas,  and
Mr.  Corbin.  2  Elliot's  Virginia  Debates,  51,  57,  97,  98.  The  subject  is
also  discussed  in  the  North  Carolina  Debates,  (3  Elliot's  Deb.  134, 145,)
and  in  the  Massachusetts  Debates.  1  Elliot's  Deb.  72,  110.  See  also
2  Pitk.  Hist.  270 ;  3  Amcr.  Museum,  53C,  54G.

vol.  i.  57


450  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

lead  the  way,  if  not  designedly,  at  least  insensibly,  to  a
separation,  as  involving  no  necessary  sacrifice  of  impor-
tant blessings,  or  principles,  and,  on  the  whole,  under
some  circumstances,  as  not  undesirable  or  improbable.

§  467.  It  is  easy  to  see,  how  many  different,  and  even
opposite  motives  may,  in  different  parts  of  the  Union,  at
different  times,  give  rise  to,  and  encourage  such  specu-
lations. Political  passions  and  prejudices,  the  disap-
pointments of  personal  ambition,  the  excitements  and
mortifications  of  party  strife,  the  struggles  for  particular
systems  and  measures,  the  interests,  jealousies,  and.
rivalries  of  particular  states,  the  unequal  local  pressure
of  a  particular  system  of  policy,  either  temporary  or
permanent,  the  honest  zeal  of  mere  theorists  and  enthu-
siasts in  relation  to  government,  the  real  or  imaginary
dread  of  a  national  consolidation,  the  debasive  and  cor-
rupt projects  of  mere  demagogues ;  these,  and  many
other  influences  of  more  or  less  purity  and  extent,  may,
and  we  almost  fear,  must,  among  a  free  people,  open  to
argument,  and  eager  for  discussion,  and  anxious  for  a
more  perfect  organization  of  society,  for  ever  preserve
the  elements  of  doubt  and  discord,  and  bring  into  inqui-
ry among  many  minds,  the  question  of  the  value  of  the
Union.

^  468.  Under  these  circumstances  it  may  not  be
without  some  use  to  condense,  in  an  abridged  form,
some  of  those  reasons,  which  became,  with  reflecting
minds,  the  solid  foundation,  on  which  the  adoption  of
the  constitution  was  originally  vested,  and  which,  being
permanent  in  their  nature,  ought  to  secure  its  perpe-
tuity, as  the  sheet  anchor  of  our  political  hopes.  Let  us
follow  out,  then,  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  Chief  Justice
Jay,  in  the  passage  already  cited.1

i  Chisholm  v.  Georgia,  2  Dall.  R.  419.  —  We  shall  freely  use  the
admirable  reasoning  of  the  Federalist  on  the  subject  of  the  Union,  with-


CH.  VI.]  THE PREAMBLE.  451

^  469.  The  constitution,  then,  was  adopted  first  "  to
form  a  more  perfect  union."  Why  this  was  desirable
has  been  in  some  measure  anticipated  in  considering
the  defects  of  the  confederation.  When  the  constitu-
tion, however,  was  before  the  people  for  ratification,
suggestions  were  frequently  made  by  those,  who  were
opposed  to  it,  that  the  country  was  too  extensive  for  a
single  national  government,  and  ought  to  be  broken  up
into  several  distinct  confederacies,  or  sovereignties ;  and
some  even  went  so  far,  as  to  doubt,  whether  it  were  not,
on  the  whole,  best,  that  each  state  should  retain  a  sep-
arate, independent,  and  sovereign  political  existence.1
Those,  who  contemplated  several  confederacies,  specu-
lated upon  a  dismemberment  into  three  great  confede-
racies, one  of  the  northern,  another  of  the  middle,  and
a  third  of  the  southern  states.  The  greater  probability,
certainly,  then  was  of  a  separation  into  two  confedera-
cies ;  the  one  composed  of  the  northern  and  middle
states,  and  the  other  of  the  southern.  The  reasoning
of  the  Federalist  on  this  subject  seems  absolutely  irre-
sistible.2 The  progress  of  the  population  in  the  west-
ern territory,  since  that  period,  has  materially  changed
the  basis  of  all  that  reasoning.  There  could  scarcely
now,  upon  any  dismemberment,  exist,  with  a  view  to
local  interests,  political  associations,  or  public  safety,
less  than  three  confederacies,  and  most  probably  four.
And  it  is  more  than  probable,  that  the  line  of  division
would  be  traced  out  by  geographical  boundaries,  which
would  separate  the  slave-holding  from  the  non-slave-


out  in  every  instance  quoting  the  particular  citations,  as  they  would
incumber  the  text.

i  The  Federalist,  No.  1,2,9,  13,14;  3  Wilson's  Works,'285,  QS6:
Paley's  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy,  B.  4,  ch.  6.

2  The  Federalist,  No.  13, 14.


452 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

holding  states.  Such  a  distinction  in  government  is  so
fraught  with  causes  of  irritation  and  alarm,  that  no  hon-
est patriot  could  contemplate  it  without  many  painful
and  distressing  fears.

§  470.  But  the  material  consideration,  which  should
be  kept  steadily  in  view,  is,  that  under  such  circum-
stances a  national  government,  clothed  with  powers  at
least  equally  extensive  with  those  given  by  the  consti-
tution, would  be  indispensable  for  the  preservation  of
each  separate  confederacy.  Nay,  it  cannot  be  doubted,
that  much  larger  powers,  and  much  heavier  expendi-
tures would  be  necessary.  No  nation  could  long  main-
tain its  public  liberties,  surrounded  by  powerful  and
vigilant  neighbours,  unless  it  possessed  a  government
clothed  with  powers  of  great  efficiency,  prompt  to  act,
and  able  to  repel  every  invasion  of  its  rights.  Nor
would  it  afford  the  slightest  security,  that  all  the  con-
federacies were  composed  of  a  people  descended  from
the  same  ancestors,  speaking  the  same  language,  pro-
fessing the  same  religion,  attached  to  the  same  princi-
ples of  government,  and  possessing  similar  manners,
habits,  and  customs.  If  it  be  true,  that  these  circum-
stances would  not  be  sufficient  to  hold  them  in  a  bond
of  peace  and  union,  when  forming  one  government,  act-
ing for  the  interests,  and  as  the  representatives  of  the
rights  of  the  whole ;  how  could  a  better  fate  be  expect-
ed, when  the  interests  and  the  representation  were
separate  ;  and  ambition,  and  local  interests,  and  feelings,
and  peculiarities  of  climate,  and  products,  and  institu-
tions, and  imaginary  or  real  aggressions  and  grievances,
and  the  rivalries  of  commerce,  and  the  jealousies  of
dominion,  should  spread  themselves  over  the  distinct
councils,  which  would  regulate  their  concerns  by  hide-


CH.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  153

pendent  legislation  ?  *  The  experience  of  the  whole
world  is  against  ;m\  reliance  for  security  and  peace  be-
tween neighbouring  nations,  under  such  circumstances.

The  Abbe  Mably  lias  forcibly  stated  in  a  single  pas-
sage the  whole  result  of  human  experience  on  this  sub-
ject. "  Neighbouring  states,"  says  he,  "  are  naturally
enemies  of  each  other,  unless  their  common  weakness
forces  them  to  league  in  a  confederate  republic ;  and
their  constitution  prevents  the  differences,  that  neigh-
bourhood occasions,  extinguishing  that  secret  jealousy,
which  disposes  all  states  to  aggrandize  themselves  at
the  expense  of  their  neighbours."  This  passage,  as
has  been  truly  observed,  at  the  same  time  points  out
the  evil,  and  suggests  the  remedy.2

§  471.  The  same  reasoning  would  apply  with  aug-
mented force  to  the  case  of  a  dismembeiment,  when
each  state  should  by  itself  constitute  a  nation.  The
very  inequalities  in  the  size,  the  revenues,  the  popu-
lation, the  products,  the  interests,  and  even  in  the  insti-
tutions and  laws  of  each,  would  occasion  a  perpetual
petty  warfare  of  legislation,  of  border  aggressions  and
violations,  and  of  political  and  personal  animosities,
which,  first  or  last,  would  terminate  in  the  subjugation
of  the  weaker  to  the  arms  of  the  stronger.3  In  our  fur-
ther observations  on  this  subject,  it  is  not  proposed
to  distinguish  the  case  of  several  confederacies  from
that  of  a  complete  separation  of  all  the  states  ;  as  in  a
general  sense  the  remarks  apply  with  irresistible,  if  not
with  uniform,  force  to  each.

^  472.  Does,  then,  the  extent  of  our  territory  form

i  The  Federalist,  No.  2,  5,  (3,  7  ;  3  Wilson's  Works,  286 ;  Paley's
Moral  and  Political  Philosophy,  B.  4,  eh.  (3.

2  The  Federalist,  No.  6.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  5,  6,  7.


454 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

any  solid  objection  against  forming  "  this  more  perfect
union  ?  "  This  question,  so  far  as  respects  the  original
territory  included  within  the  boundaries  of  the  United
States  by  treaty  of  peace  of  1783,  seems  almost  set-
tled by  the  experience  of  the  last  forty  years.  It  is  no
longer  a  matter  of  conjecture,  how  far  the  govern-
ment is  capable  (all  other  things  being  equal)  of  being
practically  applied  to  the  whole  of  that  territory.  The
distance  between  the  utmost  limits  of  our  present  pop-
ulation, and  the  diversity  of  interests  among  the  whole,
seem  to  have  presented  no  obstacles  under  the  benefi-
cent administration  of  the  general  government,  to  the
most  perfect  harmony  and  general  advancement  of  all.
Perhaps  it  has  been  demonstrated,  (so  far  as  our  limited
experience  goes,)  that  the  increased  facilities  of  inter-
course, the  uniformity  of  regulations  and  laws,  the  com-
mon protection,  the  mutual  sacrifices  of  local  interests,
when  incompatible  with  that  of  all,  and  the  pride  and
confidence  in  a  government,  in  which  all  are  represent-
ed, and  all  are  equal  in  rights  and  privileges ;  perhaps,
we  say,  it  has  been  demonstrated,  that  these  effects  of
the  Union  have  promoted,  in  a  higher  degree,  the  pros-
perity of  every  state,  than  could  have  been  attained  by
any  single  state,  standing  alone,  in  the  freest  exercise
of  all  its  intelligence,  its  resources,  and  its  institutions,
without  any  check  or  obstruction  during  the  same  pe-
riod. The  great  change,  which  has  been  made  in  our
internal  condition,  as  well  as  in  our  territorial  power,  by
the  acquisition  of  Louisiana  and  Florida,  have,  indeed,
given  rise  to  many  serious  reflections,  whether  such  an
expansion  of  our  empire  may  not  hereafter  endanger
the  original  system.  But  time  alone  can  solve  this  ques-
tion ;  and  to  time  it  is  the  part  of  wisdom  and  patriot-
ism to  leave  it.


CH.  VI.]  THE PREAMBLE.  456

^  473.  When,  however,  the  constitution  was  before
the  people  for  adoption,  objections,  as  has  been  already
suggested,  were  strenuously  urged  against  a  general
government,  founded  upon  the  then  extent  of  our  ter-
ritory. And  the  authorit)  of  Montesquieu  was  relied  on
in  support  of  the  objections.1  It  is  not  a  little  surpris-
ing, that  Montesquieu  should  have  been  relied  on  for
this  purpose.  He  obviously  had  in  view,  when  he  re-
commends a  moderate  extent  of  territory,  as  best  suited
to  a  republic,  small  states,  whose  dimensions  were  far
less  than  the  limits  of  one  half  of  those  in  the  Union  ;
so  that  upon  strictly  following  out  his  suggestions,  the
latter  ought  to  have  been  divided.  But  he  suggests
the  appropriate  remedy  of  a  confederate  republic,  (the
very  form  adopted  in  the  constitution,)  as  the  proper
means  of  at  once  securing  safety  and  liberty  with  ex-
tensive territory.2  The  truth  is,  that  what  size  is  safe
for  a  nation,  with  a  view  to  the  protection  of  its  rights
and  liberties,  is  a  question,  which  admits  of  no  univer-
sal solution.  Much  depends  upon  its  local  position,  its
neighbours,  its  resources,  the  facilities  of  invasion,  and  of
repelling  invasion,  the  general  state  of  the  world,  the
means  and  weapons  of  warfare,  the  interests  of  other
nations  in  preserving  or  destroying  it,  and  other  circum-
stances, which  scarcely  admit  of  enumeration.  How
far  a  republican  government  can,  in  a  confederated
form,  be  extended,  and  be  at  once  efficient  abroad  and
at  home,  can  ensure  general  happiness  to  its  own  citi-
zens, and  perpetuate  the  principles  of  liberty,  and  pre-
serve the  substance  of  justice,  is  a  great  problem  in  the

1  1  Montesquieu's Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  il  eh.  1. See also Beccaria,
ch.  26.

2  The  Federalist,  No.  9  ;  1  Wilson's  Works,  347  to  350  ;  3  Wilson's
Works,  276  to  278.


456 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III,

theory  of  government,  which  America  is  now  endeav-
ouring to  unfold,  and  which,  by  the  blessing  of  God,
we 'must  all  earnestly  hope,  that  she  may  successfully
demonstrate.

^  474.  In  the  mean  time,  the  following  considera-
tions may  serve  to  cheer  our  hopes,  and  dispel  our
fears.  First,  (1.)  that  extent  of  territory  is  not  incompat-
ible with  a  just  spirit  of  patriotism ;  (2.)  nor  with  a
general  representation  of  all  the  interests  and  popula-
tion within  it ;  (3.)  nor  with  a  due  regard  to  the  pecu-
liar local  advantages  or  disadvantages  of  any  part ;  (4.)
nor  with  a  rapid  and  convenient  circulation  of  informa-
tion useful  to  all,  whether  they  are  rulers  or  people.
On  the  other  hand,  it  has  some  advantages  of  a  very
important  nature.  (1.)  It  can  afford  greater  protection
against  foreign  enemies.  (2.)  It  can  give  a  wider  range
to  enterprize  and  commerce.  (3.)  It  can  secure  more
thoroughly  national  independence  to  all  the  great  in-
terests of  society,  agriculture,  commerce,  manufactures,
literature,  learning,  religion.  (4.)  It  can  more  readily
disarm  and  tranquillize  domestic  factions  in  a  single
state.  (5.)  It  can  administer  justice  more  completely
and  perfectly.  (6.)  It  can  command  larger  revenues
for  public  objects  without  oppression  or  heavy  taxation.
(7.)  It  can  economise  more  in  all  its  internal  arrange-
ments, whenever  necessary.  In  short,  as  has  been  said,
with  equal  truth  and  force  :  "  One  government  can  col-
lect and  avail  itself  of  the  talents  and  experience  of  the
ablest  men,  in  whatever  part  of  the  Union  they  may  be
found.  It  can  move  on  uniform  principles  of  policy.  It
can  harmonize,  assimilate,  and  protect  the  several  parts
and  members,  and  extend  the  benefit  of  its  foresight
and  precautions  to  each.  In  the  formation  of  treaties,
it  will  regard  the  interests  of  the  whole,  and  the  par-


CH.  VI.]  THE PREAMBLE.  157

ticular  interests  of  the  parts,  as  connected  with  thai  of
the  whole.  Ii  can  apply  the  revenues  of  the  whole  to
the  defence  of  any  particular  part,  and  that  more  easily
and  expediciously,  than  State  -owTinnents  <>r  separate
confederacies  can  possibly  do,  for  want  of  concert,  arid
unity  of  system."  1  Upon  some  of  these  topics,  we  may
enlarge  hereafter.

i  The  Federalist,  No.  4.  —  The  following  passages  from  the  Federal-
ist, No.  51,  present  the  subject  of  the  advantages  of  the  Union  in  a  strik-
ing light  :  "There  are,  moreover,  two  considerations  particularly  appli-
cable to  the  federal  system  of  America,  which  place  it  in  a  very  inter-
esting point  of  view.

"  First :  In  a  single  republic,  all  the  power  surrendered  by  the  people
is  submitted  to  the  administration  of  a  single  government ;  and  the  usur-
pations are  guarded  against  by  a  division  of  the  government  into  distinct
and  separate  departments,  In  the  compound  republic  of  America,  the
power  surrendered  by  the  people  is  first  divided  between  two  distinct
governments,  and  then  the  portion  allotted  to  each  subdivided  among
distinct  and  separate  departments.  Hence  a  double  security  arises  to
the  rights  of  the  people.  The  different  governments  will  control  each
other  ;  at  the  same  time  that  each  will  be  controlled  by  itself.

"Secondly:  It  is  of  great  importance  in  a  republic,  not  only  to  guard
the  society  against,  the  oppression  of  its  rulers;  but  to  guard  one  part  of
the  society  against  the  injustice  of  the  other  part.  Different  interests
necessarily  exist  in  different  classes  of  citizens.  If  a  majority  be  united
by  a  common  interest,  the  rights  of  the  minority  will  be  insecure.  There
are  but  two  methods  of  providing  against  this  evil :  The  one  by  creating
a  will  in  the  community  independent  of  the  majority,  that  is,  of  the  soci-
ety itself;  the  other,  by  comprehending  in  the  society  so  many  sepa-
rate descriptions  of  citizens,  as  will  render  an  unjust  combination  of  a
majority  of  the  whole  very  improbable,  if  not  impracticable.  The  first
method  prevails  in  all  governments  possessing  an  hereditary,  or  self-
appointed  authority.  This,  at  best,  is  hut  a  precarious  security  ;  because
a  power,  independent  of  the  society,  may  as  well  espouse  the  unjust
views  of  the  major,  as  the  rightful  interests  of  the  minor  party,  and  may
possibly  be  turned  against  both  parties.  The  second  method  will  be  ex-
emplified in  the  federal  republic  of  the  United  States.  Whilst  all  au-
thority in  it  will  he  derived  from,  and  dependent  on  the  society,  the  so-
ciety itself  will  be  broken  into  so  many  parts,  interests,  and  classes  of
citizens,  that  the  rights  of  individuals,  or  of  the  minority,  will  be  in  little
danger  from  interested  combinations  of  the  majority.  In  a  free  govern-
ment, the  security  for  civil  rights  must  be  the  same,  as  that  for  religious
rights. It  consists,  in  the  one  case,  in  the  multiplicity  of  interests,  and

vol.  i.  58


458  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

§  475.  The  union  of  these  states,  "  the  more  perfect
union  "  is,  then,  and  must  for  ever  be  invaluable  to  all,  in

in  the  other,  in  the  multiplicity  of  sects.  The  degree  of  security  in  both
cases  will  depend  on  the  number  of  interests  and  sects  ;  and  this  may
be  presumed  to  depend  on  the  extent  of  country  and  number  of  people
comprehended  under  the  same  government.  This  view  of  the  subject
must  particularly  recommend  a  proper  federal  system  to  all  the  sincere
and  considerate  friends  of  republican  government ;  since  it  shows,  that
in  exact  proportion,  as  the  territory  of  the  Union  may  be  formed  into
more  circumscribed  confederacies,  or  states,  oppressive  combinations  of
a  majority  will  be  facilitated ;  the  best  security  under  the  republican
form,  for  the  rights  of  every  class  of  citizens,  will  be  diminished  ;  and
consequently,  the  stability  and  independence  of  some  member  of  the
government,  the  only  other  security,  must  be  proportionably  increased.
Justice  is  the  end  of  government.  It  is  the  end  of  civil  society.  It  ever
has  been,  and  ever  will  be,  pursued,  until  it  be  obtained,  or  until  liberty  be
lost  in  the  pursuit.  In  a  society,  under  the  forms  of  which  the  stronger
faction  can  readily  unite  and  oppress  the  weaker,  anarchy  may  as  truly
be  said  to  reign,  as  in  a  state  of  nature,  where  the  weaker  individual  is
not  secured  against  the  violence  of  the  stronger.  And,  as  in  the  latter
state,  even  the  stronger  individuals  are  prompted  by  the  uncertainty  of
their  condition  to  submit  to  a  government,  which  may  protect  the  weak,
as  well  as  themselves  :  so,  in  the  former  state,  will  the  more  powerful
factions  be  gradually  induced,  by  a  like  motive,  to  wish  for  a  government,
which  will  protect  all  parties,  the  weaker,  as  well  as  the  more  powerful.
It  can  be  little  doubted,  that  if  the  state  of  Rhode-Island  was  separated
from  the  confederacy,  and  left  to  itself,  the  insecurity  of  rights,  under
the  popular  form  of  government  within  such  narrow  limits,  would  be  dis-
played by  such  reiterated  oppressions  of  the  factious  majorities,  that  some
power,  altogether  independent  of  the  people,  would  soon  be  called  for
by  the  voice  of  the  very  factions,  whose  misrule  had  proved  the  necessity
of  it.  In  the  extended  republic  of  the  United  States,  and  among  the
great  variety  of  interests,  parties,  and  sects,  which  it  embraces,  a  coali-
tion of  a  majority  of  the  whole  society  could  seldom  take  place  upon
any  other  principles,  than  those  of  justice,  and  the  general  good  ;  whilst
there  being  thus  less  danger  to  a  minor,  from  the  will  of  the  major  party,
there  must  be  less  pretext  also  to  provide  for  the  security  of  the  former,
by  introducing  into  the  government  a  will  not  dependent  on  the  latter;
or,  in  other  words,  a  will  independent  of  the  society  itself.  It  is  no  less
certain,  that  it  is  important,  notwithstanding  the  contrary  opinions,  which
have  been  entertained,  that  the  larger  the  society,  provided  it  lie  within
a  practicable  sphere,  the  more  duly  capable  it  will  be  of  self-government.
And  happily  for  the  republican  cause,  the  practicable  sphere  may  be
carried  to  a  very  great  extent,  by  a  judicious  modification  and  mixture  of
the  federal  principle."


CH.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  459

respect  both  to  foreign  and  domestic  concerns.  It  will
prevent  some  of  the  causes  of  war,  that  scourge  of  the
human  race,  by  enabling  the  general  government,  not
only  to  negotiate  suitable  treaties  for  the  protection  of  the
rights  and  interests  of  all, but  by  compelling  a  general  obe-
dience to  (hem,  and  a  general  respect  for  the  obligations
of  the  law  of  nations.  It  is  notorious,  that  even  under
the  confederation,  the  obligations  of  treaty  stipulations,
were  openly  violated,  or  silently  disregarded  ;  and  the
peace  of  the  whole  confederacy  was  at  the  mercy  of
the  majority  of  any  single  state.  If  the  states  were  sep-
arated, they  would,  or  might,  form  separate  and  inde-
pendent treaties  with  different  nations,  according  to
their  peculiar  interests.  These  treaties  would,  or  might,
involve  jealousies  and  rivalries  at  home,  as  well  as
abroad,  and  introduce  conflicts  between  nations  strug-
gling for  a  monoply  of  the  trade  with  each  state.  Retali-
atory or  evasive  stipulations  would  be  made,  to  counter-
act the  injurious  system  of  a  neighbouring  or  distant  state,
and  thus  the  scene  be  again  acted  over  with  renewed
violence,  which  succeeded  the  peace  of  1 783,  when  the
common  interests  were  forgotten  in  the  general  strug-
gle for  superiority.  It  would  manifestly  be  the  interest
of  foreign  nations  to  promote  these  animosities  and
jealousies,  that,  in  the  general  weakness,  the  states  might
seek  their  protection  by  an  undue  sacrifice  of  their  in-
terests, or  fall  an  easy  prey  to  their  arms.1

^  476.  The  dangers,  too,  to  all  the  states,  in  case  of
division,  from  foreign  wars  and  invasion,  must  be  im-
minent, independent  of  those  from  the  neighbourhood
of  the  colonies  and  dependencies  of  ether  governments
on  this  continent. Their  very  weakness  would  invite

i  The  Federalist.  No.  2,  3,  4  :  3  Wilson's  Works,  200.


460  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U. STATES. [BOOK  III.

aggression.  The  ambition  of  the  European  governments,
to  obtain  a  mastery  of  power  in  colonies  and  distant
possessions,  would  be  perpetually  involving  them  in  em-
barrassing negotiations  or  conflicts,  however  peaceable
might  be  their  own  conduct,  and  however  inoffensive
their  own  pursuits,  and  objects.  America,  as  ol  old,
would  become  the  theatre  of  warlike  operations,  in
which  she  had  no  interests ;  and  with  a  view  to  their
own  security,  the  states  would  be  compelled  to  fall
back  into  a  general  colonial  submission,  or  sink  into  de-
pendencies of  such  of  the  great  European  powers,
as  might  be  most  favourable  to  their  interests,  or  most
commanding  over  their  resources.1

§  477.  There  are  also  peculiar  interests  of  some  of
the  states,  which  would,  upon  a  separation,  be  wholly
sacrificed,  or  become  the  source  of  immeasurable  ca-
lamities. The  New-England  states  have  a  vital  inter-
est in  the  fisheries  with  their  rivals,  England  and
France  ;  and  how  could  New-England  resist  either  of
these  powers  in  a  struggle  for  the  common  right,  if
attempted  to  be  restrained  or  abolished  ?  What  would
become  of  Maryland  and  Virginia,  if  the  Chesapeake
were  under  the  dominion  of  different  foreign  powers
de  facto,  though  not  in  form  ?  The  free  navigation  of
the  Mississippi  and  the  lakes,  and  it  may  be  added,  the
exclusive  navigation  of  them,  seems  indispensable  to
to  the  security,  as  well  as  the  prosperity  of  the  west-
ern states.  How  otherwise,  than  by  a  general  union,
could  this  be  maintained  or  guarantied  1 2

^  478.  And  again,  as  to  commerce,  so  important  to  the
navigating  states,  and  so  productive  to  the  agricultural
states, it  must  be  at  once  perceived,  that  no  adequate  pro-

i  The  Federalist,  No.  3,  4,  5.
2  The  Federalist,  No.  J5.


CH.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  461

tection  could  be  given  to  either,  unless  by  the  strong  and
uniform  operations  of  a  genera]  government.  Each  state
by  its  own  regulations  would  seefc  to  promote  its  own
interests,  to  the  ruin  or  injury  of  those  of  others.  The
relative  situation  of  these  states  ;  the  Dumber  of  rivers,  by
which  they  are  intersected,  and  of  bays,  thai  wash  their
shores;  the  facility  of  communication  in  ever]  direc-
tion; the  affinity  of  language  and  manners;  the  fa-
miliar habits  of  intercourse  ;  all  these  circumstan-
ces would  conspire  to  render  an  illicit  trade  between
them  matter  of  little  difficulty,  and  would  insure  fre-
quent evasions  of  the  commercial  regulations  of  each
other.1  All  foreign  nations  would  have  a  common  in-
terest in  crippling  us ;  and  all  the  evils  of  colonial  ser-
vitude, and  commercial  monopoly  would  be  inflicted
upon  us,  by  the  hands  of  our  own  kindred  and  neigh-
bours.2 But  this  topic,  though  capable  of  being  pre-
sented in  detail  from  our  past  experience  in  such  glow-
ing colours,  as  to  startle  the  most  incredulous  into  a
conviction  of  the  ultimate  poverty,  wretchedness,  and
distress,  which  would  overwhelm  every  state,  does  not
require  to  be  more  than  hinted  at.  We  have  already
seen  in  our  former  examination  of  the  defects  of  the  con-
federation, that  every  state  was  ruined  in  its  revenues,
as  well  as  in  its  commerce,  by  the  want  of  a  more  effi-
cient government.'

^  479.  Nor  should  it  be  imagined,  that  however  in-
jurious to  commerce,  the  evils  would  be  less  in  respect
to  domestic  manufactures  and  agriculture.  In  respect
to  manufactures,  the  truth  is  so  obvious,  that  it  requires


i  The  Federalist,  No  12.  -  The  Federalist,  Nos.  11,  12.

3  The  Federalist,  Nos.  5,  7,  11,'  12;  3  Wilson's  Works,  290  :  I  El-
liot's Debates,  74, 144  ;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  24S,  249  :  Brown
v.Maryland,  12  Wheat.  R.  419,  1 15,  1 16.


462 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

no  argument  to  illustrate  it.  In  relation  to  the  agricul-
tural states,  however,  an  opinion  has,  at  some  times
and  in  some  sections  of  the  country,  been  prevalent,
that  the  agricultural  interests  would  be  equally  safe
without  any  general  government.  The  following,
among  other  considerations,  may  serve  to  show  the
fallacy  of  all  such  suggestions.  A  large  and  uniform
market  at  home  for  native  productions  has  a  ten-
dency to  prevent  those  sudden  rises  and  falls  in
prices,  which  are  so  deeply  injurious  to  the  farmer
and  the  planter.  The  exclusive  possession  of  the
home  market  against  all  foreign  competition  gives
a  permanent  security  to  investments,  which  slowly
yield  their  returns,  and  encourages  the  laying  out  of
capital  in  agricultural  improvements.  Suppose  cotton,
tobacco,  and  wheat  were  at  all  times  admissible  from
foreign  states  without  duty,  would  not  the  effect  be
permanently  to  check  any  cultivation  beyond  what  at
the  moment  seems  sure  of  a  safe  sale?  Would  not
foreign  nations  be  perpetually  tempted  to  send  their
surplus  here,  and  thus,  from  time  to  time,  depress  or
glut  the  home  market  1

§  480.  Again,  the  neighbouring  states  would  often
engage  in  the  same  species  of  cultivation  ;  and  yet  with
very  different  natural,  or  artificial  means  of  making  the
products  equally  cheap.  This  inequality  would  imme-
diately give  rise  to  legislative  measures  to  correct  the
evil,  and  to  secure,  if  possible,  superior  advantages
over  the  rival  state.  This  would  introduce  end-
less crimination  and  retaliation,  laws  for  defence,  and
laws  for  offence.  Smuggling  wTould  be  every  where
openly  encouraged,  or  secretly  connived  at.  The  vital
interests  of  a  state  would  lie  in  many  instances  at  the
mercy  of  its  neighbours,  who  might,  at  the  same  time,


CH.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  463


feel,  thai  their  own  interests  were  promoted  by  il
of  their  neighbours. And  the  distant  states,


ie  ruin


Know  mir


b»


that  their  own  wants  and  pursuits  were  wholly  disre-
garded, would  hoooino  willing  auxiliaries  in  any  plans
to  encourage  cultivation and consumption elsewhere.

Such  is  human  nature:!  Such  arc  the  infirmities,  which
history  severely  instructs  us  belong  to  neighbours  and
rivals ;  to  those,  who  navigate,  and  those,  who  plant ;  to
those,  who  desire,  and  those,  who  repine  at  the  pros-
perity of  surrounding  states.1

^  481.  Again  ;  foreign  nations,  under  such  cir-
cumstances, must  have  a  common  interest,  as  carriers,
to  bring  to  the  agricultural  states  their  own  manufac-
tures at  as  dear  a  rate  as  possible,  and  to  depress
the  market  of  the  domestic  products  to  the  minimum
price  of  competition.  They  must  have  a  common  inter-
est to  stimulate  the  neighbouring  states  to  a  ruinous
jealousy;  or  by  fostering  the  interests  of  one,  with  whom
they  can  deal  upon  more  advantageous  terms,  or  over
whom  they  have  acquired  a  decisive  influence,  to  sub-
ject to  a  corresponding  influence  others,  which  struggle
for  an  independent  existence.2  This  is  not  mere
theory.  Examples,  and  successful  examples  of  this
policy,  may  be  traced  though  the  period  between  the
peace  of  1783  and  the  adoption  of  the  constitution.

^  482.  But  not  to  dwell  farther  on  these  important
inducements  "  to  form  a  more  perfect  union,"  let  us
pass  to  the  next  object,  which  is  to  "  establish  justice."
This  must  for  ever  be  one  of  the  great  ends  of  every
wise  government ;  and  even  in  arbitrary  governments  it
must,  to  a  great  extent,  be  practised,  at  least  in  respect
to  private  persons,  as  the  only security  against  rebel-

i  The  Federalist,  No.  7.  2  id.  No.  4,  5,  1!.


464  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

lion,  private  vengeance,  and  popular  cruelty.  But  in  a
free  government  it  lies  at  the  very  basis  of  all  its  insti-
tutions. Without  justice  being  freely,  fully,  and  impar-
tially administered,  neither  our  persons,  nor  our  rights,
nor  our  property,  can  be  protected.  And  if  these,  or
either  of  them,  are  regulated  by  no  certain  laws,  and
are  subject  to  no  certain  principles,  and  are  held  by
no  certain  tenure,  and  are  redressed,  when  violated,
by  no  certain  remedies,  society  fails  of  all  its  value ;
and  men  may  as  well  return  to  a  state  of  savage  and
barbarous  independence.  No  one  can  doubt,  there-
fore, that  the  establishment  of  justice  must  be  one
main  object  of  all  our  state  governments.  Why,  then,
may  it  be  asked,  should  it  form  so  prominent  a  motive
in  the  establishment  of  the  national  government?

^  483.  This  is  nowT  proposed  to  be  shown  in  a  con-
cise manner.  In  the  administration  of  justice,  foreign
nations,  and  foreign  individuals,  as  well  as,  citizens,  have
a  deep  stake  ;  but  the  former  have  not  always  as  com-
plete means  of  redress  as  the  latter;  for  it  may  be  pre-
sumed, that  the  state  laws  will  always  provide  ade-
quate tribunals  to  redress  the  grievances  and  sustain
the  rights  of  their  own  citizens.  But  this  would  be  a
very  imperfect  view  of  the  subject.  Citizens  of  con-
tiguous states  have  a  very  deep  interest  in  the  admin-
istration of  justice  in  each  state  ;  and  even  those,  which
are  most  distant,  but  belonging  to  the  same  confede-
racy, cannot  but  be  affected  by  every  inequality  in  the
provisions,  or  the  actual  operations  of  the  laws  of  each
other.  While  every  state  remains  at  full  liberty  to
legislate  upon  the  subject  of  rights,  preferences,  con-
tracts, and  remedies,  as  it  may  please,  it  is  scarcely  to
be  expected,  that  they  will  all  concur  in  the  same  gen-
eral system  of  policy. The  natural  tendency  of  every


CH. VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  465

government  is  to  favour  its  own  citizens  ;  and  unjust
preferences,  not  only  in  the  administration  of  justice,
but  in  the  very  structure  of  the  laws,  may  reasonably  be
expected  to  arise.  Popular  prejudices,  or  passions,
supposed  or  real  injuries,  the  predominance  of  home
pursuits  and  feelings  over  the  comprehensive  views  of
a  liberal  jurisprudence,  will  readily  achieve  the  most
mischievous  projects  for  this  purpose.  And  these,
again,  by  a  natural  reaction,  will  introduce  correspon-
dent regulations,  and  retaliatory  measures  in  other
states.

§  483.  Now,  exactly  what  this  course  of  reasoning
has  led  us  to  presume  as  probable,  has  been  demon-
strated by  experience  to  be  true  in  respect  to  our  own
confederacy  during  the  short  period  of  its  existence,
and  under  circumstances  well  calculated  to  induce
each  state  to  sacrifice  many  of  its  own  objects  for  the
general  good.  Nay,  even  when  we  were  colonies,
dependent  upon  the  authority  of  the  mother  country,
these  inequalities  were  observable  in  the  local  legisla-
tion of  several  of  the  states,  and  produced  heart-burn-
ings and  discontents,  which  were  not  easily  appeased.

§  484.  First,  in  respect  to  foreign  nations.  After
the  confederacy  was  formed,  and  we  had  assumed  the
general  rights  of  war  as  a  sovereign  belligerent  nation,
authority  to  make  captures,  and  to  bring  in  ships  and
cargoes  for  adjudication  naturally  flowed  from  the
proper  exercise  of  these  rights  by  the  law  of  nations.
The  states  respectively  retained  the  power  of  ap-
pointing prize  tribunals,  to  take  cognizance  of  these
matters  in  the  first  instance ;  and  thus  thirteen  dis-
tinct jurisdictions  were  established,  which  acted  en-
tirely independent  of  each  other.  It  is  true,  that  the
articles  of  confederation  had  delegated  to  the  general

vol.  i.  59


466 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

government  the  authority  of  establishing  courts  for
receiving  and  determining,  finally,  appeals  in  all  cases
of  captures.  Congress  accordingly  instituted  proper
appellate  tribunals,  to  which  the  state  courts  were
subordinate,  and,  upon  constitutional  principles,  were
bound  to  yield  obedience.  But  it  is  notorious,  that  the
decisions  of  the  appellate  tribunals  were  disregarded,
and  treated  as  mere  nullities,  for  no  power  to  enforce
them  was  lodged  in  congress.  They  operated,  there-
fore, merely  by  moral  influence  and  requisition,  and,  as
such,  soon  sunk  into  insignificance.  Neutral  individuals,
as  well  as  neutral  nations,  were  left  wholly  without  any
adequate  redress  for  the  most  inexcusable  injustice,
and  the  confederacy  subjected  to  imminent  hazards.
And  until  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  was
established,  no  remedy  was  ever  effectually  adminis-
tered.1 Treaties,  too,  were  formed  by  congress  with
various  nations  ;  and  above  all,  the  treaty  of  peace  of
1783,  which  gave  complete  stability  to  our  indepen-
dence against  Great  Britain.  These  treaties  were,  by
the  theory  of  the  confederation,  absolutely  obligatory
upon  all  the  states.  Yet  their  provisions  were  notori-
ously violated  both  by  state  legislation  and  state  judi-
cial tribunals.  The  non-fulfilment  of  the  stipulations
of  the  British  treaty  on  our  part  more  than  once  threat-
ened to  involve  the  whole  country  again  in  war.  And
the  provision  in  that  treaty  for  the  payment  of  British
debts  was  practically  disregarded  in  many,  if  not  in  all,
the  state  courts.  These  debts  never  were  enforced,
until  the  constitution  gave  them  a  direct  and  adequate

i  See  the  Resolves  of  Congress,  Journals  of  1779,  p.  86;  Ptnhallow  v.
Doane,  3  Dall.  54  ;  Jennings  v.  Carson,  4  Cranch,  2 ;  Chisholm  v.  Geor-
gia, 2  Dall.  419,  47-1.


CH,  VI.]  THE PREAMBLE.  Hi?

sanction,  independently  of  state  (legislation  and  state
courts.1

§  485.  Besides  the  debts  due  to  foreigners,  and  the
obligations  to  pay the  same,  the  public  debt  of  the

United  States  was  lefl  utterly  unprovided  lor;  and  the
officers  and  soldiers  of  the  revolution,  who  had  achiev-
ed our  independence,  were,  as  we  have  had  occasion
to  notice,  suffered  to  languish  in  want,  and  their  just
demands  evaded,  or  passed  by  with  indifference.2  No
efficient  system  to  pay  the  public  creditors  was  ever
carried  into  operation,  until  the  constitution  was  adopt-
ed; and,  notwithstanding  the  increase  of  the  public
debt,  occasioned  by  intermediate  wars,  it  is  now  on  the
very  eve  of  a  total  extinguishment.

^  486.  These  evils,  whatever  might  be  their  magni-
tude, did  not  create  so  universal  a  distress,  or  so  much
private  discontent,  as  others  of  a  more  domestic  nature,
which  were  subversive  of  the  first  principles  of  justice.
Independent  of  the  unjustifiable  preferences,  which
wrere  fostered  in  favour  of  citizens  of  the  state  over
those  belonging  to  other  states,  which  were  not  few
nor  slight,  there  were  certain  calamities  inflicted  by
the  common  course  of  legislation  in  most  of  the
states,  which  went  to  the  prostration  of  all  public  faith
and  all  private  credit.  Lawrs  were  constantly  made
by  the  state  legislatures  violating,  with  more  or  less
degrees  of  aggravation,  the  sacredness  of  private  con-
tracts. Laws  compelling  the  receipt  of  a  depreciated


i  See  1  Wait's  State  Papers,  226  to  388  ;  Ware  v.  Jfi/llon.  3  Dall.  R.
199  ;  Hopkins  v.  Bell,  3  Cranch,  454  ;  3  Wilson's  Works,  290;  Chisholm
v.  Georgia,  2  Dall.  4 J 9,  471.

2  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  ch.  1,  p.  46  to  49  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist.
180  to  183 ;  Journal  of  Congress,  1783,  p.  194  et  seq.  ;  3  Wilson's
Works.  290  :  4  Elliot's  Debates,  84.


468  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U. STATES. [BOOK  111.

and  depreciating  paper  currency  in  payment  of  debts
were  generally,  if  not  universally, prevalent. Laws
authorizing  the  payment  of  debts  by  instalments,  at
periods  differing  entirely  from  the  original  terms  of  the
contract ;  laws  suspending,  for  a  limited  or  uncertain
period,  the  remedies  to  recover  debts  in  the  ordinary
course  of  legal  proceedings  ; laws  authorizing  the  de-
livery of  any  sort  of  property,  however  unproductive  or
undesirable,  in  payment  of  debts  upon  an  arbitrary  or
friendly appraisement ; laws  shutting  up  the  courts
for  certain  periods  and  under  certain  circumstances,
were  not  infrequent  upon  the  statute  books  of  many  of
the  states  now  composing  the  Union. In  the  rear  of
all  these  came  the  systems  of  general  insolvent  laws,
some  of  which  were  of  a  permanent  nature,  and  others
again  were  adopted  upon  the  spur  of  the  occasion,  like
a  sort  of  gaol  delivery  under  the  Lords'  acts  in  England,
which  had  so  few  guards  against  frauds  of  every  kind
by  the  debtor, that  in  practice  they  amounted  to  an
absolute  discharge  from  any  debt,  without  any  thing
more  than  a  nominal  dividend ;  and  sometimes  even
this  vain  mockery  was  dispensed  with.1 In  short,  by
the  operations  of  paper  currency,  tender  laws,  install-
ment laws,  suspension  laws,  appraisement  laws, and
insolvent  laws,  contrived  with  all  the  dexterous  inge-
nuity of  men  oppressed  by  debt,  and  popular  by  the
very  extent  of  private  embarrassments,  the  states  were
almost  universally  plunged  into  a  ruinous  poverty,  dis-
trust, debility,  and  indifference  to  justice. The  local
tribunals  were  bound  to  obey  the  legislative  will ; and
in  the  few  instances,  in  which  it  was  resisted,  the  inde-
pendence of  the  judges  was sacrificed  to  the  temper

i  See  Chase  J.  in  Ware  v.  Hylton,  3  Dall.  199 ;  1  Cond.  R.  99,  111.


CH.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  160

of  the  times.1  It  is  well  known,  thai  Shays's  rebellion
in  Massachusetts  took  its  origin  from  this  source.  The
object  was  to  prostrate  the  regular  administration  of
justice  by  a  system  of  terror,  which  should  prevent  the
recovery  of  debts  and  taxes.5

^  487.  The  Federalist  speaks  on  (his  subject  with
unusual  emphasis.  "The  loss,  which  America  has
sustained  from  the  pestilent  effects  of  paper  money  on
the  necessary  confidence  between  man  and  man,  on
the  necessary  confidence  in  the  public  councils,  on  the
industry  and  morals  of  the  people,  and  on  the  charac-
ter of  republican  government,  constitutes  an  enormous
debt  against  the  states,  chargeable  with  this  unadvised
measure,  which  must  long  remain  unsatisfied  ;  or  rather
an  accumulation  of  guilt,  which  can  be  expiated  no
otherwise  than  by  a  voluntary  sacrifice  on  the  altar  of
justice  of  the  power,  which  has  been  the  instrument  of
it." 3  "  Laws  impairing  the  obligation  of  contracts  are
contrary  to  the  first  principles  of  the  social  compact,
and  to  every  principle  of  sound  legislation." 4  And  the
Federalist  dwells  on  the  suggestion,  that  as  such  laws
amount  to  an  aggression  on  the  rights  of  the  citizens  of
those  states,  whose  citizens  are  injured  by  them,  they
must  necessarily  form  a  probable  source  of  hostilities
among  the  states. Connecticut  retaliated  in  an  exem-

i  The  case  of  Trevett  v.  Welden,  in  1786,  in  Rhode-Island,  is  an  in-
stance of  this  sort,  which  is  in  point,  and  illustrates  the  text,  tnough  it
would  not  be  difficult  to  draw  others  from  states  of  larger  extent.  The
judges  in  that  case  decided,  that  a  law  making  paper  money  a  tender  in
payment  of  debts  was  unconstitutional,  and  against  the  principles  of
magna  charta.  They  were  compelled  to  appear  before  the  legislature
to  vindicate  themselves  ;  and  the  next  year  (being  chosen  annually)  they
were  left  out  of  office  for  questioning  the  legislative  power.

2  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  111,  112,  &c.  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist.  214  ;
Minot's  History  of  the  Insurrection  in  Massachusetts.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  44.  4  Id.


470  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

plary  manner  upon  enormities  of  this  sort,  which  she
thought  had  been  perpetrated  by  a  neighbouring  state
upon  the  just  rights  of  her  citizens.  Indeed,  war  con-
stitutes almost  the  only  remedy  to  chastise  atrocious
breaches  of  moral  obligations,  and  social  justice  in
respect  to  debts  and  other  contracts."  1

^  488.  So,  that  we  see  completely  demonstrated  by
our  own  history  the  importance  of  a  more  effectual
establishment  of  justice  under  the  auspices  of  a  na-
tional government.2

i  The  Federalist,  No.  7.

2  The  remarks  of  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Jay  in  Chisholm  v.  Georgia,  (2
Dall.  R.  419,  474  ;  S.  C.  2  Peters's  Cond.  R.  635,  670,)  illustrate  the
truth  of  these  reasonings  in  an  interesting  manner.  "  Prior  to  the  date,"
says  he,  "  of  the  constitution,  the  people  had  not  any  national  tribunal,
to  which  they  could  resort  for  justice  ;  the  distribution  of  justice  was
then  confined  to  state  judicatories,  in  whose  institution  and  organization
the  people  of  the  other  states  had  no  participation,  and  over  whom  they
had  not  the  least  control.  There  was  then  no  general  court  of  appellate
jurisdiction,  by  whom  the  errors  of  state  courts,  affecting  either  the
nation  at  large,  or  the  citizens  of  any  other  state,  could  be  revised  and
corrected.  Each  state  was  obliged  to  acquiesce  in  the  measure  of  jus-
tice, which  another  state  might  yield  to  her,  or  to  her  citizens  ;  and  that,
even  in  cases  where  state  considerations  were  not  always  favourable  to
the  most  exact  measure.  There  was  danger,  that  from  this  source  ani-
mosities would  in  time  result ;  and  as  the  transition  from  animosities  to
hostilities  was  frequent  in  the  history  of  independent  states,  a  common
tribunal  for  the  termination  of  controversies  became  desirable,  fvom  mo-
tives both  of  justice  and  of  policy.

"  Prior  also  to  that  period,  the  United  States  had,  by  taking  a  place
among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  become  amenable  to  the  laws  of  na-
tions ;  and  it  was  their  interest  as  well  as  their  duty  to  provide,  that
those  laws  should  be  respected  and  obeyed.  In  their  national  character
and  capacity,  the  United  States  were  responsible  to  foreign  nations  for
the  conduct  of  each  state,  relative  to  the  laws  of  nations,  and  the  per-
formance of  treaties  ;  and  there  the  inexpediency  of  referring  all  such
questions  to  state  courts,  and  particularly  to  the  courts  of  delinquent
states  became  apparent.  While  all  the  states  were  bound  to  protect
each,  and  the  citizens  of  each,  it  was  highly  proper  and  reasonable,
that  they  should  be  in  a  capacity,  not  only  to  cause  justice  to  be  done  to


OH. IV.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  471

^  -189.  The  next  clause  in  the  preamble  is "  to  en-
sure domestic  tranquillity." The  illustrations  appro-
priate to  this  head  have  been  in  a  great  measure  antici-
pated  in  our  previous  observations. The security of
the  states  against  foreign  influence,  domestic  dissen-
sions, commercial  rivalries,  legislative retaliations,  ter-
ritorial disputes, and  the  petty  irritations  of  a  border
warfare  for  privileges,  exemptions,  and  smuggling,  have
been  already  noticed.1 The  very  habits  of  intercourse,
to  which  the  states  were  accustomed  with  each other
during  their  colonial  state,  would,  as  has  been  justly
remarked,  give  a  keener  edge  to  every  discontent  ex-
cited by  any  inequalities,  preferences,  or  exclusions,
growing  out  of  the  public  policy of  any of them.2
These,  however,  are  not  the  only  evils. In  small  com-
munities domestic  factions  may  well  be  expected  to  arise,
which,  when  honest,  may  lead  to  the  most  pernicious
public  measures  ;  and  when  corrupt,  to  domestic  insur-
rections, and  even  to  an  overthrow  of  the  government.
The  dangers to  a  republican  government from  this
source  have  been  dwelt  upon  by  the  advocates  of  arbi-
trary government  with  much  exultation  ; and  it  must
be  confessed,  that  the  history  of  free  governments  has
furnished but too  many  examples to apologize for,
though  not  to  justify their  arguments,  drawn  not  only
against  the  forms  of  republican  government,  but  against
the  principles  of  civil  liberty. They  have  pointed  out
the  brief  duration  of  republics,  the  factions,  by  which  they
have  been  rent,  and  the  miseries,  which  they  have  suf-
fered from  distracted  councils,  and  time-serving  policy,

each,  and  the  citizens  of  each  ;  but  also  to  cause  justice  to  be  done  by
each,  and  the  citizens  of  each  ; and  that,  not  by  violence  and  force,  but
in  a  stable,  sedate,  and  regular  course  of  judicial  procedure."
1  The  Federalist,  No.  0,  /,  12.  2  u.  No.  7.


472  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

and  popular  fury,  and  corruption,  in  a  manner  calculat-
ed to  increase  the  solicitude  of  every  well-wisher  to  the
cause  of  rational  liberty.  And  even  those,  who  are
most  favourable  in  their  views,  seem  to  have  thought,
that  the  experience  of  the  world  had  never  yet  furnish-
ed any  conclusive  proofs  in  its  support.1  We  know  but
too  well,  that  factions  have  been  the  special  growth  of
republics.  By  a  faction,  we  are  to  understand  a  num-
ber of  citizens,  whether  amounting  to  a  minority  or  ma-
jority of  the  whole,  who  are  united  by  some  common
impulse  of  passion,  or  interest,  or  party,  adverse  to  the
rights  of  the  other  citizens,  or  to  the  permanent  and
aggregate  interests  of  the  community.2

^  490.  The  latent  causes  of  faction  seem  sown  in
the  nature  of  man.  A  zeal  for  different  opinions  con-
cerning religion,  and  government,  and  many  other
points,  both  of  speculation  and  practice  ;  an  attachment
to  different,  leaders  ;  mutual  rivalries  and  animosities  ;
the  restlessness  of  ambition  ;  the  pride  of  opinion  ;  the
desire  for  popular  favour  ;  commonly  supply  a  ready
origin  to  factions.  And  where  deeper  causes  are  not
at  work,  the  most  trivial  differences,  and  the  most  acci-
dental circumstances,  occasionally  excite  the  most  se-
vere conflicts.  But  the  most  durable,  as  well  as  the
most  alarming  form,  in  which  faction  has  displayed  it-
self, has  grown  out  of  the  unequal  distribution  of  prop-
erty. Those,  who  have,  and  those,  who  have  not
property,  have,  and  must  for  ever  have,  distinct  interests
in  society.  The  relation  of  debtor  and  creditor,  at  all
times  delicate,  sometimes  assumes  a  shape,  which
threatens  the  overthrow  of  the  government  itself.3

^  491.  There  are  but  two  methods  of  curing  the
mischiefs  of  faction ;  the  one,  by removing  its  causes,

i  The  Federalist,  No.  9.  2  I(i.  n0.  io.  3  id.  No.  10.


CH.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  473

wh:ch,  in  a  free  government,  is  impracticable  without
the  destruction  of  liberty ;  the  other,  by  controlling  its
effects.  If  a  faction  be  a  minority,  the  majority  may
apply  the  proper  corrective,  by  defeating  or  checking
the  violence  of  the  minority  in  the  regular  course  of
legislation.  In  small  states,  however,  this  is  not  always
easily  attainable,  from  the  difficulty  of  combining  in  a
permanent  form  sufficient  influence  for  this  purpose.
A  feeble  domestic  faction  will  naturally  avail  itself,  not
only  of  all  accidental  causes  of  dissatisfaction  at  home,
but  also  of  all  foreign  aid  and  influence  to  carry  its  pro-
jects. And,  indeed,  in  the  gradual  operations  of  fac-
tions, so  many  combinations  are  formed  and  dissolved,
so  many  private  resentments  become  embodied  in  pub-
lic measures,  and  success  and  triumph  so  often  follow
after  defeat,  that  the  remnants  of  different  factions,
which  have  had  a  brief  sway,  however  hostile  to  each
other,  have  an  interest  to  unite  in  order  to  put  down
their  rivals.  But  if  the  faction  be  a  majority,  and  stand
unchecked,  except  by  its  own  sense  of  duty,  or  its  own
fears,  the  dangers  are  imminent  to  all  those,  whose
principles,  or  interests,  or  characters  stand  in  the  way
of  their  supreme  dominion.1

^  492.  These  evils  are  felt  in  great  states  ;  but  it  has
been  justly  observed,  that  in  small  states  they  are  far
more  aggravated,  bitter,  cruel,  and  permanent.  The
most  effectual  means  to  control  such  effects  seem  to  be
in  the  formation  of  a  confederate  republic,  consisting  of
several  states.2  It  will  be  rare,  under  such  circum-
stances, if  proper  powers  are  confided  to  the  general
government,  that  the  state  line  does  not  form  the  nat-
ural, as  it  will  the  jurisdictional  boundary  of  the  opera-


i  The  Federalist,  No.  JO.  2  Id.  No.  9.

vol.  i.  60


474  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

tions  of  factions.  The  authority  of  the  general  govern-
ment will  have  a  natural  tendency  to  suppress  the  vio-
lence of  faction,  by  diminishing  the  chances  of  ultimate
success ;  and  the  example  of  the  neighbouring  states,
who  will  rarely,  at  the  same  time,  partake  of  the  same
feelings,  or  have  the  same  causes  to  excite  them  into
action,  will  mitigate,  if  it  does  not  wholly  disarm,  the
violence  of  the  predominant  faction.1

§  493.  One  of  the  ordinary  results  of  disunion  among
neighbouring  states  is  the  necessity  of  creating  and
keeping  up  standing  armies,  and  other  institutions  unfa-
vourable to  liberty.  The  immediate  dangers  from  sud-
den inroads  and  invasions,  and  the  perpetual  jealousies
and  discords  incident  to  their  local  position,  compel
them  to  resort  to  the  establishment  of  armed  forces,
either  disproportionate  to  their  means,  or  inadequate
for  their  defence.  Either  alternative  is  fraught  with
public  mischiefs.  If  they  do  not  possess  an  adequate
military  force  to  repel  invasion,  they  have  no  security
against  aggression  and  insult.  If  they  possess  an  ade-
quate military  force,  there  is  much  reason  to  dread,  that
it  may,  in  the  hands  of  aspiring  or  corrupt  men,  become
the  means  of  their  subjugation.2  There  is  no  other
refuge  in  such  cases,  but  to  seek  an  alliance  always
unequal,  and  to  be  obtained  only  by  important  conces-
sions to  some  powerful  nation,  or  to  form  a  confederacy
with  other  states,  and  thus  to  secure  the  co-operation
and  the  terror  of  numbers.  Nothing  has  so  strong  a
tendency  to  suppress  hostile  enterprises,  as  the  con-
sciousness, that  they  will  not  be  easily  successful.
Nothing  is  so  sure  to  produce  moderation,  as  the  con-
sciousness, that  resistance  will steadily  maintain  the

i  The  Federalist,  No.  9,  10.  2  id.  No.  41.


(II. M.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  475

dictates  of  justice.  Summary,  nay,  even  arbitrary
authority,  must  be  granted,  where  the  safety  of  a  state
cannot  await  the  slow  measures  of  ordinary  legislation
to  protect  it.  That  government  is,  therefore,  most  sale
in  its  liberties,  as  well  as  in  its  domestic  peace,  whose
numbers  constitute  a  preventive  guard  against  all  inter-
nal, as  well  as  external  attacks.

^  494.  We  now  proceed  to  the  next  clause  in  the
preamble,  to  "  provide  lor  the  common  defence."  And
many  of  the  considerations  already  stated  apply  with
still  greater  force  under  this  head.  One  of  the  surest
means  of  preserving  peace  is  said  to  be,  by  being
always  prepared  for  war.  But  a  still  more  sure  means
is  the  power  to  repel,  with  effect,  every  aggression.
That  power  can  scarcely  be  attained  without  a  wide
extent  of  population,  and  at  least  a  moderate  extent  of
territory.  A  country,  which  is  large  in  its  limits,  even
if  thinly  peopled,  is  not  easily  subdued.  Its  variety  of
soil  and  climate,  its  natural  and  artificial  defences,  nay,
its  very  poverty  and  scantiness  of  supplies,  make  it  diffi-
cult to  gain,  or  to  secure  a  permanent  conquest.  It  is
far  easier  to  overrun,  than  to  subdue  it.  Armies  must
be  divided,  distant  posts  must  be  maintained,  and  chan-
nels of  supplies  kept  constantly  open.  But  where  the
territory  is  not  only  large,  but  populous,  permanent  con-
quest can  rarely  occur,  unless  (which  is  not  our  case)
there  are  very  powerful  neighbours  on  every  side,  hav-
ing a  common  interest  to  assist  each  other,  and  to  sub-
jugate their  enemy.  It  is  far  otherwise,  where  there
are  many  rival  and  independent  states,  having  no  com-
mon union  of  government  or  interests.  They  are  half
subdued  by  their  own  dissensions,  jealousies,  and  re-
sentments before  the  conflict  is  begun.  They  are  easily
made  to  act  a  part  in  the  destruction  of  each  other,  or


476 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

easily  fall  a  prey  for  want  of  proper  concert  and  energy
of  operations.

^  495.  Besides ;  —  The  resources  of  a  confederacy
must  be  far  greater  than  those  of  any  single  state  be-
longing to  it,  both  for  peace  and  war.  It  can  com-
mand a  wider  range  of  revenue,  of  military  power,  of
naval  armaments,  and  of  productive  industry.  It  is
more  independent  in  its  employments,  in  its  capacities,
and  in  its  influences.  In  the  present  state  of  the  world,
a  few  great  powers  possess  the  command  of  commerce,
both  on  land  and  at  sea.  In  war,  they  trample  upon
the  rights  of  neutrals  who  are  feeble ;  for  their  weak-
ness furnishes  an  excuse  both  for  servility  and  disdain.
In  peace,  they  control  the  pursuits  of  the  rest  of  the
world,  and  force  their  trade  into  every  channel  by  the
activity  of  their  enterprise,  their  extensive  navigation,
and  their  flourishing  manufactures.  They  little  regard
the  complaints  of  those,  who  are  subvided  into  petty
states  with  varying  interests  ;  and  use  them  only  as  in-
struments to  annoy  or  check  the  enterprise  of  each
other.  Such  states  are  not  formidable  in  peace  or  in
war.  To  secure  their  rights  and  maintain  their  inde-
pendence they  must  become  a  confederated  nation,  and
speak  with  the  force  of  numbers,  as  well  as  the  elo-
quence of  truth.1  The  navy  or  army,  which  could  be
maintained  by  any  single  state  in  the  Union,  would  be
scarcely  formidable  to  any  second  rate  power  in  Europe.
It  would  be  a  grievous  public  burthen,  and  exhaust  the
whole  resources  of  the  state.  But  a  navy  or  army  for
all  the  purposes  of  home  defence,  or  protection  upon
the  ocean,  is  within  the  compass  of  the  resources  of  the
general  government,  without  any  severe  exaction. And

1  The  Federalist,  No.  11.


CH.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE,  477

with  the  growing  strength  of  the  Union  must  be  at  once

more  safe  lor  us,  and  more  formidable  to  foreign  nations.
The  means,  therefore,  to  provide  for  the  common  de-
fence are  ample;  and  they  can  only  be  rendered  inert
and  inadequate  by  a  division  among  the  states,  and  a
want  of  unity  of  operations.1

§  496.  We  pass,  in  the  next  place,  to  the  clause  to
"  promote  the  general  welfare."  And  it  may  be  asked,
as  the  state  governments  are  formed  for  the  same  pur-
pose by  the  people,  why  should  this  be  set  forth,  as  a
peculiar  or  prominent  object  of  the  constitution  of  the
United  States  ?  To  such  an  inquiry  two  general  an-
swers may  be  given.  The  states,  separately,  would  not
possess  the  means.  If  they  did  possess  the  means,
they  wrould  not  possess  the  power  to  carry  the  appro-
priate measures  into  operation.

§  497.  First,  in  respect  to  means.  It  is  obvious,  that
from  the  local  position  and  size  of  several  of  the  states,
they  must  for  ever  possess  but  a  moderate  revenue,  not
more  than  what  is  indispensable  for  their  own  wants,
and,  in  the  strictest  sense,  for  domestic  improvements.
In  relation  to  others  more  favourably  situated  for  com-
merce and  navigation,  the  revenues  from  taxation  may
be  larger ;  but  the  main  reliance  must  be  placed  upon
the  taxation  by  way  of  imposts  upon  importations.
Now,  it  is  obvious,  from  the  remarks  already  made,  that
no  permanent  revenue  can  be  raised  from  this  source,
when  the  states  are  separated.  The  evasions  of  the
laws,  which  will  constantly  take  place  from  the  rivalries,
and  various  interests  of  the  neighbouring  states  ;  the
facilities  afforded  by  the  numerous  harbours,  rivers,  and
bays,  which  indent  and  intersect  our  coasts  ;  the  strong


i  The  Federalist,  No.  24,  25.


478  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

interest  of  foreigners  to  promote  smuggling  ;  the  want
of  uniformity  in  the  duties  laid  by  the  different  states  ;
the  means  of  intercourse  along  the  internal  territorial
boundaries  of  the  commercial  states ;  these,  and  many
other  causes,  would  inevitably  lead  to  a  very  feeble  ad-
ministration of  any  local  revenue  system,  and  would
make  its  returns  moderate  and  unsatisfactory.  What
could  New-York  do  with  a  single  sea-port,  surrounded
on  each  side  by  jealous  maritime  neighbours  with  nu-
merous ports  1  What  could  Massachusetts,  or  Con-
necticut do  with  the  intermediate  territory  of  Rhode-
Island,  running  into  the  heart  of  the  states  by  water
communications  admirably  adapted  for  the  security  of
illicit  trade?  What  could  Maryland  or  Virginia  do
with  the  broad  Chesapeake  between  them  wTith  its
thousand  landing  places  ?  What  could  Pennsylvania
oppose  to  the  keen  resentments,  or  the  facile  policy  of
her  weaker  neighbour,  Delaware  ?  What  could  any
single  state  on  the  Mississippi  do  to  force  a  steady  trade
for  itself  with  adequate  protecting  duties  1  In  short,
turn  to  whichever  part  of  the  continent  we  may,  the
difficulties  of  maintaining  an  adequate  system  of  rev-
enue would  be  insurmountable,  and  the  expenses  of  col-
lecting it  enormous.  After  some  few  struggles  for  uni-
formity, and  co-operation  for  mutual  support,  each  state
would  sink  back  into  listless  indifference  or  gloomy  des-
pondency ;  and  rely,  principally,  upon  direct  taxation
for  its  ordinary  supplies.1  The  experience  of  the  few
years  succeeding  the  peace  of  1 783  fully  justifies  the
worst  apprehensions  on  this  head.

§  498.  On  the  other  hand,  a  general  government,
clothed  with  suitable  authority  over  all  the  states,  could

i  The  Federalist,  No.  12.


CH.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  479

easily  guard  the  whole  Atlantic  coast,  and  make  it  the
interest  of  all  honourable  merchants  to  assist  in  a  regular
and  punctilious  payment  of  duties. Vessels  arriving  a1

different  ports  of  the  Union  would  rarely  choose  to  ex-
pose themselves  to  the  perils  of  seizure,  nol  in  a  single

state  only,  but  in  every  state,  into  which  the  goods
might  be  successively  imported.  The  dangers  upon
the  coast,  from  the  vigilant  operations  of  the  revenue
officers  and  revenue  vessels,  would  be  great ;  and  they
would  be  much  enhanced  by  the  expenses  of  conceal-
ment after  the  goods  were  landed.1  And  the  fact  has
corresponded  with  the  theory.  Since  the  establishment
of  the  national  government,  there  has  been  compara-
tively little  smuggling  on  our  coasts  ;  and  the  revenue
from  the  duties  upon  importations  has  steadily  increas-
ed with  the  developement  of  the  other  resources  of  the
country.

§  499.  And  this  leads  us  to  remark,  in  the  next
place,  that  the  establishment  of  a  general  government
is  not  only  beneficial,  as  a  source  of  revenue,  but  as  a
means  of  economy  in  its  collection,  distribution,  and
expenditure.  Instead  of  a  large  civil  list  for  each  state,
which  shall  be  competent  of  itself  to  discharge  all  the
functions  applicable  to  a  sovereign  nation,  a  compara-
tively small  one  for  the  whole  nation  will  suffice  to
carry  into  effect  its  powers,  and  to  receive  and  dis-
burse its  revenues.  Besides  the  economy  in  the  civil
department,  we  have  already  seen,  how  much  less  ac-
tual expenditures  will  be  necessary  for  the  military  and
naval  departments,  for  the  security  of  all  the  states,  than
would  be,  if  each  were  compelled  to  maintain  at  all
points  its  independent  sovereignty. No  fortifications,

i  The  Federalist,  No.  12.


480 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

no  commanding  posts,  no  naval  flotilla  will  be  necessary
to  guard  the  states  against  each  other ;  nor  any  corps  of
officers  to  protect  the  frontiers  of  each  against  invasion,
or  smuggling.  The  exterior  boundary  of  the  whole
Union  will  be  that  alone,  which  will  require  to  be  pro-
tected at  the  national  expense.1  Besides ;  there  will  be
a  uniformity  of  operations  and  arrangements  upon  all
subjects  of  the  common  welfare  under  the  guidance  of
a  single  head ;  instead  of  multifarious,  and  often  con-
flicting systems  by  distinct  states.

^  500.  But  if  the  means  were  completely  within  the
power  of  the  several  states,  it  is  obvious,  that  the  juris-
diction would  be  wanting  to  carry  into  effect  any  great
or  comprehensive  plan  for  the  welfare  of  the  whole.
The  idea  of  a  permanent  and  zealous  co-operation  of
thirteen  (and  now  of  twenty-four)  distinct  governments
in  any  scheme  for  the  common  welfare,  is  of  itself  a
visionary  notion.  In  the  first  place,  laying  aside  all
local  jealousies  and  accidental  jars,  there  is  no  plan  for
the  benefit  of  the  whole,  which  would  not  bear  une-
qually upon  some  particular  parts.  Is  it  a  regulation  of
commerce  or  mutual  intercourse,  which  is  proposed  1
Who  does  not  see,  that  the  agricultural,  the  manufac-
turing, and  the  navigating  states,  may  have  a  real  or
supposed  difference  of  interest  in  its  adoption.  If  a
system  of  regulations,  on  the  other  hand,  is  prepared  by
a  general  government,  the  inequalities  of  one  part  may,
and  ordinarily  will,  under  the  guidance  of  wise  coun-
cils, correct  and  meliorate  those  of  another.  The  ne-
cessity of  a  sacrifice  of  one  for  the  benefit  of  all  may
not,  and  probably  will  not,  be  felt  at  the  moment  by  the
state  called  upon  to  make  it. But  in  a  general  govern-

1  The  Federalist,  No.  13,  14.


CH.  VJ.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  481

ment,  represent  ins;-  tlic  interests  of  all,  the  sacrifice,
though  first  opposed,  will,  ill  the  end,  bo  loimd  ade-
quately recompensed  by  other  substantial  good.  Agri-
culture, commerce,  manufactures,  may,  each  in  turn,  he
compelled  to  yield  something  of  their  peculiar  benefits,
and  yet,  on  the  whole,  ho  still  each  a  gainer  by  the
general  system.  The  very  power  of  thus  redressing
the  evils,  felt  by  each  in  its  intercourse  with  foreign  na-
tions, by  prohibitory  regulations,  or  countervailing  du-
ties, may  secure  permanent  privileges  of  an  incalculable
value.1  And  the  fact  has  been,  as  theoretical  reasoning
would  lead  us  to  suppose.  The  navigation  and  com-
merce, the  agriculture  and  manufactures  of  all  the  states,
have  received  an  advancement  in  every  direction  by
the  union,  which  has  far  exceeded  the  most  sanguine
expectation  of  its  warmest  friends.

^  501.  But  the  fact  alone  of  an  unlimited  inter-
course, without  duty  or  restriction,  between  all  the
states,  is  of  itself  a  blessing  of  almost  inconceivable
value.  It  makes  it  an  object  with  each  permanently  to
look  to  the  interests  of  all,  and  to  withdraw  its  opera-
tions from  the  narrow  sphere  of  its  own  exclusive  terri-
tory. Without  entering  here  into  the  inquiry,  how  far
the  general  government  possesses  the  power  to  make,
or  aid  the  making  of  roads,  canals,  and  other  general
improvements,  which  will  properly  arise  in  our  future
discussions,  it  is  clear,  that  if  there  were  no  general
government,  the  interest  of  each  state  to  undertake,  or
to  promote  in  its  own  legislation  any  such  project,  would
be  far  less  strong,  than  it  now  is ;  since  there  would  be
no  certainty,  as  to  the  value  or  duration  of  such  im-
provements, looking  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  state.

The  Federalist,  No.  11.
VOL.  I.  61


482 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

The  consciousness,  that  the  union  of  the  states  is  per-
manent, and  will  not  be  broken  up  by  rivalries,  or  con-
flicts of  policy,  that  caprice,  or  resentment,  will  not  di-
vert any  state  from  its  proper  duties,  as  a  member  of
the  Union,  will  give  a  solid  character  to  all  improve-
ments. Independent  of  the  exercise  of  any  authority
by  the  general  government  for  this  purpose,  it  was  justly
foreseen,  that  roads  would  be  every  where  shortened
and  kept  in  better  order ;  accommodations  for  travellers
would  be  multiplied  and  meliorated ;  an  interior  navi-
gation on  our  eastern  side  would  be  opened  throughout
the  whole  extent  of  our  coast;  and,  by  canals  and  im-
provements in  river  navigation,  a  boundless  field  open-
ed to  enterprise  and  emigration,  to  commerce  and  pro-
ducts, through  the  interior  states,  to  the  farthest  limits
of  our  western  territories.1

§  502.  Passing  from  these  general  considerations  to
those  of  a  direct  practical  nature,  let  us  see,  how  far
certain  measures,  confessedly  promotive  of  the  general
welfare,  have  been,  or  would  be,  affected  by  a  disunion
of  the  states.  Take,  for  example,  the  post-office  estab-
lishment, the  benefits  of  which  can  scarcely  be  too
strongly  stated  in  respect  to  the  public  interests,  or  to
private  convenience.  With  what  a  wonderful  facility  it
now  communicates  intelligence,  and  transmits  orders  and
directions,  and  money  and  negotiable  paper  to  every
extremity  of  the  Union.  The  government  is  enabled
to  give  the  most  prompt  notice  of  approaching  dangers,
of  its  commands,  its  wishes,  its  duties,  its  interests,  its
laws,  and  its  policy,  to  the  most  distant  functionaries
with  incredible  speed.  Compare  this  with  the  old
course  of  private  posts,  and  special  expresses. Lcok

I  The  Federalist,  No.  14.


CH.  VI.]  THE  PREAMBLE.  183

to  the  extensive  advantages  to  trade,  navigation,  and
commerce,  to  agriculture  and  manufactures,  in  the
ready  distribution  of  news,  of  knowledge  of  markets,
and  of  transfers  of  funds,  independent  of  da-  inestima-
ble blessings  of  communication  between  distanl  friends,
to  relieve  the  heart  from  its  oppressive  anxieties.  In
our  colonial  state  it  took  almost  as  longa  period  of  time
to  convey  a  letter  (independent  of  the  insecurity  and
uncertainty  of  its  transmission)  from  Philadelphia  to
Boston,  as  it  now  takes  to  pass  from  the  seat  of  gov-
ernment to  the  tardiest  limits  of  any  of  the  states.
Even  under  the  confederation,  from  the  want  of  effi-
cient funds  and  an  efficient  government,  the  post  mov-
ed on  with  a  tardy  indifference  and  delay,  which  made
it  almost  useless.  We  nowr  communicate  with  Eng-
land, and  the  continents  of  Europe,  within  periods  not
essentially  different  from  those,  which  were  then  con-
sumed in  passing  from  the  centre  to  the  eastern  and
southern  limits  of  the  Union.  Suppose  the  national
government  were  now  dissolved,  how  difficult  would  it
be  to  get  the  twenty -four  states  to  agree  upon  any  uni-
form system  of  operations,  or  proper  apportionment  of
the  postage  to  be  paid  on  the  transmission  of  the  mail.
Each  state  must  act  continually  by  a  separate  legisla-
tion ;  and  the  least  change  by  any  one  would  disturb
the  harmony  of  the  whole  system.  It  is  not  at  all  im-
probable, that  before  a  single  letter  could  reach  New-
Orleans  from  Eastport,  it  would  have  to  pay  a  distinct
postage  in  sixteen  independent  states,  subject  to  no
common  control  or  appointment  of  officers.  The  very
statement  of  such  a  case  amounts  to  a  positive  prohibi-
tion upon  any  extensive  internal  intercourse  by  the
mail,  as  the  burthens  and  the  insecurity  of  the  estab-
lishment would  render  it  intolerable. With  what  admi-


484  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

rable  ease,  and  expedition,  and  noiseless  uniformity  of
movement,  is  the  whole  now  accomplished  through  the
instrumentality  of  the  national  government !

^  503.  Let  us  take  another  example,  drawn  from  the
perils  of  navigation  ;  and  ask  ourselves,  how  it  would  be
possible,  without  an  efficient  national  government,  to
provide  adequately  for  the  erection  and  support  of
light-houses,  monuments,  buoys,  and  other  guards
against  shipwreck.  Many  of  these  are  maintained  at
an  expense  wholly  disproportionate  to  their  advantage
to  the  state,  in  which  they  are  situate.  Many  of  them
never  would  be  maintained,  except  for  the  provident
forecast  of  a  national  government,  intent  on  the  good  of
the  whole,  and  possessing  powers  adequate  to  secure
it.  The  same  considerations  apply  to  all  measures  of
internal  improvement,  either  to  navigation  by  removing
obstructions  in  rivers  and  inlets,  or  by  erecting  fortifi-
cations for  purposes  of  defence,  and  to  guard  our  har-
bours against  the  inroads  of  enemies.

^  504.  Independent  of  these  means  of  promoting  the
general  welfare,  we  shall  at  once  see,  in  our  negotia-
tions with  foreign  powers,  the  vast  superiority  of  a  na-
tion combining  numbers  and  resources  over  states  of
small  extent,  and  divided  by  different  interests.  If  we
are  to  negotiate  for  commercial  or  other  advantages,
the  national  government  has  more  authority  to  speak,
as  well  as  more  power  to  influence,  than  can  belong  to
a  single  state.  It  has  more  valuable  privileges  to  give
in  exchange,  and  more  means  of  making  those  privi-
leges felt  by  prohibitions,  or  relaxations  of  its  commer-
cial legislation.  Is  money  wanted ;  how  much  more
easy  and  cheap  to  borrow  upon  the  faith  of  a  nation
competent  to  pay,  than  of  a  single  state  of  fluctuating
policy. Is  confidence  asked  for  the  faithful  fulfilment


CH.  VI.]  THE PREAMBLE.  485

of  treaty  stipulations;  how  much  more  strong  the  guar-
anty of  the  Union  with  suitable  authorities,  than  any
pledge  of  an  individual  stale.  Is  a  currency  wanted  at
once  fixed  on  a  solid  basis,  and  sustained  by  ade  [uate

sanctions  to  enlarge  public  or  private  credit ;  how  much
more  decisive  is  the  legislation  of  the  Union,  than  of  a
single  state  with  a  view  to  extent,  or  uniformity  of  ope-
rations.

^  505.  Thus  we  see,  that  the  national  government,
suitably  organized,  has  more  efficient  means,  and  more
extensive  jurisdiction  to  promote  the  general  welfare,
than  can  belong  to  any  single  state  of  the  confederacy.
And  there  is  much  truth  in  the  suggestion,  that  it  will
generally  be  directed  by  a  more  enlightened  policy,  a
more  liberal  justice,  and  more  comprehensive  wisdom,
in  the  application  of  its  means  and  its  powers  to  their
appropriate  end.  Generally  speaking,  it  will  be  better
administered  ;  because  it  will  command  higher  talents,
more  extensive  experience,  more  practical  knowledge,
and  more  various  information  of  the  wants  of  the  whole
community,  than  can  belong  to  smaller  societies.1  The
wider  the  sphere  of  action,  the  less  reason  there  is  to
presume,  that  narrow  views,  or  local  prejudices  will
prevail  in  the  public  councils.  The  very  diversities  of
opinion  in  the  different  representatives  of  distant  re-
gions will  have  a  tendency,  not  only  to  introduce  mu-
tual concession  and  conciliation,  but  to  elevate  the  poli-
cy, and  instruct  the  judgment  of  those,  who  are  to  di-
rect the  public  measures.

§  506.  The  last  clause  in  the  preamble  is  to  "  secure
the  blessings  of  liberty  to  ourselves  and  our  posterity."
And  surely  no  object  could  be  more  worthy  of  the  wis-
dom and  ambition  of  the  best  men  in  any  age. If  there

l  The  Federalist,  No.  27.


486  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

be  any  thing,  which  may  justly  challenge  the  admira-
tion of  all  mankind,  it  is  that  sublime  patriotism,  which,
looking  beyond  its  own  times,  and  its  own  fleeting  pur-
suits, aims  to  secure  the  permanent  happiness  of  pos-
terity by  laying  the  broad  foundations  of  government
upon  immovable  principles  of  justice.  Our  affections,
indeed,  may  naturally  be  presumed  to  outlive  the  brief
limits  of  our  own  lives,  and  to  repose  with  deep  sensi-
bility upon  our  own  immediate  descendants.  But  there
is  a  noble  disinterestedness  in  that  forecast,  which  dis-
regards present  objects  for  the  sake  of  all  mankind,
and  erects  structures  to  protect,  support,  and  bless  the
most  distant  generations.  He,  who  founds  a  hospital,
a  college,  or  even  a  more  private  and  limited  charity,  is
justly  esteemed  a  benefactor  of  the  human  race.  How
much  more  do  they  deserve  our  reverence  and  praise,
whose  lives  are  devoted  to  the  formation  of  institutions,
which,  when  they  and  their  children  are  mingled  in  the
common  dusr,  may  continue  to  cherish  the  principles
and  the  practice  of  liberty  in  perpetual  freshness  and
vigour.

^  507.  The  grand  design  of  the  state  governments  is,
doubtless,  to  accomplish  this  important  purpose ;  and
there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  they  are,  when  well  admin-
istered, well  adapted  to  the  end.  But  the  question  is
not  so  much,  whether  they  conduce  to  the  preservation
of  the  blessings  of  liberty,  as  whether  they  of  themselves
furnish  a  complete  and  satisfactory  security.  If  the
remarks,  which  have  been  already  offered,  are  founded
in  sound  reasoning  and  human  experience,  they  estab-
lish the  position,  that  the  state  governments,  per  sc,  are
incompetent  and  inadequate  to  furnish  such  guards  and
guaranties,  as  a  free  people  have  a  right  to  require  for
the  maintenance  of  their  vital  interests,  and  especially


cu.  VI.]  Tin;  PREAMBLE.  487

of  their  liberty.  The  inquiry  then  naturally  pre  sents
itself,  whether  the  establishment  of  a  national  govern-
ment will  afford  more  effectual  and  adequate  security  s.

&  508.  The  fact  has  been  already  adverted  to,  that
when  the  constitution  was  before  the  people  lor  adop-
tion, it  was  generally  represented  by  its  opponents,  that
its  obvious  tendency  to  a  consolidation  of  the  powers
of  government  would  subvert  the  state  sovereignties,
and  thus  prove  dangerous  to  the  liberties  of  the  people.1
This  indeed  was  a  topic  dwelt  on  with  peculiar  empha-
sis; and  it  produced  so  general  an  alarm  and  terror,
that  it  came  very  nigh  accomplishing  the  rejection  of
the  constitution.2  And  yet  the  reasoning,  by  which  it
was  supported,  was  so  vague  and  unsatisfactory;  i  i.  I
the  reasoning,  on  the  other  side,  was  so  cogent  and
just,  that  it  seems  difficult  to  conceive,  how,  at  that
time,  or  at  any  later  time,  (for  it  has  often  been  resort-
ed to  for  the  same  purpose,)  the  suggestion  could  have
had  any  substantial  influence  upon  the  public  opinion.

§  509.  Let  us  glance  at  a  few  considerations,  (some
of  which  have  been  already  hinted  at,)  which  are  cal-
culated to  suppress. all  alarm  upon  this  subject  In  the
first  place,  the  government  of  the  United  States  is  one
of  limited  powers,  leaving  all  residuary  general  powers
in  the  state  governments,  or  in  the  people  thereof.  The
jurisdiction  of  the  general  government  is  confined  to  a
few  enumerated  objects,  which  concern  the  common
welfare  of  all  the  states.  The  state  governments  have  a
lull  superintendence  and  control  over  the  immense  mass
of  local  interests  erf  their  respective  states,  which  con-

i  1  Elliot's  Debates,  278,  29  I,  297,332;  333;  '2  Elliot's  Debates,  17,

96,  J3G  ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  243,  257,  29] ;  The  Federalist,  No.  39,  45,
17,  31.
2  The  Federalist,  No.  17.


488  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

nect  themselves  with  the  feelings,  the  affections,  the
municipal  institutions,  and  the  internal  arrangements  of
the  whole  population.1  They  possess,  too,  the  imme-
diate administration  of  justice  in  all  cases,  civil  and
criminal,  which  concern  the  property,  personal  rights,
and  peaceful  pursuits  of  their  own  citizens.  They
must  of  course  possess  a  large  share  of  influence ;  and
being  independent  of  each  other,  will  have  many  op-
portunities to  interpose  checks,  as  well  as  to  combine  a
common  resistance,  to  any  undue  exercise  of  power  by
the  general  government,  independent  of  direct  force.2

§  510.  In  the  next  place,  the  state  governments  are,
by  the  very  theory  of  the  constitution,  essential  con-
stituent parts  of  the  general  government.  They  can
exist  without  the  latter,  but  the  latter  cannot  exist  with-
out them.  Without  the  intervention  of  the  state  legis-
latures, the  president  of  the  United  States  cannot  be
elected  at  all  ;  and  the  senate  is  exclusively  and  ab-
solutely under  the  choice  of  the  state  legislatures.
The  representatives  are  chosen  by  the  people  of  the
states.  So  that  the  executive  and  legislative  branches
of  the  national  government  depend  upon,  and  ema-
nate from  the  states.  Every  where  the  state  sovereign-
ties are  represented  ;  and  the  national  sovereignty,  as
such,  has  no  representation.3  How  is  it  possible,  under
such  circumstances,  that  the  national  government  can
be  dangerous  to  the  liberties  of  the  people,  unless  the
states,  and  the  people  of  the  states,  conspire  together
for  their  overthrow  ?  If  there  should  be  such  a  con-
spiracy, is  not  this  more  justly  to  be  deemed  an  act  of
the  states  through  their  own  agents,  and  by  their  own
choice,  rather  than  a  corrupt  usurpation  by  the  general
government  ?

1  The  Federalist,  No.  14,  45. 2  y.  No.  45. 3  Id.  No.  45.


CH. VI.]  THE PREAMBLE.  189

^  511.  Besides;  the  perpetual  organization  of  the
state  governments,  in  all  their  departments,  executive,
legislative,  and  judicial;  their  natural  tendencj  toco-
operation  in  cases  of  threatened  danger  to  their  com-
mon liberties;  the  perpetually  recurring  right  of  the
elective  franchise,  at  short  intervals,  must  prevent  the
most  formidable  barriers  against  any  deliberate  usurpa-
tion, which  does  not  arise  from  the  hearty  co-operation
of  the  people  of  the  suites.  And  when  such  a  general
co-operation  for  usurpation  shall  exist,  .it  is  obvious,
that  neither  the  genera],  nor  the  state  governments,  can
interpose  any  permanent  protection.  Each  must  sub-
mit to  that  public  will,  which  created,  and  may  destroy
them.

^512.  Another  not  unimportant  consideration  is,  that
the  powers  of  the  general  government  will  be,  and  in-
deed must  be,  principally  employed  upon  external  ob-
jects, such  as  war,  peace,  negotiations  with  foreign  pow-
ers, and  foreign  commerce.  In  its  internal  operations  it
can  touch  but  few  objects,  except  to  introduce  regula-
tions beneficial  to  the  commerce,  intercourse,  and  other
relations,  between  the  states,  and  to  lay  taxes  for  the
common  good.  The  powers  of  the  states,  on  the  other
hand,  extend  to  all  objects,  which,  in  the  ordinary
course  of  affairs,  concern  the  lives,  and  liberties,  and
property  of  the  people,  and  the  internal  order,  improve-
ment, and  prosperity  of  the  state.  The  operations  of
the  general  government  will  be  most  extensive  and  im-
portant in  times  of  war  and  danger  ;  those  of  the  state
governments,  in  times  of  peace  and  security.1  Inde-
pendent of  all  other  considerations,  the  fact,  that  the
states  possess  a  concurrent  power  of  taxation,  and  an


1  The  Federalist,  No.  45.

vol.  i.  62


490  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

exclusive  power  to  regulate  the  descents,  devise,  and
distribution  of  estates,  (a  power  the  most  formidable  to
despotism,  and  the  most  indispensable  in  its  right  ex-
ercise to  republicanism,)  will  for  ever  give  them  an
influence,  which  will  be  as  commanding,  as,  with  refe-
rence to  the  safety  of  the  Union,  they  could  deliberate-
ly desire.1

§  513.  Indeed,  the  constant  apprehension  of  some
of  the  most  sincere  patriots,  who  by  their  wisdom  have
graced  our  country,  has  been  of  an  opposite  character.
They  have  believed,  that  the  states  would,  in  the  event,
prove  too  formidable  for  the  Union.  That  the  tenden-
cy would  be  to  anarchy  in  the  members,  and  not  to
tyranny  in  the  head.2  Whether  their  fears,  in  this  re-
spect, were  not  those  of  men,  whose  judgments  were
misled  by  extreme  solicitude  for  the  welfare  of  their
country,  or  whether  they  but  too  well  read  the  fate  of
our  own  in  the  history  of  other  republics,  time,  the  great
expounder of  such  problems,  can  alone  determine.3

i  The  Federalist,  No.  31.

2  Id.  17,45,46,31.

3  Mr.  Turgot  appears  to  have  been  strongly  impressed  with  the  diffi-
culty of  maintaining  a  national  government,  under  such  circumstances.
In  his  letter  to  Dr.  Price,  he  says :  "  In  the  general  union  of  the  states,
I  do  not  observe  a  coalition,  a  fusion  of  all  the  parts  to  form  one  homo-
geneous body.  It  is  only  a  jumble  of  communities  too  discordant,  and
which  contain  a  constant  tendency  to  separation,  owing  to  the  diversity  in
their  laws,  customs,  and  opinions,  to  the  inequality  of  their  present
strength,  but  still  more  to  the  inequality  of  their  advances  to  greater
strength.  It  is  only  a  copy  of  the  Dutch  republic,  with  this  difference,
that  the  Dutch  republic  had  nothing  to  fear,  as  the  American  republic
has,  from  the  future  possible  increase  of  any  one  of  the  provinces.
All  this  edifice  has  been  hitherto  supported  upon  the  erroneous  founda-
tion of  the  most  ancient  and  vulgar  policy  ;  upon  the  prejudice,  that  na-
tions and  states,  as  such,  may  have  an  interest  distinct  from  the  interest,
which  individuals  have  to  be  free,  and  defend  their  property  against  the
attacks  of  robbers  and  conquerors,"  &c.  &c.  Similar  views  seem  to  have


CH.  VJ.]  THE PREAMBLE.  491

The  reasoning  on  this  subject,  which  has  been  with  so

much  profoundness  and  ability  advanced  by  tBe  Fed-
eralist, will,  in  the  mean  time,  deserve  the  attention  of
every  considerate  man  in  Ann  rica.1

^  514.  Hitherto  our  experience  lias  demonstrated
the  entire  safety  of  the  states,  under  the  benign  opera-
tions of  the  constitution.  Each  of  the  states  has  grown
in  power,  in  vigour  of  operation,  in  commanding  influ-
ence, in  wealth,  revenue,  population,  commerce,  ag-
riculture, and  general  efficiency.  No  man  will  venture
to  affirm,  that  their  power,  relative  to  that  of  the  Union,
has  been  diminished,  although  our  population  has,  in  the
intermediate  period,  passed  from  three  to  more  than
twelve  millions.  No  man  will  pretend  to  say,  that  the
affection  for  the  state  governments  has  been  sensibly
diminished  by  the  operations  of  the  general  govern-
ment. If  the  latter  has  become  more  deeply  an  object
of  regard  and  reverence,  of  attachment  and  pride,  it  is,
because  it  is  felt  to  be  the  parental  guardian  of  our  pub-
lic and  private  rights,  and  the  natural  ally  of  all  the  state
governments,  in  the  administration  of  justice,  and  the
promotion  of  the  general  prosperity.  It  is  beloved,  not
for  its  power,  but  for  its  beneficence ;  not  because  it
commands,  but  because  it  protects  ;  not  because  it
controls,  but  because  it  sustains  the  common  interests,
and  the  common  liberties,  and  the  common  rights  of
the  people.

§  515.  That  there  have  been  measures  adopted  by
the  general  government,  which  have4  not  met  with  uni-
versal approbation,  must  be  admitted,  l^ut  was  not  this

occupied  the  mind  of  a  distinguished  American  gentleman,  who  publish-
ed a  pamphlet  in  1788,  (edic.  Worcester,)  entitled, "Thoughts  upon  the
Political  Situation  of  the  United  States  of  America,"  &c.  p.  .'17,  k.c.
1  The  Federalist,  No.  45,4(1,31.


492  CONSTITUTION OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

difference  of  opinion  to  be  expected  ?  Does  it  not  exist
in  relation  to  the  acts  of  the  state  governments  ?  Must
it  not  exist  in  every  government,  formed  and  directed
by  human  beings  of  different  talents,  characters,  pas-
sions, virtues,  motives,  and  intelligence  ?  That  some  of
the  measures  of  the  general  government  have  been
deemed  usurpations  by  some  of  the  states  is  also  true.
But  it  is  equally  true,  that  those  measures  were  deem-
ed constitutional  by  a  majority  of  the  states,  and  as
such,  received  the  most  hearty  concurrence  of  the  state
authorities.  It  is  also  true,  that  some  measures,  whose
constitutionality  has  been  doubted  or  denied  by  some
states,  have,  at  other  times,  upon  re-examination,  been
approved  of  by  the  same  states.  Not  a  single  measure
has  ever  induced  three  quarters  of  the  states  to  adopt
any  amendment  to  the  constitution  founded  upon  the
notion  of  usurpation.1  Wherever  an  amendment  has
taken  place,  it  has  been  to  clear  a  real  doubt,  or  obvi-
ate an  inconvenience  established  by  our  experience.
And  this  very  power  of  amendment,  at  the  command
of  the  states  themselves,  forms  the  great  balance-wheel
of  our  system  ;  and  enables  us  silently  and  quietly  to
redress  all  irregularities,  and  to  put  down  all  practical
oppressions.  And  what  is  not  a  little  remarkable  in  the
history  of  the  government,  is,  that  two  measures,  which
stand  confessedly  upon  the  extreme  limits  of  constitu-
tional authority,  and  carry  the  doctrine  of  constructive
power  to  the  last  verge,  have  been  brought  forward  by
those,  who  were  the  opponents  of  the  constitution,  or
the  known  advocates  for  its  most  restricted  construc-


i  If  there  be  any  exception,  it  is  the  decision,  as  to  the  suability  of
the  states. But  even  this  s  not  the  name  of  usurpation,  for  the

case  falls  clearly  within  the  words  of  the  constitution.


CH. VI.]  Till: PKK/.MHLE.  4Q3

don.  In  each  case,  however,  they  received  the  derided
support  of  a  great majority  of  all  the  states  of  the
Union;  and  the  constitutionality  of  them  is  now  uni-
versally acquiesced  in,  if  not  universally  affirmed. We
allude  to  the  unlimited  embargo,  passed  in  1807,  and
the purchase and admission of Louisiana into the
Union,  under  the  treaty  with  France  in  1803.1 That
any  act  has  ever  been  done  by  the  general  government,
which  even  a  majority  of  the  states  in  the  Union  have
deemed  a  clear  and  gross  usurpation,  may  be  safely
denied. On  the  other  hand,  it  is  certain,  that  many
powers  positively  belonging  to  the  general  government,
have  never  yet  been  put  into  full  operation. So  that
the  influence  of  state  opinions,  and  state  jealousies,
and  state  policy,  may  be  clearly  traced  throughout  the
operations  of  the  general  government,  and  especially  in
the  exercise  of  the  legislative  powers. This  furnishes
no  just  ground  of  complaint  or  accusation. It  is  right,
that  it  should  be so. But  it  demonstrates,  that the
general  government  has  many  salutary  checks,  silently
at  work  to  control  its  movements ;  and,  that  experience
coincides  with  theory  in  establishing,  that  it  is  calculat-
ed to  secure  "  the  blessings  of  liberty  to  ourselves  and
our  posterity."

^  516.  If,  upon  a  closer  survey  of  all  the  powers  giv-
en by  the  constitution,  and  all  the  guards  upon  their
exercise,  we  shall  perceive  still  stronger  inducements

i  4  Elliot's  Debutes,  257. —  President  Jefferson  himself,  under  whose
administration  both  these  measures  were  passed,  which  were,  in  the
highest  sense,  his  own  measures,  was  deliberately  of  opinion,  that  an
amendment  of  the  constitution  was  oecessarj,  to  authorize  the  general
government  to  admit  Louisiana  into  the  Union.  Yet  he  ratified  the  very
treaty,  which  secured  this  right ;  and  confirmed  the  laws,  which  gave
it  effect.  4  Jefferson's  Corresp.  1,  2,  3  —  A  more  particular  considera-
tion of  these  subjects  will  naturally  arise  in  some  future  discussions.


494  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

to  fortify  this  conclusion,  and  to  increase  our  confidence
in  the  constitution,  may  we  not  justly  hope,  that  every
honest  American  will  concur  in  the  dying  expression  of
Father  Paul,  "Esto  perpetua,"  may  it  be  perpetual
