Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States, Vol. II (Joseph Story, 1833)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1833 first edition, vol. II (https://archive.org/details/commentariesonc20storgoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

COMMENTARIES


CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES;

WITB

A  PRELIMINARY  REVIEW
or

THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  BISTORT  OF  THX  COLONIES  AND  STATK8,
BEFORE  THE  ADOPTION  OF  THE  CON8TITUTI<»l.


By  JOSEPH STORY,  LL.  D.,

DAHX PROFSffOR OF LAW IN BARTARD UHITXRSITr.


IN  THREE  VOLUMEa

'  MagifiUatUnM  igitar  opos  Mt }  lino  qnoniin  pradaDlii  ae  dilifmtiiL  •■•«  eiTitti  noo  peU«t  i
quonunqiM  deaeripCioM  oomia  ReipobUoi  moderatio  oontinatnr."

• •  CfOBSo  »B  JLb*.  lib.  3.  cap.  SL

"Ooveminttit  ia  a  contriTaoee  6f^!iooiao  wjiQ^  to'^troVk^  i«r  JK^ufn  waata."

VOLUMS?Il.-


BOSTON:

HILLIARD, GRAY, AND COMPANY.
*  CAMBRIDGE:
BROWN, 8HATTUCK, ANDCO.

1833.


^*'^*''  \ ' Digitized  by  Google


THEKh.v/V  YORK

PUBLIC  LIBRARY


TILOEN'FoBBoATlifs


Entered  aoeording  to  the  act  of  Congren  in  the  year  one  thousand  eight  hondred  and  thirty-threey

by  JosBrH  Stokt,

in  the  Clerk'i  office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  District  of  Masiachuietts.


,'  ■'- '•'•  '  '-''-l.v  \


{ '


'/-


/


•  .  ••• ;

•••  • •  .


• ••••• /,• ,. J

E. W. M  E  T  Va  iJ  f"  ^^V  t?0  M  P  A  N  T,

Printers  to  the  University.


Digitized  by


Google


COMMENTARIES.


CHAPTER  Vn.

DISTRIBUTION  OF POWERS.

§  517.  In  siffveymg  the  general  structure  of  Ae
constitution  of  the  United  States,  we  are  naturally  led
to  an  examination  of  the  fundamental  principles^  cm
which  it  is  organized,  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  int^
eflfect  the  objects  disclosed  in  the  preamble.  Every
government  must  include  within  its  scope,  at  least  if  it
is  to  possess  suitable  stability  and  energy,  the  exercise
of  the  three  great  powers,  upon  which  all  governments
are  supposed  to  rest,  viz-  the  executive,  the  legi^tive,
and  the  judicial  powers.  The  manner  and  extent,  in
whidi  these  powers  are  to  be  exercised;  and  the  fimc-
tionariesy  in  whom  they  i&fe  'toJbe  vested,  constitute  the
great  distinctions,  which  are  known  in  the  formS  of
government  In  absolirte^,^yfetii^ent»  the  whole
executive,  legislative,  anil  jjiidieiaJ.w>wers  are,  at  least
in  their  final  result,^  exclusively  confined  to  a  single  in-
dividual ;  and  such  a  form  of  government  is  denominat-
ed a  despotism,  as  the  whole  sovereignty  of  the  state  is
vested  in  him^  If  the  same  powers  are  exclusively  con-
fided to  a  few  persons,  constituting  a  permanent  sove-
reign council,  the  government  may  be  appropriately
denommated  an  absolute  of  despotic  Aristocracy. If

VOL.  II.  1

Digitized  by  Google


2  CONSTITUTION OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

they  are  exercised  by  the  people  at  large  in  their  origi-
nal sovereign  assemblies,  the  government  is  a  pure  and
absolute  Democracy.  But  it  is  more  common  to  find
these  powers  divided,  and  separately  exercised  by  in-
dependent functionaries,  the  executive  power  by  one
department,  the  legislative  by  another,  and  the  judi-
cial by  a  third ;  and  in  these  cases  the  government
is  properly  deemed  a  mixed  one ;  a  mixed  monarchy,
if  the  executive  power  is  hereditary  in  a  smgle  person ;
a  mixed  aristocracy,  if  it  is  hereditary  in  several  chief-
tains or  families  ;  and  a  mixed  democracy  or  republic,
if  it  is  delegated  by  election,  and  is  not  hereditary.  In
mixed  monarchies  and  aristocracies  some  of  the  func-
tkmaries  of  the  legislative  and  judicial  powers  are^  or  at
least  may  be,  hereditary.  But  in  a  representative  re-
public all  power  emanates  from  the  people,  and  is  ex-
ercised by  their  choice,  and  aever  extends  beyond  the
lives  of  tl^  individuals,  to  whom  it  is  entrusted  It  may
be  entrusted  for  any  shorter  period ;  and  then  it  i  etums
to  them  again,  to  be  again  delegated  by  a  new  choice.

^518.  In  the  convention,  which  framed  the  consti-
tution of  the  United  States,  the  first  resolution  adopted
by  that  bod}^  :^^t  fh^^  ^:  ^  natiqnal  government  ought
to  be  estabUs&^S^*c6nsQf^g']C^:a  supreme  legislative,
judiciary,  and  e^^u4t^f^::;And  from  this  limdamental
proposition  sprij^  i^^^ubset^u  oi^anization  of  the
whole  govemttiemJDt  lA&*:tJi]ited  States.  It  is,  then,
our  duty  to  examine  and  consumer  the  grounds^  on  which
this  proposition  rests,  since  it  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all
our  institutions,  state,  as  weU  as  BatienaL

§  519.  In  die  establishment  of  a  free  goverameiit,
the  division  of  the  three  great  powers  of  government,

&  Joornals  of  Convent.  83»  83, 139, 207, 315.


Digitized  by


Google


cu«  TuJ  pisTRiBirrioir  of  powcms.

the  executive,  the  legis]atiye»  and  the  judicial^
different  fuQctionaiies,  has  been  a  favorite  policy  with
patriots  and  statesmen*  It  has  by  many  beea  deemed
a  maxim  of  vital  importance,  that  these  powen  shoiikl
^  evw  be  kept  separate  and  distinct.  And  according-
ly we  find  it  laid  down  widi  emphatic  care  in  the  biUof
rights  of  several  of  the  state  constitutions.  In  the  con-
stitution of  Massachusetts,  ibr  example,  it  is  dedareci^
that  ^^in  the  government  of  this  commonwealth,  the
legislative  department  shall  never  exercise  die  execu-
tive and  judicial  powers,  or  either  of  them ;  the  execu-
tive, shall  never  exercise  the  legislative  and  judicial
powers,  or  either  of  them ;  the  judicial  shall  nev^  ex-
ercise the  legislative  and  Judicial  powers,  or  either  of
them ;  to  the  end  it  may  be  a  government  of  kuo$  and
not  of  men. "  ^  Other  declarations  of  a  shnilar  char-
acter are  to  be  foimd  in  other  state  constitutions.*

^  620.  Montesquieu  seems  to  have  been  the  first,  who^
with  a  truly  philosophical  eye,  surveyed  the  political
truth  involved  in  this  maxim,  in  its  fiiU  extent^  and  gave
to  it  a  paramount  importance  and  value.  As  it  is  tacitly
assumed,  as  a  fundamental  basis  in  the  conatitutioii  of
the  United  States,  in  the  distribution  of  its  powers,  it
may  be  worth  inquiry,  what  is  the  true  nature,  object,

I  Bill  of  Rights;  article  20.

*  Tbe  Federalist  No.  47. — It  has  been  remarked  by  Mr.  J.  Adanis,  that
the  practicability  or  the  duration  of  a  repul))icy  in  which  there  is  a  gov-
ernor, a  senate,  and  a  house  of  representatives,  is  doubted  by  Tacitus,
though  he  admits  the  theory  to  be  laudable.  Cunctas  nationes  et  orbes
populus,  aut  priures,  aut  singuli  regunt  Delects  ex  his  et  constitata
reipublice  forma  laudari  facilius  quam  inveniri,  vel  si  evenit,  haud
diutuma  esse  potest  Tacit  Ann.  lib.  14.  Cicero  asserts,  **  Statuo  ease
optime  constitutam  rempublicam,  que  ex  tribus  generibus  illis,  regali,
Optimo,  et  populari,  raodice  confusa."  Cic.  Frag,  de  Repub.*  The  Brit-
ish government  perhaps  answers  more  nearly  to  the  form  of  government
proposed  by  these  writers,  than  what  we  in  modem  times  should  esteem
strictly  a  republic,

*  1  AduDB*!  Amer.  Ooniiitatuni,  Preftoe,  19.


f  r


Digitized  by


Google


4  coir 8TITUTI0N  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

and  extent  of  the  maxim,  and  of  the  reasoning,  by  which
it  is  supported.  The  remarks  of  Montesquieu  on  this
subject  will  be  found  in  a  professed  commentary  upon
the  constitution  of  England.^  "  When/'  says  he,  "  the
legislative  and  executive  powers  are  united  in  the  same
person,  or  in  the  same  body  of  magistrates,  there  can  be
HO  liberty,  because  apprehensions  may  arise,  lest  the
same  monarch  or  senate  should  enact  tyrannical  laws,  to
execute  them  in  a  tyrannical  manner.  Again ;  there  is  no
liberty,  if  the  judiciary  power  be  not  separated  from  the
}egislative  and  executive.  Were  it  joined  with  the
legislative,  the  life  and  liberty  of  the  subject  would  be
exposed  to  arbitrary  cpntrol ;  for  the  judge  would  be
the  legislator.  Were  it  joined  to  the  executive  power,
the  judge  might  behave  with  violence  and  oppression.
There  would  be  an  end  of  every  thing,  were  the  same
man,  or  the  same  body,  whether  of  the  nobles,  or  of  the
people,  to  exercise  these  three  powers,  that  of  enactmg
laws,  that  of  executing  the  public  resolutions,  and  of
trying  the  causes  of  individuals.*' '

§  521.  The  same  reasoning  is  adopted  by  Mr.  Justice
Blackstone,  in  his  Commentaries.'  ^^  In  all  tyrannical
goyemments,'*  says  he,  "  the  supreme  magistracy,  or
jthe  right  both  of  making  and  of  enforcing  laws,  is  vest-
ed in  the  same  man,  or  one  and  the  same  body  pf  men ;
.and  wherever  these  two  powers  are  united  together,

1  MoDtesqaieu,  B.  11,  ch.  6.

s  Mr.  Turgot  u^es  the  following  strong  longaage :  ''The  tyranny  of
.the  people  is  the  most  cruel  and  intolerable,  because  it  leaves  the  fewest
reeources  to  the  oppressed.  A  despot  }s  restrained  by  a  sense  of  his  own
interest  He  is  checked  by  remorse  or  public  opinion.  But  the  mujti-
tade*ney^r  calculate ;  the  multitude  are  never  checked  by  renjorse,  and
will  even  aspribe  to  themselves  the  hi^ghest  honour,  when  they  deserve
X)nly  disgrace.^ Letter  to  Dr.  Price.

'  1  filapk.  Comm.  146,


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Til.]  DISTRIBUTION  OF  POWERS.  5

there  can  be  no  public  liberty.  The  magistrate  may
enact  tyrannical  laws,  and  execute  them  in  a  tyrannical
manner,  since  he  is  possessed,  in  quality  of  dispenser  of
justice,  with  all  the  power,  which  he,  as  legislator,  thinks
proper  to  give  himselt  But  where  the  legislative  and
executive  authority  are  in  distinct  hands,  the  former  will
take  care  not  to  entrust  the  latter  with  so  large  a  power,
as  may  tend  to  the  subversion  of  its  own  independence,
and  therewith  of  the  Uberty  of  the  subject.'*  Again  ;
"  In  this  distinct  and  separate  existence  of  the  judicial
power  in  a  peculiar  body  of  men,  nominated,  indeed,
by,  but  not  removeable  at,  the  pleasure  of  the  crown,
consists  one  main  preservative  of  the  public  liberty ;
which  cannot  long  subsist  in  any  state,  unless  the  ad-
ministration of  common  justice  be  in  some  degree  sep-
arated from  the  legislative,  and  also  the  executive  pow-
er. Were  it  joined  with  the  legislative,  the  life,  Uberty,
and  property  of  the  subject  would  be  in  the  hands  of
arbitrary  judges,  whose  decisions  would  then  be  regu-
lated only  by  their  opinions,  and  not  by  any  fundamen*
tal  principles  of  law ;  which,  though  legislators  may
depart  from,  yet  judges  are  bound  to  observe.  Were
it  joined  with  the  executive,  this  unioii  might  soon  be
an  overbalance  for  the  legislative.*'  *

1  1  Black.  Conam.  269.  See  1  Wilson's  Law  Lectures,  394,  399,  400,
407,408,409;  Woodeson's  Elem.  of  Jurisp.  53,  56.— The  remarks  of
Dr.  Paley,  on  the  same  subject,  are  full  of  his  usual  practical  sense.
^The  first  maxim,"  says  he,  ^  of  a  free  state  is,  that  the  laws  be  made
by  one  set  of  men,  and  administered  by  another ;  in  other  words,  that
the  legislative  and  judicial  characters  be  kept  separate.  When  these
offices  are  united  in  the  same  person  or  assembly,  particular  laws
are  made  for  particular  cases,  springing  oftentimes  from  partial  motives,
and  directed  to  private  ends.  Whilst  they  are  kept  separate,  general
laws  are  made  by  one  body  of  men,  without  foreseeing  whom  they  may
affect ;  and,  when  made,  they  must  be  applied  by  the  other,  let  them  af>
feet  whom  they  will.

^  For  the  sake  of  illustration  let  it  be  supposed,  in  this  country,  either


Digitized  by


Google


6  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  nu

^  522.  And  the  Federalist  has,  i^ith  equal  point  and
brevity,  remarked,  that  ^  the  accumulation  of  all  pow-
ers legislative,  executive,  and  judiciary,  in  the  same
hands,  whether  of  one,  a  few,  or  many,  and  whether
hereditary,  self-appointed,  or  elective,  may  be  justly
pronounced  the  very  definition  of  tyranny.*'  ^

that,  parliaments  beitig  laid  aside,  the  courts  of  Westminster  Hall  made
their  own  laws ;  or,  that  the  two  houses  of  parliament,  with  the  king  at
their  head,  tried  and  decided  causes  at  their  bar.  It  b  ertdent,  in  tiie
first  place,  that  the  decisions  of  such  u  judicature  would  be  so  many
laws  ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  that,  when  the  parties  and  the  interests
to  be  afiected  by  the  laws  were  known,  the  inclinations  of  tlie  law^mak*
eis  would  inevitably  attach  on  one  aide  or  the  other ;  and  thai  wheie
there  were  neither  any  fixed  rules  to  regulate  their  determinatioDs,  nor
any  superior  power  to  control  their  proceedings,  these  inclinations  would
interfere  with  the  integrity  of  public  justice.  The  consequence  of  which
must  be,  that  the  subjects  of  such  a  constitution  would  lire  either  with-
out any  constant  laws,  that  is,  without  any  known  pre-established  rules
of  adjudication  whatever ;  or  under  laws  made  for  particular  persons,
and  partaking  of  the  contradictions  and  iniquity  of  the  motiTes,  to  which
they  owed  their  origin.

These  dangers,  by  the  division  of  the  legislative  and  judicial  functions,
are  in  this  country  effectually  provided  against  Parliament  knows  not
the  individuals,  upon  whom  its  acts  will  operate ;  it  has  no  eases  or  par*
ties  before  it ;  no  private  deigns  to  serve :  consequently,  its  resolutions
will  be  suggested  by  the  consideration  of  universal  effects  and  tenden-
cies, which  always  produce  impartial,  and  commonly  advantageous  regu-
lations. When  laws  are  made,  courts  of  justice,  whatever  be  the  dispo-
sition of  the  judges,  must  abide  by  them ;  for  the  legislative  being
necessarily  the  supreme  power  of  the  state,  the  judicial  and  every  other
power  is  accountable  to  that:  and  it  cannot  be  doubted,  that  the  persons,
who  possess  the  sovereign  authority  of  government,  will  be  tenacious  of
the  laws,  which  they  themselves  prescribe,  and  sufficiently  jealous  of  the
assumption  of  dispensing  and  legislative  power  by  any  others.**  Paley's
Moral  Philosophy,  B.  6,  ch.  &

s  The  Federalist,  No.  47;  Id.  No.  33.  See  also  Gov.  Randolph's
Letter,  4  Elliot's  Deb.  133 ;  Woodeson's  Elem.  of  Jurisp.  53, 56.  —  Mr.
Jefferson,  in  his  Notes  on  Virginia,*  has  expressed  the  same  truth  with
peculiar  fervour  and  force.  Speaking  of  the  constitution  of  government
of  his  own  state,  he  says,  **all  the  powers  of  government,  legislative
executive,  and  judiciary,  result  to  the  legislative  body.  The  concen-
trating these  in  the  same  hands  is  precisely  the  definition  of  a  despotic

•  J«ffenMi*i  NoUfl,  p.  199.


Digitized  by


Google


OIL  TU.]  DISTRIBUTION  OF  POWERS.  7

»  ^  523.  The  general  reasoning,  by  which  the  maxim
is  supported,  independently  of  the  just  weight  of  the
authority  m  its  support,  seems  entirely  satis&ctory.
What  is  of  far  more  value  than  any  mere  reasoning,
experience  has  demonstated  it  to  be  founded  in  a  just
view  of  the  nature  of  government,  and  the  safety  and
fiberty  of  the  people.  And  it  is  no  small  commendation
of  die  constitation  of  the  United  States,  that  instead  of
adopting  anew  theory,  it  has  placed  this  practical  truth,
as  i^e  basis  of  its  organization.  It  has  placed  the  legis-
lative, executive,  and  judicial  powers  in  different  hands.
It  has,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  made  their  term  of
office  and  their  organization  different ;  and,  for  objects  of
permanent  and  paramount  importance,  has  given  to  the
judicial  department  a  tenure  of  office  during  good  be

|fo?enuDeat.  It  will  be  no  allevkdoD,  that  these  powers  will  bo  exer-
ctsed  by  a  plurality  of  haods,  aod  not  by  a  single  one.  One  hundred
and  seventy-three  despots  would  surely  be  as  oppressive  as  one.  Let
thoae^  wbo  doubt  it,  torn  their  eyes  on  the  republic  of  Venice.  Aa  elec-
tive deqx»tism  is  aot  the  government  we  fought  for ;  but  one,  which
should  not  only  be  founded  on  free  principles,  but  in  which  the  powers
of  government  should  be  so  divided  and  balanced  among  several  bodies  of
nagistracy,  as  tint  no  one  could  transcend  their  legal  limits  without  be-
ing effectually  checked  and  restrained  by  the  others  "  Yet  Virginia
lived  voluntarOy  under  this  constitution  more  than  fifly  years;*  and,
notwithstanding  ^is  solemn  warning  by  her  own  favourito  statesman,  in
tb«  recent  nevinon  of  her  old  constitution  and  the  formation  of  a  new
one,  she  has  not  in  this  respect  changed  the  po\¥ers  of  the  government.
The  legislature  still  remains  with  all  its  great  powers.

^o  person,  however,  has  examined  this  whole  subject  more  profbcmdly,
and  with  more  illustrations  from  history  and  political  philosophy,  than
Mr.  John  Adams,  in  his  celebrated  Defence  of  the  American  Constitu-
tions. It  deserves  a  thorough  perusal  by  every  statesman.

Milton  was  aai  open  advocate  for  concentrating  all  powers,  legislative
and  executive,  in  one  body;  and  his  opinions,  as  well  as  those  of  some
other  men  of  a  philosophical  cast,  are  sufficiently  wild  and  extravagant
to  put  US  upon  our  guard  against  too  much  reliance  on  mere  authority .f

•  8m  a  PitUn'i  Hbt.  298, 999, 900.

t  Sea  1  Adaiiia*!  Da?.  o7  Amer.  Conat.  365  to  371.


Digitized  by


Google


8  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III^

haviour ;  while  it  has  limited  each  of  the  others  to  a
term  of  years.

^  524.  But  when  we  speak  of  a  separation  of  the
three  great  departments  of  government,  and  maintain,
that  that  separation  is  indispensable  to  public  liberty,
we  are  to  understand  this  maxim  in  a  limited  senses
It  is  not  meant  to  aflSrm,  that  they  must  be  kept  wholly  *
and  entirely  separate  and  distinct,  and  have  no  common
link  of  connexion  or  dependence,  the  one  upon  the  other,
in  the  slightest  degree;  The  true  meaning  is,  that
the  whole  power  of  one  of  these  departments  should
not  be  exercised  by  the  same  hands,  which  possess  the
whole  power  of  either  of  the  other  departments ;  and
that  such  exercise  of  the  whole  would  subvert  the  prin*
ciples  of  a  free  constitution.  This  has  been  shown  vnth
great  clearness  and  accuracy  by  the  authors  of  the
Federalist.^  It  was  obviously  the  view  taken  of  the
subject  by  Montesquieu  and  Blackstone  in  their  Com-
mentaries ;  for  they  were  each  speaking  with  approba*
tion  of  a  constitution  of  government,  which  embraced
this  division  of  powers  in  a  general  view ;  but  which,  at
the  same  time,  established  an  occasional  mixture  of  each
with  the  others,  and  a  mutual  dependency  of  each  upon
the  others.  The  slightest  examination  of  the  British
constitution  will  at  once  convince  us,  that  the  legislative;
executive,  and  judiciary  departments  are  by  no  means
totally  distinct,  and  separate  from  each  other.  The
executive  magistrate  forms  an  integral  part  of  the  legis-
lative department ;  for  parliament  consists  of  the  king,
lords,  and  commons  ;  and  no  law  can  be  passed  except
by  the  assent  of  the  king.  Indeed,  he  possesses  cer-
tain prerogatives,  such  as,  for  instance,  that  of  making
foreign  treaties,  by  which  he  can,  to  a  limited  extent,

1  The  Federalist,  No.  43.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  VII.] BiSTRiBtmoir  or  powjgrs.  9

impart  to  them  a  legislative  force  and  operation.  He
also  possesses  the  sole  appointing  power  to  the  judicial
department,  though  the  judges,  when  once  appcnnted,
are  not  subject  to  his  will,  or  power  of  removal  The
house  of  lords  also  constitutes,  not  only  a  vital  and  in-
dependent branch  of  the  legislature,  but  is  also  a  great
constitutional  council  of  the  executive  magistrate,  and
is,  in  the  last  resort,  the  highest  appellate  judicial  tribu*
naL  Again;  the  other  branch  of  the  legislature,  the
commons,  possess,  in  some  sort,  a  portion  of  the  execu-
tive and  judicial  power,  in  exercising  the  power*  of
accusation  by  impeachment ;  and  in  this  case,  as  also  in
the  trial  of  peers,  the  house  of  lords  sits  as  a  grand  court
of  trials  for  public  oflfences.  The  powers  of  the  judi-
ciary department  are,  indeed,  more  narrowly  confined  to
theu'  own  proper  sphere.  Yet  still  the  judges  occasionally
assist  in  the  deliberations  of  the  house  of  lords  by  giv*
ing  their  opinions  upon  matters  of  law  referred  to  them
for  advice ;  and  thus  they  may,  in  some  sort,  be  deemed
assessors  to  the  lords  in  their  legislative,  as  well  as  judi*
cial  capacity.^

^  525.  Mr.  Justice  Blackstone  has  illustrated  the
advantages  of  an  occasional  mixture  of  the  legislative
and  executive  functions  in  the  English  constitution  in
a  strikmg  manner.  "  It  is  highly  necessary,*'  says  he,
*'for  preserving  the  balance  of  the  constitution,  that  the
executive  power  should  be  a  branch,  though  not  the
whde  of  the  legislative.  The  total  union  of  them,  we
have  seen,  would  be  productive  of  tyranny.  The  total
disjunction  of  them,  for  the  present,  would,  in  the  end,
produce  the  same  effects  by  causmg  that  union,  against
wluch  it  seems  to  provide. The  legislative  would  soon

1  The  Federalist,  No.  47;  De  Lolme  on  the  English  Constitution,  B.
3,ch.a

VOL.  II.  2


Digitized  by


Google


10  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  IIL

become  tyrannical  by  making  continual  encroachments,
and  gradually  assuming  to  itself  the  rights  of  the  execu-
tive power,  &c.  To  hinder,  therefore,  any  such
encroachments,  the  king  is,  himself,  a  part  of  the  parlia-
ment ;  and,  as  this  is  the  reason  of  his  being  so,  very
properly,  therefore,  the  share  of  legislation,  which  the
constitution  has  placed  in  the  crown,  consists  in  the
power  of  rejecting^  rather  than  resolving ;  this  being
sufficient  to  answer  the  end  proposed.  For  we  may
apply  to  the  royal  negative,  in  this  instance,  what  Cice-
ro ^observes  of  the  negative  of  the  Roman  tribunes,
that  the  crown  has  not  any  power  of  domg  wrong ;  but
merely  of  preventing  wrong  from  being  done.  The
crown  cannot  begin  of  itself  any  alterations  in  the  pres-
ent established  law ;  but  it  may  approve,  or  disapprove
of  the  alterations  suggested,  and  consented  to  by  the
two  houses,*'  ^

§  526.  Notwithstanding  the  memorable  terms,  in
which  this  maxim  of  a  division  of  powers  is  mcorporat-
ed  into  the  bill  of  rights  of  many  of  our  state  constitu-
tions, the  same  mixture  will  be  found  pro\ided  for,  and
indeed  required  in  the  same  solemn  instruments  of  gov-
ernment. Thus,  the  governor  of  Massachusetts  exer-
cises a  part  of  the  legislative  power,  possessing  a  quali-
fied negative  upon  all  laws.  The  house  of  representa-
tives is  a  grand  mquest  for  accusation ;  and  the  senate
is  a  high  court  for  the  trial  of  impeachments.  The  gov-
ernor, with  the  advice  of  the  executive  council,  pos-
sesses the  power  of  appointment  in  general ;  but  the
appointment  of  certain  officers  still  belongs  to  the  sen-
ate and  house  of  representatives.  On  the  other  hand,
although  the  judicial  department  is  distmct  from  the

1  1  Black.  Comm.  154.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Til.]  DISTRIBITTIOir  OF  POWERS.  1 1

executive  and  legislative  in  many  respects,  either  branch
may  require  the  advice  of  the  judges,  upon  solemn
questions  of  law  referred  to  them.  The  same  general
division,  with  the  same  occasional  mixture,  may  be  found
m  the  constitutions  of  other  states.  And  in  some  o(
them  the  deviations  from  the  stiict  theory  are  quite  re-
markable. Thus,  until  the  late  revision,  the  constitu-
tion of  New- York  constituted  the  governor,  the  chan-
cellor, and  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court,  or  any
two  of  them  with  the  governor,  a  councU  of  revision,
which  possessed  a  qualified  negative  upon  all  laws  pass-
ed by  the  senate  and  house  of  representatives.  And,
now,  the  chancellor  and  the  judges  of  the  Supreme
Court  of  that  state  constitute,  with  the  senate,  a  court
of  impeachment,  and  for  the  correction  of  errors.  In
New-Jersey  the  governor  is  appointed  by  the  legisla-^
ture,  and  is  the  chancellor  and  ordinary,  or  surrogate,  a
member  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Appeals,  and  presi-
dent, with  a  casting  vote,  of  one  of  the  branches  of  the
legislature.  In  Virginia  the  great  mass  of  the  s^point-
ing  power  is  vested  in  the  legislature.  Indeed,  there
is  not  a  single  constitution  of  any  state  in  the  Union,
which  does  not  practically  embrace  some  acknowledg-
ment of  the  maxim,  and  at  the  same  time  some  admix-
ture'of  powers  constituting  an  exception  to  it.*

^  627.  It  would  not,  perhaps,  be  thought  unportant
to  have  dwelt  on  this  subject,  if  originally  it  had  not
been  made  a  special  objection  to  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  that  though  it  professed  to  be  founded
upon  a  division  of  the  legislative,  executive,  and  judi-
cial departments,  yet  it  was  really  chargeable  with  a
departure  from  the  doctrine  by  acciunulating  m  some

1  Tbe  Federalist,  No.  47, 4a


Digitized  by


Google


12 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U*  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

instances  the  diflferent  powers  in  the  same  hands,  and
by  a  mixture  of  them  in  others ;  so,  that  it,  in  effect,
subverted  the  maxim,  and  could  not  but  be  dangerous
to  the  public  liberty.^  The  fact  must  be  admitted,  that
such  an  occasional  accumulation  and  mixture  exists ;
but  the  conclusion,  that  the  system  is  therefore  danger-
ous to  the  pubhc  liberty,  is  wholly  inadmissible.  If  the
objection  were  well  founded,  it  would  apply  with  equal,
and  in  some  cases  with  far  greater  force  to  most  of  our
state  constitutions;  and  thus  the  people  would  be
proved  their  own  worst  enemies,  by  embodying  in  their
own  constitutions  the  means  of  overthrowmg  their  lib-
erties.

^  628.  The  authors  of  the  Federalist  thought  this
subject  a  matter  of  vast  importance,  and  accordingly
bestowed  upon  it  a  most  elaborate  commentary.  At
the  present  time  the  objection  may  not  be  felt,  as  pos-
sessing much  practical  force,  smce  experience  has  de-
monstrated the  fallacy  of  the  suggestions,  on  which  it
was  founded.  But,  as  the  objection  may  be  revived ;
and  as  a  perfect  separation  is  occasionally  found  sup-
ported by  the  opinions  of  ingenious  minds,  dazzled  by
theory,  and  extravagandy  attached  to  the  notion  of
simplicity  m  government,  it  may  not  be  without  use  to
recur  to  some  of  the  reasoning,  by  which  those  illustri-
ous statesmen,  who  formed  the  constitution,  while  they
admitted  the  general  truth  of  the  maxim,  endeavoured
to  prove,  that  a  rigid  adherence  to  it  in  all  cases  would
be  subversive  of  the  eflSciency  of  the  government,  and
result  in  the  destruction  of  the  public  liberties.  The
proposition,  which  they  undertook  to  maintain,  was  this,
that  ^^imless  these  departments  be  so  far  connected  and
blended,  as  to  give  to  each  a  constitutional  control  over

1  1  Amer.  Museum,  536, 549, 550 ;  Id.  553 ;  3  Amer.  Museum,  78,  79.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  VII.]  DISTRIBUTION  OF  POWERS.  13

the  others,  the  degree  of  separation,  which  the  maxim
requires,  as  essential  to  a  free  government,  can  never
m  practice  be  duly  maintained."  *

§  629.  It  is  proper  to  premise,  that  it  is  agreed  on
all  sides,  that  the  powers  belonging  to  one  departme'ht
ought  not  to  be  directly  and  completely  administered
by  either  of  the  other  departments ;  and,  as  a  corollary,
that,  in  reference  to  each  other,  neither  of  them  ought
to  possess,  direcdy  or  mdirectiy,  an  overruling  influence
in  the  administration  of  their  respective  powers.*  Power,
however,  is  of  an  encroaching  nature,  and  it  ought  to
be  effectually  restrained  from  passing  the  limits  assign-
ed to  it  Having  separated  the  three  great  depart-
ments by  a  broad  line  from  each  other,  the  difficult
task  remains  to  provide  some  practical  means  for  the
security  of  each  against  the  meditated  or  occasional  in-
vasions of  the  others.  Is  it  sufficient  to  declare  on
parchment  in  the  constitution,  that  each  shall  remain,
and  neither  shall  usurp  the  functions  of  the  other?  No
one,  well  read  in  history  in  general,  or  even  in  our  own
history  durmg  the  period  of  the  existence  of  our  state
constitutions,  will  place  much  reliance  on  such  declara-
tions. In  the  first  place,  men  may  and  will  differ,  as  to
the  nature  and  extent  of  the  prohibition.  Their  wishes
and  their  mterests,  the  prevalence  of  faction,  an  appa-
rent necessity,  or  a  predominant  popularity,  will  give  a
strong  bias  to  their  judgments,  and  easily  satisfy  them
with  reasoning,  which  has  but  a  plausible  colouring.
And  it  has  been  accordingly  found,  that  the  theory  has
bent  under  the  occasional  pressure,  as  well  as  under  the
occasional  elasticity  of  public  opinion,  and  as  well  in  the
states,  as  in  the  general  government  under  the  confed-

1  The  Federalist,  No.  48.  «  The  Federalist,  No.  48.


Digitized  by


Google


14 OONSTITUTIOK  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  HI*

eration.  Usurpations  of  power  have  been  notoriously
assumed  by  particular  departments  in  each ;  and  it  has
often  happened,  that  these  very  usurpations  have  re-
ceived popular  favour  and  indulgence,^

•§  630.  In  the  next  place,  in  order  to  preserve  m  full
vigour  the  constitutional  barrier  between  each  depart-
ment, when  they  are  entirely  separated,  it  is  obviously
mdispensable,  that  each  should  possess  equally,  and  in
the  same  degree,  the  means  of  self-protection.  Now,
m  point  of  theory,  this  would  be  almost  impracticable,
if  not  impossible ;  and  in  pomt  of  fact,  it  is  well  known,
that  the  me^s  of  self-protection  in  the  different  depart-
ments are  immeasurably  disproportionate.  The  judi-
ciary is  mcomparably  the  weakest  of  either ;  and  must
for  ever,  in  a  considerable  measure,  be  subjected  to  the
legislative  power.  And  the  latter  has,  and  must  have,
a  controlling  influence  over  the  executive  power,  since
it  holds  at  its  own  command  all  the  resources,  by  which
a  chief  magistrate  could  make  hunself  formidable.  It
possesses  the  power  over  the  purse  of  the  nation,  and
the  property  of  the  people.  It  can  grant,  or  withhold
supplies ;  it  can  levy,  or  withdraw  taxes ;  it  can  un-
nerve the  power  of  the  sword  by  striking  down  the
arm,  which  wields  it.

§  531.  De  Lolme  has  said,  with  great  emphasis,  '^It
is,  without  doubt,  absolutely  necessary  for  securing  the
constitution  of  a  state,  to  restrain  the  executive  power ;
but  it  is  still  more  necessary  to  restrain  the  legislative.
What  the  former  can  duly  do  by  successive  steps,
(I  mean  subvert  the  laws,)  and  through  a  longer,  or  a
shorter  tradn  of  enterprises,  the  latter  does  in  a  moment
As  its  bare  will  can  give  being  to  the  laws,  so  its  bare

1  The  Federalist,  No.  48. See  also  Tbe  Federalist,  No.  38, 42.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  til] distribution  of  powers.  16

will  can  also  annihilate  them ;  and  if  I  may  be  permit-
ted the  expression,  the  legislative  power  can  change
the  constitution,  as  God  created  the  light  In  order,
therefore,  to  insure  stability  to  the  constitution  of  a
state,  it  is  indispensably  necessary  to  restrain  the  legis-
lative authority.  But,  here,  we  must  observe  a  diflfer-
ence  between  the  legislative  and  executive  powers.
The  latter  may  be  confined,  and  even  is  more  easily  so,
when  undivided.  The  legislative,  on  the  contrary,  in
order  to  its  being  restrained,  should  absolutely  be  di-
vided.''*

§  532.  The  truth  is,  that  the  legislative  power  is  the
great  and  overruling  power  in  every  fi^e  government
It  has  been  remarked  with  equal  force  and  sagacity,
that  the  legislative  power  is  every  where  extending  the
sphere  of  its  activity,  and  drawing  all  power  into  its
impetuous  vortex.  The  founders  of  our  republics,  wise
as  they  were,  under  the  influence  and  the  dread  of  the
royal  prerogative,  which  was  pressing  upon  them,  never
for  a  moment  seem  to  have  turned  their  eyes  from  the
immediate  danger  to  liberty  from  that  source,  combined,
as  it  was,  with  an  hereditary  authority,  and  an  heredi-
tary peerage  to  support  it  They  seem  never  to  have
recollected  the  danger  from  legislative  usurpation,  which,
by  ultimately  assembling  all  power  in  the  same  hands,
must  lead  to  the  same  tyranny,  as  is  threatened  by  ex*-
ecutive  usurpations.  The  representatives  of  the  people
will  watch  with  jealousy  every  encroachment  of  the
executive  magistrate,  for  it  trenches  upon  their  own
authority.  But,  who  shall  watch  the  encroachment  of
these  representatives  themselves?  Will  they  be  as
jealous  of  the  exercise  of  power  by  themselves,  as  by

1  De  Ldme,  B.  2,  ch.  a


Digitized  by


Google


16  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES* [bOOK  III,

Others  1  In  a  representative  republic,  where  the  ex-
ecutive magistracy  is  carefully  limited,  both  in  the  ex-
tent and  duration  of  its  power ;  and  where  the  legisla-
tive power  is  exercised  by  an  assembly,  which  is  in-
spired, by  a  supposed  influence  over  the  people,  with
an  intrepid  confidence  in  its  own  strength ;  which  is
sufficiently  numerous  to  feel  all  the  passions,  which  ac-
tuate the  multitude ;  yet  not  so  numerous,  as  to  be  in-
capable of  pursuing  the  objects  of  its  passions  by  means,
which  reason  prescribes ;  it  is  easy  to  see,  that  the
tendency  to  the  usurpation  of  power  is,  if  not  constant,
at  least  probable ;  and  that  it  is  against  the  enterprising
ambition  of  this  department,  that  the  people  may  weU
indulge  all  their  jealousy,  and  exhaust  all  their  precau-
tions.^

§  533,  There  are  many  reasons,  which  may  be  as-
signed for  the  engrossing  influence  of  the  legislative
department.  In  the  first  place,  its  constitutional  pow-
ers are  more  extensive,  'and  less  capable  of  being
brought  within  precise  limits,  than  those  of  either  of  the
other  departments.  The  bounds  of  the  executive
authority  are  easily  marked  out,  and  defined.  It  reaches
few  objects,  and  those  are  known.  It  cannot  transcend
them,  without  being  brought  in  contact  with  the  other
departments.  Laws  may  check  and  restrain,  and  bound
its  exercise.  The  same  remarks  apply  with  still  greater
force  to  the  judiciary.  The  jurisdiction  is,  or  may  be,
bounded  to  a  few  objects  or  persons;  or,  however
general,  and  unlimited,  its  operations  are  necessarily
confined  to  the  mere  administration  of  private  and  pub-
lic justice.  It  cannot  punish  without  law.  It  cannot
create  controversies  to  act  upon. It  can  decide  only

I  The  Federalist,  No.  48, 49.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  VII.]  DISTRIBUTION  OF  P0W£R8.  17

upon  rights  and  cases,  as  they  are  brought  by  others  be-
fore it.  It  can  do  nothmg  for  itself.  It  must  do  every
thing  for  others.  It  must  obey  the  laws ;  and  if  it  cor-
ruptly administers  them,  it  is  subjected  to  the  power  of
impeachment  On  the  other  hand,  the  legislative  power,
except  in  the  few  cases  of  constitutional  prohibition,  is
unlimited.  It  is  for  ever  varying  its  means  and  its  ends.
It  governs  the  institutions,  and  laws,  and  public  policy
of  the  coimtry.  It  regulates  all  its  vast  mterests.  It  dis-
poses of  all  its  property.  Look  but  at  the  exercise  of
two  or  three  branches  of  its  ordinary  powers.  It  levies
all  taxes ;  it  directs  and  appropriates  all  supplies ;  it
gives  the  rules  for  the  descent,  distribution,  and  de-
vises of  all  property  held  by  individuals.  It  contrds
the  sources  and  the  resources  of  wealth.  It  changes
at  its  will  the  whole  fabric  of  the  laws.  It  moulds  at  its
pleasure  ahnost  all  the  institutions,  which  give  strength,
and  comfort,  and  dignity  to  society.

§  534.  In  the  next  place,  it  is  the  direct,  visible  rep-
resentative of  the  will  of  the  people  in  all  the  changes
of  times  and  circumstances.  It  has  the  pride,  as  well
as  the  power  of  numbers.*  It  is  easUy  moved  and
steadily  moved  by  the  strong  impulses  of  popular  feel-
ing, and  popular  odium.  It  obeys,  without  reluctance,
the  wishes  and  the  will  of  the  majority  for  the  time
being.  The  path  to  public  favour  lies  open  by  such
obedience ;  and  it  finds  not  only  support,  but  impimity,
in  whatever  measures  the  majority  advises,  even
though  they  transcend  the  constitutional  limits.  It  has
no  motive,  therefore,  to  be  jealous,  or  scrupulous  in  its
own  use  of  power ;  and  it  finds  its  ambition  stimulated,

1  ''.Numerous  assembHes,"  says  Mr.  Turgot,  **  are  swayed  in  tbeir  de-^
bates  by  Uie  smallest  motives."

VOL.  II.  3


Digitized  by


Google


16  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III,

and  its  arm  strengthened  by  the  countenance,  and  the
courage  of  numbers.  These  views  are  not  alone  those
of  men,  who  look  with  apprehension  upon  the  fate  of
republics ;  but  they  are  also  freely  admitted  by  some
of  the  strongest  advocates  for  popular  rights,  and  the
permanency  of  republican  institutions.^  Our  domestic
history  furnishes  abundant  examples  to  verify  these
suggestions.'

§  635.  If,  then,  the  legislative  power  possesses  a
decided  preponderance  of  influence  over  either  or
both  of  the  others  ;  and  if,  in  its  own  separate  struc-
ture, it  furnishes  no  effectual  security  for  the  others,  or
for  its  own  abstinence  from  usurpations,  it  will  not  be
sufficient  to  rely  upon  a  mere  constitutional  division  of
the  powers  to  insure  our  liberties.*

§  636.  What  remedy,  then,  can  be  proposed,  ade-
quate for  the  exigency?  It  has  been  suggested,  that
an  appeal  to  the  people,  at  stated  times,  might  redress
any  inconveniences  of  this  sort.  But,  if  these  be  fre-
quent, it  will  have  a  tendency  to  lessen  that  respect
for,  and  confidence  in  the  stability  of  our  constitutions,
which  is  so  essential  to  their  salutary  influence.  If  it
be  true,  that  all  governments  rest  on  opmion,  it  is  no
less  true,  that  the  strength  of  opinion  in  each  individ-
ual, and  its  practical  influence  on  his  conduct,  depend
much  upon  the  number,  which  he  supposes  to  have
entertained  the  same  opinion.^  There  is,  too,  no  small
danger  in  disturbing  the  public  tranquillity  by  a  fre-

1  See  Mr.  Jefferson's  very  striking  remarks  in  his  Notes  on  Virginia^
p.  195, 196, 197, 248.  In  December,  1776,  and  again,  June,  1781,  the
legislature  of  Virginia,  under  a  great  pressure,  were  near  passing  an
act  appointing  a  dictator.  lb.  p.  207.

«  The  Federalist,  No.  48,  49.

3  See  Jefferson's  Notes  on  Virginia,  195,  196,  197.

^  The  Federalist,  No.  48.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  VII.]  DISTRIBUTION  OF  POWERS.  10

queht  recurrence  to  questions  respecting  the  funda-
mental principles  of  government.*  Whoever  has  been
present  in  any  assembly,  convened  for  such  a  purpose,
must  have  perceived  the  great  diversities  of  opinion
upon  the  most  vital  questions ;  and  the  extreme  diffi-
culty in  bringing  a  majority  to  concur  in  the  long-
sighted wisdom  of  the  soundest  provisioAS*  Tempo-
rary feelings  and  excitements,  popular  prejudices,  an
ardent  love  of  theory,  an  enthusiasdc  temperament,
mexperience,  and  ignorance,  as  well  as  preconceived
opinions,  operate  wonderfully  to  blind  the  judgment,
and  seduce  the  understanding.  It  v^ill  probably  be
foimd,  in  the  history  of  most  convendons  of  this  sort,
that  the  best  and  soundest  parts  of  the  constitution,
those,  which  give  it  permanent  value,  as  well  as  safe
and  steady  operation,  are  precisely  those,  which  have
enjoyed  the  least  of  the  public  favour  at  the  moment,
or  were  least  estimated  by  the  framers.  A  lucky  hit,
or  a  strong  figure,  has  not  imfrequently  overturned  the
best  reasoned  plan.  Thus,  Dr.  Franklin's  remark,
that  a  legislature,  vnth  two  branches,  was  a  wagon,
drawn  by  a  horse  before,  and  a  horse  behind,  in  oppo-
site directions^  is  understood  to  have  been  decisive  in
inducing  Pennsylvania,  m  her  original  constitution,  to
invest  all  the  legislative  power  in  a  single  body.*  In
her  present  constitution,  that  error  has  been  fortimately
corrected.  It  is  not  believed,  that  the  clause  m  the
constitution  of  Vermont  providing  for  a  septennial
council  of  celisors  to  mquire  mto  the  infractions  of  her
constitution  during  the  last  septenary,  and  to  recom-
mend suitable  measures  to  the  legislature,  and  to  call^

1  The  Federalist,  No.  48,  50.

s  1  Adams's  American  ConstitatioDS,  105, 106.


Digitized  by


Google


20 coifSTiTirrioif  of  the  u.  states, [book  hi.

if  they  see  fit,  a  conyention  to  amend  the  constitution,
has  been  of  any  practical  advantage  in  that  state  in
securing  it  against  legislative  or  other  usurpations,
beyond  the  security  possessed  by  other  states,  having
no  such  provision.*

§  537.  On  the  other  hand,  if  an  appeal  to  the  people,
or  a  convention,  is  to  be  called  only  at  great  distances
of  time,  it  will  afford  no  redress  for  the  most  pressing
mischiefs.  And  if  the  measures,  which  are  supposed
to  be  infractions  of  the  constitution,  enjoy  popular
favour,  or  combine  extensive  private  interests,  or  have
taken  root  in  the  habiteof  the  government,  it  is  obvious,
that  the  chances  of  any  effectual  redress  will  be  essen-
tially diminished.'

^  538.  But  a  more  conclusive  objection  is,  that  the
decisions  upon  all  such  appeals  would  not  answer  the
purpose  of  miuntaining,  or  restoring  the  constituticmal
equilibrium  of  the  government  The  remarks  of  the
Federalist,  on  this  subject,  are  so  striking,  that  they
scarcely  admit  of  abridgment  without  impairing  their
force :  "  We  have  seen,  that  the  tendency  of  repub-
^lican  governments  is  to  aggrandizement  of  the  legis-
**lature  at  the  expense  of  the  other  departments.  The
*<  appeals  to  the  people,  therefore,  would  usually  be
**made  by  the  executive  and  judiciary  departments.
•*But  whether  made  by  one  or  the  other,  would  each
^side  enjoy  equal  advantages  on  the  trial?  Let  us
**view  their  different  situations.  The  members  of  the
**  executive  and  judiciary  departments  are  few  in  num-
^ber,  and  can  be  personally  known  to  a  small  part

^  The  hiitory  of  the  former  constitution  of  Pennsylvania,  and  the
report  of  its  council  of  censon,  shows  the  little  value  of  provisions  of
this  sort  in  a  strong  light The  Federalist,  No.  48,  50.

8  The  Federalist,  No.  50.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Til.]  piSTRIBUTIOV  OF  POWERS.  21

**only^of  Ac  people.  The  latter,  by  the  mode  of  their
^appointment,  as  well  as  by  the  nature  and  perma-
"nency  of  it,  are  too  far  removed  fix)m  the  people  to
^  share  much  in  their  professions.  The  former  are
**  generally  objects  of  jealousy ;  and  their  administra-
^  tion  is  aJways  liable  to  be  discoloured  and  rendered
•^unpqpular.  The  members  of  the  legislative  depart-
**ment,  on  the  other  hand,  are  numerous.  They  are
^distributed  and  dwell  among  the  people  at  large.
^  Their  connexions  of  blood,  of  friendship,  and  of
^acquamtance,  embrace  a  great  proportion  of  the  most
"influential  part  of  the  society.  The  nature  of  their
** public  trust  implies  a  personal  weight  with  the  peo-
"ple,  and  that  they  are  more  immediately  the  confi-
"dential  guardians  of  their  rights  and  liberties.  With
*  these  advantages  it  can  hardly  be  supposed,  that  the
^adverse  party  would  have  an  equal  chance  of  a  favour-*
^able  issue.  But  the  legislative  party  would  not  only
•*be  able  to  plead  their  case  most  successfully  with  the
** people;  they  would  probably  be  constituted  them-
"  selves  the  judges.  The  same  mfluence,  which  had
"gamed  them  an  election  into  the  legislature,  would
"  gain  them  a  seat  in  the  convention.  If  this  should
"  not  be  the  case  with  all,  it  would  probably  be  the
"case  with  many,  and  pretty  certamly  widi  those
"leading  characters,  on  wh6m  every  thing  depends  in
"such  bodies.  The  convention,  in  short,  would  be
"composed  chiefly  of  men,  who  had  been,  or  who
"  actually  were,  or  who  expected  to  be,  members  of  the
"department,  whose  conduct  was  arraigned.  They
"would  consequently  be  parties  to  the  very  ques-
"  tion  to  be  decided  by  them.*'  ^

1  The  Federalist,  No.  48.  —  The  trath  of  this  reasonine^,  aa  well  aa

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


22 CONSTITUTION  Or  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

§  539.  I^  then,  occasional  or  periodical  appeals  to
the  people  would  not  aflFord  an  eflFectual  barrier  against
the  inroads  of  the  legislature  upon  the  other  depart-
ments of  the  government,  it  is  manifest,  that  resort
must  be  had  to  some  contrivances  in  the  interior  struc-
ture of  the  government  itself,  which  shall  exert  a  con-
stant check,  and  preserve  the  mutual  relations  of  each
with  the  other.  Upon  a  thorough  examination  of  the
subject,  it  will  be  found,  that  this  can  be  best  accom-
plished, if  not  solely  accomplished,  by  an  occasional
mixture  of  the  powers  of  each  department  with  that  of
the  others,  while  the  separate  existence,  and  constitu-
tional independence  of  each  are  fully  provided  for.
Each  department  should  have  a  will  of  its  own,  and
the  members  of  each  should  have  but  a  limited  agency
in  the  acts  and  appointments  of  the  members  of  the
others.  Each  should  have  its  own  independence
secured  beyond  the  power  of  being  taken  away  by
either,  or  both  of  the  others.  But  at  th«  same  tune  the
relations  of  each  to  the  other  should  be  so  strong,  that
there  should  be  a  mutual  interest  to  sustain  and  pro-
tect each  other.  There  should  not  only  be  constitu-
tional means,  but  personal  motives,  to  resist  encroach-
ments of  one,  or  either  of  the  others.  Thus,  ambidon
would  be  made  to  counteract  ambition ;  the  desire  of
power  to  check  power ;  and  the  pressure  of  interest  to
balance  an  opposing  mterest.^

§  540. There  seems  no  adequate  method  of  pro-
ducing this  result  but  by  a  partial  participation  of  each

the  utter  inefficacy  of  any  tnich  periodical  conveDtions,  is  abundantly
established  by  the  history  of  Pennsylvania  under  her  former  constitu-
tion.*

1  The  Federalist,  No.  48, 50,  51.


*  Tho  Fedenliit,  No.  60. 8M3PitkiB'iHift.305,306.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  rn.]  DISTRIBUTION  OF  POWERS.  23

in  the  powers  of  the  other ;  and  by  introducing  into
every  operation  of  the  government  m  all  its  branches^
a  system  of  checks  and  balances,  on  which  the  safety
of  free  institutions  has  ever  been  found  essentially  to
depend.  Thus,  fot  instance,  a  guard  against  rashness
and  violence  in  legislation  has  often  been  found,  by  dis-
tributing the  power  among  different  branches,  each
having  a  negative  check  upon  the  other.  A  guard  against
the  inroads  of  the  legislative  power  upon  the  execu-
tive has  been  in  like  manner  applied,  by  giving  the  lat-
ter a  qualified  negative  upon  the  former ;  and  a  guard
against  executive  influence  and  patronage,  or  unlawful
exercise  of  authority,  by  requiring  the  concurrence  of
a  select  council,  or  a  branch  of  the  legislature  in  ap-
pointments to  office,  and  in  the  discharge  of  other  high
functions,  as  well  as  by  placing  the  command  of  the
revenue  in  other  hands. '

^  541.  The  usual  guard,  applied  for  the  security  of
the  judicial  department,  has  been  m  the  tenure  of
office  of  the  judges,  who  commonly  are  to  hold  office
during  good  behaviour.  But  this  is  obviously  an  mad-
equate  provision,  while  the  legislature  is  entrusted  with
a  complete  power  over  the  salaries  of  the  judges,  and
over  the  jurisdiction  of  the  courts,  so  that  they  can
alter,  or  diminish  them  at  pleasure.  Indeed,  the  judi-
ciary is  naturally,  and  almost  necessarily  (as  has  been
already  said)  the  weakest  department*  It  can  have
no  means  of  influence  by  patronage.  Its  powers  can
never  be  wielded  for  itself.  It  has  no  command  over
the  purse  or  the  sword  of  the  nation.  It  can  neither  lay
taxes,  nor  appropriate  money,  nor  command  armies,  or
appoint  to  offices. It  is  never  brought  into  contact

1  Montesq.  Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  II,  ch.  6.


Digitized  by


Google


24  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

with  the  people  by  the  constant  appeals  and  solicita-
tions, and  private  mtercourse,  which  belong  to  all  the
other  departments  of  government  It  is  seen  only  in
controversies,  or  in  trials  and  punishments.  Its  rigid
justice  and  impartiality  give  it  no  claims  to  favour,
however  they  may  to  respect.  It  stands  solitary  and
unsupported,  except  by  that  portion  of  public  opinion,
wUch  is  interested  only  in  the  strict  administration  of
justice.  It  can  rarely  secure  the  sympathy,  or  zealous
support,  either  of  the  executive,  or  the  legislature.  If
they  are  not  (as  is  not  unfrequently  the  case)  jealous
of  its  prerogatives,  the  constant  necessity  of  scrutiniz-
ing  the  acts  of  each,  upon  the  application  of  any  private
person,  and  the  painful  duty  of  pronouncing  judgment,
that  these  acts  are  a  departure  from  the  law  or  consti-  •
tution,  can  have  no  tendency  to  conciliate  kindness,  or
nourish  influence.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  some
additional  guards  would,  under  such  circumstances,  be
necessary  to  protect  this  department  jrom  the  absolute
dominion  of  the  others.  Yet  rarely  have  any  such
guards  been  applied ;  and  every  attempt  to  introduce
them  has  been  resisted  with  a  pertinacity,  which  de-
monstrates, how  slow  popular  leaders  are  to  introduce
checks  upon  their  own  power ;  and  how  slow  the  peo*
pie  are  to  believe,  that  the  judiciary  is  the  real  bulwark
of  their  liberties.  In  some  of  the  states  the  judicial
department  is  partially  combined  with  some  branches
of  the  executive  and  legislative  departments ;  and  it  b
believed,  that  in  those  cases,  it  has  been  foxmd  no
unimportant  auxiliary  in  preserving  a  wholesome  vig-
our in  the  laws,  as  well  as  a  wholesome  administration
of  public  justice.

^  542.  How  far  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,
in  the  actual  separation  of  these  departments,  and  the


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  rih]  DISTRIBUTION  OF  POWSRS.  85

occasional  mixtures  of  some  of  the  powers  of  each,  haa
accomplished  the  objects  of  the  great  maxim,  which  we
have  been  considering,  will  appear  more  fully,  when  a
survey  is  taken  of  the  particular  powers  confided  to
each  department.  But  the  true  and  only  test  must,
after  all,  be  experience,  which  corrects  at-  once  the
errors  of  theory,  and  fortifies  and  illustrates  the  eternal
judgments  of  nature.

^  543.  It  is  not  a  little  singular,  however,  (as  has
been  already  stated,)  that  one  of  the  principal  objec-
tions urged  against  the  constitution  at  the  time  of  its
adoption  was  this  occasional  mixture  of  powers,*  upon
which,  if  the  preceding  reasoning  (drawn,  as  must  be
seen,  from  the  ablest  commentators)  be  well  founded,
it  must  depend  for  life  and  practical  influence.  It  was
said,  that  the  several  departments  of  power  were  dis-
tributed, and  blended  in  such  a  manner,  as  at  once  to
destroy  all  symmetry  and  beauty  of  form ;  and  to
expose  some  of  the  essential  parts  of  the  edifice  to  the
danger  of  being  crushed  by  the  disproportionate  weight
of  the  other  parts.  The  objection,  as  it  presents  itself
in  details,  will  be  more  accurately  examined  hereafter.
But  it  may  here  be  said,  that  the  experience  of  more
than  forty  years  has  demonstrated  the  entire  safety  o(
this  distribution,  at  least  in  the  quarter,  where  the  ob-
jection was  supposed  to  apply  with  most  force.  If
any  department  of  the  government  has  an  undue  influ-
ence, or  absorbing  power,  it  certainly  has  not  been
either  the  executive  or  judiciary.

1  The  Federalist,  No.  47 ;  Id.  38.
VOL.  II.  4


Digitized  by


Google


26  COIC45TlTUTlblC  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.


CHAPTER  VIII.

THE  LEGISLATURE.

§  544.  The  first  article  of  the  constitution  contains
the  structure,  organization,  and  powers,  of  the  legisla-
ture of  the  Union.  Each  section  of  that  article,  and  in-
deed, of  every  other  article,  will  require  a  careful  analy-
sis, and  distinct  examination.  It  is  proposed,  therefore,
to  bring  each  separately  under  review,  in  the  present
commentaries,  and  to  unfold  the  reasons,  on  which
each  is  founded,  the  objections,  which  have  been  urged
agsdnst  it,  and  the  interpretation,  so  far  as  it  can  sat-
isfactorily be  ascertained,  of  the  terms,  in  which  each  is
expressed.

§  545.  The  first  section  of  the  first  article  is  in  the  fol-
lowmg  words :  "  All  legislative  powers  herein  granted
"shall  be  vested  inacongress  of  the  United  States,  which
**  shall  consist  of  a  senate  and  house  of  representatives.**

^  546.  This  section  involves,  as  a  fundamental  rule,
the  exercise  of  the  legislative  power  by  two  distinct
and  independent  branches.  Under  the  confederation,
the  whole  legislative  power  of  the  Union  was  vested  in
a  single  branch.  Limited  as  was  that  power,  the  con-
centration of  it  in  a  single  body  was  deemed  a  prom-
inent defect  of  the  confederation.  But  if  a  single  assem-
bly could  properly  be  deemed  a  fit  receptacle  of  the
slender  and  fettered  authorities,  confided  to  the  federal
government  by  that  instrument,  it  could  .scarcely  be
consistent  with  the  principles  of  a  good  government  to
entrust  it  with  the  more  enlarged^ai^d  vigorous  pow-
ers delegated  in  the  constitution.*

1  The  Federalist,  No.  22.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  viil]  the  legislature.  SS7

§  547.  The  utility  of  a  subdivision  of  the  legislatiye
power  into  different  branches,  having  a  negative  upon
each  other,  is,  perhaps,  at  the  present  time  admitted
by  most  persons  of  sound  reflection.^  But  it  has  not
always  found  general  approbation ;  and  is,  even  now,
sometimes  disputed  by  men  of  speculative  ingenui*
ty,  and  recluse  habits.  It  has  been  justly  observed^
that  there  is  scarcely  in  the  whole  science  of  politics  a
more  important  maxim,  and  one,  which  bears  with
greater  influence  upon  the  practical  operations  of  gov-'
emment.  It  has  been  already  stated,  that  Pennsylvania,
in  her  first  constitution,  adopted  the  scheme  of  a  sin^e
body,  as  the  depositary  of  Ae  legislative  power,  under
the  influence,  as  is  understood,  of  a  mind  of  a  very
high  philosophical  character.^  Georgia,  also,  is  said  in
her  first  constitution,  (since  changed,)  to  have  confided
the  whole  legislative  power  to  a  single  body.'  Vermont
adopted  the  same  course,  giving,  however,  to  the  exec-
utive council  a  power  of  revision,  and  of  proposing
amendments,  to  which  she  yet  adheres.^  We  are  ajso
told  by  a  distinguished  statesman  of  great  accuracy  and
leammg,  that  at  the  first  formation  of  our  state  consti-
tutions, it  was  made  a  question  of  transcendant  unport-
ance,  and  divided  the  opinions  of  our  most  eminent
men.  Legislation,  being  merely  the  expression  of  the
will  of  the  community,  was  thought  to  be  an  operation
so  simple  in  its  nature,  that  inexperienced  reason  could
not  readily  perceive  the  necessity  of  committing  it  to

*  Jefferson's  Notes  on  Virginia,  194 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  208 ;  DeLolme
on  the  Constitution  of  England,  B.  2,  ch.  3 ;  3  Amer.  Museum,  62,  66,
Gov.  Randolph's  Letter.

«  1  Adams's  Defence  of  American  Constitution,  105,106 ;  2  PKk.  Hist
294,305,316.

9  1  Kent's  Comm.  206  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist  315.

4  2  Pitk.  Hist  314, 316;  Const  of  Vermont,  1793,  ch.  2,  §  2, 16.


Digitized  by


Google


SB  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  UI.

two  bodies  of  men,  each  having  a  decisive  check  upon
the  action  of  the  other.  All  the  arguments  derived  from
the  a&alogy  between  the  movements  of  political  bod-
ies, and  the  operations  of  physical  nature  ;  all  the  im-
pulses of  political  parsimony  ;  all  the  prejudices  against
a  second  co-ordinate  legislative  assembly  stimulated
by  the  exemplification  of  it  in  the  British  parliament,
were  against  a  division  of  the  legislative  power.^

^  548.  It  is  also  certain,  that  the  noiion,  that  the
legislative  power  ought  to  be  confided  to  a  single  body,
has  been»  at  various  times,  adopted  by  men  eminent
fior  thek*  talents  and  virtues.  MUton,  Turgot,  Franklin,
are  but  a  few  among  those,  who  have  professedly  en-
tertained, and  discussed  the  question.^  Sir  James
Mackintosh,  in  a  woik  of  a  controversial  character,  writ-
ten with  the  zeal  and  eloquence  of  youth,  advocated  the
doctrme  of  a  single  legislative  body.'  Perhaps  his  ma-
turer  life  may  have  changed  this  early  opinion.  At  all
events,  he  can,  in  our  day,  count  few  foUowers.  Against
his  opinbn,  thus  uttered,  there  is  the  sad  example  of
France  itself, 'whose  first  constitution,  in  1791,  was
formed  on  this  basis,  and  whose  proceedings  the  genius
of  this  great  man  was  employed  to  vindicate.  She
stands  a  monument  of  the  folly  and  mischiefs  of  the
scheme  ;  and  by  her  subsequent  adoption  of  a  division
of  the  legislative  power,  she  has  secured  to  herself  (as
it  is  hoped)  the  permanent  blessings  of  liberty.^  Against
all  visionary  reasoning  of  this  sort,  Mr.  Chancellor  Kent

1  President  J.  Q.  Adams's  Oration,  4th  July,  1831.  See  also  Adams's
Defence  of  AmeAcan  Constitution,  per  iot ;  1  Kent's  Coram.  208,  209,
210 ;  2  Pitk.  Hist  233,  305 ;  Paley's  Moral  Phil.  B.  6,  ch.  7.

9  1  Adams's  Defence  American  Constitution,  3 ;  Id.  105  ;  Id.  366 ;
2  Pitk.  Hist.  233.

3  Mackintosh  on  the  French  Revoludon,  (1792)  4  edit  p.  265  to  273.

4  1  Kent's  Comm.  209, 210.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  VIII.]  THE  LEGISLATURS.  89

has,  in  a  few  pages  of  pregnant  sense  and  brevity,  con*
densed  a  decisive  argument^  There  is  danger,  however,
that  it  may  hereafter  be  revived ;  and  indeed  it  is  occa-
sionally hinted  by  gifted  minds,  as  a  problem  yet  wor-
thy of  a  fuller  trial*

^  649.  It  may  not,  therefore,  be  uninstrucdve  to  re-
view some  of  the  principal  arguments,  by  which  this
division  is  vindicated.  The  first  and  most  important
ground  is,  that  it  forms  a  great  check  upon  undue,  hasty,
and  oppressive  legislation.  Public  bodies,  like  private
persons,  are  occasionally  under  the  dominion  of  strong
passions  and  excitements ;  impatient,  irritable,  and  im-
petuous. The  habit  of  acting  together  produces  a
strong  tendency  to  what,  for  want  of  a  better  word,  may
be  called  the  corporation  spirit,  or  what  is  so  happily
expressed  in  a  foreign  phrase,  P esprit  du  corps.  Certain
popular  leaders  often  acquire  an  extraordinary  ascen-
dency over  the  body,  by  their  talents,  their  eloquence,
their  intrigues,  or  their  cunning.  Measures  are  often
introduced  in  a  huiry,  and  debated  with  little  care,  and
examined  with  less  caution.  The  very  restlessness  of
many  minds  produces  an  utter  impossibility  of  debat-
ing with  much  deliberation,  when  a  measure  has  a  plau-
sible aspect,  and  enjoys  a  momentary  favour.  Nor  is
it  infrequent,  especially  in  cases  of  this  sort,  to  over-
look well-founded  objections  to  a  measure,  not  only
because  the  advocates  of  it  have  little  desire  to  bring
them  in  review,  but  because  the  opponents  are  often
seduced  into  a  credulous  silence.  A  legislative  body  is
not  ordinarily  apt  to  mistrust  its  own  powers,  and  far

1  1  Kent's  Coram.  208  to  210.

8  Mr.  Tucker,  the  learned  author  of  the  Commentaries  on  Blackstone,
seems  to  hold  the  doctrine,  that  a  division  of  the  legislative  power  la  not
useful  or  important See  Tuck.  Black.  Como.  App.  226, 227.


Digitized  by


Google


so  CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  IH.

less  the  temperate  exercise  of  those  powers.  As  it
prescribes  its  own  rules  for  its  own  deliberations,  it
easily  relaxes  them,  whenever  any  pressure  is  made  for
an  immediate  decision.  If  it  feels  no  check  but  its  own
will,  it  rarely  has  the  firmness  to  insist  upon  holding  a
question  long  enough  under  its  own  view,  to  see  and
mark  it  in  all  its  bearings  and  relations  on  society.^

§  550.  But  it  is  not  merely  inconsiderate  and  rash
legislation,  which  is  to  be  guarded  against,  in  the  ordi-
nary course  of  things.  There  is  a  strong  propensity  in
public  bodies  to  accumulate  power  in  their  own  hands,
to  vnden  the  extent  of  their  own  influence,  and  to  ab-
sorb within  their  own  circle  the  means,  and  the  motives
of  patronage.  If  the  whole  legislative  power  is  vested
m  a  single  body,  there  can  be,  practically,  no  restraint
upon  the  fullest  exercise  of  that  power ;  and  of  any
usurpation,  which  it  may  seek  to  excuse  or  justify,
either  from  necessity  or  a  superior  regard  to  the  public
good.  It  has  been  often  said,  that  necessity  is  the  plea
of  tyrants ;  but  it  is  equally  true,  that  it  is  the  plea  of  all
public  bodies  invested  with  power,  where  no  check  ex-
ists upon  its  exercise.* Mr.  Hume  has  remarked  with

*  1  1  Kent's  Comm.  206,  209 ;  3  Amer.  Museum,  66.

9  The  facility,  with  which  even  great  men  satisfy  themselves  with  ex-
ceeding their  constitutional  powers,  was  never  better  exemplified,  than
by  Mr.  Jefferson's  own  practice  and  example,  as  stated  in  his  own  cor-
respondence. In  1802,  he  entered  into  a  treaty,  by  which  Louisiana  was
to  become  a  part  of  the  Union,  although  (as  we  have  seen)  in  his  own
opinion,  it  was  unconstitutional.*  And,  in  1810,  he  contended  for  the
right  of  the  executive  to  purchase  Flori^m  if,  in  his  own  opiuion,  the  op-
portunity would  otherwfee  be  lost,  notwithstanding  it  might  involve  a
transgression  of  the  law.f  Such  are  the  examples  given  of  a  state  neces-
sity, which  is  to  supersede  the  constitution  and  laws.  Such  are  the
principles,  which  he  contended,  justified  him  in  an  arrest  of  persons  not
sanctioned  bylaw.|

♦  4  Jeffenon*s  Gorresp.  1, 9, 3, 4.  f  W.  149, 150.  %  Id- 151-


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  VIII.]  THE  LEGISLATURE.  31

great  sagacity,  that  men  are  generally  more  honest  in
their  private,  than  in  their  public  capacity  ;  and  wiU  go
greater  lengths  to  serve  a  party,  than  when  their  own
private  interest  is  alone  concerned.  Honour  is  a  great
check  upon  mankind.  But  where  a  considerable  body
of  men  act  together,  this  check  is  in  a  great  measure
removed,  since  a  man  is  sure  to  be  approved  of  by  hia
own  party,  for  what  promotes  the  common  interest ;
and  he  soon  learns  to  despise  the  clamours  of  adversa-
ries.* This  is  by  no  means  an  opinion  peculiar  to  Mr.
Hume.  It  will  be  found  lying  at  the  foundation  of  the
political  reasonings  of  many  of  the  greatest  men  in  all
ages,  as  the  result  of  a  close  survey  of  the  passions,  and
infirmaties,  of  the  history,  and  experience  of  mankind.'
With  a  view,  therefore,  to  preserve  the  rights  and  lib-
erties of  the  people  against  unjust  encroachments,  and
to  secure  the  equal  benefits  of  a  free  constitution,  it  is
of  vital  importance  to  interpose  some  check  against  the
undue  exercise  of  the  legislative  power,  which  in  every
government  is  the  predominating,  and  almost  irresist-
ible power.*

§  551.  This  subject  is  put  in  a  very  strong  light  by
an  eminent  writer,^  whose  mode  pf  reasoning  can  be

1  1  Hume's  Essays,  Essay  6 ;  Id.  Essay  16.  —  Mr.  Jefferson  has  said,
that  "  the  functionaries  of  public  power  rarely  strengthen  in  their  dis-
positions to  abridge  it" 4  Jefferson's  Corresp.  277.

9  See  1  Adams's  Defence  of  American  Constitution,  p.  121,  Letter  26,
Slc.  ;  Id.  Letter,  24 ;  Td.  Letter  55 ;  1  Hume's  Essays,  Essay  IG  ;  1  WU-
son's  Lawl^ect  394  to  397 ;  3  Adamses  Defence  of  American  Constitution,
Letter  6,  p.  209,  &c.

3  Mr.  Hume's  thoughts  ore  often  striking  and  convincing ;  but  his
mode  of  a  perfect  commonwealth  *  contains  some  of  the  most  extrava-
gant vagaries  of  the  human  mind,  equalled  only  by  Locke's  Constitution
for  Carolina.  These  examples  show  the  danger  of  relying  implicitly
upon  the  mere  speculative  opinions  of  the  wisest  men.  «

^  Mr.  John  Adams.

*  1  Home's  Emayt,  Enay  16.


Digitized  by


Google


32  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

best  conveyed  in  his  own  words.  "  If,'*  says  he,  **  we
should  extend  our  candour  so  far,  as  to  own,  that  the
majority  of  mankind  are  generally  under  the  dominion
of  benevolence  and  good  intentions  ;  yet  it  must  be
confessed,  that  a  vast  majority  frequently  transgress  ;
and  what  is  more  decidedly  in  point,  not  only  a  major-
ity, but  almost  all,  confine  their  benevolence  to  their
families,  relations,  personal  friends,  parish,  village,  city,
county,  province ;  and  that  very  few  indeed  extend  it
impartially  to  the  whole  community.  Now,  grant  but
thip  truth,  and  the  question  is  decided.  If  a  majority
are  capable  of  preferring  their  own  private  interests,  or
that  of  their  families,  counties,  and  party,  to  that  of  the
nation  collectively,  some  provision  must  be  made  in
the  constitution  in  favour  of  justice,  to  compel  all  to  re-
spect the  common  right,  the  public  good,  the  universal
law  in  preference  to  all  private  and  partial  considera-
tions.'*  ^  Again  :  "  Of  all  possible  forms  of  government,
a  sovereignty  in  one  assembly,  successively  chosen  by
the  people,  is,  perhaps,  the  best  calculated  to  facilitate
the  gratification  of  self-love,  and  the  pursuit  of  the  pri-
vate interests  of  a  few  individuals.  A  few  emment,  con-
spicuous characters  will  be  continued  in  their  seats  in
the  sovereign  assembly  from  one  election  to  another,
whatever  changes  are  made  in  the  seats  around  them.
By  superior  art,  address,  and  opulence,  by  more  splen-
did birth,  reputations,  and  connexions,  they  wifl  be  able
to  intrigue  with  the  people,  and  their  leaders  out  of
doors,  until  they  worm  out  most  of  their  opposers,  and
introduce  their  friends.  To  this  end  they  will  bestow
all  offices,  contracts,  privileges  in  commerce,  and  other
emoluments  on  the  latter,  and  their  connexions,  and

1  3  Adams's  Defence  of  American  Constitution,  Letter  6,  p.  215,  216.
See  North  American  Review,  Oct  1827,  p.  263.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  VIII.]  THE  LEGISLATURC.  33

throw  every  vexation  and  disappointment  in  the  way
of  the  former,  until  they  establish  such  a  system  of
hopes  and  fears  throughout  the  whole  state,  as  shaU
enable  them  to  carry  a  majority  in  every  fresh  election
of  the  house.  The  judges  will  be  appointed  by  them
and  their  party,  and  of  consequence  will  be  obsequi-
ous enough  to  their  inclinations.  The  whole  judicial
authority,  as  well  as  the  executive,  will  be  employed,
pprverted,  and  prostituted,  to  the  purposes  of  elec-
tioneering. No  justice  will  be  attainable ;  nor  will  inno-
cence or  virtue  be  safe  in  the  judicial  courts,  but  for  the
friends  of  the  prevailing  leaders.  Legal  prosecutions
will  be  instituted,  and  carried  on  against  opposers  to
their  vexation  and  ruin.  And  as  they  have  the  public
purse  at  command,  as  well  as  the  executive  and  judi-
cial power,  the  public  money  will  be  expended  in  the
same  way.  No  favours  will  be  attainable,  but  by  those,
who  vrill  court  the  ruUng  demagogues  of  the  house,  by
votmg  for  their  friends,  and  mstruments ;  and  pensions,
tod  pecimiary  rewards  and  gratifications,  as  well  as
honours,  and  offices  of  every  kind,  voted  to  friends  and
partisans,  5lc.  &c.  The  press,  that  great  barrier  and
bulwark  of  the  rights  of  mankind,  when  it  is  protected
by  law,  can  no  longer  be  free.  If  the  authors,  writers,
and  printers,  vnll  not  accept  of  the  hire,  that  will  be
offered  them,  they  must  submit  to  the  rum,  that  will  be
denounced  against  them.  The  presses,  with  much
secrecy  and  concealment,  will  be  made  the  vehicles  of
calumny  agamst  the  minority,  and  of  panegyric,  and
empirical  applauses  of  the  leaders  of  the  majority,  and
no  remedy  can  possibly  be  obtained.  In  one  word,  the
whole  system  of  affiadrs,  and  every  conceivable  motive
of  hope  or  fear,  will  be  employed  to  promote  the  private
interests  of  a  few,  and  their  obsequious  majority ;  and

VOL.  II.  5


Digitized  by


Google


34  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  IIU

there  id  no  remedy  but  in  arms.  Accordingly  we  find  in
all  the  Italian  republics,  the  mmority  always  were  driv-
en to  arms  in  despair.^

^  662.  Anothfer  learned  writer  has  ventured  on  the
bold  declaration,  that  *^  a  single  legislature  is  calculated
to  unite  in  it  all  the  pernicious  qualities  of  the  different
extremes  of  bad  government.  It  produces  general
weakness,  inactivity,  and  confusion  ;  and  these  are  in-
termixed with  sudden  and  violent  fits  of  despotism,  in-
justice and  cruelty."  *

^  663.  Without  conceding,  that  this  language  exhib-
its an  unexaggerated  picture  of  the  results  of  the  legis-
lative power  being  vested  in  a  single  assembly,  there  is
enough  in  it  to  satisfy  the  minds  of  considerate  men,
that  there  is  great  danger  in  such  an  exclusive  deposit
of  it.^  Some  check  ought  to  be  provided,  to  maintain
the  real  balance  intended  by  the  constitution  ;  and  this
check  will  be  most  effectually  obtained  by  a  co-ordinate
branch  of  equal  authority,  and  different  organization,
which  shall  have  the  same  legislative  power,  and  pos*
sess  an  independent  negative  upon  the  doings  of  the
other  branch.  The  value  of  the  check  will,  indeed,  in  a
great  measure  depend  upon  this  difference  of  organiza-
tion. If  the  term  of  office,  the  qualifications,  the  mode  of
election,  the  persons  and  interests  represented  by  each
branch,  are  exactly  the  same,  the  check  will  be  less
powerful,  and  the  guard  less  perfect,  than  if  some,  or
all  of  these  ingredients  differ,  so  as  to  bring  into  play
all  the  various  interests  and  influences,  which  belong  to
a  free,  honest,  and  enlightened  society.

1  3  Adtms'f  Defence  of  American  Conatitation,  284  to  386.
8  1  Wilson's  Law  Lect  393  to  405 ;  The  Federalist,  Na  22.
3  See  Sidney  on  Government,  eh.  3,  $  45.


Digitized  by


Google


CH. rmJ]  THE  LE«ISLATURX,  36

§  554.  The  vahie,  then,  of  a  distrftution  of  the  legis-
lative power,  between  two  branches,  each  possessing  a
negative  upon  the  other,  may  be  summed  up  under  the
following  heads.  First :  It  operates  directly  as  a  se-
curity against  hasty,  rash,  and  dangerous  legislation ;  and
allows  errors  and  mistakes  to  be  corrected,  before  they
have  produced  any  public  mischiefs.  It  interposes  de-
lay betweaoi  the  introduction,  and  final  adoption  of  a
measure  ;  and  thus  furnishes  time  for  reflection  ;  and
for  the  successive  deliberations  of  different  bodies,  ac-
tuated by  different  motives,  and  organized  upon  difer-
.  ent  principles.

^  555.  In  the  next  place,  it  operates  indirectly  as  a
preventive  to  attempts  to  carry  private,  personal,  or
party  objects,  not  connected  with  the  common  good
The  very  circumstance,  that  there  exists  another  body
clothed  with  equal  power,  and  jealous  of  its  own  rights,
and  independent  d*  the  influ^ice  of  the  leaders,  who
favour  a  particular  measiu*e,  by  whom  it  must  be  scan-
ned, and  to  whom  it  must  be  recommended  upon  its
own  merits,  will  have  a  silent  tendency  to  discourage
the  effiMis  to  carry  it  by  surprise,  ot  by  mtrigue,  or  by
corrupt  party  combinations.  It  is  £su*  less  easy  to  de-
ceive, or  ccHTupt,  or  persuade  two  bodies  into  a  course,
subversive  of  the  general  good,  than  it  is  one ;  especial-
ly if  the  elements,  of  which  they  are  composed,  are  es-
sentially different

^  556.  In  the  next  place,  as  legislation  necessarily
acts,  or  may  act,  upon  the  whole  community,  and  in-
volves interests  of  vast  difficulty  and  complexity,  and
requires  nice  adjustments,  and  comprehensive  enact-
ments, it  is  of  the  greatest  consequence  to  secure  an
independent  review  of  it  by  different  minds,  acting
under  different,  and  sometimes  opposite  opinions  and


Digitized  by


Google


36  COWSTITUTIOir  of  the  U.  states, [book  III.

feeliij^s ;  so,*'  that  it  may  be  as  perfect,  as  human  wis-
dom can  devise.  An  appellate  jurisdiction,  therefore,
that  acts,  and  is  acted  upon  alternatively,  in  the  exer-
cise of  an  independent  revisory  authority,  must  have
the  means,  and  can  scarely  fail  to  possess  the  will,  to
give  it  a  full  and  satisfactory  review.  Every  one  knows,
notwithstanding  all  the  guards  interposed  to  secure  due
deliberation,  how  imperfect  all  human  legislation  is;
how  much  it  embraces  of  doubtful  principle,  and  of  still
more  doubtful  utility ;  how  various,  and  yet  how  defec-
tive, are  its  provisions  to  protect  rights,  and  to  redress
wrongs.  Whatever,  therefore,  naturally  and  necessa-  .
rily  awakens  doubt,  solicits  caution,  attracts  inquiry,  or
stimulates  vigilance  and  industry,  is  of  value  to  aid  us
against  precipitancy  in  framing,  or  altering  laws,  as  well
as  against  yielding  to  the  suggestions  of  indolence,  the
selfish  projects  of  ambition,  or  the  cunning  devices  of
corrupt  and  hollow  demagogues.^  For  this  purpose,  no
better  expedient  has,  as  yet,  been  foimd,  than  the  crea-
tion of  an  independent  branch  of  censors  to  revise  the
legislative  enactments  of  otho^and  to  alter,  amend,  or
reject  them  at  its  pleasure,^aiiaHib,  in  return,  its  own
are  to  pass  through  a  like  ordeaL

^  557.  In  the  next  place,  there  can  scarcely  be  any
other  adequate  security  against  encroachments  upon
the  constitutional  rights  and  liberties  of  the  people.
Algernon  Sidney  has  said  with  great  force,  that  the  legis-
lative power  is  always  arbitrary,  and  not  to  be  trusted
in  the  hands  of  any,  who  are  not  bound  to  obey  the

*  "  Look,"  says  an  intelligrent  writer,  "  into  every  society,  analyze  pub-
lic measures,  and  get  at  the  real  conducters  of  thero,and  it  will  be  found,
that  few,  very  few,  men  in  any  government,  and  in  tiie  most  democraiical
perhaps  the  feweHj  are,  in  fact,  the  persons,  who  give  the  lead  and  direc-
tion to  all,  which  is  brought  to  pass."  Thoughts  upon  the  Political  Sit-
oation  of  the  United  States  of  America,  printed  at  Worcester,  1788.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  riuJ]  THE  LEGISLATURE.  37

laws  they  make.'  But  it  is  not  less  true,  that  it  has  a
constant  tendency  to  overies^  its  proper  boundaries,
from  passion,  from  ambition,  from  inadvertence,  from
the  prevalence  of  faction,  or  from  the  overwhelming  m-
fluence  of  private  interests.*  Under  such  circumstan-
ces, the  only  effectual  barrier  against  oppression,  acci-
dental or  intentional,  is  to  separate  its  operations,  to
balance  interest  against  interest,  ambition  against  ambi-
tion, the  combinadons  and  spirit  of  dominion  of  one
body  against  the  like  combinations  and  spirit  of  another.
And  it  is  obvious,  that  the  more  various  the  elements,
which  enter  mto  the  actual  composition  of  each  body,
the  greater  the  security  will  be.'  Mr.  Justice  Wilson
has  truly  remarked,  that,  ^^  when  a  single  legislature  is
determined  to  depart  from  the  principles  of  the  consti-
tution, and  its  uncontrollable  power  may  prompt  the  de-
termination^ there  is  no  constitutional  authority  to  check
its  progress.  It  may  proceed  by  long  and  hasty  strides
in  violating  the  constitution,  till  nothing  but  a  revolution
can  check  its  career.  Far  different  will  the  case  be,
when  the  legislature  consists  of  two  branches.  If  one
of  them  should  depart,  or  attempt  to  depart,  from  the
principles  of  the  constitution,  it  will  be  drawn  back  by
the  other.  The  very  apprehension  of  the  event  will
prevent  the  departure,  or  the  attempt*

1  Sidney's  Disc,  on  Government,  ch.  3,  §  45.

8  The  Federalist,  No.  15.  3  Id.  No.  62, 15.

4  1  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  396 ;  The  Federalist,  No.  62,  63.  — Mr.  Jef-
ferson was  decidedly  in  favour  of  a  division  of  the  legislative  power  into
two  branches,  as  will  be  evident  from  an  examination  of  his  Notes  on
Virginia,  (p.  194,)  and  his  Correspondence  at  the  period,  when  this  sub-
ject was  much  discussed.*  De  Lolme,  in  his  work  on  the  constitution
of  England,  has  (ch.  3,  p.  214,  &c.)  some  very  striking  remarks  on  the
same  subject,  in  the  passage  already  cited.  He  has  added  :  **  The  re-
sult of  a  division  of  the  executive  power  is  either  a  more  or  less  speedy

•  . -a  Pitk.  flirt,  sea.


Digitized  by


Google


38  CONSTITUTION  OF  THB  U.  8TAT£S. [BOOK  III.

^  558.  Such  is  an  outline  of  the  general  reasoning,
by  which  the  system  of  a  separation  of  the  legislative
power  into  two  branches  has  been  maintained.  Expe-
rience has  shown,  that  if  in  all  cases  it  has  not  been
found  a  complete  check  to  inconsiderate  or  imconstitu-
tional  legislation;  yet,  that  it  has,  upon  many  occasions,
been  found  sufficient  for  the  purpose.  There  is  not
probably  at  this  moment  a  single  state  in  the  Union,
which  would  consent  to  unite  the  two  branches  into  one
assembly ;  though  there  have  not  been  wantmg  at  all
times  minds  of  a  high  order,  which  haiTe  been  led  by
enthusiasm,  or  a  love  of  simplicity,  or  a  devotion  to
theory,  to  vindicate  such  a  union  with  arguments  strik-
ing and  plausible,  if  not  convincing.

§  559.  In  the  convention,  which  formed  the  consti-
tution, upon  the  resolution  moved,  *'  that  the  nati<mal
legislature  ought  to  consist  of  two  branches,''  all  the
states  present,  except  Pennsylvania,  voted  in  the  af-
firmative.^ At  a  subsequent  period,  however,  seven
only,  of  eleven  states  present,  voted  in  the  affirma-
tive ;  three  in  the  negative,  and  one  was  divided.*  But,
although  in  the  convention  this  diversity  of  opinion  ap-
pears,* it  seems  probable,  that  ultimately,  when  a  na-
tional government  was  decided  on,  which  should  exert
great  controlling  authwity  over  the  states,  all  opposi-
tion was  withdrawn,  as  the  existence  of  two  branches
furnished  a  greater  security  to  the  lesser  states.  It
does  not  appear,  that  this  division  of  the  legislative

establishment  of  the  right  of  the  strongest,  or  a  continued  state  of  war ;
that  of  a  division  of  the  legislative  power  is  either  tmth,  or  general
tranquillity."  See  also  Paley's  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy,  B.  6,  ch.
6,7.

1  Journal  of  the  Convention,  85 ;  2  Pitk.  Hist  233.

s  Journal  of  the  Convention,  140.

3  Yates's  Minutes,  4  Elliot's  Debates,  59,  75,  76 ;  Id.  87,  88,  89 ;  Id.
124, 125.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Till.]  THE  L£GISLATUR£«  39

power  became  with  the  people  any  subject  of  ardent
discussion,  or  of  real  controversy.  If  it  had  been  so,
deep  traces  of  it  would  have  been  found  in  the  public
debates,  instead  of  a  general  silence.  The  Federalist
touches  the  subject  in  but  few  places,  and  then  princi-
pally with  reference  to  the  articles  of  confederation,  and
the  structure  of  the  senate.^  In  fact,  the  opponents  of
the  constitution  felt,  that  there  was  additional  security
given  to  the  states,  as  such,  by  their  representation  in
the  senate ;  and  as  the  large  states  must  have  a  com-
manding influence  upon  the  actual  basis  in  the  house,
the  lesser  states  could  not  but  unite  in  a  desire  to  main-
tain their  own  equality  in  a  co-ordinate  branch.*

§  560.  Having  considered  the  general  reasoning,  by
which  the  division  of  the  legislative  power  has  been
justified,  it  may  be  proper,  in  conclusion,  to  give  a  sum-
mary of  those  grounds,  which  were  deemed  most  im-
portant, and  which  had  most  influence  in  settling  the
actual  structure  of  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.
The  question  of  course  had  reference  altogether  to  the
establishment  of  the  senate ;  for  no  one  doubted  the
propriety  of  establishing  a  house  of  representatives,  as
a  depositary  of  the  legislative  power,  however  much
any  might  differ,  as  to  the  nature  of  its  composition.

^661.  In  order  to  justify  the  existence  of  a  senate
with  co-ordinate  powers,  it  was  said,  first,  that  it  was  a
misfortune  incident  to  republican  governments,  though
in  a  less  degree  than  to  other  governments,  that  those,
who  administer  it,  may  forget  their  obligations  to  then-
constituents,  and  prove  unfaithful  to  their  important
trust.  In  this  point  of  view,  a  senate,  as  a  second
branch  of  the  legislative  assembly,  distinct  fi-om,  and

1  The  Federalist,  No.  22,  62,  63.

9  The  Federalist,  No.  22  ;  Id.  No.  37, 38 ;  Id.  No.  39 ;  Id.  No.  62.


Digitized  by


Google


40 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  III.

dividing  the  power  with  a  first,  must  be  in  all  cases  a
salutary  check  on  the  government.  It  doubles  the
security  to  the  people  by  requiring  the  concurrence  of
two  distinct  bodies,  in  schemes  of  usurpation  or  per-
^fidy ;  whereas  the  ambition  or  corruption  of  one  would
otherwise  be  sufficient  This  precaution,  it  was  adde^!,
was  founded  on  sujh  clear  principles,  and  so  well  un-
derstood in  the  United  States,  that  it  was  superfluous
to  enlarge  on  it.  As  the  improbability  of  sinister  com-
binations would  be  in  proportion  to  the  dissimilarity  in
the  genius  of  the  two  bodies,  it  must  be  politic  to  dis-
tinguish them  fi-om  each  other  by  every  circumstance,
which  would  consist  with  a  due  harmony  in  all  proper
measures,  and  with  the  genume  principles  of  republican
government*

§  662.  Secondly.  The  necessity  of  a  senate  was
not  less  indicated  by  the  propensity  of  all  single  and
numerous  assemblies  to  yield  to  the  impulse  of  sud-
den and  violent  passions,  and  to  be  seduced  by  fac-
tious leaders  into  intemperate  and  pernicious  resolu-
tions. Examples  of  this  sort  might  be  cited  without
number,  and  fi*om  proceedings  in  the  United  States,  as
well  as  fit)m  the  history  of  other  nations.  A  body,
which  is  to  correct  this  infirmity,  ought  to  be  free  from
it,  and  consequently  ought  to  be  less  numerous,  and  to
possess  a  due  degree  of  firmness,  and  a  proper  tenure
of  office.'

^  663.  Thirdly.  Another  defect  to  be  supplied  by
a  senate  lay  in  the  want  of  a  due  acquaintance  with  the
objects  and  principles  of  legislation.  A  good  govern-
ment implies  two  things ;  fidelity  to  the  objects  of  the

1  The  PederalUt,  No.  69.

9  The  Federalist,  No.  62 ;  Paley's  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy,
B.  6,  cL  6,  7 ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Leci  144  to  148.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Till.]  TH£  L£GI8LATim£.  41

government ;  secondly,  a  knowledge  of  the  means,  by
which  those  objects  can  be  best  attained.  It  was  sug-
gested, that  in  the  American  goveraments  too  little  at-
tention had  been  paid  to  the  last ;  and  that  the  estab-
lishment of  a  senate  upon  a  proper  basis  would  greatly
increase  the  chances  of  fidelity,  and  of  wise, and  safe
legislation.  What  (it  was  asked)  are  all  the  repealing,
explaining,  and  amending  laws,  which  fill  and  disgrace
our  voluminous  codes,  but  so  many  monuments  of  de-
ficient wisdom;  so  many  impeachments  exhibited
by  each  succeeding,  against  each  preceding  session ;
30  many  admonitions  to  the  people  of  the  value  of  those
aids,  which  may  be  expected  firom  a  well-constituted
senate?  ^

§  664.  Fourthly.  Such  a  body  would  prevent  too
great  a  mutability  in  the  public  councils,  arising  from  a
Tapid  succession  of  new  members ;  for  from  a  change  of
men  there  must  proceed  a  change  of  opinions,  and  from
a  change  of  opinions,  a  change  of  measures.  Such  in-
stability in  legislation  has  a  tendency  to  diminish  respect
and  confidence  abroad,  as  well  as  safety  and  prosperity
at  home.  It  has  a  tendency  to  damp  the  ardour  of  in-
dustxyloid  enterprise;  to  diminish  the  security  of  prop-
erty ;  ajid  to  impair  the  reverence  and  attachment,
which  are  indispensable  to  the  permanence  of  every
political  institution.*

§  666.  Fifthly.  Another  ground,  illustratmg  the  util-
ity of  a  senate,  was  suggested  to  be  the  keeping  alive  of
a  due  sense  of  national  character.  In  respect  to  foreign
nations,  this  was  of  vital  importance ;  for  m  our  inter-
course with  them,  if  a  scrupulous  and  uniform  adher-
ence to  just  principles  was  not  observed,  it  must  sub-


1  The  Federalist,  No.  62.  «  Id.  No.  &l

VOL.  II.  6


Digitized  by


Google


43  CONSTITUTiOlf  OF  THB  U.  «TATBS. [bOOK  in*

ject  us  to  many  embarrassments  and  collisions.  It  is
difficult  to  impress  upon  a  single  body,  which  is  nume-
rous and  changeable,  a  deep  sense  of  the  value  of  na-
tional character.  A  small  portion  of  the  praise,  or
blame  of  any  particular  measure  can  fall  to  the  lot  of
any  particular  person ;  and  the  period  of  office  is  so
short,  that  litde  responsibility  is  felt,  and  little  pride  is
indulged,  as  to  the  course  of  the  government^

^  566.  Sixthly.  It  was  urged,  that  paradoxical  as
it  might  seem,  the  want  in  some  important  cases  of  a
due  responsibility  in  the  government  soises  from  that
very  frequency  of  elections,  which  in  other  cases  pro-
duces such  responsibility.  In  order  to  be  reasonable,
responsibility  must  be  limited  to  objects  withm  the
power  of  the  responsible  party ;  and  in  order  to  be
effectual,  it  must  relate  to  operations  of  that  power,  of
which  a  ready  and  proper  judgment  can  be  formed  by
the  constituents.  Some  measures  have  singly  an  im-
mediate and  sensible  operation ;  others  agsdn  depend
on  a  succession  of  weU  connected  schemes,  and  have
a  gradual,  and  perhaps  unobserved  operation.  If,  there^
fore,  there  be  but  one  assembly,  chosen  for  a  short  peri-
od, it  will  be  difficult  to  k^p  up  the  train  of  prefer
measures,  or  to  preserve  the  proper  connexion  between
the  past  and  the  future.  And  the  more  numerous  the
body,  and  the  more  changeable  its  component  parts,
the  more  difficult  it  wiU  be  to  preserve  the  perscmal
responsibility,  as  well  as  the  uniform  action,  of  the  suc-
cessive memb^^  to  the  great  objects  of  the  public
wdfare.*

^  667.  Lastiy.  A  senate  duly  constituted  would  not
only  operate,  as  a  salutary  check  upon  the  representa-

1  The  Federalist,  No.  63.  .a  M.  No.  68.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


OH.  Tfn.]  THS  LKmisukTxrwm.  48

iiyes^  but  occasbiiallj  iipoB  the  peqple  themselves,
a^painst  their  own  temporary  delosions  and  errors.
The  cod,  deliberate  sense  of  the  commimity  ought,  in
aQ  governments,  and  aetuattjr  will,  m  all  free  gorem*
ments^  ultimately  prevail  over  the  views  of  their  rulers.
Bat  there  are  particular  moments  in  public  affairs,  when
the  people,  stimulated  by  some  irregular  passion,  w
some  illicit  advantage,  or  misled  by  the  artful  misrepre-
sentations of  mterested  men,  may  call  jbr  measures,
whidi  they  themselves  will  afterwards  be  the  most
ready  to  lament  and  condemn.  In  these  critical  mo*
ments,  how  salutary  will  be  the  interference  of  a  body
of  respectaWe  citizens,  chosen  without  reference  to  the
exciting  cause,  to  check  the  misguided  career  of  public
opinion,  and  to  suspend  the  blow,  untS  reason,  justice,
find  truth  can  regain  their  authority  over  the  public
mind.^  '  It  was  thought  to  add  great  weight  to  all  these
considerations,  that  history  has  informed  us  of  no  long-
lived  republic,  which  bad  not  a  senate.  Sparta,  Rome,
Carthage  were,  in  fact,  the  only  states,  to  whom  that
dbaraeter  can  be  applied.'


&  The  Federalist,  No.  69.

9  The  Federalist,  No.  63. — There  areeome  very  striking  remarks  on
this  subject  in  the  reasoning  of  the  convention,  in  the  county  of  Essex,
called  to  consider  the  constitution  proposed  for  Massachusetts,  in  1778,*
and  which  was  finally  rejected.  **  The  legislative  power,"  said  that
body,  "must  not  be  trusted  with  one  assembly.  A  single  assembly  is
frequently  influenced  by  the  vices,  follies,  passions,  and  prejudices  of  an
mdividual.  It  is  liable  to  be  avaricious,  and  to  exempt  itself  from  the
burthens  it  lays  on  its  constituents.  It  is  subject  to  ambition ;  and  after
a  series  of  years  will  be  prompted  to  vote  itself  perpetual.  The  long
paHinmeni  in  Eisgland  voted  itself  perpetual,  and  thereby  for  a  time  de-
stroyed the  political  liberty  of  the  «mbject Holland  was  governed  by

•  It  is  coDUiDod  in  a  pamphlet,  entitled  **  The  Ewoz  Result,**  and  was  printed  io  1778.  I
quote  the  passage  ftom  Blr.  BavageVi  ralnable  Exposition  of  the  Constitution  of  MassacbusetU,
printed  in  the  New-Bngland  Mafazine  for  March,  1838,  p.  9.  Sise  abo  on  this  sobject  Palej's
H«ra]PhUoioph7,B.6,eb.7,p.3e8  }  The  Federalis^  No.  88,63.


Digitized  by


Google


44  CONSTITUTIOir  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

^  668.  It  will  be  observed,  that  some  parts  of  the
foregoing  reasoning  apply  to  the  fundamental  impor-
tance of  an  actual  division  of  the  legislative  power ;  and
other  parts  to  the  true  principles,  upon  which  that  di-
vision should  be  subsequently  organized,  in  order  to
give  full  effect  to  the  constitutional  check.  Some  parts
go  to  show  the  value  of  a  senate ;  and  others,  what
should  be  its  structure,  in  order  to  ensure  wisdom,  ex-
perience, fidelity,  and  dignity  in  its  members.  All  of
it,  however,  instructs  us,  that,  in  order  to  give  it  fair
play  and  influence,  as  a  co-ordinate  branch  of  govern-
ment, it  ought  to  be  less  numerous,  more  select,  and
more  durable,  than  the  other  branch ;  and  be  chosen  in
a  manner,  which  should  combine,  and  represent  differ-
ent interests  with  a  varied  force.*  How  far  these  ob-
jects are  attained  by  the  constitution  will  be  better
seen,  when  the  details  belongmg  to  each  department
are  succesifiively  examined.

^  569.  This  discussion  may  be  closed  by  the  remark,
that  in  the  Roman  republic  the  legislative  authority,  in
the  last  resort,  resided  for  ages  in  two  distinct  political
bodies,  not  as  branches  of  the  same  legislature,  but  as
distinct  and  independent  legislatures,  in  each  of  which
an  opposite  interest  prevailed. In  one,  the  patrician ;

one  representative  assembly,  annually  elected.  They  afterwards  voted
themselves  from  annual  to  septennial ;  then  for  life ;  and  finally  exerted
the  power  of  filling  up  all  vacancies,  without  application  to  their  constit-
uents. The  government  of  HoUand  is  now  a  tyranny,  thottgh  a  rtpuhltc
The  result  of  a  single  assembly  will  be  hasty  and  indigested ;  and  their
judgments  frequently  absurd  and  inconsistent  There  must  be  a  second
body  to  revise  with  coolness,  and  wisdom,  and  to  control  with  firmness,
independent  upon  the  first,  either  for  their  creation,  or  existence.  Yet
the  first  must  retain  a  right  to  a  similar  revision  and  control  over  the
second."

1  The  Federalist,  No.  63, 63.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Tin.]  THE  LBOISLATITBS.  46

in  the  other,  the  plebeian  predominated  And  yet,
during  the  co-existence  of  these  two  legislatures,  the
Roman  republic  attained  to  the  supposed  pmnade  of
human  greatness.^

1  The  Fedenlift,  No.  34.


Digitized  by


Google


4B  CONSTITUTJOir  OF  TBB  IT*  8TAT£S. [bQOIC  HI.

CHAt>TEH  IX.

HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIYBH.

§  670.  The  second  section  of  the  first  article  con-
tains the  structure  and  organization  of,  the  house  of
representatives. The  first  clause  is  as  foUows :

"The  house  of  representatives  shall  be  composed  of
"  members  chosen  every  second  year  by  the  people  of
"  the  several  states ;  and  the  electors  in  each  state  shall
"  have  the  qualifications  requisite  for  electors  of  the
"  most  numerous  branch  of  the  state  legislature.**

^571.  As  soon  as  it  was  settled,  that  the  legislative
power  should  be  divided  into  two  separate  and  distinct
branches,  a  very  important  consideration  arose  in  regard
to  the  organization  of  those  branches  respectively.  It
is  obvious,  that  the  organization  of  each  is  susceptible  of
very  great  diversities  and  modifications,  in  respect  to
the  principles  of  representation  ;  the  qualification  of  the
electors,  and  the  elected ;  the  term  of  service  of  the
members ;  the  ratio  of  representation ;  and  the  number,
of  which  the  body  should  be  composed.

^  572.  First;  the  principle  of  representation.
The  American  people  had  long  been  in  the  enjoyment
of  the  privilege  of  electing,  at  least,  one  branch  of  the
legislature ;  and,  in  some  of  the  colonies,  of  electing  all
the  branches  composing  the  legislature.  A  house  of
representatives,  under  various  denominations,  such  as  a
house  of  delegates,  a  house  of  commons,  or,  simply,  a
house  of  representatives,  emanating  directly  fix)m,  and
responsible  to,  the  people,  and  possessing  a  distinct  and
independent  legislative  authority,  was  familiar  to  all  the
colonies,  and  was  held  by  them  in  the  highest  rever-


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOiarsfi  of  RfiPRESsnrATiTss.  47

ence  and  respect They  justly  thought,  that  as  the
goTermnent  in  general  should  always  have  a  common
interest  with  the  people,  and  be  admin  stered  for  their
good ;  so  it  was  essential  to  their  rights'and  liberties,
that  the  most  numerous  branch  should  have  an  immedi-
ate dependence  iq>on,  and  sympathy  with,  the  people.^
Th&te  was  no  novelty  in  this  view. It  was  not  the
mere  result  of  a  state  of  cdonial  dependence,  in  which
their  jealousy  was  awake  to  all  the  natural  encroach-
ments of  power  in  a  foreign  reahn. They  had  drawn
their  opinions  and  principles  firom  the  practice  of  the
parent  country. They  knew  the  inestimable  value  oi
die  house  of  commons,  as  a  component  branch  of  the
British  parliament ; and  they  believed,  that  it  had  at
all  times  furnished  the  best  security  against  the  oppres-
sions of  the  crown,  and  the  aristocracy. While  the
power  of  taxation,  (rf  revenue,  and  of  supplies,  remamed
in  the  hands  of  a  popular  branch,  it  was  difficult  for
usurpation  to  exist  for  any  length  of  time  without  check ;
and  prerogative  must  yield  to  that  necessity,  which
controtied  at  once  the  sword  and  the  purse. No  rea-
soning, th^^efore,  was  necessary  to  satisfy  the  American
people  of  die  advantages  of  a  house  of  representatives,
vdiich  should  emanate  directiy  from  themselves;  which
should  guard  their  interests,  support  their  rights,  ex-
press theu*  opmions,  make  known  their  wants,  redress
their  grievances,  and  introduce  a  pervading  popular  influ-
ence throughout  all  the  operations  of  the  government.
Experience,  as  weU  as  theory,  had  settled  it  in  their
minds,  as  a  fundamental  principle  of  a  free  government,
and  especis3iy  of  a  republican  government,  that  no  laws

1  The  Federalist,  No.  52;  1  Black.  Comm«  158,  159;  Paley's  Moral «
Philosophy,  B.  6,  ch.  7 ;  1  Wilson's  Law  Lect  429  to  433 ;  2  Wilson's
Law  Lect  122  to  132.  »


Digitized  by


Google


48  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  0.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

ought  to  be  passed  without  the  co-operation  and  con-
sent of  the  representatives  of  the  people;  and  that
these  representatives  should  be  chosen  by  themselves
without  the  intervention  of  any  other  functionaries  to
intercept,  or  vary  their  responsibility.  ^

§473.  The  principle,  however,  had  been  hitherto
applied  to  the  political  organization  of  the  state  legis-
latures only ;  and  its  application  to  that  of  the  fed-
eral government  was  not  without  some  diversity  of
opinion.  This  diversity  had  not  its  origin  in  any  doubt
of  the  correctness  of  the  principle  itself  when  applied  to
simple  republics ;  but,  the  propriety  of  applying  it  to
cases  of  confederated  republics  was  affected  by  other
independent  considerations.  Those,  who  might  wish
to  retain  a  very  large  portion  of  state  sovereignty,  in  its
representative  character,  in  the  coimcils  of  the  Union,
would  naturally  desire  to  have  the  house  of  representa-
tives elected  by  the  state  in  its  political  character,  as
under  the  old  confederation.  Those,  on  the  other  hand,
who  wished  to  impart  to  the  government  a  national
character,  would  as  naturally  desire  an  independent
election  by  the  people  themselves  in  their  primary  meet-
ings. Probably  these  circumstances  had  some  opera-
tion upon  the  votes  given  on  the  question  in  the  con-
vention itself.  For  it  appears,  that  upon  the  origmal
proposition  in  the  convention,  "  That  the  members  of
the  first  branch  of  the  national  legislature  ought  to  be
elected  by  the  people  of  the  several  states,  six  states
voted  for  it,  two  against  it,  and  two  were  divided.*  And
upon  a  subsequent  motion  to  strike  out  the  word  ^  peo-
ple,'* and  insert  m  its  place  the  word  "  legislatures,**

I  1  Tacker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  2B.

s  Journal  of  Convention,  May  31, 1787^  p.  85,  86, 135 ;  4  EUiot'a  De-
batea,  (Yatea'a  Minutea,)  58.


Digitized  by


Google


CH. IX.]  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES.  49

three  states  voted  in  the  affirmative  and  eight  in  the
negative.^  At  a  subsequent  period  a  motion,  that  the
representatives  should  be  appointed  in  such  manner  as
the  legislature  of  each  state  should  direct,  was  negativ-
ed^ six  states  voting  in  the  affirmative,  three,  in  the
negative,  and  one  being  divided ;  and  the  final  vote  in
favour  of  an  election  by  the  people  was  decided  by  the
vote  of  nine  states  in  the  affirmative,  one  voting  in  the
negative,  and  one  being  divided.*  The  result  was  not
therefore  obtained  without  much  discussion  and  argu-
ment ;  though  at  last  an  entbe  imanimity  prevailed.*
It  is  satisfactory  to  know,  that  a  fundamentsJ  principle
of  public  liberty  has  been  thus  secured  to  ourselves  and
our  posterity,  which  will  for  ever  indissolubly  connect
the  interests  of  the  people  with  the  mterests  of  the
Union.*  Under  the  confederation,  though  the  delegates
to  congress  might  have  been  elected  by  the  people,
they  were,  in  fact,  in  all  the  states  except  two,  elected
by  the  state  legislature.*

1  Joanialof  Convention,  May  31,  1787,  p.  103,  J04  ;  4  Elliot'a  De-
bates, (1  Yates's  Minutes,)  62,  63,  90,  91.

9  Journal  of  Convention,  June  21,  1787,  p.  140,  141, 215  ;  4  Elliot's
Debates,  90, 91,  (Yates's  Minutes.)

3  Journal  of  Convention,  p.  il6, 233.

4  Mr.  fiurke,  in  his  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution,  has  treated
the  subject  of  the  mischiefs  of  an  indirect  choice  only  by  the  people  of
their  representatives  in  a  masterly  manner.  He  has  demonstrated,  that
such  a  system  must  remove  all  real  responsibility  to  the  people  from  the
representative.  Mr.  Jefierson  has  expressed  his  approbation  of  the  prin-
ciple of  a  direct  choice  in  a  very  qualified  manner.  He  says,  "  I  ap-
prove of  the  greater  house  being  chosen  by  the  people  directly.  For,
though  I  think  a  house  so  chosen  will  be  very  inferior  to  the  present
congress,  toiU  be  very  ill  quaiiJUd  to  legislate  for  the  Union,  for  foreign
nations,  &.c.  ;  yet  this  evil  does  not  weigh  against  the  good  of  preserv-
ing inviolate  the  fundamental  principle,  that  the  people  ought  not  to  be
taxed  but  by  representatives  chosen  immediately  by  themselves."
2  Jefferson's  Corresp.  p.  273.

*  The  Federalist,  No.  40.
VOL.  II.  7


^k  Digitized  by  GoOglC


60 coNsnruTioir  of  the  v.  states, [book  hi.

§  574  We  accordingly  find,  that  in  the  section  under
consideration,  the  house  of  representatives  is  required
to  be  composed  of  representatives  chosen  by  the  people
of  the  several  states.  The  choice,  too,  is  to  be  made
immediately  by  them ;  so  that  the  power  is  direct ;  the
influence  (Krect ;  and  the  responsibility  direct  If  any
intermediate  agency  had  been  adopted,  such  as  a  choice
through  an  electoral  college,  or  by  official  personages,
or  by  select  and  specially  qualified  functionaries  pro
hoc  mcBj  it  is  obvious,  that  the  dependence  d*  the  repre-
sentative upon  the  people,  and  the  responsibility  to
them,  would  have  been  far  less  felt,  and  £Bir  more  ob-
structed. Influence  would  have  naturally  grown  up
with  patronage ;  and  here,  as  in  many  other  case^  the
legal  maxim  would  have  applied,  causa  proxma^  non
remotOj  spectaiwr.  The  select  body  woidd  have  been
at  once  the  patrons  and  the  guides  of  the  represen-
tative; and  the  people  themselves  have  beonne  the
instruments  of  subverting  their  own  rights  and  power.

§  676.  The  indirect  advantages  from  this  immediate
agency  of  the  people  in  the  choice  of  their  representa-
tives are  of  incalculable  benefit,  and  deserve  a  brief
mention  in  this  place,  because  they  furnish  us  with
matter  for  most  serious  reflection,  in  regard  to  the
actual  operations  and  influences  of  republican  gov-
ernments. :  In  the  first  place,  the  right  confers  an
additional  sense  of  personal  dignity  and  duty  upon
the  mass  of  the  people.  It  gives  a  strong  direc-
tion to  the  education,  studies,  and  pursuits  of  the  whole
community.  It  enlarges  the  sphere  of  action,  and  con-
tributes, in  a  high  degree,  to  the  formation  (rf  the  public
manners,  and  national  character.  It  procures  to  the
common  people  courtesy  and  sympathy  from  their  su-
periors, and  difiuses  a  common  confidence,  as  well  as  a


Digitized  by


Google


,€&  IX.] HOirU  OF  R£FmS»VTATITS8.  51

coDimoii  interest)  through  aU  the  ranks  of  society.  It
awakens  a  desire  to  examine,  and  sift,  and  debate  all
pi&lic  proceedings,  and  thus  nourishes  a  lively  curiosity
to  acquire  knowledge,  and,  at  the  same  time,  furnishes
the  means  of  gratifying  it  The  proceedings  and  de-
bates of  the  legislature ;  the  conduct  of  publk:  officers
from  the  highest  to  the  lowest ;  the  character  and  poo-
duct  of  the  executive  and  his  ministers ;  the  struggles,
mtriguesy  and  conduct  of  difierent  parties ;  and  the  dis-
cussion of  the  great  public  measures  and  questions,
which  s^tate  and  divide  the  community,  are  not  only
freely  canvassed,  and  thus  improve  and  elevate  con-
versation ;  but  they  gradually  furnish  the  mmd  with
safe  and  solid  materials  for  judgment  upon  all  public
affairs ;  and  check  that  impetuosity  and  rashness,  to
which  sudden  impulses  might  otherwise  lead  the  peo-
ple, when  they  are  artfully  misguided  by  selfish  dema-
gogues, and  plausible  schemes  of  change*^

^  576.  But  this  fundamental  pvincifde  of  an  immedi-
ate choice  by  the  people,  however  important,  would
alone  be  insufficient  for  the  pubUc  security,  if  the  right
of  choice  had  not  many  auxiliary  guards  and  accom-
paniments. It  was  indispensable,  secondly,  to  provide
for  the  qualifications  of  the  electors.  It  is  obvious,  that
even  when  the  principle  is  established,  that  the  popular
branch  of  the  legislature  shall  emanate  du*ecdy  from  the
people,  there  still  remains  a  very  serious  question,  by
whom  and  in  what  manner  the  choice  shall  be  made.
It  is  a  question  vital  to  the  system,  and  in  a  fraciicdl
sense  decisive,  as  to  the  durability  and  efficiency  of  the
powers  of  government.  Here,  there  is  much  room  for
doubt,  and  ingenious  speculation,  and  theoretical  inqui-

1 1  have  borrowed  these  views  from  Dc  Palejr,  and  fear  only,  that  by
abridging  them  I  have  lessened  their  force.  Paley's  Moral  Philosophy,
6. 6^  ch.  6. See  abo  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  124  to  12a


Digitized  by


Google


52 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  IT.  STATES.  [bOOK  ni.

ry ;  upon  which  diflFerent  minds  may  arrive,  and  indeed
have  arrived,  at  very  different  results.  To  whom  ought
the  right  of  suffrage,  in  a  free  government,  to  be  con-
fided 1  Or,  in  other  words,  who  ought  to  be  permitted
to  vote  in  the  choice  of  the  representatives  of  the  peo-
ple 1  Ought  the  right  of  suffrage  to  be  absolutely
universal  ?  Ought  it  to  be  qualified  and  restrained  1
Ought  it  to  belong  to  many,  or  few  ?  If  there  ought  to
be  restraints  and  qualifications,  what  are  the  true  bound-
aries and  limits  of  such  restraints  and  qualifications  ?

^  677.  These  questions  are  sufficiently  perplexing
and  disquieting  in  theory ;  and  in  the  practice  of  differ-
ent states,  and  even  of  free  states,  ancient  as  weU  as
modem,  they  have  assumed  almost  infinite  varieties  of
form  and  illustiration.  Perhaps  they  do  not  admit  of
any  general,  much  less  of  any  universal  answer,  so  as
to  fiunish  an  unexceptionable  and  certsdn  rule  for.aU
ages  and  all  nations.  The  manners,  habits,  institutions,
characters,  and  pursuits  of  different  nations ;  the  local
position  of  the  territory,  in  regard  to  other  nations ;  the
actual  organizations  and  classes  of  society ;  the  influ-
ences of  peculiar  religious,  civil,  or  political  institutions ;
the  dangers,  as  well  as  the  difficulties,  of  the  times ;  the
degrees  of  knowledge  or  ignorance  pervading  the  mass
of  society ;  the  national  temperament,  and  even  the  cli-
mate and  products  of  the  soil ;  the  cold  and  thoughtful
gravity  of  the  north;  and  the  warm  and  mercurial
excitability  of  tropical  or  southern  regions ;  all  these
may,  and  probably  will,  introduce  modifications  of  prin-
ciple, as  well  as  of  opinion,  m  regard  to  the  right  of
suffrage,  which  it  is  not  easy  either  to  justify  or  to  over-
throw.*

A  1  Black. Comm.  171, 172.  — Mr.  Justice  Blackstone*  has  remarked,

*lBlMk.Comm.  171.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] H0IT8C  OF  RSPRESSlTTATiyES.  63

^  578.  The  most  strenuous  advocate  for  universal
suffrage  has  never  yet  contended,  that  the  right  should
be  absolutely  universal  No  one  has  ever  been  suffi-
ciently visionary  to  hold,  that  all  persons,  of  every  age,
degree,  and  character,  should  be  entitled  to  vote  in  all
elections  of  all  public  officers.  Idiots,  infants,  minors,
and  persons  insane  or  utterly  imbecile,  have  been,  with-
out scruple,  denied  the  right,  as  not  having  the  sound
judgment  and  discretion  fit  for  its  exercise.  In  many
countries,  persons  guilty  of  crimes  have  also  been  denied
the  right,  as  a  personal  punishment,  or  as  a  security  to
society.  In  most  countries,  females,  whether  married
or  smgle,  have  been  purposely  excluded  fi'om  voting,  as
interfering  with  sound  policy,  and  the  harmony  of  social
life.  In  the  few  cases,  in  which  they  have  been  per-
mitted to  vote,  experience  has  not  justified  the  coucla-
sion,  that  it  has  been  attended  with  any  correspondent
advantages,  either  to  the  public,  or  to  themselves.  And
yet  it  would  be  extremely  difficult,  upon  any  mere  theo-
retical reasoning,  to  establish  any  satisfactory  principle,

"  That  the  true  reason  of  requiring  any  qualification  with  regard  to  proper-
ty in  voters  is  to  exclude  such  persons,  as  are  in  so  mean  a  situation,  that
they  are  esteemed  to  have  no  will  of  their  own.  If  these  persons  had  votes,
they  would  be  tempted  to  dispose  of  them  under  some  undue  influence  or
other.  This  would  give  a  great,  an  artful,  or  a  wealthy  man  a  larger  share
in  elections,  than  is  consistent  with  general  liberty.  If  it  were  probable,
that  every  roan  would  give  his  vote  freely  and  without  influence  of  any
kind,  then,  upon  the  true  theory  and  genuine  principles  of  liberty,  every
member  of  the  community,  however  poor,  should  have  a  vote  in  electing
those  delegates,  to  whose  charge  is  committed  the  disposal  of  his  proper-
ty, his  liberty,  and  his  life.  But  since  that  can  hardly  be  expected  in
persons  of  indigent  fortunes,  or  such  as  are  under  the  immediate  dominion
of  others,  all  popular  states  have  been  obliged  to  establish  certain  quali-
fications, whereby  some,  who  are  suspected  to  have  no  will  of  their  own,
are  excluded  from  voting,  in  order  to  set  other  individuals,  whose  will
may  be  supposed  independent,  more  thoroughly  upon  a  level  with  each
other.''  Similar  reasoning  might  be  employed  to  j  ustify  other  exclusions,
besides  those  founded  upon  a  want  of  property.


Digitized  by


Google


64  CONSTITUTION  OF  THS  V*  STATSS. [bOOE  III.

upon  which  the  one  half  of  every  society  has  thus  been
systematically  excluded  by  the  other  half  from  all  right
of  participating  in  government,  which  would  not,  at  the
same  time,  apply  to  and  justify  many  other  exclusions.
If  it  be  said,  that  all  men  have  a  natural,  equal,  and
unalienable  right  to  vote,  because  they  are  all  bom  free
and  equal ;  that  they  all  have  common  rights  and  inter-
ests entided  to  protection,  and  therefore  have  an  equal
right  to  decide,  either  personally  or  by  their  chosen
representatives,  upon  the  laws  and  regulations,  which
shall  control,  measure,  and  sustain  those  rights  and
interests ;  that  they  cannot  be  compelled  to  surrender,
except  by  their  free  consent,  what,  by  the  bounty  and
order  of  Providence,  belongs  to  them  in  common  with
all  their  race ;  —  what  is  there  in  these  considerations,
which  is  not  equally  applicable  to  females,  as  free,  intel-
ligent, moral,  responsible  beings,  entided  to  equal  rights,
and  mterests,  and  protection,  and  havmg  a  vital  stake  in
all  the  regulations  and  laws  ofsociety  ?  And  if  an  excep-
tion, from  the  nature  of  the  case,  could  be  felt  in  regard
to  persons,  who  are  idiots,  infants,  and  insane ;  how  can
this  apply  to  persons,  who  are  of  more  mature  growth,
and  are  yet  deemed  mmors  by  the  municipal  law?
Who  has  an  original  right  to  fix  the  time  and  period  of
pupilage,  or  minority  1  Whence  was  derived  the  right
of  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans  to  declare,  that
women  should  be  deemed  never  to  be  of  age,  but  should
be  subject  to  perpetual  guardianship?  Upon  what
principle  of  natural  law  did  the  Romans,  in  after  times,
fix  the  majority  of  females,  as  well  as  of  males,  at  twenty-
five  years  ?  *  Who  has  a  right  to  say,  that  in  England
it  shall,  for  some  purposes,  be  at  fourteen,  for  others,  at
seventeen,  and  for  all,  at  twenty-one  years ;  while,  in

1  1  Black.  Comm.  463^  464.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


€H.  IX.] HOUSE  or  RSPRESENTATirSS.  66

France,  a  person  arrives,  for  all  purposes,  at  majority,
only  at  thirty  years,  in  Naples  at  eighteen,  and  in  Hol-
land at  twenty-five  ?  *  Who  shall  say,  that  one  man  is
not  as  well  qualified;  as  €MCQter,  at  eighteen  years  of  ag^e,
as  another  is  at  twenty-five,  or  a  third  at  forty ;  and  far
better,  than  most  men  are  at  eighty  ?  And  if  any  socie-
ty is  invested  with  authority  to  settle  the  matter  of  the
age  and  sex  of  voters,  according  to  its  own  view  of  its
policy,  or  convenience,  or  justice,  who  shall  say,  that  it
has  not  equal  authority,  for  like  reasons,  to  settle  any
other  matter  regarding  the  rights,  qualifications,  and
duties  of  voters  ?  *

§  679,  The  truth  seems  to  be,  that  the  right  of
voting,  like  many  other  rights,  is  one,  which,  wheth-
er it  has  a  fixed  foundation  in  natural  law  or  not,  has
always  been  treated  in  the  practice  of  nations,  as  a
strictly  civil  right,  derived  from,  and  regulated  by  each
society,  according  to  its  own  circumstances  and  inter-
ests.^ It  is  difficult,  even  in  the  abstract,  to  conceive
how  it  could  have  otherwise  been  treated.  The  terms
and  conditions,  upon  which  any  society  is  formed  and
organized,  must^  essentially  depend  upon  the  wUI  of
those,  who  are  associated ;  or  at  least  of  those,  who
constitute  a  majority,  actually  controlling  the  rest.
Originally,  no  man  could  have  any  right  but  to  act  for
himself;  and  the  power  to  choose  a  chief  magistrate  or
other  officer  to  exercise  dominion  or  authority  over
others,  as  well  as  himself,  could  arise  only  upon  a  joint
consent  of  the  others  to  such  appointment ;  and  their
consent  might  be  qualified  exactly  according  to  their

1  1  Black  ComiiL  463,  464.  »  Id.  171.

3  1  Black.  Comtn.  171; 2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  130; Montesquieu's
Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  11.  ch.  6 ;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  52,  53.


Digitized  by


Google


56  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

own  interests,  or  power,  or  policy.  The  choice  of
representatives  to  act  in  a  legislative  capacity  is  not
only  a  refinement  of  much  later  stages  of  actual  asso-
ciation and  civilization,  but  could  scarcely  occur,  until
the  society  had  assumed  to  itself  the  right  to  introduce
such  institutions,  and  to  confer  such  privileges,  as  it
deemed  conducive  to  the  public  good,  and  to  prohibit
the  existence  of  any  other.  In  point  of  fact,  it  is  well
known,  that  representative  legislative  bodies,  at  least
in  the  form  now  used,  are  the  peculiar  invention  of
modern  times,  and  were  unknown  to  antiquity.  If,
then,  every  well  organized  society  has  the  right  to
consult  for  the  common  good  of  the  whole,  and  if,  upon
the  principles  of  natural  law,  this  right  is  conceded  by
'  the  very  union  of  society,  it  seems  difficult  to  assign
any  limit  to  this  right,  which  is  compatible  with  the
due  attainment  of  the  end  proposed.  If,  therefore,
any  society  shall  deem  the  common  good  and  interests
of  the  whole  society  best  promoted  under  the  partic-
ular circumstances,  in  which  it  is  placed,  by  a  restric-
tion of  the  right  of  suffrage,  it  is  not  easy  to  state  any
solid  ground  of  objection  to  its  exercise  of  such  an  au-
thority. At  least,  if  any  society  has  a  clear  right  to  de-
prive females,  constituting  one  half  of  the  whole  popu-
lation, from  the  right  of  suffrage,  (which,  with  scarcely
an  exception,  has  been  uniformly  mamtained,)  it  will
require  some  astuteness  to  find  upon  what  ground  this
exclusion  can  be  vindicated,  which  does  justify,  or  at
least  excuse,  many  other  exclusions.*  Government  (to
^Jt^  •^'^  the  pithy  language  of  Mr.  Burke)  has  been  deemed
i  a  practical  thing,  made  for  the  happiness  of  mankind,

1  See  Paley's  Moral  Philosophy,  B.  6,  ch.  7,  p.  393 ; 1  Black.  Comm.
J  71 ;  Montesquieu's  Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  11.  ch.  6.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES.  67

and  not  to  furnish  out  a  spectacle  of  unifonnity  to
gratify  the  schemes  of  vbionary  politicians.^

§  580.  Without  laying  any  stress  upon  this  theoreti-
cal reasoning,  which  is  brought  before  the  reader,  not
so  much  because  it  solves  all  doubts  and  objecticms,
as  because  it  presents  a  view  of  the  serious  difficulties
attendant  upon  the  assumption  of  an  origmal  and  un-
alienable right  of  suffice,  as  (niginating  in  natural  law^
and  independent  of  ciril  law,  it  may  be  proper  to
state,  that  every  civilized  society  has  uniformly  fixed,
modified,  and  regulated  the  right  of  suffrage  for  itself
according  to  its  own  free  will  and  pleasure.  Every
constitution  of  government  in  these  United  States  has
assumed,  as  a  fundamental  principle,  the  right  of  the
people  of  the  state  to  alter,  abolish,  and  modify  the  (ona
of  its  own  government,  according  to  the  sovereign  pleas- '
ure  of  the  people.'  In  fact,  the  people  of  each  state
have  gone  much  farther,  and  settled  a  far  more  critical
question,  by  deciding,  who  shall  be  the  voters,  entitled
to  approve  and  reject  the  constitution  fi-amed  by  a  dele-
gated body  under  their  direction.  In  the  adoption  of
no  state  constitution  has  the  assent  been  asked  of  any
but  the  qualified  voters ;  and  women,  and  minors,  and
other  persons,  not  recognised  as  voters  by  existing
laws,  have  been  studiously  excluded.  And  yet  the
constitution  has  been  deemed  entirely  obligatory  upon
them,  as  well  as  upon  the  minority,  who  voted  against
it.  From  this  it  will  be  seen,  how  little,  even  in  the
most  fi-ee  of  republican  governments,  any  abstract  right
of  suffrage,  or  any  original  and  indefeasible  privilege,
has  been  recognised  in  practice. If  this  consideration

1  Burke's  Letter  to  the  Sheriff  of  Bristol  in  1777.
3  See  Locke  on  Government,  p.  2,  §  149, 2S7.

VOL.  IL  8


Digitized  by


Google


58 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES*  [bOOK  UI.

does  not  satisfy  our  minds,  it  at  least  will  prepare  us
to  presume,  that  there  may  be  an  almost  infinite  diver-
sity in  the  established  right  of  voting,  without  any  state
being  able  to  assert,  that  its  own  mode  is  exclusively
founded  in  natural  justice,  or  is  most  conformable  to
sound  policy,  or  is  best  adapted  to  the  public  security.
It  will  teach  us,  that  the  question  is  necessarily  com-
plex and  intricate  in  its  own.  nature,  and  is  scarcely
susceptible  of  any  simple  solution,  which  shall  rigidly
apply  to  the  circtmistances  and  conditions,  the  inter-
ests and  the  feelings,  the  institutions  and  the  manners
of  all  nations.^  What  may  best  promote  the  public  weal,
and  secure  the  public  liberty,  and  advance  the  public
prosperity  in  one  age  or  nation,  may  totally  fail  of  similar
results  under  local,  physical,  or  moral  predicaments
essentiaUy  different

^581.  It  would  carry  us  too  far  from  the  immediate
object  of  these  Commentaries  to  take  a  general  survey
of  the  various  modifications,  under  which  the  right  of
su&age,  either  in  relation  to  laws,  or  magistracy,  or
even  judicial  controversies,  has  appeared  in  different
nations  in  ancient  and  modem  times.  The  examples
of  Greece  and  Rome,  in  ancient  times,  and  of  England
in  modem  times,  will  be  found  most  instractive.*  In
England,  the  qualifications  of  voters,  as  also  the  modes
of  representation,  are  various,  and  fi*amed  upon  no
common  principle.  The  counties  are  represented  by
knights,  elected  by  the  proprietors  of  lands,  who  are
freeholders ;'  the  boroughs  and  cities  are  represented

1  Dr.  Lieber's  Encyclopfedia  Americana,  art  Consiituium,

9  See^3  Adams's  Amer.  Constitut  Letter  6,  p.  263,  Sic.  p.  440,  3cc.

1  Black.  Comm.  171, 172, 173 ;  Montesquieu's  Spirit  of  Laws,  Book  11,

eh.  13;  Id.  B.  2,  ch.12.
3  1  Black.  Comm.  172, 173; Paley's  Moral  Philosophy,  B.  6,  ch.  7;

The  Federalist,  No.  57.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSE  OF  R£PR£S£NTATfT£S.  50

by  citizens  and  burgesses,  or  others  chosen  by  the
citizens  or  burgesses,  according  to  the  qualifications
prescribed  by  custom,  or  by  the  respective  charters
and  by-laws  of  each  borough,  or  city.*  In  these,  the
right  of  voting  is  almost  infinitely  varied  and  modified.*
In  the  American  colonies,  under  their  charters  and
laws,  no  uniform  rules  in  regard  to  the  right  of  suffrage
existed.  In  some  of  the  colpnies  the  course  of  the
parent  country  was  closely  foUowed,  so  that  fi^ebdd*
ers  alone  were  voters  ;*  in  others  a  very  near  approach
was  made  to  universal  sufirage  among  the  males  of
competent  age ;  and  in  others,  again,  a  middle  princi-
ple was  adopted,  which  made  taxation  and  voting  de-
pendent upon  each  other,  or  annexed  to  it  the  qualifi-
cation of  holdmg  some  personal  estate,  or  the  privilege
of  being  a  fi*eeman,  or  the  eldest  son  of  a  freeholder  of
the  town  or  corporation.^  When  the  revolution  brought
about  the  separation  of  the  colonies,  and  they  formed
themselves  mto  independent  states,  a  very  striking
diversity  was  observable  in  the  original  constitutions
adopted  by  them ;  ^  and  a  like  diversity  has  pervaded
all  the  constitutions  of  the  new  states,  which  have  since
grown  up,  and  all  the  revised  constitutions  of  the  old
states,  which  have  received  the  final  ratification  of  the
people. In  some  of  the  states  the  right  of  suffrage

1  1  Black.  Comm.  172  to  175 ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  209  to
212. See  also  Bnrko's  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution.

2  See  Dr.  Lieber's  Encyclopaedia  Americana,  art  Election;  Great
Britatn,  ConsiUution  of,

3  See  Jefferson's  Notes  on  Virginia,  191 ;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Conun.
App.  96  to  100.

4  See  Charter  of  Rhode-Island,  1663,  and  Rhode-Island  Laws,  (edit
1798,)  p.  114.  See  also  Connecticut  Charter,  1662,  and  Massachusetts
Charters,  1628  and  1692.

5  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  132  to  138 ;  2  Pitkin's  Hist  ch.  19,  p.  294  to
316.


Digitized  by


Google


60  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

depends  upon  a  certain  length  of  residence,,  and  pay-
ment of  taxes ;  in  others,  upon  mere  citizenship  and
residence ;  in  others,  upon  the  possession  of  a  freehold,
or  some  estate  of  a  particular  value,  or  upon  the  pay-
ment of  taxes,  or  performance  of  some  public  duty,  such
as  service  in  the  militia,  or  on  the  highways.^  In
no  two  of  these  state  constitutions  will  it  be  found,
that  the  qualifications  of  the  voters  are  setded  upon  the
same  uniform  basis.*  So  that  we  have  the  most
abundant  proofs,  that  among  a  free  and  enlightened
people,  convened  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  their
own  forms  of  government,  and  the  rights  of  their  own
voters,  the  question,  as  to  the  due  regulation  of  the
qualifications,  has  been  deemed  a  matter  of  mere  state
poUcy,  and  varied  to  meet  the  wants,  to  suit  the  preju-
dices, and  to  fo&ter  the  mterests  of  the  majority.  An
absolute,  indefeasible  right  to  elect  or  be  elected,
seems  never  to  have  been  asserted  on  one  side,  or
denied  on  the  other ;  but  the  subject  has  been  freely
canvassed,  as  one  of  mere  civil  polity,  to  be  arranged
upon  such  a  basis,  as  the  majority  may  deem  expedi-
ent with  reference  to  the  moral,  physical,  and  intellec-
tual condition  of  the  particular  state.'

§  582.  It  was  under  this  known  diversity  of  consti-
tutional provisions  in  regard  to  state  elections,  that  the
convention,  which  framed  the  constitution  of  the  Union,


1  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  132  to  138.  — Mr.  Hume,  in  his  Idea  of  a
Perfect  Commonwealth,  proposes,  that  the  representatives  should  be
freehohlers  of  202  a  year,  and  householders  worth  500/.  1  Hume's
Essays,  Essay  16,  p.  526.

8  See  The  Federalist,  No.  54 ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lectures,  132  to  138 ;
2  Pitkin's  Hist  294  to  316.

3  Dr.  Lieber's  Encyclopedia  Americana,  art  ConstUulion  of  the
UnUed  Slates. The  Federalist,  No.  52  to  54.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES.  61

was  assembled.  The  definition  of  the  right  of  suffrage
is  very  justly  regarded,  as  a  fundamental  article  of  a
republican  government.  It  was  incumbent  on  the
convention,  therefore,  to  define  and  establish  this  right
m  the  constitution.  To  have  left  it  open  for  the  occa-
sional regulation  of  congress  would  have  been  improper,
for  the  reason  just  mentioned.  To  have  submitted  it.
to  the  Jegislative  discretion  of  the  states,  would  have
been  improper,  for  the  same  reason ;  and  for  the  addi-
tional reason,  that  it  would  have  rendered  too  depend-
ent on  the  state  governments,  that  branch  of  the  fed-
eral government,  which  ought  to  be  dependent  on  the
people  alone.^  Two  modes  of  providing  for  the  right
of  suffrage  in  the  choice  of  representatives  were  pre-
sented to  the  consideration  of  that  body.  One  was  to
devise  some  plan,  which  should  operate  uniformly  in
all  the  states,  on  a  common  principle ;  the  other  was  to
conform  to  the  existing  diversities  in  the  states,  thus
creating  a  mixed  mode  of  representation.  In  favour  of
the  former  course,  it  might  be  urged,  that  all  the  states
ought,  upon  the  floor  of  the  house  of  representatives,
to  be  represented  equally ;  that  this  could  be  accom-
plished only  by  the  adoption  of  a  uniform  qualification
of  the  voters,  who  would  thus  express  the  same  public
opinion  of  the  same  body  of  citizens  throughout  the
Union ;  that  if  freeholders  alone  in  one  state  chose  the
representatives;  and  in  another  all  male  citizens  of
competent  age ;  and  in  another  all  freemen  of  particu-
lar towns  or  corporations ;  and  in  another  all  taxed
inhabitants  ;  it  would  be  obvious,  that  different  inter-
ests and  classes  would  obtain  exclusive  representations
in  different  states ;  and  thus  the  great  objects  of  the

1  The  Federalist,  No.  52.


Digitized  by


Google


62  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U,  STATES. [bOOK  III.

constitution,  the  promotion  of  the  general  welfare  and
common  defence,  might  be^  unduly  checked  and  ob-
structed ;  that  a  uniform  principle  would  at  least  have
this  recommendation,  that  it  could  create  no  well-
founded  jealousies  among  the  different  states,  and-
would  be  most  likely  to  satisfy  the  body  of  the  people
by  its  perfect  fairness,  its  permanent  equality  of  opera-
tion, and  its  entire  mdependence  of  all  local  legislation,
whether  in  the  shape  of  state  laws,  or  of  amendments
to  state  constitutions.

§  583.  On  the  other  hand,  it  might  be  urged  m
fevour  of  the  latter  course,  that  the  reducing  of  the
different  qualifications,  already  existing  in  the  dif-
ferent states,  to  one  uniforte  rule,  woiild  have  been
a  very  difficult  task,  even  to  the  convention  itself,
and  would  be  dissatisfactory  to  the  people  of  dif-
ferent states.*  It  would  not  be  very  easy  for  the
convention  to  frame  any  rule,  which  would  satisfy
the  scruples,  the  prejudices,  of  the  judgments  of  a
majority  of  its  own  members.  It  would  not  be  easy
to  induce  Virginia  to  give  up  the  exclusive  right  of
freeholders  to  vote ;  or  Rhode-Inland,  or  Connecticut,
the  exclusive  right  of  freemen  to  vote;  or  Massachu-
setts, the  right  of  persons  possessing  a  given  value  of
personal  property  to  vote ;  or  other  states,  the  right
of  persons  paying  taxes,  or  having  a  fixed  residence,
to  vote.  The  subject  itself  was  not  susceptible  of  any
very  exact  limitations  upon  any  general  reasoning.  The
circumstances  of  different  states  might  create  great  di-
versities in  the  practical  operation  of  any  imiform  sys-
tem. And  the  natural  attachments,  which  long  habit  and
usage  had  sanctioned,  in  regard  to  the  exercise  of  the

»  The  Federalist,  No.  52.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] House  OF  B£PR£S£NTATiy£8.  63

nghty  would  enlist  all  the  feelings,  and  interests,  and
opinions  of  every  state  against  any  substantial  change
in  its  own  institutions.  A  great  embarrassment  would
be  thus  thrown  m  the  way  of  the  adoption  of  the  consti-
tution itself,  which  perhaps  would  be  thus  put  at  haz-
ard, upon  the  mere  ground  of  theoretical  propriety.*

^  584.  Besides ;  it  might  be  lU'ged,  that  it  is  far  from
being  clear,  upon  reasoning  or  experience,  that  uniform-
ity in  the  composition  of  a  representative  body  is  either
desirable  or  expedient,  founded  in  sounder  policy,  or
more  promotive  of  the  general  good,  than  a  mixed  sys-
tem, embracing,  and  representing,  and  combinmg  distinct
interests,  classes,  and  opmions.*  In  England  the  house
of  commons,  as  a  representative  body,  is  foimded  upon
no  uniform  principle,  either  of  nimibers,  or  classes,  or

I  Rawle  on  the  Constitution^  ch.  4,  p.  40.

s  Mr.  Burke  manifestly  thought,  that  no  system  of  representative  gov-
ernment could  be  safe  without  a  large  admiicture  of  different  persons
and  interests.  "  Nothing,*^  says  he,  ^  is  a  due  and  adequate  represonta-
tation  of  a  state,  that  does  not  represent  its  ability,  as  well  as  its  prop-
erty. But  as  ability  is  a  vigorous  and  active  principle,  and  as  property  is
sluggish,  inert,  and  timid,  it  can  never  be  safe  from  the  invasion  of  abili-
ty, unless  it  be,  out  of  all  proportion,  predominant  in  the  representation."  *
In  a  subsequent  page  of  his  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution,  he
discusses  the  then  favorite  theory  of  representation  proposed  for  the
constitution  of  France,  upon  the  triple  basis  of  territory,  population,  and
taxation,  and  demonstrates,  with  great  clearness,  its  inconvenience,  ine-
quality, and  inconsistency.  .The  representatives,  too,  were  to  be  chosen
indirectly,  by  electors  appointed  by  electors,  who  were  again  chosen  by
other  electors.  "  The  member,"  says  Mr.  Burke,  "  who  goes  to  the  Na-
tional Assembly,  is  not  chosen  by  the  people,  nor  accountable  to  them.
There  are  three  elections  before  he  Is  chosen ;  two  sets  of  magistrates
intervene  between  him  and  the  primary  assembly,  so  as  to  render  him,  as
I  have  said,  an  ambassador  of  a  state,  and  not  the  representative  of  the
people  within  a  state,"  So  much  for  mere  theory  in  the  hands  of  vision-
tLTj  and  speculative  statesmen.

«,

*  Borke't  RefloctioM  onthd  French  ReTolotioo.  See  alio  Paley't  Moral  Philotopfay,  B.  6,
ch.7.


Digitized  by


Google


64 ' CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

places.*  The  representation  is  made  up  of  persons
chosen  by  electors  having  very  different,  and  sometimes
very  discordant  qualifications  ;  in  some  cases,  property
is  exclusively  represented ;  in  others,  particular,  trades
and  pursuits ;  in  others,  inhabitancy  and  corporate  priv-
ileges ;  in  others,  the  reverse.  In  some  cases,  the  rep-
resentatives are  chosen  by  very  numerous  voters ;  in
others,  by  very,  few;  in,  some  cases,  a  single  patron
possesses  the  exclusive  power  of  choosmg  representa-
tives, as  in  nomination  boroughs  ;  in  others,  very  pop-
ulous cities  have  no  right  to  choose  any  representatives
at  all ;  in  some  cases,  a  select  body,  formmg  a  very
small  part  of  the  inhabitants,  has  the  exclusive  right  of
choice ;  in  others,  non-residents  can  control  the  whole
election ;  in  some  places  a  half  million  of  inhabitants
possess  the  right  to  choose  no  more  representatives,
than  are  assigned  to  the  most  msignificant  borough,  with
scarcely  an  inhabitant  to  point  out  its  local  limits.*  Yet
this  inequality  has  never,  of  itself,  been  deemed  an  ex-
clusive evil  m  Great  Britain.*  And  in  every  system  of
reform,  which  has  found  public  favour  in  that  coimtry,
many  of  these  diversities  have  been  embodied  Grom
choice,  as  important  checks  upon  undue  legislation,  as
facilitating  the  representation  of  different  interests,  and

1  Paley's  Moral  Phaosophy,  B.  6,  ch.  7,  p.  380,  381  to  394 ;  DeLolme,
Const  of  England,  B.  1,  ch.  4,  p.  61,  62  ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  219;  1  Tuck.
Black.  App.  209,  210,  211 ;  1  Wilson's  Law  Lect  431.

8  Mr.  Jefferson,  in  his  Notes  on  Virginia,  insists  with  great  earnest-
ness upon  the  impropriety  of  allowing  to  different  counties  in  that  state,
the  same  number  of  representatives,  without  anyregard  to  their  relative
population.*  And  yet  in  the  new  constitution  adopted  in  1830-1831,
Virginia  has  adhered  to  the  same  system  in  principle,  and  ber  present
representation  is  apportioned  upon  an  arbitrary  and  unequal  basil.

3  Burke's  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution.

•  JeirenoD>tNotM,19S.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUS£  OF  REPRE8EKTATIVE8.  05

different  opinions;  and  as  thus  securing,  by  a  well-balanc-
ed and  intelligent  representation  of  all  the  various  class-
es of  society,  a  permanent  protection  of  the  public  liber-
ties of  the  people,  and  a  firm  security  of  the  private  rights
of  persons  and  property.*  Without,  therefore,  asserting,
that  such  a  mixed  representation  is  absolutely,  and  un-
der alt  circtmistances,  the  best,  it  might  be  safely  affirm-
ed, that  the  existence  of  various  elements  in  the  com-
position of  the  representative  body  is  not  necessarily
inexpedient,  imjust,  or  insecure ;  and,  in  many  cases,
may  promote  a  wholesome  restraint  upon  partial  plans
of  legislation,  and  ensure  a  vigorous  growth  to  the  gen-
eral interests  of  the  Union.  The  planter,  the  farmer,
the  mechanic,  the  merchant,  and  the  manufacturer
might  thus  be  brought  to  act  together,  in  a  body  repre-
senting each ;  and  thus  superior  intelligence,  as  well  as
mutual  good-will  and  respect,  be  diffused  through  the
whole  of  the  collective  body.*

^  585.  In  the  judgment  of  the  convention,  this  latter
reasoning  seems  to  have  obtained  a  decisive  influence,

1  Mr.  WUson  in  his  Lectures,  considers  the  inequality  of  representa-
tion in  the  house  of  commons,  as  a  prominent  defect  in  the  British  gov-
ernment. But  his  objections  are  mainlj  urged  against  the  mode  of  ap-
portioning the  representation,  and  not  against  the  qualifications  of  the
voters.*  In  the  reform  now  under  the  consideration  of  parliament,  there
is  a  very  great  diversity  of  electoral  qualifications  allowed,  and  appar-
ently supported  by  all  parties.  Mr.  Burke  in  his  Reflections  on  the
French  Revolution,  holds  doctrines  essentially  different  in  many  pointa
from  Mr.  Wilson.  See  also  in  Winne's  Eunomus,  Dialogue  3,  §  18, 19,
20,  an  ingenious  defence  of  the  existing  system  in  Great-Britain.

a  See  Paley's  Moral  Philosophy,  B.  6,  ch.  7,  p.  380  ;  Id.  394.  See  also
Franklin's  Remarks  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist  242.  —  Dr.  Paley  has  placed  the  in-
equalities of  representation  in  the  house  of  commons  in  a  strong  light;
and  be  has  attempted  a  vindication  of  it,  which,  whether  satisfactory
or  not,  is  at  least  urged  with  great  skill  and  ingenuity  of  reasoning.
Paley's  Moral  Philosophy,  B.  6,  ch,  7,  p.  391  to  400.  See  also  2  Pitk.  Hist
242.


*  1  Wilfon'9  Lect.  430  to  433.
VOL.  11.  9


Digitized  by


Google


66 coNSTrruTioir  op  the  it.  states, [book  hi.

and  to  have  established  the  final  result ;  and  it  was  ac-
cordingly declared,  in  the  clause  under  consideration,
that  "the  electors  in  each  state  shall  have  the  qualifica-
tions requisite  for  electors  of  the  most  numerous  branch
of  the  state  legislature."  ^  Upon  this  clause  (which  was
finally  adopted  by  a  unanimous  vote)  the  Federalist  has
remarked,  "  the  provision  made  by  the  convention  ap-
pears to  be  the  best,  that  lay  withm  their  option.  It  must
be  satisfactory  to  every  state,  because  it  is  conformable
to  the  standard  already  established  by  the  state  itself.  It
will  be  safe  to  the  United  States,  because,  being  fixed
by  the  state  constitutions,  it  is  not  alterable  by  the
state  governments  ;  and  it  cannot  be  feared,  that  the
people  of  the  states  will  alter  this  part  of  their  constitu-
tions in  such  a  manner,  as  to  abridge  the  rights  secur-
ed to  them  by  the  federal  constitution.''  *  The  remark,
in  a  general  sense,  is  true ;  but  the  provision  has  not,  in
fact,  and  may  not  have,  all  the  security  against  alteration
by  the  state  governments,  which  is  so  confidently  af-
firmed. At  the  time,  when  it  was  made,  Connecticut
and  Rhode-Island  were  acting  under  the  royal  charters
of  1662  and  1663;  and  their  legislatures  possessed  the
power  of  modifying,  from  time  to  time,  the  right  of  suf-
fi*age.  Rhode-Island  yet  continues  without  any  written
constitution,  unless  the  charter  of  1663  is  to  be  deem-
ed such.  In  Maryland  successive  legislatures  may
change  the  form  of  government ;  and  in  other  states
amendments  may  be,  and  indeed  have  been  adopted,

1  Journal  of  Convention,  216,  233.'— The  clause,  however,  did  not  pass
without  opposition ;  a  motion  to  strike  out  was  made  and  negatived,  seven
states  voting  in  the  negative,  one  in  the  affirmative,  and  one  being  di-
vided. Journ.  of  Convention,  7  Aug.  p.  233.

9  The  Federalist,  No.  52.  See  also  2  £iliot's  Debates,  38  ;  2  Wilson's
Law  Lect  123, 139, 131.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSE  OP  Il£PR£SENTATiy£8.  67

materially  varying  the  rights  of  suffrage.*  So  that  ab-
solute stability  is  not  to  be  predicated  of  the  existing
modes  of  suffrage  ;  though  there  is  little  practical  dan-
ger of  any  changes,  which  would  work  unfavourably  to
popular  rights.

§  586.  In  the  third  place,  the  term  of  service  of
representatives.  In  order  to  ensure  permanent  safety  to
the  liberties  of  the  people,  other  guards  are  indispensa-
ble, besides  those,  which  are  derived  from  the  exercise  of
the  right  of  suffrage  and  representation.  If,  when  the  legis-
lature is  once  chosen,  it  is  perpetual,  or  may  last  during
the  life  of  the  representatives;  and  in  case  of  death,  or  re-
signation only,  the  vacancy  is  to  be  supplied  by  the  elec-
tion of  new  representatives ;  it  is  easy  to  perceive,  that
in  such  cases  there  will  be  but  a  very  slight  check  up-
on their  acts,  on  the  part  of  the  people.  In  such  cases,
if  the  legislative  body  should  be  once  corrupted,  the  evil
would  be  past  all  remedy,  at  least  without  some  violent
revolution,  or  extraordinary  calamity.^  But,  when  dif-
ferent legislative  bodies  are  to  succeed  each  other  at
short  intervals,  if  the  people  disapprove  of  the  present,
they  may  rectify  its  faults,  by  the  silent  exercise  of  their
power  in  the  succeeding  election.  Besides,  a  legisla-
tive assembly,  which  is  sure  to  be  separated  again,  and
its  members  soon  return  to  private  life,  will  feel  its  own
interests,  as  well  as  duties,  bound  up  with  those  of  the
community  at  large.'  It  may,  therefore,  be  safely  laid
down,  as  a  fundamental  axiom  of  republican  govern-
ments, that  there  must  be  a  dependence  on,  and  re-
sponsibility to,  the  people,  on  the  part  of  the  represen-
tative, which  shall  constandy  exert  an  influence  upon

1  See  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  note  (d,)  196, 137.

s  1  Black.  Comm.  189 ;  Montesqaieu's  Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  11,  ch.  6.

»  1  Black.  Comm.  1^.


Digiti


zed  bv  Google


68  CONSTITUTION  DT  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

his  acts  and  opinions,  and  produce  a  sympathy  between
him  and  his  constituents.^  If,  when  he  is  once  elected,
he  holds  his  place  for  life,  or  during  good  behaviour,  or
for  a  long  period  of  years,  it  is  obvious,  that  there  will
be  litde  effective  control  exercised  upon  him  ;  and  he
will  soon  learn  to  disregard  the  wishes,  the  interests,
and  even  the  rights  of  his  constituents,  whenever  they
interfere  with  his  own  selfish  pursuits  and  objects.
When  appointed,  he  may  not,  indeed,  consider  himself,
as  exclusively  their  representative,  bound  by  their  opin-
ions, and  devoted  to  their  peculiar  local  interests,
although  they  may  be  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  good
of  the  Union.  He  ought  rather  to  deem  himself  a  repre-
sentative of  the  nation,  and  bound  to  provide  for  the
general  welfare,  and  to  consult  for  the  general  safety.*
But  still,  in  a  just  sense,  he  ought  to  feel  his  responsi-^
bility  to  them,  and  to  act  for  them  in  common  with  the
rest  of  the  people  ;  and  to  deem  himself,  in  an  emphatic
manner,  their  defender,  and  their  friend.^

§  687.  Frequent  elections  are  unquestionably  the
soundest,  if  not  the  sole  policy,  by  which  this  depend-.

1  The  Federalist,  No.  52,  57.

8  1  Black.  Comra.  159.  See  also  Dr.  Franklin's  Remarks;  2  Pitk.
Hist  242;  Rawle  on  Const  38,  ;)9.  Bat  see  I  Tucker's  Black.  ComTti.
App.  193;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  209.->Mr.  Burke  in  his  Speech  to  the
Electors  of  Bristol,  in  1774,  has  treated  this  subject  with  great  candour,
and  dignity,  and  ability.  "  Parliament,"  said  he,  **  is  not  a  congress  of
ambassadors  from  different  and  hostile  interests,  which  interests  eaph
must  maintain,  as  an  agent  and  advocate,  against  other  agents  and  ad-
vocates. But  parliament  is  a  deliberative  assembly  of  one  nation  with  one
Interest,  that  of  the  whole  ;  where  not  local  purposes,  not  local  prejudi-
eesi  ought  to  guide ;  but  the  general  good,  resulting  from  the  general
reason  of  the  whole.  You  choose  a  member  indeed ;  but  when  you  have
chosen  him,  he  is  not  a  member  of  Bristol,  but  he  is  a  member  of  parlia-
ment" See,  on  this  subject,  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  193 ;  2  Lloyd's
Deb.inl789,p.]99to217.

9  See  Burke's  Speech  to  the  Electors  of  Bristol  in  1774.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSE  OF  R£PllJDBE]fTATiy£S.  69

'  ence  and  sympathy  and  responsibility  can  be  effectual*
ly  secured.^  But  the  question,  what  degree  of  frequen-
cy IS  best  csSculated  to  accomplish  that  object  is  not
susceptible  of  any  precise  and  universal  answer,  and
must  essentially  depend  upon  very  different  considera*
tions  m  different  nations,  and  vary  with  their  size,  their
age,  their  conditions,  their  institutions,  and  their  local ,
peculiarities.^

§  688.  It  has  been  a  current  observation,  that "  where
annual  elections  end,  tyranny  begins.'' '  But  this  re-
mark, like  many  others  of  a  general  nature,  is  open  to
much  question.  There  is  no  pretence,  that  there  is  any
natural  connexion  between  the  period  of  a  year,  or  any
other  exact  revolution  of  time,  and  the  political  changes
fit  for  governments  or  magistrates.  Why  is  the  elec-
tion of  a  magistrate  or  representative  more  safe  for  one
year,  than  for  two  years  ?  For  one  year,  more  than  for
six  months  ?  For  six  months,  more  than  for  three
months  ?  It  is  certainly  competent  for  a  state  to  elect
its  own  rulers,  daily,  or  weekly,  or  monthly,  or  annual-

I  Tbe  Federalist,  No.  52,  57,

s  Dr.  Paley,  with  his  usual  practical  sense,  has  remarked,  in  regard
to  tbe  composition,  and  tenure  of  office,  of  the  British  house  of  commons,
thatf  *'  the  number,  the  fortune,  and  quality  of  the  members ;  the  variety
of  interests  and  characters  among  tiiem ;  above  ail^  the  temporary  dura-
tion of  their  power y  and  the  change  of  men,  which  every  new  election
produces,  are  so  many  securities  to  the  public,  as  well  against  the
Bvbjection  of  their  judgments  to  any  external  dictation,  as  against  the
formation  of  a  junto  in  their  own  body,  sufficiently  powerful  to  govern
their  decisions.  The  representatives  are  so  intermixed  with  the  constit-
uents, and  the  constituents  with  the  rest  of  the  people,  that  they  can-
not) without  a  partiality  too  flagrant  to  be  endured,  impose  any  burthen
upon  the  subject,  in  which  they  do  not  share  themselves.  Nor  scarce-
ly can  they  adopt  an  advantageous  regulation,  in  which  their  own  in-
terests Will  not  participate  of  the  advantage."  Paley's  Moral  Philosophy,
B.  6,  ch.  7.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  53.  See  Montesquieu'^  Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  2,  ch.  3.


Digitized  by


Google


70 coNSTiTUTioir  or  the  u.  statics, [book  in.

ly,  or  for  a  longer  period,  if  it  is  deemed  expedient.  In
this  respect,  it  must  be,  or  ought  to  be,  governed  by  its
own  convenience,  interests,  and  safety.  It  is,  therefore,
a  question  of  sound  policy,  dependent  upon  circumstan-
ces, and  not  resolvable  into  any  absolute  elements  de-
pendent upon  the  revolution  or  retiun  of  natural  sea-
sons.* The  aim  of  every  political  constitution  is,  or  ought
to  be,  first  to  obtain  for  rulers  men,  who  possess  most
wisdom  to  discern,  and  most  virtue  to  pursue  the  com-
mon good  of  the  society ;  and,  in  the  next  place,  to  take
the  most  effectual  precautions  for  keeping  them  virtuous,
whilst  they  continue  their  public  trust.*  Various  means
may  be  resorted  to  for  this  purpose ;  and  doubdess  one
of  the  most  efficient  is  the  frequency  of  elections.  But
who  is  there,  that  will  not  perceive,  upon  the  slightest
examination  of  the  subject,  what  a  wide  space  there
is  for  the  exercise  of  discretion,  and  for  diversity  of
judgment.

§  689.  Without  pretending  to  go  into  a  complete
survey  of  the  subject,  in  all  its  bearings,  the  fi*equency
of  elections  may  be  materially  affected,  as  matter  of
policy,  by  the  extent  of  the  population  and  territory  of
a  country,  the  concentration  or  sparseness  of  the  popu-
lation, the  nature  of  the  pursuits,  and  employments,  and
engagements  of  the  people ;  and  by  the  locsd  and  politi-
cal situation  of  the  nation  in  regard  to  contiguous  na-
tions. If  the  government  be  of  small  extent,  or  be  con-
centrated in  a  smgle  city,  it  will  be  far  more  easy  for
the  citizens  to  choose  their  rulers  frequendy,  and  to
change  them  without  mischief,  than  it  would  be,  if  the
territory  were  large,  the  population  sparse,  and  the  means

1  The  Federalist,  No.  52, 53 ;  Montesquieu's  Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  2,  ch.  3 ;
1  Elliot's  Debates,  30,  31 ,  39.
s  The  Federalist,  No.  57  ;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  42.


Digiti


zed  by  Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSE  OF  REP^SENTATIYES.  71

of  intercourse  few  and  liable  to  interruption.  If  all  the
inhabitants,  who  are  to  vote,  reside  in  towns  and  viUages
there  will  be  little  inconvenience  in  assembling  together
at  a  short  notice  to  make  a  choice.  It  will  be  far  other-
wise, if  the  inhabitants  are  scattered  over  a  large  territo-
ry, and  are  engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits,  like  the
planters  and  farmers  of  the  southern  and  western  states,
who  must  meet  at  adistance  from  their  respective  homes,
and  at  some  common  place  of  assembling.  In  cases  of
this  sort,  the  sacrifice  of  time  necessary  to  accomplish
the  object,  the  expenses  of  the  journey,  the  imperfect
means  of  communication,  the  slow  progress  of  inter-
changes of  opinion,  would  naturally  diminish  the  exer-
cfae  of  the*  right  of  suffrage.  There  would  be  great
danger,  under  such  circumstances,  that  there  would
grow  up  a  general  indifference  or  inattention  to  elec-
tions, it  they  were  frequent,  since  they  wouM  create
litde  interest,  and  would  involve  heavy  charges  and
burthens.  The  nature  of  the  pursuits  and  employments
of  the  people  must  also  have  great  influence  in  settling
the  question.  If  the  mass  of  the  citizens  are  engaged
m  employments,  which  take  them  away  for  a  long  peri-
od from  home,  such  as  employments  in  the  whale  and
cod  fisheries,  in  the  fur-trade,  in  foreign  and  distant
commerce,  in  periodical  caravans,  or  in  other  pursuits,
which  require  constant  attention,  or  long  continued  lar
hours  at  particular  seasons ;  it  is  obvious,  that  frequent
elections,  which  should  interfere  with  their  primary  m-
terests  and  objects,  would  be  at  once  mconvenient,  op-
pressive, and  unequal.  They  would  enable  the  few  to
obtain  a  complete  triumph  and  ascendency  in  the  af-
fairs of  the  state  over  the  many.  Besides,  the  frequen-
cy of  elections  must  be  subject  to  other  considerations,
affecting  the  general  comfort  and  convenience,  as  well


Digitized  by


Google


72  COHSTITUTIOK  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

of  rulers,  as  of  electors.  In  the  bleak  regions  of  Lapland,
and  the  farther  north,  and  m  the  sultry  and  protracted
heats  of  the  south,  a  due  regard  must  be  had  to  the
health  of  the  inhabitants,  and  to  the  ordinary  means  of
travelling.  If  the  territory  be  large,  the  representatives
must  come  Jrom  great  distances,  and  are  hable  to  be
retarded  by  all  the  varieties  of  climate,  and  geological
features  of  the  country ;  by  drifts  of  impassable  snows;
by  sudden  inundations ;  by  chains  of  mountains ;  by
extensive  prairies;  by  numerous  streams;  by  sandy
deserts.^

§  690.  The  task  of  legislation,  too,  is  exceedingly
different  in  a  small  state,  from  what  it  is  in  a  large  one ;
in  a  state  engaged  m  a  single  pursuit,  or  living  in  pas-
toral simplicity,  from  what  it  is  in  a  state  engaged  in
the  infinitely  varied  employments  of  agriculture,  manu-
facture, and  commerce,  where  enterprise  and  capital
rapidly  circulate ;  and  new  legislation  is  constantly  re-
quired by  the  new  fortunes  of  society.  A  single  week
might  suffice  for  the  ordinary  legislation  of  a  state  of
the  territorial  extent  of  Rhode-Island ;  while  several
months  would  scarcely  suffice  for  that  of  New-York.
In  Great-Britain  a  half  year  is  consumed  in  legislation
for  its  diversified  interests  and  occupations ;  while  a
week  would  accomplish  all,  that  belongs  to  that  of  Lap-
land or  Greenland,  of  the  narrow  republic  of  Geneva,
or  of  the  subordinate  principalities  of  Germany.  Athens
might  legislate,  without  obstructing  the  daily  course  of
common  business,  for  her  own  meagre  territory ;  but
when  Rome  had  become  the  mistress  of  the  world,  the
year  seemed  too  short  for  all  the  exigencies  of  her
sovereignty. When  she  deliberated  for  a  world,  she

1  1  Elliot's  Debates,  33,  Ames's  Speech.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CBU  IX.] HOUSE  OF  REPRESXlTTAnyXS.  73

felt,  that  legislation,  to  be  wise  or  safe,  must  be  slow
and  cautious ;  that  knowledge,  as  well  as  power,  was
indispensable  for  the  true  government  of  her  ppoyinces.

^591.  Again;  the  local  position  of  a  nation  in  n^
gard  to  other  nations  may  recpiire  very  different  courses
of  legislation,  and  very  different  intervals  of  etoctionSy
from  what  would  be  dictated  by  a  sense  of  its  own  in-
terest and  convenience  imder  other  circumstances.  If
it  is  surrounded  by  powerful  and  warlike  neighbours,  its
own  government  must  be  invested  with  proportionately
prompt  means  to  act,  and  to  legislate,  in  order  to  repel
aggressions,  and  secure  its  own  rights.  Frequent
changes  in  the  public  councils  might  not  oatf  leave  it
exposed  to  the  hazard  of  having  no  efficient  body  in
existence  to  act  upon  any  sudden  emergency,  but  also,
by  the  fluctuations  of  opinion,  necessarily  growing  out
of  these  changes,  introduce  imbecility,  irresolution,  and
the  want  of  due  information  into  those  councils.  Men,
to  act  vnth  vigour  and  effect,  must  have  time  to  mature
measures,  and  judgment  and  experience^  as  to  the  best
method  of  applying  thenu  They  must  not  be  harried
on  to  theair  conclusions  by  the  passions,  or  the  fears  of
the  multitude.  They  must  deliberate,  as  well  as  re-
solve. If  the  power  drops  from  their  hands  before  they
have  an  opportunity  to  carry  any  system  into  full  effect,
or  even  to  put  it  on  its  trial,  it  is  impossible,  that  foreign
nations  should  not  be  able,  by  uitrigues,  by  fabe  alarms,
and  by  ccHTupt  influences,  to  defeat  the  wbest  measures
of  the  best  patriots.

§  592.  One  other  con^deration  of  a  general  nature

deserves  attention. It  is,  that  while^  on  the  one  hand,

constantly  reciuring  elections  afford  a  great  security  to

puWic  liberty,  they  are  not,  on  the  other  hand,  without

.some dangers and  inconveniences  of  a  formidable

VOL.  IX.  10


Digitized  by


Google


74 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  HI.

nature.  The  very  firequency  of  elections  has  a  ten-
dency to  create  agitations  and  dissensions  in  the  pub-
lic mind;  to  nourish  factions^  and  encourage  restless-
ness, to  favour  rash  innovations  in  domestic  legis-
lation and  public  policy ;  and  to  produce  violent  and
sudden  changes  in  the  administration  of  public  af-
fairs, founded  upon  temporary  excitements  and  pre-
judices.*

§  593.  It  is  plain,  that  some  of  the  considerations,
which  have  been  stated,  must  apply  with  very  different
force  to  the  condition  and  interests  of  different  states ;
a^d  they  demonstrate,  if  not  the  absurdity,  at  least  the
impolicy  of  laying  down  any  general  maxim,  as  to  the
frequency  of  elections  to  legislative,  or  other  offices.*
There  is  quite  as  much  absurdity  in  laymg  down,  as  a
general  rule,  that  where  annual  elections  end,  tyranny
begins,  as  there  is  in  saymg,  that  the  people  are  free
only  while  they  are  choosing  their  representatives,  and
slaves  during  the  whole  period  of  their  service.

§  694.  If  we  examine  this  matter  by  the  light  of
history,  or  at  feast  of  that  portion  of  it,  which  is  best
entided  to  instruct  us  on  the  point,  it  will  be  found,
that  there  is  no  uniformity  of  practice,  or  principle,
among  free  nations  in  regard  to  elections.  In  England
it  is  not  easy  to  trace  out  any  very  decided  course.
The  history  of  parliament,  after  magna  charta,  proves,
that  that  body  had  been  accustomed  usually  to  assemble
once  a  year ;  but,  as  these  sessions  were  dependent
upon  the  good  pleasure  and  discretion  of  the  crown,
very  long  and  inconvenient  intermissions  occasionally

1  See  Mr.  Ames's  Speech,  1  Elliot's  Debates,  31,  33 ;  Ames's  Works,
20,24.

9  Montesquieu's  Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  2,  ch.  3 ;  I  Elliot's  Debates,  30  to
42.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  OF  R£PR£8SNTATIV£S.  76

occurred,  from  royal  contrivance,  ambition,  or  policy.*
Bat,  even  when  parliament  was  accustomed  to  sit  every
year,  the  members  were  not  chosen  every  year.  On
the  contrary,  as  the  dissolution  of  parliament  was  solely
dependent  on  the  will  of  the  crown,  it  might,  and  for-
merly it  sometimes  did  happen,  that  a  single  pariia-
ment  lasted  through  the  whole  life  of  the  king,  who
convened  it*  To  remedy  these  grievances,  it  was
provided  by  a  statute,  passed  in  the  reign  of  Charies
the  Second,  that  the  intermissions  should  not  be  pro-
tracted beyond  the  period  of  three  years ;  and  by  a
subsequent  statute  of  William  and  Mary,  that  the  same
parliament  should  not  sit  longer  than  three  years,  but
be,  at  the  end  of  that  period,  dissolved,  and  a  new  one
elected.  This  period  was,  by  a  statute  of  (Jeorge  the
Fu^t,  prolonged  to  seven  years,  after  an  animated  de»
bate;  and  thus  septennial  became  a  substitute  for
triennial  parliaments.'  Notwithstanding  the  constantly
increasing  influence  of  the  house  of  commons,  and  its
popular  cast  of  opinion  and  action,  more  than  a  century
has  elapsed  without  any  successful  effort,  or  even  any
general  desire,  to  change  the  duration  of  parliament.
So  that,  as  the  English  constitution  now  stands,  the
parliament  must  expire,  or  die  a  natural  death,  at  the
end  of  the  seventh  year,  and  not  sooner,  unless  dis-
solved by  the  royal  prerogative.^  Yet  no  man,  tolera-
bly well  acquainted  with  the  history  of  Great  Britain
for  the  last  century,  would  venture  to  affirm,  that  the
people  had  not  enjoyed  a  higher  degree  of  liberty  and

II  - _

1  The  Federalist,  No.  SSL

9  1  Black.  Comm.  189,  and  note.

3  1  Black.  Corora.  189;  Tbe  Federalist,  No.  52,  53;  1  Elliot's  De-
bates, 37, 39 ;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  42.

4  1  Black.  Comm.  189 ;  The  Federalist,  No.  52-


Digitized  by


Google


76  CONSTITUTION  or  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

influence  in  all  the  proceedings  of  the  government,  than
ever  existed  in  any  antecedent  period.

§  595.  If  we  bring  our  inquiries  nearer  home^  it  will
be  found,  that  the  history  of  the  American  colonies  be-
fore the  revolution  affords  an  equally  striking  proof  of
the  diversity  of  opinion  and  usage.  It  is  very  wcJl
known,  that  the  principle  of  representation  in  one  branch
of  the  legislature  was  (as  has  been  already  stated)
established  in  all  the  colonies.  But  the  periods  of
election  of  the  representatives  were  very  different
They  varied  fix)m  a  half-year  to  seven  years.  In  Vir-
ginia the  elections  were  septennial;  in  North  and  South-
Carolina,  biennial ;  in  Massachusetts,  annual ;  in  Con*
necticut  and  Rhode-Island,  semi-annuaL^  It  has  been
very  justly  remarked  by  the  Federalist,  that  there  is
not  any  reason  to  mfer,  from  the  spirit  and  conduct  of
the  representatives  of  the  people  prior  to  the  revolu*
tion,  that  biennial  elections  would  have  been  dangerous
to  the  public  liberties.  The  spirit,  which  every  where
displayed  itself  at  the  commencement  of  the  struggle,
and  which  vanquished  the  obstacles  to  independence,
is  the  best  of  proofs,  that  a  sufficient  portion  of  liberty
had  been  every  where  enjoyed  to  inspire  both  a  sense
of  its  worth,  and  a  zeal  for  its  proper  enlargement.
This  remark  holds  good,  as  well  with  regard  to  the
then  colonies,  whose  elections  were  least  frequent,  as
to  those,  whose  elections  were  most  frequent.  Vir-
ginia was  the  colony,  which  stood  first  in  resisting  the
parliamentary  encroachments  of  Great  Britam ;  it  was
the  first  also  in  espousing,  by  a  public  act,  the  resolution
of  independence. Yet  her  house  of  representatives

1  The  Federalist,  ^o.  52 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  41,43;  2  Elliot's  De-
bates, 42 ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  4a


Digitized  by


Google


GH.  IX.] HOI78£  OF  RSPRESSITTATiyiS.  77

was  septenniaL^  When,  after  the  revolutioDy  the  states
freely  framed  and  adopted  theu*  own  constitutioDS  of
gOTernment,  a  similar,  though  not  so  marked  a  diversity
of  opinion,  was  exhibited.  In  Connecticut,  untU  her
recent  constitution,  the  representatives  were  chosen
semi-annually ;  in  Rhode-Island  they  are  still  chosen
semi-annually ;  in  South-Carolina,  Tennessee,  Missouri,
Illinois,  and  Louisiana  they  are  chosen  biennially ;  and
in  the  rest  of  the  states  annually.'  And  it  has  been
justly  observed  in  the  Federalist,'  that  it  would  not
be  easy  to  show,  that  Connecticut  or  Rhode-Island  is
better  governed,  or  enjoys  a  greater  share  of  rational
liberty,  than  Soutb^CaroUna,  (or  any  of  the  other  states
having  biennial  elections ;)  or,  that  either  the  one  or  the
other  of  these  states  is  distmguished,  in  these  respects,
and  by  these  causes,  from  the  states,  whose  elections
are  dijQferent  from  both.

§  596.  These  remarks  are  sufficient  to  establish  the
(utility  of  the  maxim  alluded  to,  respecting  the  value  of
annual  elections.  The  question,  how  frequent  elections
should  be,  and  what  should  be  the  term  of  service  of
representatives,  cannot  be  answered  in  any  universal
form,  applicable  to  all  times,  and  all  nations.^  It  is
very  complex  in  its  nature,  and  must  ultimately  resolve
itself  into  a  question  of  policy  and  sound  discretion,
with  reference  to  the  particular  condition  and  circum-
stances of  each  nation,  to  which  it  is  sought  to  be
applied.  The  same  fundamental  principles  of  govern-
ment may  require  very  different,  if  not  entirely  oppo-
site practices  in  different  states. There  is  great  wis-

1  The  Federalist,  No.  52.

*  Dr.  Lieber's  E^cjcL  Americana,  art  ContlUuiums  of  tkt  UmUd
Slates ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  260 ;  1  Kent  Comm.  215.
'  The  Federalist,  No.  53  ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  260.
4  1  EUiot's  Debates,  40,  41,  42.


Digitized  by


Google


/


78  CONSTITtJTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

dom  in  the  observations  of  one  of  our  eminent  states-
men on  this  subject.  "It  is  apparent,"  said  he,  "that
a  delegatiQn.  for  a  very  short  period,  as  for  a  single  day,
would  defeat  the  design  of  representation.  The  elec-
tion in  that  case  would  not  seem  to  the  people  to  be  of
any  importance,  and  the  person  elected  would  think  as
lighdy  of  his  appointment.  The  other  extreme  is
equaUy  to  be  avoided.  An  election  for  a  long  term  of
years,  or  for  life,  would  remove  the  member  too  far
from  the  control  of  the  people,  would  be  dangerous  to
liberty,  and  in  fact  repugnant  to  the  purposes  of  the
delegation.  The  truth,  as  usual,  is  placed  somewhere
between  the  extremes,  and,  I  believe,  is  included  iii
this  proposition;  the  term  of  election  must  be  so  long,
that  the  representative  may  understand  the  interests  of
the  people ;  and  yet  so  limited,  that  his  fidelity  may  be
secured  by  a  dependence  upon  theu'  approbation.'*  *

§  697.  The  question,  then,  which  was  presented  to
the  consideration  of  the  convention,  was,  what  duration
of  office,  on  the  part  of  the  members  of  the  house  of
representatives,^was,  with  reference  to  the  structure  of
the  other  branches  of  the  legislative  department  of  the
general  government,  best  adapted  to  preserve  the  pub-
lic liberty  and  to  promote  the  general  welfare.  I  say,
with  reference  to  the  structure  of  the  other  branches
of  the  legislative  department  of  the  general  govern-
ment, because  it  is  obvious,  that  the  duration  of  office
of  the  president  and  senate,  and  the  nature  and  extent
of  the  powers  to  be  confided  to  congress,  must  most
materially  aflfect  the  decision  upon  this  point  Abso-
lute unanimity  upon  such  a  subject  could  hardly  be
expected ; and  accordingly  it  vdll  be  found,  that  no

i  Mr.  Ames's  Speech,  1  Elliot's  Debates,  90,  81 ;  Ames's  Works,  21 ;
2  EUiot's  Debates,  44, 46.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  H0U8£  OF  REPRESEITTATiyES.  79

inconsiderable  diversity  of  opinion  was  exhibited  in  the
discussions  in  the  convention.  It  was,  in  the  first  in-
stance, decided  in  a  committee  of  the  whole,  that  the
period  should  be  three  years,  seven  states  voting  in  the
affirmative,  and  four  in  the  negative.*  That  period  was
afterwards  struck  out  by  a  vote  of  the  convention,  seven
states  voting  in  the  affirmative,  three  in  the  negative,
and  one  being  divided,  and  the  word  "  twp*'  was  unani-
mously  inserted  in  its  stead.*  In  the  subsequent  re-
vision the  clause  took  the  shape,  in  which  it  now  stands
m  the  constitution.

§  598.  The  reasons,  which  finally  prevailed  in  the
convention  and  elsewhere  in  favour  of  biennial  elections
in  preference  to  any  other  period,  may  be  arranged
under  the  following  heads :

§  599.  In  the  first  place,  an  argument  might  prop-
erly be  drawn  firom  die  extent  of  the  country  to  be
governed.  The  territorial  extent  of  the  United  States
would  require  the  representatives  to  travel  from  great
distance*s,  and  the  arrangements,  rendered  necessary  by
that  circumstance,  would  furnish  much  more  serious  ob-
jections with  men  fit  for  this  service,  if  limited  to  a  single
year,  than  if  extended  to  two  years.'  Annual  elections
might  be  very  well  adapted  to  the  state  legislatures
from  the  faciUty  of  convening  the  members,  and  from
the  familiarity  of  the  people  with  all  the  general  objects
of  local  legislation,  when  they  would  be  highly  inconve-
nient for  the  legislature  of  the  Union.  If,  when  con-
vened, the  term  of  congress  was  of  short  duration,  there
would  scarcely  be  time  properly  to  examine  and  mature

1  Journal  of  the  Convention,  p.  67,  115,  1 16, 135;  4  Elliot's  Debates,
(Yates's  Minutes,)  70,  7i.

9  Journal  of  the  Convention,  p.  14] ,  207,  216 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  30 ;
4  £!lliot's  Debates,  (Yates's  Minutes,)  91, 03.

a  The  Federalist,  No.  53 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  30, 40, 41, 43.


Digitized  by


Google


80  CONSTITimoir  OF  TH£  IT.  STATSSk [bOOK  Ul.

measures.  A  new  election  might  intervene  bef<Nre
there  had  been  an  opportunity  to  interchange  opinions
and  acquire  the  information  indispensable  for  wise  and
salutary  action.^  Much  of  the  business  of  the  national
legislature  must  necessarily  be  postponed  beyond  a
single  session ;  and  if  new  men  are  to  come  every  year,
a  great  part  of  the  information  already  accumulated  will
be  lost,  or  be  unavoidably  open  for  re-exammation  be-^
fore  any  vote  can  be  properly  had.

§  600.  In  the  next  place,  however  well  founded  the
maxim  might  be,  that  where  no  other  circumstances
affect  the  case,  the  greater  the  power  is,  the  shorter
ought  to  be  its  duration ;  and  conversely,  the  smaller
the  power,  the  more  safely  its  duration  may  be  pro-
tracted ; '  that  maxim,  if  it  applied  at  all  to  the  govern-
ment of  the  Union,  was  favourable  to  the  extension  of
the  period  of  service  beyond  that  of  the  state  legisla-
tures. The  powers  of  congress  are  few  and  limited,
and  of  a  national  character ;  those  of  the  state  legi^a-
tures  are  general,  and  have  few  positive  limitations*  If
annual  elections  are  safe  for  a  state ;  biennial  elections
would  not  be  less  safe  for  the  United  States.  No  just
objection,  then,  could  arise  from  this  source,  upon  any
notion,  that  there  would  be  a  more  perfect  security  for
public  liberty  in  annual  than  in  biennial  elections.

^601.  But  a  far  more  important  consideration  grows
out  of  the  nature  and  objects  of  the  powers  of  congress.
The  aim  of  every  political  constitution  is,  or  ought  to
be,  first,  to  obtain  for  nilers  men,  who  possess  most
wisdom  to  discern,  and  most  virtue  to  pursue,  the  com-
mon good  of  society ;  and,  in  the  next  place,  to  take
the  most  effectual  precautions  for  keeping  them  virtu-

1  The  Federalist,  No.  53 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  40,  41,  42.

9  The  Federalist,  No.  53 ;  Moniesqaieu's  Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  3,  cb.  3.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSE  OF  REPRESElfTATiyES.  81

ous,  whQst  they  continue  to  hold  their  public  trust
Frequent  elections  have,  without  question,  a  tendency
to  accomplish  the  latter  object  But  too  great  a  fre-
quency will,  almost  invariably,  defeat  the  former
object,  and,  in  most  cases,  put  at  hazard  the  latter.
As  has  been  already  intimated,  it  has  a  tendency  to  in-
troduce faction,  and  rash  counsels,  and  passionate  ap-
peals to  the  prejudices,  rather  than  to  the  sober  judgment
of  the  people.  And  we  need  not  to  be  reminded,  that
faction  and  enthusiasm  are  the  instruments,  by  which
popular  governments  are  destroyed.*  It  operates  alsO|
as  a  great  discouragement  upon  suitable  candidates
oflFering  themselves  for  the  public  service.  They  can
have  little  opportunity  to  establish  a  solid  reputation,  as
statesmen  or  patriots,  when  their  schemes  are  liable  to
be  suddenly  broken  in  upon  by  demagogues,  who  may
create  injurious  suspicions,  and  even  displace  them  from
office,  before  their  measures  are  fably  tried.*  And  th^y
are  apt  to  grow  weary  of  continued  appeals  to  vindicate
their  character  and  conduct  at  the  polls,  since  success,
however  triumphant,  is  of  such  short  duration,  and  con-
fidence is  so  easily  loosened.  These  considerations,
which  are  always  of  some  weight,  are  especially  appli-
cable to  services  in  a  national  legislature,  at  a  distance
from  the  constituents,  and  in  cases,  where  a  great  varie-
ty of  information,  not  easily  accessible,  is  indispensable
to  a  right  understanding  of  the  conduct  and  votes  of
representatives.

§  602.  But  the  very  nature  and  objects  of  the  na-
tional government  require  far  more  experience  and
knowledge,  than  what  may  be  thought  requisite  in  the

1  The  Federalist,  No.  57;  1  Kent's  Comm.  215.

2  Ames's  Speech ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  3:5.

3  1  Kent's  Comm.  215.

VOL.  II.  1 1


Digitized  by


Google


82  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

members  of  a  state  legislature.  For  the  latter  a  knowl-
edge of  local  interests  and  opinions  may  ordinarily  suf-
fice. But  it  is  far  different  with  a  member  of  congress.
He  is  to  legislate  for  the  interest  and  welfare,  not  of
one  state  only,  but  of  all  the  states.  It  is  not  enough,
that  he  comes  to  the  task  with  an  upright  intendon  and
sound  judgment,  but  he  must  have  a  competent  degree
of  knowledge  of  all  thrf  subjects,  on  which  he  is  c^ed
to  legislate  ;  and  he  must  have  skill,  as  to  the  best  mode
of  applymg  it.  The  latter  can  scarcely  be  acquired,  but
by  lon^  experience  and  training  in  the  national  coun-
cUs.  The  period  of  service  ought,  therefore,  to  bear
some  proportion  to  the  variety  of  knowledge  and  prac-
tical skill,  which  the  duties  of  the  station  demand.^

^  603.  The  most  superficial  glance  at  the  relative
duties  of  a  member  of  a  state  legislature  and  of  those
of  a  member  of  congress,  will  put  this  matter  in  a  strik-
ing light  In  a  single  state,  the  habits,  manners,  insti-
tutions, and  laws,  are  uniform,  and  all  the  citizens  are
more  or  less  conversant  with  them.  The  relative  bear-
ings of  the  various  pursuits  and  occupations  of  the  people
are  well  understood,  or  easily  ascertained.  The  gen-
eral affairs  of  the  state  lie  in  a  comparatively  narrow
compass,  and  are  daily  discussed  and  examined  by
those,  who  have  an  immediate  interest  in  them,  and  by
frequent  communication  with  each  other  can  inter-
change opinions.^  It  is  very  different  with  the  general
government.  There,  every  measure  is  to  be  discussed
with  reference  to  the  rights,  interests,  and  pursuits  of
all  the  states.  When  the  constitution  was  adopted,
there  were  thirteen,  and  there  are  now  twenty -four

1  The  Federalist,  No.  53; 1  Elliot's  Debates,  30,  37,  39,  40,  41 ;  Id-
230;  a  ElUot'8  Debates,  42 ;  1  Kent's  Coinin.2I5.
s  The  Federalist,  No.  53,  56.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES.  88

States,  having  different  laws,  institutions,  emplojonents,
products,  and  climates,  and  many  artificial,  as  well  as
natural  differences  m  the  structure  of  society,  growing
out  of  these  circumstances.  Some  of  them  are  almost
wholly  agricultural ;  some  commercial ;  some  manufac-
turing ;  some  have  a  mixture  of  all ;  and  in  no  two  of
them. are  there  precisely  the  same  relative  adjustments
of  all  these  interests.  No  legislation  for  the  Union  can
be  safe  or  wise,  which  is  not  founded  upon  an  accurate
knowledge  of  these  diversities,  and  their  practical  influ*
ence  upon  public  measures.  What  may  be  beneficial
and  politic,  with  reference  to  the  interests  of  a  smgle
state,  may  be  subversive  of  those  of  other  states.  A
regulation  of  commerce,  wise  and  just  for  the  commer-
cial states,  may  strike  at  the  foundation  of  the  prosperi-
ty of  the  agricultural  or  manufacturing  states.  And,  on
the  other  hand,  a  measure  beneficial  to  agriculture  or
manufactures,  may  disturb,  and  even  overwhelm  the
shipping  interest.  Large  and  enlightened  views,  com-
prehensive information,  and  a  just  attention  to  the  local
^peculiarities,  and  products,  and  employments  of  differ-
ent states,  are  absolutely  indispensable  qualifications  (ot
a  member  of  congress.  Yet  it  is  obvious,  that  if  very
short  periods  of  service  are  to  be  allowed  to  members
of  congress,  the  continual  fluctuations  in  the  public
coimcils,  and  the  perpetual  changes  of  members  will  be
very  unfavourable  to  the  acquirement  of  the  proper
knowledge,  and  the  due  application  of  it  for  the  public
welfare.  One  set  of  men  will  just  have  mastered  the
necessary  information,  when  they  will  be  succeeded  by
a  second  set,  who  are  to  go  over  the  same  grounds,  and
then  are  to  be  succeeded  by  a  third.  So,  that  inexpe-
rience, instead  of  practical  wisdom,  hasty  legislation,  in-
stead of sober  deliberation,  and  imperfect  projects*


Digitized  by


Google


84  CONSTITUTION OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

instead  of  well  constructed  systems,  would  characterize
the  national  government^

§  604.  Congress  has  power  to  regulate  commerce
witii  foreign  nations  and  among  the  several  states.  How
can  foreign  trade  be  properly  regulated  by  uniform  laws
without  (I  do  not  say  some  acquaintance,  but)  a  large
acquamtance  with  tiie  commerce,  ports,  usages,  and
regulations  of  foreign  states,  and  with  the  pursuits  and
products  of  the  United  States?  How  can  trade  be-
tween the  different  states  be  duly  regulated,  without  an
accurate  knowledge  of  their  relative  situation,  and  cli-
mate, ^d  productions,  and  facilities  of  intercourse.'
Congress  has  power  to  lay  taxes  and  imposts ;  but  how
can  taxes  be  judiciously  imposed,  and  effectively  col-
lected, unless  they  are  accommodated  to  the  local  cir-,
cumstances  of  the  several  states  1  The  power  of  taxa-
tion, even  with  the  purest  and  best  intentions,  might,
without  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  diversified  inter-
ests of  the  states,  become  a  most  oppressive  and  ruinous
engine  of  power.'  It  is  true,  that  difficulties  of  this  sort,
will  occur  more  frequently  in  the  first  operations  of  the
government,  than  afterwards.^  But  in  a  growing  com-
munity, like  that  of  the  United  States,  whose  popula-
tion has  already  mcreased  from  three  to  thirteen  mil-
lions within  forty  years,  there  must  be  a  perpetual
change  of  measures  to  suit  the  new  exigencies  of  agri-
culture, commerce,  and  manufactures,  and  to  ensure
the  vital  objects  of  the  constitution.  And,  so  far  is  it
fix)m  being  true,  that  the  national  government  has  by
its  familiarity  become  more  simple  and  facile  in  its  ma-
chmery  and  operations,  that  it  may  be  affirmed,  that  a


i  The  Federalist,  No.  53,  56.

«  M.  3  Id.  4  Id.


Digitized  by


Google


CH«  IX«]  HOUSE  OF  REPRESEXTATIVES*  85

far  more  exact  and  comprehensive  knowledge ,  is  now
necessary  to  preserve  its  adjustments,  and  to  carry  on
its  daily  operations,  than  was  required,  or  even  dream-
ed of,  at  its  first  institution.  Its  very  success,  as  a  plan
of  government,  has  contributed,  in  no  small  degree,  to
give  complexity  to  its  legislation.  And  the  important
changes  in  the  world  during  its  existence  has  requir«
ed  very  many  developements  of  its  powers  and  duties,
which  could  hardly  have  occurred,  as  practical  truths  to
its  enlightened  founders.

§  605.  There  are  other  powers  belonging  to  the  na-
tional government,  which  require  qualifications  of  a  high
character.  They  regard  our  foreign  intercourse  and
diplomatic  policy.  Although  the  house  of  representa-
tives does  not  direcdy  participate  in  foreign  negotiations
and  arrangements ;  yet,  fix>m  the  necessary  connexion
between  the  several  branches  of  public  affairs,  its  co-
operation with  the  other  departments  of  the  govern-
ment will  be  often  indispensable  to  carry  them  into  full
effect  Treaties  with  foreign  nations  will  often  require
the  sanction  of  laws,  not  merely  by  way  of  appropria-
tions of  money  to  comply  with  their  stipulations ;  but
also  to  provide  suitable  regulations  to  give  them  a  prac-
tical operation.  Thus,  a  purchase  of  territory,  like  that
of  Louisiana,  would  not  only  require  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives to  vote  an  appropriation  of  money ;  and  a
treaty,  containing  clauses  of  indemnity,  like  the  British
treaty  of  1794,  in  like  manner  require  an  appropriation
to  give  it  effect ;  but  commercial  treaties,  in  ^n  especial
manner  would  require  many  variations  and  additions  to
the  existmg  laws  in  order  to  adjust  them  to  the  general
system,  and  produce,  where  it  is  intended,  a  just  re-
ciprocity.* It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say,  that  a  com-

1  The  Federalist,  No.  S3.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


86  CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III,

petent  knowledge  of  the  law  of  nations  is  mdispensable
to  every  statesman ;  and,  that  ignorance  may  not  only
involve  the  nation  in  embarrassing  controversies  with
other  nations ;  but  may  also  involve  it  in  humiliating
sacrifices.  Congress  aJone  is  entrusted  with  the  pow-
er to  declare  wan  What  would  be  said  of  representa-
tives called  upon  to  exercise  this  ultimate  appeal  of
sovereignty,  who  were  ignorant  of  the  just  rights  and
duties  of  belligerent  and  neutral  nations  ?  *

§  606.  Besides ;  the  whole  diplomacy  of  the  execu-
tive department,  and  all  those  relations  with  mdepen-
dent  powers,  which  connect  themselves  with  foreign
intercourse,  are  so  intimately  blended  with  the  proper
discharge  of  legislative  duties,  that  it  is  impossible,  that
they  should  not  be  constantiy  brought  under  review  in
the  public  debates.  They  must  fi'equently  furnish  mat-
ter for  censure  or  praise ;  for  accusation  or  vindication ;
for  legislative  checks,  or  legislative  aids ;  for  powerful
appeals  to  popular  favour,  or  popular  resentment ;  for
the  ardent  contests  of  party  ;  and  even  for  the  graver
exercise  of  the  power  of  impeachment.

§  607.  And  this  leads  us  naturally  to  another  remark ;
and  that  is,  that  a  due  exercise  of  some  of  the  powers
confided  to  the  house  of  representatives,  even  in  its  most
narrow  functions,  require,  that  the  members  should  at
least  be  elected  for  a  period  of  two  years.  The  power
of  impeachment  could  scarcely  be  exerted  with  efiSect
by  any  body,  which  had  not  a  legislative  life  of  such  a
period.  It  would  scarcely  be  possible,  in  ordinary  cases,
to  begin  and  end  an  impeachment  at  a  single  annual
session.  And  the  effect  of  change  of  members  during
its  prosecution  would  be  attended  with  no  inconsidera-
ble embarrassment  and  inconvenience. If  the  power

1  The  Fcderulist,  No.  53.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CR.  IX.J HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES.  87

is  ever  to  be  exerted,  so  as  to  bring  great  offenders  to
justice,  there  must  be  a  prolonged  legislative  term  of
office,  so  as  to  meet  the  exigency.  One  year  will  not
suffice  to  detect  guilt,  and  to  pursue  it  to  conviction.*

§  608.  Again ;  the  house  of  representatives  is  to  be
the  sole  judge  of  the  elections  of  its  own  members.
Now,  if  but  one  legislative  session  is  to  be  held  in  a
year,  and  more  than  one  cannot  ordinarily  be  presumed
convenient  or  proper,  spurious  elections  cannot  be  in-
vestigated and  annulled  in  time  to  have  a  due  effect.
The  sitting  member  must  either  hold  his  seat  during
the  whole  period  of  the  investigation,  or  he  must  be
suspended  during  the  same  period.  In  either  case  the
public  mischief  will  be  very  great  The  imiform  prac-
tice has  been  to  allow  the  member,  who  is  retmned,  to
hold  his  seat  and  vote,  until  he  is  displaced  by  the  or-
der of  the  house,  after  full  mvestigation.  If,  then,  a
return  can  be  obtained,  no  matter  by  what  means,  the
irregular  member  is  sure  of  holding  his  seat,  until  a
long  period  has  elapsed,  (for  that  is  indispensable  to
any  thorough  investigation  of  facts  arising  at  great  dis-
tances ;)  and  thus  a  very  pernicious  encouragement  is
given  to  the  use  of  unlawful  means  for  obtaining  irreg-
ular returns,  and  fraudulent  elections.*

§  609.  There  is  one  other  consideration,  not  without
its  weight  in  all  questions  of  this  nature.  Where  elec-
tions are  very  frequent,  a  few  of  the  members,  as  hap-
pens in  all  such  assembles,  will  possess  superior  talents;
will,  by  frequent  re-elections,  become  members  of  long
standing ;  will  become  thoroughly  masters  of  the  public
business ;  and  thus  will  acquire  a  preponderating  and
undue  influence,  of  which  they  will  naturally  be  dis-

1  1  Elliot's  Debates,  34 ;  Mr.  Ames's  Speech.
8  The  Federalist,  No.  53.


Digitized  by


Google


88  CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  Til.

pose(J  to  avail  themselves.  The  great  bulk  of  the  house
Wai  be  composed  of  new  members,  who  will  necessa-
rily be  inexperienced,  diflSdent,  and  undisciplined,  and
thus  be  subjected  to  the  superior  ability  and  informa-
tion of  the  veteran  legislators.  If  biennial  elections
would  have  no  more  cogent  effect,  than  to  diminish  the
amount  of  this  inequality ;  to  guard  unsuspecting  confi-
dence agamst  the  snares,  which  may  be  set  for  it ;  and
to  stimulate  a  watchful  and  ambitious  responsibility,  it
would  have  a  decisive  advantage  over  mere  annual
elections.^

§  610.  Such  were  some  of  the  reasons,  which  pro-
duced, on  the  part  of  the  fi-amers  of  the  constitution,
and  ultimately  of  the  people  themselves,  an  approbation
of  biennial  elections.  Experience  has  deiponstrated
the  sound  policy  and  wisdom  of  the  provision.  But
looking  back  to  the  period,  when  the  constitution  was
upon  its  passage,  one  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the
alarms,  with  which  the  public  mind  was  on  this  subject
attempted  to  be  disturbed.  It  was  repeatedly  urged  in
and  out  of  the  state  conventions,  that  biennial  elections
were  dangerous  to  the  public  liberty ;  and  that  con-
gress might  perpetuate  itself,  and  reign  with  absolute
power  over  the  nation.*

§  611.  In  the  next  place,  as  to  the  qualifications  of
the  elected.  The  constitution  on  this  subject  is  as
follows:'  "No  person  shall  be  a  representative,  who
"  shall  not  have  attained  to  the  age  of  twenty-five  years,
"  and  been  seven  years  a  citizen  of  the  United  States ;

1  The  Federalist,  No.  53. See  also  I  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.
229 ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lectures,  151.
9  J  Elliot's  Debates,  28,  37,  38,  43;  Id.  217.
9  Art  1)  §  2,  paragraph  3.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  IX.] HOUSE  OF  RfiPRESSNTATtVES.  80

'^  and  who  shall  not,  when  elected,  be  an  inhabitant  of
"  that  state,  in  which  he  shall  be  chosen.^

^612.  It  is  obvious,  that  the  inquiry,  as  to  the  due
qualifications  of  representatives,  like  that,  as  to  the  due
qualifications  of  electors  in  a  government,  is  susceptible,
in  its  own  nature,  of  very  different  answers,  according  to
the  habits,  institutions,  interests,  and  local  peculiarities
of  different  nations.  It  is  a  point,  upon  which  we  can
arrive  at  no  universal  rule,  which  will  accommodate
itself  to  the  welfare  and  wants  of  every  people,  with  the
same  proportionate  advantages.  The  great  objects
are,  or  ought  to  be,  to  secure,  on  the  part  of  the  repre-
sentatives, fidelity,  sound  judgment,  competent  infor-
mation, and  mcorruptible  independence.  The  best
modes,  by  which  these  objects  can  be  attained,  are  mat-
ters of  discussion  and  reasoning,  and  essentially  depen-
dent upon  a  large  and  enlightened  survey  of  the  human
character  and  passions,  as  developed  in  the  different
stages  of  civilized  society.  There  is  great  room,  there-
fore, for  diversities  of  judgment  and  qpinion  upon  a
subject  so  comprehensive  and  variable  in  its  elements.
It  would  be  matter  of  surprise,  if  doctrines  essentially
different,  nay,  even  opposite  to  each  other,  should  not;
under  such  circumstances,  be  maintained  by  political
writers,  equally  eminent  and  able.  Upon  questions  of
civil  policy,  and  the  fundamental  structure  of  govern-
ments, there  has  hitherto  been  too  little  harmony  (rf
opinion  among  the  greatest  men  to  encourage  any  hq>e,
that  the  future  will  be  less  finiitfiil  in  dissonances,  than
the  past  In  the  practice  of  governments,  a  veiy  great
diversity  of  qualifications  has  been  insisted  on,  as  pre-
requisites of  oflice ;  and  this  alone  would  demonstrate,
that  there  was  not  admitted  to  exist  any  ccnnmc^  stan-

VOL.  II.  12


Digitized  by


Google


90 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  III.

dard  of  superior  excellence,  adapted  to  all  ages,  and  all
nations.

^613.  In  Great-Britain,  besides  those  negative  quali-
fications, which  are  founded  m  usage,  or  positive  law,
such  as  the  exclusion  of  persons  holding  certain  offices
and  pensions,  it  is  required,  that  every  member  for  a  coun-
ty, or  knight  of  a  shire,  (as  he  is  technically  called,)  shall
have  a  clear  estate  of  freehold,  or  copyhold,  to  the  value
of  .£600  sterling  per  annum  ;  anji  every  member  for  a
city  or  borough,  to  the  value  of  <£300,  except  the  eldest
sons  of  peers,  and  of  persons  qualified  to  be  knights  of
shires,  and  except  the  members  of  the  two  universities.*
.  ^614.  Among  the  American,  colonies  antecedent  to
the  revolution,  a  great  diversity  of  qualifications  existed;
and  the  state  constitutions,  subsequently  formed,  by  no
means  lessen  that  diversity.  Some  insist  upon  a  fi'ee-
hcdd,  or  other  property,  of  a  certain  value ;  others  re-
quire a  certain  period  of  residence,  and  citizenship  only;
others  require  a  freehold  only ;  others  a  payment  of
taxes,  or  an  equivalent ;  others,  again,  mix  up  all  the
various  qualifications  of  property,  residence,  citizenship,
and  taxation,  or  substitute  some  of  these,  as  equivalents
for  others.*

^615.  The  existing  qualifications  in  the  states  being
then  so  various,  it  may  be  thought,  that  the  best  course
would  have  been,  to  adopt  the  rules  of  the  states  re-
spectively, in  regard  to  the  most  numerous  branch  of
their  own  legislatures.  And  this  course  might  not  have
been  open  to  serious  objections.  But,  as  the  qualifica-
tions of  members  were  thought  to  be  less  carefully  de-
fined in  the  state  constitutions,  and  more  susceptible  of

^  1  Black.  Comm.  176. See  4  Instit  46  to  48.
s  Dr.  Liebei;^  EncycL  Americana,  art  CmHUtUumi  of  the  UniUd
States.


Digitized  by


Google


CH,  IX.] HOUSE  OP  REPRSSENTATITES.  91

uniformity,  than  those  of  the  electors,  the  subject  was
thought  proper  for  regulation  by  the  convention.*  And
it  is  observable,  that  the  positive  qualifications  are  few
and  simple.  They  respect  only  age,  citizenship,  and
inhabitancy.*

§  616.  First,  in  regard  to  age.  The  representative
must  have  attained  twenty-five  years.  And  certainly
to  this  no  reasonable  objection  can  be  made.*  If  expe-
rience, or  wisdom,  or  knowledge  be  of  value  in  the  na-
tional councils,  it  can  scarcely  be  pretended,  that  an
earlier  age  could  afford  a  certain  guaranty  for  either.
That  some  qualification  of  age  is  proper,  no  one  will
dispute.  No  one  will  contend,  that  persons,  who  are
minors,  ought  to  be  eligible ;  or,  that  those,  who  have
not  attained  manhood,  so  as  to  be  entitled  by  the  com-
mon law  to  dispose  of  their  persons^  or  estates,  at
their  own  will,  would  be  fit  depositaries  of  the  authority
to  dispose  of  the  rights,  persons,  and  property  of  others.
Would  the  mere  attainment  of  twenty-one  years  of  age
be  a  more  proper  qualification?  All  just  reasomng
would  be  against  it.  The  characters  and  passions  of
young  men  can  scarcely  be  understood  at  the  moment
of  their  majority.  They  are  then  new  to  the  rights  of
self-government;  warm  in  their  passions;  ardent  in
their  expectations ;  and,  just  escaping  from  pupilage,
are  strongly  tempted  to  discard  the  lessons  of  caution,
which  riper  years  inculcate.  What  they  will  become,
remams  to  be  seen ;  and  four  years  beyond  that  period
is  but  a  very  short  space,  in  which  to  try  their  virtues,
develope  their  talents,  enlarge  their  resources,  and  give
them  a  practical  insight  into  the  busmess  of  life  ade-

1  The  Federalist,  No.  2d5. >  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  1^.
d  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  313, 314 ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  139,
140.


.Digitized  by


Google


92  OOXSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

quate  to  their  own  immediate  wants  and  duties.  Can
ttie  interests  of  others  be  safely  confided  to  those,  who
have  yet  to  learn  how  to  take  care  of  their  own  ?  The
British  constitution  has,  indeed,  provided  only  for  the
members  of  the  house  of  commons  not  being  minors ;  *
and  illustrious  instances  have  occurred  to  show,  that
great  statesmen  may  be  formed  even  during  their  mmor-
ity.  But  such  mstances  are  rare,  they  are  to  be  looked  at
as  prodigies,  rather  than  as  examples ;  as  the  extraordi*
nary  growth  of  a  peculiar  education  and  character,  and
a  hot-bed  precocity  in  a  monarchy,  rather  than  as  the
sound  and  thrifty  growth  of  the  open  air,  and  the
bracing  hardihood  of  a  republic.  In  the  convention  this
qualification,  as  to  age,  did  not  pass  without  a  struggle.
It  was  originally  carried  by  a  vote  of  seven  states
against  three,  one  being  divided ;  though  it  was  ulti-
mately adopted  without  a  division.'  In  the  state  con-
ventions it  does  not  seem  to  have  formed  any  impor-
tant topic  of  debate.^


1  1  Hlaok.  Comm,  16S,  173, 175 ;  4  lostit  46, 47.

s  Journal  of  Convention,  June  22,  p.  143;  Id.  Ang.  8,  p.  235 ;  4  Elli-
ot's Debates,  (Yates's  Minutes,)  94.

9  Lork  €k>ke  has  with  much  gravity  enumerated  the  proper  quallfi-
cationa  of  a  pariiameotsnan,  drawing  the  resemblances  from  the  profh
erties  of  the  elephant  First,  that  he  should  be  without  gaU ;  tlwt  is,
without  malice,  rancour,  heat,  and  ehvy.  Secondly,  that  he  should  be
eonstant,  inflexible,  and  not  to  be  bowed,  or  turned  from  the  right,  either
for  fear,  reward,  or  fkvour,  nor  in  judgment  respect  persons.  Thirdly,
that  he  should  be  of  a  ripe  memory,  that  remembering  perils  past,  he
might  remember  dangers  to  come.  Fourthly,  that  though  he  be  of  the
greatest  strength  and  understanding,  yet  he  be  sociable,  and  go  in  com-
panies ;  and  fifthly,  that  he  be  philanthropic,  showing  the  way  to  every
man."^  Whatever  one  may  now  think  of  this  quaint  analogy,  these  qual-
ities would  not,  in  our  day,  be  thought  a  bad  enumeration  of  the  proper
qualities  of  a  good  modem  member  of  parliament,  or  congress.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  IX.] HOUtfi  OF  RSPRESSNTATIYSS.  93

§  617.  Secondly,  in  regard  to  citizenship. It  is
required,  that  the  representative  shall  have  been  a
citizen  of  the  United  States  seven  years. Upon  the
propriety  of  excluding  aliens  from  eligibility, there
could  scarcely  be  any  room  for  debate; for  there
ceuld  be  no  security  for  a  due  administration  of  any
government  by  persons,  whose  interests and  con-
nexions were  foreign,  and  who  owed  no  permanent
allegiance  to  it,  and  had  no  permanent  stake  in  its
measures  or  operations. Foreign  influence,  of  the
most  corrupt  and  mischievous  nature,  could^not  fail  to
make  its  way  into  the  public  councils,  if  there  was  no
guard  against  the  introduction  of  alien  representatives.^
It  has  accordingly  been  a  fundamental  policy  of  most,  if
not  of  all  free  states,  to  exclude  all  foreigners  from  hold-
ing offices  in  the  state. The  only  practical  question
would  seem  to  be,  whether  foreigners,  even  after  natu*
ralization,  should  be  eligible  as  representatives ;  and  if
so,  vehat  was  a  suitable  period  of  citizenship  for  the  al-
lowance of  the  privilege. In  England,  all  aliens  born,
unless  naturalized,  were  c»iginally  excluded  from  a
seat  in  parliament ;  and  now,  by  poi^tive  legislation,  no
alien,  though  naturalized,  is  capable  of  being  a  member
of  either  house  of  parliament^ A  diflFerent  course,
naturaUy  arising  from  the  circumstances  of  the  country,
was  adopted  in  the  American  cdonies  antecedent  to
the  revcdution,  with  a  view  to  invite  emigrations,  and  set-
tlements, and  thus  to  facilitate  the  cultivation  of  their
wild  and  waste  lands. A  similar  policy  had  smce
pervaded  the  state  governments,  and  had  been  attend-
ed with  so  many  advantages,  that  it  would  have  been

1  The  Federalist,  Na  63.

s  1  Black.  Comm.  162, 175 ;  4  Inst  46.


Digitized  by


Google


94  OOXSTITUTIOX  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

impracticable  to  enforce  any  total  exclusion  of  natural-
ized citizens  from  office.  In  the  convention  it  was
originally  proposed,  that  three  years'  citizenship  should
constitute  a  qualification ;  but  that  was  exchanged  for
seven  years  by  a  vote  of  ten  states  to  one.*  No  ob-
jection seems  even  to  have  been  suggested  against
this  qualification ;  and  hitherto  it  has  obtained  a  gen-
eral acquiescence  or  approbation.  It  certainly  sub-
serves two  important  purposes.  1.  That  the  constit-
uents have  a  full  opportunity  of  knowing  the  character
and  merits  of  their  representative.  2.  That  the  repre-
sentative has  a  like  opportunity  of  learning  the  charac-
ter, and  wants,  and  opinions  of  his  constituents.'

§  618.  Thirdly,  in  regard  to  inhabitancy.  It  is  re-
qmred,  that  the  representative  shall,  when  elected,  be
an  mhabitant  of  the  state,  in  which  he  shall  be  chosen.
The  object  of  this  clause,  doubdess,  was  to  secure  an
attachment  to,  and  a  just  representation  o^  the  inter-
ests of  the  state  in  the  national  councils.  It  was  sup-
posed, that  an  inhabitant  would  feel  a  deeper  concern,
and  possess  a  more  enlightened  view  of  the  various
interests  of  his  constituents,  than  a  mere  stranger.  And,
at  all  events,  he  would  generally  possess  more  entirely
their  sympathy  and  confidence.  It  is  observable,  that
the  inhabitancy  required  is  within  the  state,  and  not
within  any  particular  district  of  the  state,  in  which  the
member  is  chosen.  In  England,  in  former  times,  it
was  required,  that  all  the  members  of  the  house  of
commons  should  be  inhabitants  of  the  places,  for  which
they  were  chosen.  But  this  was  for  a  long  time  wholly
disregarded  in  practice,  and  was  at  length  repealed  by

1  Journal  of  Uie  ConTentioD,8  Aagust,  333;  234.
9  2  Wilion's  Law  Lectures,  14].


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSS  OF  RXPRSSSXTATITSS*  96

Statute  of  14  Greo.  3^  cL  58.^  This  circumstance  is
not  a  little  remarkable  in  parliamentary  history ;  and
it  establishes,  in  a  very  striking  manner,  how  little
mere  theory  can  be  regarded  in  matters  of  government
It  was  found  by  experience,  that  boroughs  and  cities
were  often  better  represented  by  men  of  eminence,
and  known  patriotism,  who  were  strangers  to  them,
than  by  those  chosen  from  their  own  vicinage.  And
to  this  very  hour  some  of  the  proudest  names  in  Eng-
lish history,  as  patriots  and  statesmen,  have  been  the
representatives  of  obscure,  and,  if  one  may  so  say,  of
ignoble  boroughs.

^619.  An  attempt  was  made  m  the  convention  to
mtroduce  a  qualification  of  one  year's  residence  before
the  election ;  but  it  failed,  four  states  voting  in  favour
ofxit,  six  against  it,  and  one  bemg  divided.*  The
omission  to  provide,  that  a  subsequent  non-residence
shall  be  a  vacation  of  the  seat,  may  in  some  measure
defeat  the  policy  of  the  original  limitation.  For  it  has
happened,  in  more  than  one  instance,  that  a  member,
after  his  election^  has  removed  to  another  state,  and
thus  ceased  to  have  that  intimate  intercourse  with,  and
dependence  upon  his  constituents^pon  which  so  much
value  has  been  placed  in  all  M^scussions  on  this
subject.

^  620.  It  is  observable,  that  no  qualification,  in  point
of  estate,  has  been  required  on  the  part  of  members  of
the  house  of  representatives.'  Yet  such  a  qualifica-
tion is  insisted  on,  by  a  considerable  number  of  the
states,  as  a  qualification  for  the  popular  branch  of  the


1  1  Black.  Comm.  175 ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  142.

9  Journal  of  Convention,  8  August,  p.  224,  225.

3  Journal  of  Convention,  26  July,  p.  204, 205 ;  Id.  212 ; Id.  241, 242.


Digitized  by


Google


96  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES^ [bOOX  IIL

state  legislature,^  The  probability  is,  that  it  was  not
incorporated  into  the  constitution  of  the  Unbn  from
the  difficulty  of  framing  a  provision,  that  would  be  gen-
erally acceptable.  Two  reasons  have,  however,  been
assigned  by  a  learned  commentator  for  the  omission,
which  deserve  notice.  First,  that  in  a  representative
government  the  people  have  an  undoubted  right  to
judge  for  themselves  of  the  qualification  of  their  repre-
sentative, and  of  their  opinion  if  his  integrity  and  abil-
ity will  supply  the  want  of  estate,  there  is  better  reason
for  contending,  that  it  ought  not  prevail  Secondly,
that  by  requiring  a  property  qualification,  it  may  hs^
pen,  that  men,  the  best  qualified  in  other  respects,
might  be  incapacitated  firom  serving  their  country.*
There  is,  doubtless,  weight  in  each  of  these  considera-
tions. The  first,  however,  is  equally  applicable  to  all
sorts  of  qualifications  whatsoever ;  and  proceeds  upon
an  inadmissible*  foundation ;  and  that  is,  that  the  soci-
ety has  no  just  right  to  regulate  for  the  common  good,
what  a  portion  of  the  community  may  deem  for  their
special  good.  The  other  reason  has  a  better  founda-
tion in  theory;  though,  generally  speaking,  it  will
rarely  occur  in  practice.  But  it  goes  very  far  towards
overturning  another  fundamental  guard,  which  is
deemed  essential  to  public  liberty ;  and  that  is,  that
the  representative  should  have  a  common  interest  in
measures  with  his  constituents.  Now,  the  power  of
taxation,  one  of  the  most  delicate  and  important  in
human  society,  will  rarely  be  exerted  oppressively  by
those,  who  are  to  share  the  common  burthens.  The
possession  of  property  has  in  this  respect  a  great  value

1  Dr.  Lieber's  EDcyclopedia  Amoncana,  art. CcntUhdimu  ^  ihjt
United  States.
9  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  212, 213 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  55,  56.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSS  OF  RXPREUKTATiyES.  97

among  the  proper  qualifications  of  a  representative ;
smce  it  will  hare  a  tendency  to  check  any  undue  im-
positions, or  sacrifices,  which  may  equally  injure  his
own,  as  well  as  theirs.^

^621.  In  like  manner  there  is  a  total  absence  of
any  qualification  founded  on  religious  opinions.  How-
ever desirable  it  may  be,  that  every  government  should
be  administered  by  those,  who  have  a  fixed  religious
belief  and  feel  a  deep  responsibility  to  an  infinitely
wise  and  eternal  Bemg ;  and  however  strong  may  be
our  persuasion  of  the  everlasting  value  of  a  belief  in
Christianity  for  our  present,  as  wdl  as  our  immortal  wel-
&re ;  the  history  of  the  world  has  shown  the  extreme
dangers,  as  weU  as  difficulties^  of  connecting  the  civil
power  with  religious  opinions.  Half  the  calamities,  with
which  the  human  race  have  been  scourged,  have  aris-
en from  the  union  of  church  and  state ;  and  the  { eople
of  America^  above  all  others,  have  too  largely  partaken
of  the  terrors  and  the  sufferings  of  persecution  for
conscience'  sake,  not  to  feel  an  excessive  repugnance
to  the  introduction  of  religious  tests.  Experience  has
demonstrated  the  folly,  as  well  as  the  injustice,  of  ex-
clusions from  office,  foimded  upon  religious  opinions.
They  have  aggravated  all  other  evils  in  the  political
organization  of  societies.  They  carry  in  their  train
discord,  oppression,  and  bloodshed.*  They  perpetu-
ate a  savage  ferocity,  and  insensibility  to  human  rights
and  sufferings.  Wherever  they  have  been  abolished,
they  have  introduced  peace  and  moderation,  and  en-
li^tened  legislation.  Wherever  they  have  been  per-
petuated, they  have  always  checked,  and  in  many

1  1  Tucker's  BlaeL  Comm.  App.  213, 3ia
>  See  4  Black.  Comm.  44,  45,  46, 47.

VOL.  II.  13


Digitized  by


Google


98  CONSTITUTIOIf  OF  THC  U.  STATC8. [bOOK  HI.

cases  have  overturaed  all  the  securities  of  public  Kb*
erty.  The  right  to  burn  heretics  survived  in  England
almost  to  the  close  of  the  reign  of  Gharies  the
Second ;  *  and  it  has  been  asserted,  (but  I  have  not
been  able  to  ascertain  the  fact  by  examination  of  the
printed  journals,)  that  on  that  occasion  rhe  whole
bench  of  bishops  voted  against  the  repeal.  We  all
know  how  slowly  the  Roman  Catholics  have  recovered
their  just  rights  in  England  and  Ireland.  The  triumph
has  been  but  just  achieved,  after  ^  most  painful  contest
for  a  half  century.  In  the  catholic  countries,  to  this
very  hour,  protestants  are,  for  the  most  part,  treated
with  a  cold  and  reluctant  jealousy,  tolerated  perhaps,
but  never  cherished.  In  the  actual  situation  of  the
United  States  a  union  of  the  states  would  hare  been
impractible  from  the  known  diversity  of  religious  sects,
if  any  thing  more,  than  a  simple  belief  in  Christianity  in
the  most  general  form  of  expression,  had  been  required.
And  even  to  this  some  of  the  states  would  have  object-
ed, as  inconsistent  with  the  fundamental  policy  of  their
own  charters,  constitutions,  and  laws.  Whatever, .
indeed,  may  have  been  the  desire  of  many  persons,  of
a  deep  religious  feeling,  to  have  embodied  some  provi-
sion on  this  subject  in  the  constitution,  it  may  be
safely  affirmed,  that  hitherto  the  absence  has  not  been
felt,  as  an  evil ;  and  that  while  Christianity  continues
to  be  the  belief  of  the  enlightened,  and  wise,  and  pure,
among  the  electors,  it  is  impossible,  that  infidelity  can
find  an  easy  home  in  the  house  of  representatives.

^  622.  It  has  been  justly  observed,  that  under  the
reasonable  qualifications  established  by  the  constituticm,
the  door  of  this  part  of  the  federal  government  is  open


1  4  Black.  Comm.  49.


Digitized  by


Google


CV. IX.]  HOUSE  OF  REPRESElTTATiyES.  90

to  merit  of  every  description,  whether  native  or  adoptive,
whether  young  or  old,  and  without  regard  to  pov-
erty or  wealth,  or  any  particular  professbn  of  re-
ligious faith.^

^  623.  A  question,  however,  has  been  suggested
upon  this  subject,  which  ought  not  to  be  passed  over
without  notice.  And  that  is,  whether  the  states  can
superadd  any  qualifications  to  those  prescribed  by  the
constitution  of  the  United  States.  The  laws  of  some
of  the  states  have  already  required,  that  the  represen-
tative should  be  a  fi'eeholder,  and  be  resident  within
the  district,  for  which  he  is  chosen.*  If  a  state  legiria-
ture  has  authority  to  pass  laws  to  this  effect,  they  may
impose  any  other  qualifications  beyond  those  provided
by  the  constitution,  however  inconvenient,  restrictive,
or  even  mischievous  they  may  be  to  the  interests  of
the  Union.  The  legislature  of  one  state  may  require,
that  none  but  a  Deist,  a  Catholic,  a  Protestant,  a
Calvinist,  or  a  Universalist,  shall  be  a  representative.
The  legislature  of  anoth^  state  may  require,  that  none
shall  be  a  representative  but  a  planter,  a  farmer,  a
mechanic,  or  a  manufacturer.  It  may  exclude  mer-
chants, and  divines,  and  physicians,  and  lawyers.
Another  legislature  may  require  a  high  monied  qualifi-
cation, a  freehdd  of  great  value,  or  personal  estate  of
great  amount  Another  legislature  may  require,  that
the  party  shall  have  been  bom,  and  fdways  lived  in
the  state,  or  district ;  or  that  he  shall  be  an  inhabitant
of  a  particular  town  or  city,  fi^e  of  a  corporation,  or
eldest  son.  In  short,  there  is  no  end  to  the  varieties
of  qualifications,  which,  without  insisting  upon  extrava-
gant cases,  may  be  imagined. A  state  may,  with  the

1  The  Federalist,  No.  52.

>  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  213.


Digitized  by


Google


100 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

sole  object  of  dissolving  the  Union,  create  qualifications
so  high,  and  so  singular,  that  it  shall  become  impracti-
cable to  elect  any  representative.

^  624.  It  would  seem  but  fair  reasoning  upon  the
plainest  principles  of  interpretation,  diat  when  the  con-
stitution estabUshed  certain  qualifications,  as  necessary
for  office,  it  meant  to  exclude  all  others,  as  prerequi-
sites. Prom  the  very  nature  of  such  a  provision,  the
affirmation  of  these  qualifications  would  seem  to  imply
a  negative  of  all  others.  And  a  doubt  of  this  sort
seems  to  have  pervaded  the  mind  of  a  learned  com-
mentator.^ A  power  to  add  new  qualifications  is  cer-
tainly equivalent  to  a  power  to  vary  them.  It  adds  to
the  aggregate,  what  changes  the  nature  of  the  former
requisites.  The  house  of  representatives  seems  to  have
Acted  upon  this  interpretation,  and  to  have  held,  that
the  state  legislatures  have  no  power  to  prescribe  new
qualifications,  unknown  to  the  ccmstitution  of  the  United
States.^  A  celebrated  American  statesman,'  however,
with  his  avowed  devotion  to  state  power,  has  intimated
a  contrary  doctrine.,  **Ifi''says  he,  "whenever  the
constitution  assumes  a  single  power  out  of  many,  which
belong  to  the  same  subject,  we  should  consider  it  as
assuming  the  whole,  it  would  vest  the  general  govern-
ment with  a  mass  of  powers  never  contemplated.  On
the  contrary,  the  assumption  of  particular  powers  seems
an  exclusion  of  all  not  assumed.  This  reasoning  ap-
pears to  me  to  be  sound,  but  on  so  recent  a  change  of
view,  caution  requires  us  not  to  be  over  confident.**  *
He  intimates,  however,  that  unless  the  case  be  either

I  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  213.
>  4  Jefferson's  Corre^ndence,  338,
s  Mr.  Jefferson.
i  Jefferson's  Correspondence,  1239.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUra  OF  REPBESCNTATiyES.  101

clear  or  urgent,  it  would  be  better  to  let  it  lie  undis-
turbed.*

^  625.  It  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  this
celebrated  statesman,  that  the  whole  of  this  reasoning,
which  is  avowedly  founded  upon  that  amendment  to
the  constitution,  which  provides,  that  **  the  powers  not
delegated  nor  prohibited  to  the  states,  are  reserved  to
the  states  respectively,  or  to  the  people,'*  proceeds  upon
a  basis,  which  is  inapplicable  to  the  case.  In  the  first
place,  no  powers  could  be  reserved  to  the  states,  ex-
cept those,  winch  existed  in  the  states  before  the  con-
stitution was  adopted.  The  amendment  does  not  pro-
fess, and,  indeed,  did  not  intend  to  confer  on  the  states
any  new  powers ;  but  merely  to  reserve  to  them,  what
were  not  conceded  to  the  government  of  the  Union.
Now,  it  may  properly  be  asked,  where  did  the  states
get  the  power  to  appoint  representatives  in  the
national  government?  Was  it  a  power,  that  existed
at  all  before  the  constitution  was  adopted  ?  If  derived
from  the  constitution,  must  it  not  be  derived  exactly
under  the  qualifications  established  by  the  constitution,
and  none  others  ?  If  the  constitution  has  delegated  no
power  to  the  states  to  add  new  qualifications,  how  can
they  cladm  any  such  power  by  the  mere  adoption  of
that  instrument,  which  they  did  not  before  possess  ?

^  626.  The  truth  is,  that  the  states  can  exercise  no
powers  whatsoever,  which  exclusively  spring  out  of  the
existence  of  the  national  government,  which  the  con-
stitution does  not  delegate  to  them*  They  have  just
as  much  right,  and  no  more,  to  prescribe  new  qudifi-
cations  for  a  representative,  as  they  have  for  a  presi-
dent. Each  is  an  officer  of  the  Union,  deriving  his

1  4  Jefferson's  Correfpondancei  p.  239.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


102  CONST  ITITTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III*

powers  and  qualifications  from  the  constitution,  and
neither  created  by,  dependent  upon,  nor  controllable  by,
the  states.  It  is  no  original, prerogative  of  state  power
to  appoint  a  representative,  a  senator,  or  president  for
the  Union.  Those  oflScers  owe  their  existence  and
functions  to  the  united  voice  of  the  whole,  not  of  a  por-
tion, of  the  people.  Before  a  state  can  assert  the  rights
it  must  show,  that  the  constitution  has  delegated  and
recognised  it.  No  state  can  say,  that  it  has  reserved,
what  it  never  possessed.

^  627.  Besides ;  mdependent  of  this,  there  is  another
fundamental  objection  to  the  reasoning.  The  whole
scope  of  the  argument  is,  to  show,  that  the  legislature
of  the  state  has  a  right  to  prescribe  new  qualifications*
Now,  if  the  state  in  its  political  capacity  h^d  it,  it  wodd
not  follow,  that  the  legislature  possessed  it  That  must
depend  upon  the  powers  confided  to  the  state  legisla-
ture by  its  own  constitution.  A  state,  and  the  legisla-
ture of  a  state,  are  quite  different  political  beings.  Now
it  would  be  very  desirable  to  know,  in  which  part  of
any  state  constitution  this  authority,  exclusively  of  a
national  character,  is  found  delegated  to  any  state  legis-
lature. But  this  is  not  all.  .  The  amendment  does  not
reserve  the  powers  to  the  states  exclusively,  as  political
bodies ;  for  the  language  of  the  amendment  is,  that  the
powers  not  delegated,  &c.  are  reserved  to  the  states,
or  to  the  people.  To  justify,  then,  the  exercise  of  the
power  by  a  state,  it  is  indispensable  to  show,  that  it  has
not  been  reserved  to  the  pec^e  of  the  state.  The  peo-
ple of  the  state,  by  adoptmg  the  constitution,  have  de-
clared what  their  will  is,  as  to  the  qualifications  ibr
ofiice.  And  here  the  maxim,  if  ever,  must  aj^ly,  JSa?-
pressio  wfiius  est  exchmo  alterius.  It  might  further  be
urged,  that  the  constitution,  being  the  act  of  the  whole


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSS  or  R£PR£S£irrATIVSS.  103

people  of  the  United  States,  formed  and  fashioned  ac-
cordmg  to  their  own  views,  it  is  not  to  be  assumed,  as
the  basis  of  any  reasoning,  that  they  hare  given  any
control  over  the  functionaries  created  by  it,  to  any
state,  beyond  what  is  found  in  the  text  of  the  instru-
ment When  such  a  control  is  asserted,  it  b  matter  of
proof^  not  of  assumption  ;  it  is  matter  to  be  established,
as  of  right,  and  not  to  be  exercised  by  usurpation,  un-
til it  is  displaced.  The  burthen  of  proof  is  on  the  state,
and  not  on  the  government  of  the  Union.  The  aflirm-
ative  is  to  be  established ;  the  negative  is  not  to  be
denied,  and  the  denial  taken  for  a  concession.

§  628.  In  regard  to  the  power  of  a  state  to  prescribe
the  qualification  of  mhabitancy  or  residence  in  a  dis-
trict, as  an  additional  qualification,  there  is  this  forcible
reason  for  denying  it,  that  it  is  undertaking  to  act  upon
the  very  qualification  prescribed  by  the  constitution,  as
to  inhabitancy  in  the  state,  and  abridging  its  operation.
It  is  precisely  the  same  exercise  of  power  on  the  part  of
the  states,  as  if  they  should  prescribe,  that  a  represen-
tative should  be  forty  years  of  age,  and  a  citizen  for  ten
years.  In  each  case,  the  very  qualification  fixed  by
the  constitution  is  completely  evaded,  and  indirectly
abolished.

§  629.  The  next  clause  of  the  second  section  of  the
first  article  respects  the  apportionment  of  the  represen-
tatives among  the  states.  It  is  as  follows :  ^^  Represen-
**tatives  and  direct  taxes  shall  be  apportioned  among
*^  the  several  states,  which  may  be  included  in  this
**  Union,  according  to  their  respective  numbers,  which
"  shall  be  determined  by  adding  to  the  whole  number  of
"free  persons,  including  those  bound  to  service  for  a
"  term  of  years,  and  excluding  Indians  not  taxed,  three-
"  fifths  of  all  other  persons. The  actual  enumeration


Digitized  by


Google


104 coNSTiTunoN  or  the  u.  states, [book  iil

**  shall  be  ma  ^'^  within  three  years  after  the  first  meeting
**of  the  congress  of  the  United  States^  and  within  every
^  subsequent  term  of  ten  years,  in  such  manner,  as  they
^  shall,  by  law,  direct.  The  number  of  representatives
"  shall  not  exceed  one  for  every  thirty  thousand  j  but
"each  state  shall  have  at  least  one  representative.
"And  until  such  enumeration  shall  be  made,  the  state
"of  New-Hampshire  shall  be  entitled  to  choose  three,
"Massachusetts  eight,  Rhode-Island  and  Providence
"  Plantations  one,  Connecticut  five,New-Yorksix,New-
"  Jersey  four,  Pennsylvania  eight,  Delaware  one,  Mary-
"land  six,  Virginia  ten,  North-Carolma  five,  South-
"  Carolma  five,  and  Greorgia  three.'*

§  630.  The  first  apportionment  thus  made,  being  of
a  temporary  and  fugacious  character,  requires  no  com-
mentary.* The  basis  assumed  was  probably  very  near-
ly the  same,  which  the  constitution  pointed  out  for  aM
future  apporuonments,  or,  at  least,  of  all  the  free  persons
in  the  states.*

It  is  obvious,  that  the  question,  how  the  s^portion-
ment  should  be  made,  was  one,  upon  which  a  consid-
erable diversity  of  judgment  might,  and  probably  would^
exist.  Three  leading  principles  of  apportionment  would,
at  once,  present  themselves.  One  was  to  adopt  the  rule
already  existing,  under  the  confederation ;  that  is,  an
equality  of  representation  and  vote  by  each  state,  thus
giving  each  state  a  right  to  send  not  kss  than  two,  nor
more  than  seven  representatives^  and  in  the  determin-
ation of  questions,  each  state  to  have  one  vote.'  This
would  naturally  receive  encouragement  from  all  those,
who  were  attached  to  the  confederation,  and  preferred

»  Joarn.  of  Convention,  lOth  July,  165, 166, 167, 171, 172, 179, 216.
>  Joum.  of  Conyention^  159,  note.  But  see  The  Federdist,  No.  55*
s  Confederation,  Art  5.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSJB  or  RXPRfiflXKTATITSS*  105

a  mere  league  of  states,  to  a  government  in  any  degree
national^  And  accordingly  it  formed,  as  it  should  seem,
the  basis  of  what  was  called  the  New-Jersey  Plan.*
This  rule  of  apportionment  met,  however,  with  a  decid-
ed opposition,  and  was  negatived  m  the  conventitm  at
an  early  period,  seven  states  votmg  against  it,  three  be-
ing in  its  favour,  and  one  being  divided.'

^631.  Another  principle  might  be,  to  apportion  the
representation  of  the  states  according  to  the  relative
property  of  each,  thus  making  property  the  basis
of  representation.  This  might  commend  itsdf  to  some
persons,  because  it  would  introduce  a  salutary  check
into  the  legislature  m  regard  to  taxation,  by  securing,
in  some  measure,  an  equalization  of  the  public  burthens,
by  the  voice  of  those,  who  were  called  to  give  most  to-
wards the  common  contributions.^  That  taxation  ought
to  go  hand  in  hand  with  representation,  had  been  a  fa-
vourite theory  of  the  American  people.  Under  the  con-
federation, all  the  common  expenses  were  required  to
be  borne  by  the  states  in  proportion  to  the  value  of
the  land  within  each  state.*  But  it  has  been  already
seen,  that  this  mode  of  contribution  was  extremely  dif-
ficult and  embarrassing,  and  unsatisfactory  in  practice,
under the  confederatiop.^ There  do  not,  indeed,

1  Journ.  of  Convention,  111,  153,  159.

9  Mr.  Patterson's  Plan,  Journ.  of  Convention,  193;  4ElKot'8  Debates,
(Yates's  Minutes,)  74 ;  Id.  81 ;  Id.  107  to  113,  116  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist.  228,
239,232.

3  Journ.  of  Convention,  llth  June,  111.  See  also  Id.  153,  154;
4  Elliot's  Debates,  (Yates's  Minutes,)  68.

4  4  Elliot's  Debates,  (Yates's  Minutes,)  68,  69  ;  Jouin.  of  Convention,
llth  June,  111 ;  Id.  5th  July,  158 ;  Id.  llth  July,  169.

5  Confederation,  Art.  8.

«  Journals  of  Congress,  17th  Feb.  1783,  vol.  8,  p.  129  to  133  ;  Id.  27th
Sept.  1785,  vol.  10,  p.  328 ;  Id.  18th  April,  1783,  vol.  8,  p.  188 ;  1  Elliot's
Debates,  56;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  113  ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  235,
236,  243  to  246  ;  The  Federalist,  No.  80;  Id.  No.  21.
VOL.  II.  14


Digitized  by


Google


106  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

seem  to  be  any  traces  in  the  proceedings  of  the  conven-
tion, that  this  scheme  had  an  exclusive  influence  with
any  persons  m  that  body.  It  mixed  itself  up  with  other
considerations,  without  acquiring  any  decisive  prepond-
erance. In  the  first  place,  it  was  easy  to  provide  a  reme-
dial check  upon  undue  direct  taxation,  the  only  species,
of  which  there  could  be  the  slightest  danger  of  unequal
and  oppressive  levies.  And  it  will  be  seen,  that  this
was  sufficiently  provided  for,  by  declaring,  that  repre-
sentatives and  direct  taxes  should  be  apportioned  by
the  same  ratio.

§  632.  In  the  next  place,  although  property  may  not
be  direcdy  aimed  at,  as  a  basis  in  the  representation,
provided  for  by  the  constitution,  it  cannot,  on  the  other
hand,  be  deemed  to  be  totally  excluded,  as  will  pres-
ently be  seen.  In  the  next  place,  it  is  npt  admitted,  that
property  alone  can,  in  a  free  government,  safely  be  re-
lied on,  as  the  sole  basis  of  representation.  It  may  be
true,  and  probably  is,  that  in  the  ordinary  course  of
affairs,  it  is  not  the  interest,  or  policy  of  those,  who
possess  property,  to  oppress  those,  who  want  it  But,  in
every  well-ordered  commonwealth,  persons,  as  well  as
property,  should  possess  a  just  share  of  influence.  The
liberties  of  the  people  are  too  dear,  and  too  sacred  to  be
entrusted  to  any  persons,  who  may  not,  at  all  tunes,
have  a  common  sympathy  and  common  interest  with
the  people  in  the  preservation  of  theu*  public  rights^
privileges,  and  liberties.  Checks  and  balances,  if  not
indispensable  to,  are  at  least  a  great  conservative  in,  the
operations  of  all  fi^e  governments.  And,  perhaps,  upon
mere  abstract  theory,  it  cannot  be  justly  affirmed,  that
either  persons  or  property,  numbers  or  wealth,  can
safely  be  trusted,  as  the  final  repositaries  of  the  dele-


Digitized  by


Google


€H.  IX.]  R0U8JB  OF  RSPRXSlHTATiyXfl.  107

gated  powers  of  goyemment^  By  apportioning  influ-
ence among  each,  vigilance^  caution^  and  mutual  checks
are  naturally  introduced,  and  perpetuated.

§  633.  The  third  and  remaining  principle  was,  to
apportion  the  representatives  among  the  states  accord-
ing to  their  relative  numbers.  This  had  the  recom-
mendation of  great  simplicity  and  uniformity  in  its  ope-
ration, of  being  generally  acceptable  to  the  people,  and
of  being  less  liable  to  fraud  and  evasion,  than  any  other,
which  could  be  devised.'  Besides  ;  although  wealth
and  property  cannot  be  affirmed  to  be  in  different
states,  exacdy  in  proportion  to  the  numbers  ;  they  are
not  so  widely  separated  from  it,  as,  at  a  hasty  glance,
might  be  imagined.  There  is,  if  not  a  natural,  at  least  a
very  common  connexion  between  them  ;  and,  perhaps,
an  apportionment  of  taxes  according  to  numbers  is  as
equitable  a  rule  for  contributions  according  to  reUtive
wealth,  as  any,  which  can  be  practically  obtained.'

^  634.  The  scheme,  therefore,  under  all  the  circum-
stances, of  making  numbers  the  basis  of  the  representa-
tion of  the  Union,  seems  to  have  obtained  more  gene-
ral favour,  than  any  other  in  the  convenrion,  because  it
had  a  natural  and  universal  connexion  with  the  rights
and  liberties  of  the  whole  people.^

§  636.  But  here  a  difficulty  of  a  very  serious  nature
arose.  There  were  other  pers^ons  in  several  of  the
states,  than  those,  who  were  free.  There  were  some
persons,  who  were  bound  to  service  for  a  term  of  years;
though  these  were  so  few,  that  they  would  scarcely


1  The  Federalirt,  No.  54.  «  Id.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  54 ;  Resolve  of  Congrese,  18th  April,  1783,
(8  Joanials  of  Congress,  188,194,198);  1  United  States  Laws,(Bioren
&  Duane^s  edit)  29, 32,  35.

4  The  Federalist,  No.  54.


Digitized  by


Google


108  CONSTITUTIOK  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

vary  the  result  of  the  general  rule,  in  any  important  de-
gree. There  were  Indians,  also,  in  several,  and  proba-
bly in  most,  of  the  states  at  that  period,  who  were  not
treated  as  citizens,  and  yet,  who  did  not  form  a  part  of
independent  communities  or  tribes,  exercising  general
sovereignty  and  powers  of  government  within  the  boun-
daries of  the  states.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  pro-
vide for  these  cases,  though  they  were  attended  with  no
practical  difficulty.  There  seems  not  to  have  been  any
objection  in  including,  in  the  ratio  of  representation,  per-
sons bound  to  service  for  a  term  of  years,  and  in  ex-
cluding Indians  not  taxed.  The  real  (and  it  was  a  very
exciting)  controversy  was  m  regard  to  slaves,  whether
they  should  be  included  in  the  enumeration,  or  not.^
On  the  one  hand,  it  was  contended,  that  slaves  were
treated  in  the  states,  which  tolerated  slavery,  as  prop-
erty, and  not  as  persons.'  They  were  bought  and  sold,
devised  and  transferred,  like  any  other  property.  They
had  no  civil  rights,  or  poUtical  privileges.  They  had
no  will  of  their  own ;  but  were  bound  to  absolute  obedi-
ence to  their  masters.  There  was,  then,  no  more  reason
for  including  them  in  the  census  of  persons,  than  there
would  be  for  including  any  brute  animals  whatsoever.'
If  theywere  to  be  represented  as  property,  the  rule
should  beextended,  soas  to  embrace  all  other  property.
It  would  be  a  gross  inequality  to  allow  representation  for
slaves  to  the  southern  states ;  for  that,  in  effect,  would
be,  to  allow  to  their  masters  a  predominant  right,  found-
ed on  mere  property.  Thus,  five  thousand  free  per-
sons, in  a  slave-state,  might  possess  the  same  power

1  2  Pitk.  Hist  233  to  245.

»  The  Federalist,  No.  54  ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  58  to  60 ;  Id.  204, 212,
213 ;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  (MarUn's  Address,)  24.
9  4  Elliot's  Debates,  (Yates's  Minutes,)  69 ;  Id;  24.


Digitized  by


Google


CH*  IX.]  HOUSE  OF  BCPRESENTATiyES.  109

to  choose  a  representative,  as  thirty  thousand  free  per-
sons in  a  non-slave-hold'ing  state.^

§  636.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  contended,  that
slaves  are  deemed  persons,  as  well  as  property. They
partake  of  the  qualities  of  both. In  being  compelled  to
labour,  not  for  himself,  but  for  his  master ;  in  being
vendible  by  one  master  to  another ; and,  in  being
subject,  at  all  times,  to  be  restrained  in  his  liberty,  and
chastised  in  his  body,  by  the  will  of  another,  the  slave
may  appear  to  be  degraded  from  the  human  rank,  and
classed  with  the  irrational  animals,  which  fall  under  the
denomination  of  property. But,  in  being  protected  in
his  life  and  hubs  against  the  violence  of  others,  even
of  the  master  of  his  labour  and  liberty  ;  and  in  being
punishable  himself  for  all  violence  committed  agamst
others  ;  the  slave  is  no  less  evidently  regarded  by  law,
as  a  member  of  the  society,  and  not  as  a  part  of  the
irrational  creation  ;  as  a  moral  person,  and  not  as  a
mere  article  of  property.* The  federal  constitution
should,  therefore,  view  them  in  the  mixed  character  of
persons  and  property,  which  was  in fact  their  true
character. It  is  true,  that  slaves  are  not  included  in
the  estimate  of  representatives  in  any  of  the  states  pos-
sessmg  them. They  neither  vote  themselves,  nor  in-
crease the  vote  of  their  masters. But  it  is  also  true,
that  the  constitution  itself  does  not  proceed  upon  any
ratio  of  merely  qualified  voters,  either  as  to  represen-
tatives, or  as  to  electors  of  them. If,  therefore,  those,
who  are  not  voters,  are  to  be  excluded  from  the  enu-
meration or  census,  a  similar  inequality  ^ill  exist  in  the
apportionment  among  the  states. For  the  representa-
tives are  to  be  chosen  by  those,  who  are  qualified  vot-

1  4  £mot*8  Debates,  (Martin's  Address,)  24 ;  Id.(YatesVMinate8,)  69.
f  The  Federalist,  No.  54 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  312,  2ia


Digitized  by


Google


1 10 CONSTltUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

ers,  for  the  most  numerous  branch  of  the  state  legisla^
ture ;  and  the  qualifications  in  different  states  are  es-*
sentially  different ;  and,  indeed,  are  in  no  two  states
exactly  alike.  The  constitution  itself,  therefore,  lays
down  a  prmciple,  which  requires,  that  no  regard  shall
be  had  to  the  policy  of  particular  states,  towards  their
own  inhabitants.  Why  should  not  the  same  principle
apply  to  slaves,  as  to  other  persons,  who  were  exclud-
ed as  voters  in  the  states?  *

^  637.  Some  part  of  this  reasoning  may  not  be  very
satisfactory  ;  and  especially  the  latter  part  of  it.  The
distinction  between  a  free  person,  who  is  not  a  voter,
but  who  is,  in  no  sense,  property,  and  a  slave,  who  is  not
a  voter,  and  who  is,  in  every  practical  sense,  property,
is,  and  for  ever  must  form,  a  sound  ground  for  discrim-
inating  between  them  in  every ,  constitution  of  gov-
ernment

^  638.  It  was  added,  that  the  idea  was  not  entirely
a  just  one,  4:hat  representation  relates  to  persons  only,
and  not  to  property.  Government  is  instituted  no  less
for  the  protecUon  of  the  property,  than  of  the  persons
of  individuals.  The  one,  as  well  as  the  other,  may,
therefore,  be  considered  as  proper  to  be  represented
by  those,  who  are  charged  with  the  government  And,
in  point  of  fact,  this  view  of  the  subject  constituted  the
basis  of  some  of  the  representative  departments  in  sev-
eral of  the  state  governments.*

§  639.  There  was  another  reason  urged,  why  the
votes  allowed  in  the  federal  legislature  to  the  people
of  each  state  ought  to  bear  some  proportion  to  the
comparative  wealth  of  the  states. It  was,  that  states

1  The  Federalist,  No.  54;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  190,  191;
1  EUiot'B  Debates,  213, 214.
9  The  Federalist,  No.  54  ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  2ia


Digitized  by


Googk


CH.  IX.]  H0IT8S  OF  RSPRESElfTATiyES.  Ill

have  not  an  influence  over  other  states,  arising  from  the
superior  advantages  of  fortune,  as  individuals  in  the
same  state  possess  over  their  needy  fellow  citizens
from  the  like  cause*  The  richest  state  in  the  UnicHi
can  hardly  indulge  the  hope  of  influencing  the  choice
of  a  single  representative  in  any  other  state  ;  nor  will
the  representatives  of  the  largest  and  richest  states
possess  any  other  advantages  in  the  national  legblature,
than  what  results  from  superior  numbers  alone.^

^  640.  It  is  obvious,  that  these  latter  reasons  have
no  just  application  to  the  subject  They  are  not  only
over-strained,  and  founded  In  an  mgenious  attempt  to
gloss  over  the  real  objections ;  but  they  have  this  in-
herent vice,  that,  if  well  founded,  they  apply  with  equal
force  to  the  representation  of  all  property  in  all  the
states  ;  and  if  not  entitled  to  respect  on  this  account,
they  contain  a  most  gross  and  indefensible  inequality
in  favour  of  a  single  species  of  property  (slaves)  ex-
isting in  a  few  states  only.  It  might  have  been  con-
tended, with  full  as  much  propriety,  that  rice,  or  cot-
ton, or  tobacco,  or  potatoes,  should  have  been  exclu-
sively taken  into  account  in  apportioning  the  repre-
sentation.

^  641.  The  truth  is,  that  the  arrangement  adopted
by  the  constitution  was  a  matter  of  compromise  and
concession,  confessedly  unequal  in  its  operation,  but  a
necessary  sacrifice  to  that  spirit  of  conciliation,  which
was  indispensable  to  the  union  of  states  having  a  great
diversity  of  interests,  and  physical  condition,  and  politi-
cal institutions.* It  was  agreed,  that  slaves  should  be

1  The  Federalist,  No.  54.

3  1  Elliot's  Debates,  212, 313  ;  2  Pitk.  Hist  233  to  244  ;  Id.  245,  346,
247, 248 ;  1  Kent's  Coram.  216, 217 ;  The  Federalist,  No.  37,  54 ;  3  DalL
171, 177, 178.—  It,  at  the  present  time,  gives  iwenhf:fiioe  slave  represen-
tatives in  congress.


Digitized  by


Google


112  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

represented,  under  the  mild  appellation  of  "other  per-
sons," not  as  free  persons,  but  only  in  the  propor-
tion of  three  fifths.  The  clause  was  in  substance  bor-
rowed from  the  resolve,  passed  by  the  continental  con-
gress on  the  18th  of  April,  1783,  recommendmg  the
states  to  amend  the  articles  of  confederation  m  such
manner,  that  the  national  expenses  should  be  defrayed
out  of  a  common  treasury,  "which  shall  be  supplied  by
the  several  states,  in  proportion  to  the  whole  number

^  of  white,  or  other  free  inhabitants,  of  every  age,  sex,
and  condition,  including  those  bound  to  servitude  for  a
term  of  years,  and  three  fifths  of  all  other  persons,  not
comprehended  in  the  foregoing  description,  except  In-
dians, not  paying  taxes,  in  each  state."  ^  In  order  to
reconcile  the  non-slave-holding  states  to  this  provision,
another  clause  was  inserted,  that  direct  taxes  should
be  apportioned  in  the  same  manner  as  representatives.
So,  that,  theoretically,  representation  and  taxation  might
go  pari  passu.'  This  provision,  however,  is  more  wspe-
cious  than  solid ;  for  while,  in  the  levy  of  direct  taxes,
it  apportions  them  on  three  fifths  of  persons  not  free,  it,
on  the  other  hand,  really  exempts  the  other  two  fifths
from  being  taxed  at  all,  as  property.^  Whereas,  if  di-
rect taxes  had  been  apportioned,  as  upon  principle  they

.  ought  to  be,  according  to  the  real  value  of  property
within  the  state,  the  whole  of  the  slaves  would  have
been  taxable,  as  property.  But  a  far  more  striking  in-
equality has  been  disclosed  by  the  practical  operations'
of  the  government. The  principle  of  representation  is

i  Journals  of  Congress,  1783,  vol.  8,  p.  188;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  5a
9  The  Federalist,  No.  54  ;  Journal  of  Convention,  12lh  July,  J7I,

172;  Id.  174, 175,  176,  179,  180,  210;  Id.  235,-  Id.  372;  1  ElHot's  De-

bates,  56,  57,  58,  60;  M.  213.
3  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  190, 191 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  58,  59.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  OF  REPRfiSEHTATiySfl.  113

constant,  and  uniform ;  the  levy  of  direct  taxes  is  occa*
sional,  and  rare.  In  the  course  of  forty  years,  no  more
than  three  direct  taxes  ^  have  been  levied;  and  those  only
under  very  extraordinary  and  pressing  circumstances.
The  ordinary  expenditures  of  Uie  government  are,  and
always  have  been,  derived  from  other  sources.  Im-
posts upon  foreign  importations  have  supplied,  and  wiU
generally  supply,  all  the  common  veants ;  and  if  these
should  not  furnish  an  adequate  revenue,  excises  are
next  resorted  to,  as  the  surest  and  most  convenient
mode  of  taxation.  Direct  taxes  constitute  the  last  re-
sort ;  and  (as  might  have  been  foreseen)  wovld  never
be  laid,  until  other  resources  had  failed.

§  642.  Viewed  in  its  proper  light,  as  a  real  com-
promise, in  a  case  of  conflicting  interests,  for  the  com-
mon good,  the  provision  is  entitled  to  great  praise  for
its  moderation,  its  aim  at  practical  utility,  and  its  ten-
dency to  satisfy  the  people,  that  the  Union,  framed  by
all,  ought  to  be  dear  to  all,  by  the  privileges  it  confers,
as  well  as  the  blessings  it  secures.  It  had  a  material
influence  in  reconciling  the  southern  states  to  other
provisions  in  the  constitution,  and  especially  to  the
power  of  making  commercial  regulations  by  a  mere
majority,  which  was  thought  peculiarly  to  fkvour  the
northern  states.^  It  has  sometimes  been  complained
of,  as  a  grievance;  but  he,  who  wishes  well  to  his
country,  will  adhere  steadily  to  it,  as  a  fundamental
policy,  which  extinguishes  ^ome  of  the  most  mischiev-
ous sources  of  all  political  divisions,  —  those  founded  on
geographical  positions,  and  domestic  institutions.  It
did  not,  however,  pass  the  convention  without  objec-


1  In  1798, 1813, 1615. The  last  was  partially  repealed  in  181&
9  1  ElUot's  Debates,  212, 218.
VOL.  II.  16


Digitized  by


Google


114  COmTITUTIOH  OF  THX  U.  STATES. [BOOK  in.

iioiL  upon  its  first  introduction,  it  was  siq)ported  bj
liie  votes  of  nine  states  against  two.  In  sid[>seqiient
stages  of  the  discussicm,  it  met  with  some  opposition ;  ^
«nd  m  some  of  the  state  conventions  it  was  sirenuoaslj
resisted'  The  wish  of  every  patriot  ought  now  to  be,
requie^uxt  4n  pace.

§  643*  Another  part  of  the  chuse  regards  the  peri-
ods, at  which  the  enumeration  or  census  of  the  inhabi-
tmts  of  the  United  States  shall  be  taken,  in  order  to
provide  for  new  s^portionments  of  representatives,  ac-
txKrding  to  the  relative  increase  of  the  population  of  the
states.  Various  propositions  for  this  purpose  were  laid,
at  different  times,  before  the  convention.'  It  was  pro-
posed to  have  the  census  taken  once  in  fifteen  years,  and
in  twenty  years ;  But  the  vote  finally  prevailed  in  favour  of
t^.^  The  importance  of  this  provision  for  a  decennial
t^ensus  ckn  scarcely  be  overvalued.  It  is  the  only  effect-
ual means,  by  which  the  relative  power  of  the  several
states  could  be  justly  represented.  If  the  system  first
established  had  been  unalterable,  very  gross  inequalities
would  soon  have  taken  place  among  the  states,  from  the
very  unequal  increase  of  their  population.  The  repre-
sentation would  soon  have  exhibited  a  system  very  anal-
ogous to  that  of  the  house  of  commons  in  Great-Britam,
w'here  old  and  decayed  boroughs  send  representatives,
not  only  wholly  disproportionate  to  their  importance;
but  in  some  cases,  with  scarcely  a  single  inhabitant,
they  match  the  representatives  d*  the  most  populous
counties.*

1  Joarnal  of  CoDveDtion,  11th  June,  111,  113. See  also  Id.  11th
July,  168,  169,170,235,236;  4  £lliot's  Debates,  (Yates'b  Minutes,)  69.
9  1  EUiot's  Debates,  58,  59,  60, 204, 212, 213, 241.

3  Journal  of  Convention,  163, 164,  167, 168, 169, 172, 174, 180.

4  Journal  of  Convention,  12th  July,  168, 170, 173, 180.

6  1  Black.  Comm.  158, 173, 174;  Bawle  on  Constit  ch.  4,  p.  44.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  or  RCPRESUfTATITSS.  116

^  644.  In  regard  to  the  United  States,  the  sMghtest
examination  of  the  apportionment  made  under  tke  first
three  censuses  will  demonstrate  this  conchiaion  in  a
Yerj  strikmg  manner. The  representation  of  Deb*
ware  remains,  as  it  was  at  the  first  apportionment ;  tbooe
oi  New-Hampshire,  Rhode-Island,  Connecticut,  New*
Jersey,  and  Maryland  hare  had  hut  a  smaU  comparatire
mcrease ;  whilst  that  of  Massachusetts  (mcluding  Mune)
has  swdled  fix)m  eight  to  twraty ;  that  of  New^Toark,
firom  six  to  thirty-four ;  and  that  of  P^msyWania^  trcm
dght  to  twenty-Mx. In  the  mean  time,  the  new  states
have  sprung  into  bemg ;  and  Ohio,  which  in  1803  was
only  entided  to  one,  now  counts  fourteen  sqporesntar
tives.^ The  census  of  1831  exhibits  still  more  str&kig
results. In  1790,  the  whole  populaticm  of  the  United
States  was  about  three  millions  nine  hundred  and
twenty *nine  thousand;  and in 1830,  it  was  about
twelve  millions  eight  hundred  and  fifty-six  thousand.^
Ohio,  at  this  very  moment,  ccmtains  at  least  one  mil'*
li(m,  and  New-Tork  two  millions  of  mhabitants. These
&cts  show  the  wisdom  of  the  provision  for  a  decemwl
apportionment ;  and,  indeed,  it  would  otherwise  bare
happened,  that  the  system,  however  sound  kt  the  be^^
ning,  would  by  this  time  have  been  productive  of  gross
abuses,  and  probably  have  engendered  feuds  and  dis*^
contents,  of  themselves  sufficient  to  have  occasioned  a
dissdution  of  the  Union. We  probably  owe  this  pro*
vision  to  those  in  the  convention,  who  were  in  iiatvour  of
a  national  government,  in  preference  to  a  mere  oonfed-
eration  of  states.'


1  Rawle  on  Constitution,  ch.  4,  p.  45.
3  American  Almanac  for  1882,  p.  162.
9  See  Journal  of  Convention,  165, 168, 109, 174, 179, 180.


Digitized  by


Google


lis  CONSTITUTIOll  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

^  646.  The  next  part  of  the  clause  relates  to  the
total  number  of  the  house  of  representatives.  It  de^
dares,  that  ^the  number  of  representatives  shall  not
exceed  ohe  for  every  thirty  thousand.''  This  was  a
subject  of  great  interest ;  and  it  has  been  asserted,  that
scarcely  any  ardcle  of  the  whole  constitution  seems  to
be  rendered  more  worthy  of  attention  by  the  weight  of
character,  and  the  apparent  force  of  argument,  with
which  it  was  originally  assailed.^  The  number  fixed
by  the  constitution  to  constitute  the  body,  in  the  first
instance,  and  until  a  census  was  taken,  was  sixty-five.

i^  646.  Several  objections  were  urged  against  the
provision.  First,  that  so. small  a  number  of  represen-
tatives would  be  an  unsafe  depositary  of  the  public  in-
terests. Secondly,  that  they  would  not  possess  a
proper  knowledge  of  the  local  circumstances  of  th^
numerous  constituents.  Thirdly,  that  they  would  be
taken  fit>m  that  class  of  citizens,  which  would  sympatiiize
least  with  the  feelmgs  of  the  people,  and  be  most  likely
to  aim  at  a  permanent  elevation  of  the  few,  on  the  de-
pression of  the  many.  Fourthly,  that  defective,  as  the
number  in  the  first  instance  would  be,  it  would  be  more
and  more  dbproportionate  by  the  increase  of  the  popu-
lation, and  the  obstacles,  which  would  prevent  a  cor-
respondent increase  of  the  representatives.'

^  647.  Time  and  experience  have  demonstrated  the
Macy  of  some,  and  greatiy  unpaired,  if  they  have  not
utterly  destroyed,  the  force  of  all  of  these  objections.
The  fears,  wluch  were  at  that  period  so  studiously

1  The  FederaliBt,  No.  55 ;  2  Amer.  Moseum,  427 ;  Id.  534 ;  Id.  547 ;
4  Elliot's  Debates,  (Yates  and  LansiDg's  Letter  to  Gov.  Clinton,)  129,

laa

8  The  Federalist,  No.  58 ;  1  Ellioc's  Debates,  56 ;  Id.  206, 214, 215,
218, 219, 220, 221  to  225 ;  Id.  226  to  232.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] H01T9S  OF  REPKBSfiirTATiyXf .  117

cherished ;  the  alarms,  which  were  so  fcmiblj  spread ;
the  dangers  to  liberty,  which  were  so  strangely  exag-
gerated; and  the  predominance  of  aristocratical  and
exclusive  power,  which  were  so  ccmfidendy  predicted,
have  all  vanished  into  air,  into  thin  air.  Truth  has
silently  dissolved  the  phantoms  raised  by  imaginadcms,
heated  by  prejudice  or  controversy ;  and  at  the  dis-
tance of  forty  years  we  look  back  with  astonishment  at
the  laborious  reasoning,  which  was  employed  to  tran-
quillize the  doubts,  and  assuage  the  jealousies  of  the
people.  It  is  fit,  however,  even  now,  to  bring  this  rea-
soning under  review,  because  it  inculcates  upon  us  the
important  lesson,  how  litde  reliance  can  be  placed  upon
mere  theory  in  any  matters  of  government;  and  how
difficult  it  is  to  vindicate  the  most  sound  practical  doc-
trines agamst  the  specious  questioning  of  ingenuity  and
hostility.

§  648.  The  first  objection  was,  to  the  smaOness  of
the  number  composing  the  house  of  representatives.^
It  was  said,  that  it  was  unslde  to  deposit  the  legislative
powers  of  the  Union  vrith  so  small  a  body  of  men.  It
was  but  the  shadow  of  representation.'  Under  the
confederation,  congress  might  consist  of  ninety-one ;
whereas,  in  the  first  instance,  the  house  would  consist
of  but  sixty-five.  There  was  no  certamty,  that  it
would  ever  be  mcreased,  as  that  would  depend  upon
the  legislature  itself  in  its  fiiture  ratio  of  apportionments;
and  it  was  left  completely  in  its  discretion,  not  only  to

1  It  18  remarkable,  that  the  American  writer,  whom  I  have  feveral
times  cited,  takes  an  opposite  objectioD.  He  says,  ^  the  national  house
of  representatives  will  be  at  first  too  large ;  and  hereafter  may  be  much
too  large  to  deliberate  and  decide  upon  the  best  measores."  Thoughts
upon  the  Political  Situation  of  the  United  States  of  America,  (Worces-
ter, 1788.)

a  2  Amer.  Museum,  247, 534, 547, 551, 554.


Digitized  by


Google


118  CONSTITUTIOll  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III»

increase,  but  to  dimmish  the  present  nmnber.^  Under
such  circumstances,  there  was,  in  fact,  no  ccmstitutional
security,  for  the  whole  depended  upon  the  mere  integ-
rity and  patriotism  of  those,  who  should  be  called  t6
admmister  it'

^  649.  In  reply  to  these  suggestions  it  was  said^  that
the  present  number  would  certainly  be  adequate,  until
a  census  was  taken.  Although  under  the  confedera-
tion ninety-one  members  might  be  chosen,  in  pomt  of
hot  a  far  less  number  attended'  At  the  very  first
census,  supposing  the  lowest  ratio  of  thirty  thousand
were  adopted,  the  number  of  representatiyes  would  be
increased  to  one  hundred.  At  the  expiraticm  of  twenty-
five  years  it  would,  upon  the  same  ratio,  amount  to  two
hundred ;  and  in  fiffy  years,  to  four  hundred,  a  number,
which  no  one  could  doubt  would  be  sufficiendy  large
to  allay  all  the  fears  of  the  most  zealous  admirers  of  a
fiill  representation.^  In  regard  to  the  possible  diminu-
tion of  the  number  of  representatives,  it  must  be  purely
an  imagmary  case.  As  etery  state  is  entitled  to  at
least  one  r^resentative,  the  standard  never  would
probably  be  reduced  below  the  population  of  the  smallest
state.  The  population  of  Delaware,  which  increases
more  slowly,  than  that  of  any  other  state,  would,  under
such  circumstances,  furnish  die  rule.  And,  if  the  other
states  mcrease  to  a  very  large  degree,  it  is  idle  to  sup-
pose, that  they  will  ever  adopt  a  ratio,  which  will  give  the
smallest  state  a  greater  relative  power  and  influence,
than  themselves.^

1  1  fniiot'sDebates,  56, 57;  Id.  204, 905, 4X)6;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  53,
54;  Id.  99.

fi  1  EDiot's  Debates,  205;  2EUiot's  Debates,  53,  54,  132,  206;  Id.
293,224.

s  1  Elliot's  Debates,  57, 249.

4  The  Federalist,  No.  55 ;  1  EUiot's  Debates,  214, 215, 227.

s  1  Elliot's  Debates,  242, 249.


Digitized  by


Google


OB.  IX.] H0U8S  OF  RmPRSSEHTATlTSS.  119

^  660.  But  the  question  itself  what  is  tbe  proper
and  conyement  number  to  compose  a  r^)resentatiye
i^islatare,  is  as  little  susceptible  of  a  precise  sohitiont
as  any,  which  can  be  stated  in  the  whole  circle  of  poli-
tics. There  is  no  point,  xxpoa  which  different  nattons
are  more  at  rariance ;  and  the  policy  of  the  American
states  themselves,  on  this  subject,  while  they  were
agonies,  and  since  they  have  become  independent,  has
been  exceedingly  discordant,  bidependent  of  the  dif-
ferences, ari^g  from  tbe  population  and  size  of  the
states,  there  will  be  found  to  be  great  diversities  among
diose,  whose  population  and  size  neariy  approadi  each
other.  In  Massachu^tts,  the  house  of  representatives
is  composed  of  a  number  between  three  and  four  hun-
dred;  in  Pennsylvania,  of  not  more  than  one  fifth  of
that  number;  and  in  New-Yoilc,  of  not  more  than  one
fifth.  In  Pennsylvania  the  rq>res^itatives  do  not  bear
a  greater  proportion  to  their  constituents,  than  one  for
every  four  or  five  thousand.  In  Rhode-Island  and
Massachusetts  they  besff  a  proportion  of  at  least  one  fix*
every  thousand.  And  according  to  the  old  constitution
df  Georgia,  the  proportion  may  be  carried  to  one  for
evCTy  ten  electors.^

^  651.  Neither  is  diere  any  ground  to  assert,  that
-die  ratio  between  the  representatives  and  the  peoj^
ought,  upon  principle,  to  be  the  same,  whether  tte
latter  be  numerous  or  few.  If  the  representatives  fit»n
Virginia  were  to  be  chosen  by  the  standard  of  Rhode*
Island,  they  would  then  amount  to  five  hundred;  and  in
twenty  or  thirty  years  to  one  thousand.  On  tibe  other
hand,  the  ratio  of  Pennsylvania  applied  to  Delaware
would  reduce  the  representative  assembly  to  seven.

1  The  Federalist,  No.  55. See  also  the  State  Constitutions  of  that
period. 1  Elliot's  Debates,  214»  319, 220, 925»  328, 252, 253.


Digitized  by


Google


120 coirsTiTUTioir  of  the  u.  states, [book  iu.

Nothing  can  be  more  fallacious,  than  to  found  political
calculations  on  arithmetical  principles.  Sixty  or  seven-
ty men  maybe  more  properly  trusted  with  a  given
degree  of  power,  than  six  or  seven.  But  it  does  not
follow,  that  six  or  seven  hundred  would  beproportiona-
bly  a  better  depositary.  And  if  the  supposition  is  car-
ried on  to  six  or  seven  thousand,  the  whole  reasoning
ought  to  be  reversed.  The  truth  is,  that,  in  all  cases,
a  certain  number  seems  necessary  to  secure  the  bene-
fits of  free  consultation  and  discussion ;  to  guard  against
too  easy  a  combination  for  improper  pmposes ;  and  to
prevent  hasty  and  ill-advised  legislation.  On  the  other
hand  the  number  ought  to  be  Kept  within  a  moder-
ate Ihnit,  in  order  to  avoid  the  confusion,  mtemper-
ance,  and  inconvenience  of  a  multitude.^  It  was  a
famous  saying  of  Cardinal  De  Retz,  that  every  public
assembly,  consisting  of  more  than  one  hundred  mem-
bers, was  a  mere  mob.'  But  surely  this  is  just  as  incor-
rect, as  it  would  be  to  aver,  that  every  one,  which  con-
sisted of  ten  membei;^,  would  be  wise.

§  652.  The  question  then  is,  and  for  ever  must  be,  in
every  nation,  a  mixed  question  of  sound  policy  and  dis-
cretion, with  reference  to  its  size,  its  population,  its  in-
stitutions, its  local  and  physical  condition,  and  all  the
other  circumstances  affecting  its  own  interests  and  con-
venience. As  a  present  number,  sixty-five  was  suflGi-
cient  for  all  the  exigencies  of  the  United  States ;  and
it  was  wisest  and  safest  to  leave  all  future  questions  of
increase  to  be  judged  of  by  the  future  condition  and
exigencies  of  the  Union.  What  ground  could  there  be  to
suppose,  that  such  a  number  chosen  biennially,  and  re-
sponsible to  their  constituents,  would  voluntarily  betray

I  The  Federalist,  No.  55 ;  1  EUiot's  Debates,  219,  220, 226, 227, 241,
242,  245, 246, 253  ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  150 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  217.
9  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  150.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HO08E  OF  REPRS8EHTATITE8.  121

tbeir  trusts,  or  refuse  to  follow  the  public  will?  The
verj  state  of  the  country  forbade  the  supposition.
They  would  be  watched  with  the  jealousy  and  the
power  of  the  state  legislatures.^  They  would  have  the
highest  induc^nents  to  perform  their  duty.  And  to
suppose,  that  the  possession  of  power  for  so  short  a
period  could  blind  them  to  a  sense  of  their  own  inter-
ests, or  tempt  them  to  destroy  the  public  liberties,  was
as  impn)bable,  as  any  thing,  which  could  be  within
the  scope  of  the  imagination.^  At  all  events,  if  they
were  guilty  of  misconduct,  their  removal  would  be  inev-
itable ;  and  their  successors  would  be  above  all  false  and
corrupt  conduct  For  to  reason  otherwise  would  be
oquivalent  to  a  declaration  of  the  universal  corruption  of
all  mankind,  and  the  utter  impracticability  of  a  republi-
can government  The  ccmgress,  which  conducted  us
through  the  revolution,  was  a  less  numerous  body,  than
their  successors  will  be.'  They  were  not  chosen  by,
nor  responsible  to,  the  people  at  large ;  ^  and  though
appom  ted  from  year  to  year^  and  liable  to  be  recalled
at  pleastu^,  they  were  generally  continued  for  three
years.  They  held  their  consultations  in  secret  They
transacted  all  our  foreign  affairs.  They  held  the  fate  of
their  country  in  their  hands  during  the  whole  war.  Yet
they  never  betrayed  our  rights,  or  our  interests.  Nay,
calumny  itself  never  ventured  to  whisper  any  thing
agaimt  their  purity  or  patriotism.*

1  The  Federalist,  Na  55 ;  1  EUiot's  Debates,  238, 239.

a  The  Federalist,  No.  55 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  252,  253,  254.

3  The  Federalist.  No.  55 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  206, 223,  249-

4  Geaerally  they  were  choeen  by  the  state  legislatures  ;  but  in  two
states,  viz.  Rhode-Island  and  Connecticut,  they  were  chosen  by  the
people.*

s  The  Federalist,  No.  55 ;  1  ElUot's  Debates,  254.

•TheF6daPAlKN6.40.

VOL.  u.  16


Digitized  by


Google


122 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  III.

^  652.  The  suggestion  is  often  made,  that  a  numer-
ous representation  is  necessary  to  obtsdn  the  confidence
of  the  people.^  This  is  not  generally  true.  Public  con-
fidence will  be  easily  gained  by  a  good  administration  ;
and  it  will  be  secured  by  no  other.*  The  remark,  made
upon  another  occasion  by  a  great  man,  is  correct  in
regard  to  representatives  —  non  numerantury  ponderan"
tur.  Delaware  has  just  as  much  confidence  in  her
representation  of  twenty -one,  as  New- York  has  in  hers
of  sixty-five ;  and  Massachusetts  has  in  hers  of  more
than  three  hundred.^

^  663.  Nothing  can  be  more  unfair  and  impolitic,  than
to  substitute  for  argument  an  indiscriminate  and  un-
bounded jealousy,  with  which  all  reasoning  must  be
vain.  The  sincere  fi'iends  of  liberty,  who  give  them-
selves up  to  the  extravagancies  of  this  passion,  inflict
the  most  serious  injury  upon  their  own  cause.  As
there  is  a  degree  of  depravity  in  mankind,  which  re-
quires a  certain  degree  of  circumspection  and  dis-
trust ;  so  there  are  other  qualities  in  human  nature,
which  justify  a  certain  portion  of  esteem  and  confidence.
A  republican  government  presupposes,  and  requires  the
existence  of  these  qualities  in  a  higher  degree,  than  any
other  form;  and  wholly  to  destroy  our  reliance  on
them  is  to  sap  all  the  foundation,  on  which  our  liberties
must  rest.*

^  664.  The  next  objection  was,  that  the  house  of
representatives  would  be  too  small  to  possess  a  due
knowledge  of  the  interests  of  their  constituents.  It  was
said,  that  the  great  extent  of  the  United  States,  the

1  1  Elliotts  Debates,  206, 217.  »  Id.  227, 228.

3  1  EUiot's  Debates,  227,  228, 241,  252, 253,  254 ;  2  EUiot's  Debates,
107, 116.

4  The  Federalist,  No.  55  ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  238,  ^239.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES.  123

variety  of  its  interests,  and  occupations,  and  institutions
would  require  a  very  numerous  body  in  order  to  bring
home  information  necessary  and  proper  for  wise  legi^-
tion.*

^  655.  In  answer  to  this  objection,  it  was  admitted,
that  the  representative  ought  to  be  acquainted  with  the
interests  and  circumstances  of  his  constituents.  But
this  principle  can  extend  no  farther,  than  to  those  inter-
ests and  circumstances,  to  which  the  authority  and  care
of  the  representative  relate.  Ignorance  of  very  minute
objects,  which  do  not  lie  within  the  compass  of  legisla-
tion, is  consistent  with  every  attribute  necessary  to  the
performance  of  the  legislative  trust*  If  the  argument,
indeed,  required  the  most  minute  knowledge,  applicable
even  to  all  the  professed  objects  of  legislation,  it  would
overturn  itself ;  for  the  thing  would  be  utteriy  imprac-
ticable. No  representative,  either  in  the  state  or  na-
tional councils,  ever  could  know,  or  even  pretend  to
know,  all  arts,  and  sciences,  and  trades,  and  subjects,
upon  which  legislation  may  operate.  One  of  the  great
duties  of  a  representative  is,  to  inquire  into,  and  to  obtain
the  necessary  information  to  enable  him  to  act  wisely
and  correcdy  in  particular  cases.  And  this  is  attained
by  bringing  to  the  mvestigation  of  such  c^es  talents,
industry,  experience,  and  a  spirit  of  comprehensive
bquiry.  No  one  will  pretend,  that  he,  who  is  to  make
laws,  ought  not  to  be  well  instructed  in  their  nature,
interpretation,  and  practical  results.  But  what  would
be  said,  if,  upon  such  a  theory,  it  was  to  be  seriously
urged,  that  none,  but  practical  lawyers,  ought  ever  to  be
eligible  as  legislators  ? The  truth  is,  that  we  must  rest

1  1  EUiot'8  Debates,  219  220,  228,  232, 233,  241.
9  The  Federalist,  No.  55; 1  Elliot's  Debates,  226,  229; 1  Kent's
Comm.  217.


Digitized  by


Google


124  COirSTITUTION  OF  THS  U.  8TATS8. [bOOK  in.

satisfied  with  general  attainments ;  and  it  is  visionary
to  suppose,  that  any  one  man  can  represent  all  the  skill,
and  interests,  and  business,  and  occupations  of  all  his
constituents  in  a  perfect  manner,  whether  they  be  few  or
many.  The  most,  that  can  be  done,  is,  to  take  a  com-
prehensive survey  of  the  general  outlines ;  and  to  search^
as  occasion  may  require,  for  that  more  intimate  'miot*
matidn,  which  belongs  to  particular  subjects  requiring
immediate  legislation.

^  656.  It  is  by  no  means  true,  that  a  large  rq)resen-
tation  is  necessary  to  understand  the  interests  ol  the
people.  It  is  not  either  theoretically,  or  practically  true,
that  a  knowledge  of  those  interests  is  augmented  in
proportion  to  the  increase  of  representatives.^  The
interests  of  the  state  of  New- York  are  probably  as  well
understood  by  its  sixty^-five  representatives,  as  those  of
Massachusetts  by  its  three  or  four  hundred.  In  &ct,
higher  qualifications  will  usually  be  sought  and  required,
where  the  representatives  are  few,  than  where  they
are  many.  And  there  will  also  be  a  higher  ambition  to
serve,  where  the  smallness  of  the  number  creates  a
desirable  distinction,  than  where  it  is  shared  with  many,
and  of  course  individual  importance  is  essentially  dimin-
ished.

§  657.  Besides ;  in  considering  this  subject,  it  is  to
be  recollected,  that  the  powers  of  the  general  govern-
ment are  limited ;  and  embrace  only  such  objects,  as
are  of  a  national  character.  Local  information  of  pecu-
liar local  interests  is,  consequently,  of  less  value  aikl
importance,  than  it  would  be  in  a  state  legislature,  where
the  powers  are  general.*  The  knowledge  required  of  a
national  representative  is,  therefore,  necessarily  of  a

1  lEttiot'BDeb)itet,d99.
9  The  Federalist,  No.  5a*


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSE  OF  RSPRSSENTATirES.  125

more  large  and  comprehensive  character,  than  that  of
a  mere  state  representative. Minute  information,  and  a
thorough  knowledge  of  local  interests,  personal  opinions,
and  private  feelings,  are  far  more  important  to  the  latter
than  the  formen' Nay,  the  v^  devotion  to  local
views,  and  feelings,  and  interests,  which  naturally  tends
to  a  narrow  and  selfish  policy,  may  be  a  just  disquali-
fication and  r^roach  to  a  member  of  congress.'  A  liber-
al and  enlightened  policy,  a  knowledge  of  natbnal  rights,
duties,  and  interests,  a  familiarity  with  foreign  gov-
ernments, and  diplomatic  history,  and  a  wide  survey  of
the  operations  of  commerce,  agriculture,  and  manufac-
tures, seem  indispensable  to  a  lofty  discharge  oi  his
functions.' A  knowledge  of  the  peculiar  interests,  and
products,  and  institutions  of  the  different  states  of  the
Union,  is  doubtless  of  great  value ; but  it  is  rather  as
it  conduces  to  the  performance  of  the  higher  functions
already  spoken  o^  than  as  it  sympathizes  with  the  load
interests  and  feelings  of  a  particular  district,  that  it  is  to
be  estimated.^ And  in  regard  to  those  local  facts,  which
are  chiefly  of  use  to  a  member  of  congress,  they  are
precisely  those,  which  are  most  easily  attainable  from
the  documentary  evidence  in  the  departments  of  the
national  government,  or  which  lie  open  to  an  intelBgent
man  in  any  part  of  the  state,  which  he  may  represent^
A  knowledge  of  commerce,  and  taxaticm,  atnl  manufac-
tures, can  be  obtained  with  more  certainty  by  inquiries
conducted  through  many,  than  dirough  a  sin^  cfaannd
of  commumcaticm. The  representatives  of  each  state

1  ]  Elliot's  Debates,  228, 229, 253;  2  Lloyd's  Debates,  (in  1789,)  189 ;
The  Federalist,  No.  56.
s  1  Elliot's  Debates,  238.

3  1  Elliot's  Debates,  228, 229, 253  ;  The  Federalist,  No.  56.

4  The  Federalist,  No,  56;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  220, 241, 242,  246^  258.

5  The  Federalist,  No.  56 ;  1  ElUot's  Debates,  228, 229, 25a


Digitized  by


Google


126 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

will  generally  bring*  with  them  a  considerable  knowledge
of  its  laws,  and  of  the  local  interests  of  their  districts.
They  will  often  have  previously  served  as  members  in
the  state  legislatures ;  and  thus  have  become,  in  some
measure,  acquainted  with  all  the  local  views  and  wants
of  the  whole  state.^

^  668.  The  functions,  too,  of  a  representative  in
congress  require  very  different  qualifications  and  attain-
ments, from  those  required  in  a  state  legislature.  In-
formation relative  to  local  objects  is  easily  obtained  in  a
single  state ;  for  there  is  no  difference  in  its  laws,  and
its  interests  are  but  litde  diversified.  .  But  the  legisla-
tion of  congress  reaches  over  all  the  states ;  and  as  the
laws  and  local  circumstances  of  all  differ,  the  informa-
tion, which  is  requisite  for  safe  legislation,  is  far  more
difiicult  and  various,  and  directs  the  attention  abroad,
rather  than  at  home.*  Few  members,  comparatively,
speaking,  will  be  found  ignorant  of  the  local  mterests  of
their  district  or  state ;  but  time,  and  diligence,  and  a
rare  union  of  sagacity  and  public  spirit,  are  indispensa-
ble to  avoid  egregious  mistakes  in  national  measures.

^  669.*  The  experience  of  Great  Britain  upon  this
subject  furnishes  a  very  instructive  commentary.  Of
the  five  hundred  and  fifty-eight  members  of  the  house
of  commons  one  ninth  are  elected  by  three  hundred
and  sixty-four  persons ;  and  one  half  by  five  thousand
seven  hundred  and  twenty-three  persons.'  And  this
half  certainly  have  litde  or  no  claim  to  be  deemed  the
guardians  of  the  interests  of  the  people,  and  indeed  are

1  The  Federalist,  No.  56.  »  Id.  No.  56 ;  Id.  No.  35.

3  See  Mr.  Christian's  note,  (34,)  to  1  Black.  Comro.  174,  where  he
states  the  number,  of  which  the  house  of  commons  has  consisted  at  differ-
ent periods,  from  which  it  appears,  that  it  has  been  nearly  doubled  since
the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Eighth. See  also  4'  Inst  1.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES.  127

notoriously  elected  by  other  interests.*  Taking  the
population  of  the  whole  kingdom  the  other  half  will  not
average  more  than  one  representative  for  about  twen-
ty-nine thousand  of  the  inhabitants.'  It  may  be  added,
diat  nothing  is  more  common,  than  to  select  men  for
representatives  of  large  and  populous  cities  and  dis-
tricts, who  do  not  reside  therein ;  and  cannot  be  pre-
sumed to  be  indmately  acquainted  with  their  local  inter-
ests and  feelings.  The  choice,  however,  is  made  from
high  motives,  a  regard  to  talents,  public  services,  and
political  sagacity.  And  whatever  may  be  the  defects
of  the  representative  system  of  Great  Britain,  very
few  of  the  defects  of  its  legislation  have  been  imputed
to  the  ignorance  of  the  house  of  commons  of  the  true
interests  or  circumstances  of  the  people.'

^  660.  In  the  history  of  the  constitution  it  is  a  curi-
ous fact,  that  with  some  statesmen,  possessing  high
political  distinction,  it  was  made  a  fundamental  objec-
tion against  the  establishment  of  any  national  legislature^
that  if  it  **were  composed  of  so  numerous  a  body  of  men,
as  to  represent  the  mterests  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
United  States  in  the  usual  and  true  ideas  of  representa-
tion, the  expense  of  supportmg  it  would  be  intolera-
bly burthensome ;  and  that  if  a  few  only  were  vested
with  a  power  of  legislation,  the  mterests  of  a  great  ma-
jority of  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  States  must  be
necessarily  unknown ;  or,  if  known,  even  in  the  first
stages  of  the  operations  of  the  new  government,  unat-
tended to."  * In  their  view  a  free  government  seems  to

»  The  Federalist,  No.  56 ;  Paley's  Moral  Philosophy,  B.  6,  ch.  7.
a  The  Federalist,  No.  56,  57.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  56.  See  alsot  Dr.  Franklin's  Reraariw,  2  Pit-
kin's Hist  242 ;  1  Wilson's  Law  Lect  431, 432;  Paley's  Moral  Philoso-
phy, B.  6,  ch.  7 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  219*

4  Letter  of  Messrs.  Yates  and  Lansing  to  Gov.  Clinton,  1786,  (3  Aomr .
Museum,  156, 158.)


Digitized  by


Google


128 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U,  STATES* [BOOK  III*

have  been  incompatible  with  a  great  extent  of  territory,
or  population.  What,  then,  would  become  of  Great
Britain,  or  of  France,  under  the  present  constitution  of
their  legislative  departments  ?

§  661.  The  next  objection  was,  that  the  representa^
tives  would  be  chosen  from  that  class  of  citizens,  which
would  have  the  least  sympathy  with  the  mass  of  the
people ;  and  would  be  most  lUcely  to  aim  at  an  ambi-
tious sacrifice  of  the  many  to  the  aggrandizement  of
the  few.^  It  was  said,  that  the  author  of  nature  had
bestowed  on  some  men  greater  capacities,  than  on
others.  Birth,  education,  talents,  and  wealth,  created
distinctions  among  men,  as  visible,  and  of  as  much  in-
fluence, as  stars,  garters,  and  ribbons.  In  every  society
men  of  this  class  will  command  a  superior  degree  of
respect ;  and  if  the  government  is  so  constituted,  as  to
admit  but  few  to  exercise  ks  powers,  it  will,  according
to  the  natural  course  of  things,  be  m  then*  hands.  Men
in  the  middlmg  class,  who  are  qualified  as  representa-
tives, will  not  be  so  anxious  to  be  chosen,  as  those  of
the  first ;  and  if  they  are,  they  will  not  have  the  means
of  so  much  influence.'

§  662.  It  was  answered,  that  the  objection  itself  is
of  a  very  extraordinary  character ;  for  while  it  is  lev-
elled against  a  pretended  oligarchy,  m  principle  it  strikes
at  the  very  root  of  a  republican  government;  for  it
si4)poses  the  people  to  be  incapable  of  making  a  proper
clK)ice  of  representatives,  or  indifferent  to  it,  or  utteriy
corrupt  m  the  exercise  of  !the  right  of  suffrage.  It
would  not  be  contended,  that  the  first  class  of  society,
the  men  of  talents,  experience,  and  wealth,  ought  to  be

1  The  Federalist,  No.  57;  1  EUiot's  Debates,  220,  221. See  also
The  Federalist,  No.  35.
9  1  £Iliot'8  Debates^  221, 222.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOrSE  OF  R£PB£8ElrrATiy£8.  129

I  constitutionally  excluded  from  office.  Such  an  attempt
would  not  only  be  unjust,  but  suicidal ;  for  it  would
nourish  an  influence  and  faction  withm  the  state,  which,
upon  the  very  supposition,  would  continually  exert  its
whole  means  to  destroy  the  government,  and  overthrow
the  liberties  of  the  people.*  What,  then,  is  to  be  done  ?
If  the  people  are  free  to  make  the  choice,  they  will
naturally  make  it  from  that  class,  whatever  it  may  be,
which  will  in  their  opmion  best  promote  their  inter-
ests, and  preserve  their  liberties.*  Nor  are  the  poor,
any  more  than  the  rich,  beyond  temptation,  or  love  of
power.  Who  are  to  be  the  electors  of  the  representa-
tives? Not  the  rich,  more  than  the  poor;  not  the
learned,  more  than  the  ignorant ;  not  the  heirs  of  dis-
tinguished families,  more  than  the  children  of  obscurity
and  unpropitious  fortune.'  The  electors  are  to  be  the
body  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  jealous  of  their
rights,  and  accustomed  to  the  exercise  of  their  powen
Who  are  to  be  the  objects  of  their  choice?  Every
citizen,  whose  merit  may  commend  him  to  the  esteem
and  confidence  of  his  fellow  citizens.  No  qualification
of  wealth,  or  birth,  or  religion,  or  civil  profession,  is
recognised  in  the  constitution ;  and  consequentiy,  the
people  are  free  to  choose  from  any  rank  of  society  ac-
cording to  their  pleasure.*

§  663.  The  persons,  who  shall  be  elected  represen-
tatives, must  have  all  the  mducement  to  fidelity,  vigi-
lance, and  a  devotion  to  the  mterests  of  the  people,
which  can  possibly  exist  Tliey  must  be  presumed  to
be  selected  from  their  known  virtues,  and  estimable

I  1  1  Elliot's  Debates,  222,  223.

)  «  The  Pederalbt,  No.  35 ;  Id.  No.  26 ;  Id.  No.  57.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  57 ;  Id.  No.  35 ;  Id.  No.  36.

«  The  Federalist,  No.  57 ;  Id.  No.  35 ;  Id.  No.  36.
VOL.  II.  17


Digitized  by


Google


130  CONgTirUTION  OF  THS  V.  STATES. [BOOK  UU

qualities,  as  well  as  from  their  talents.  They  must  have
a  desire  to  retain,  and  exalt  their  reputation,  and  be
ambitious  to  deserve  the  continuance  of  that  public
favour,  by  which  they  have  been  elevated.  There  is  in
every  breast  a  sensibility  to  marks  of  honour,  of  favour,
of  esteem,  and  of  confidence,  which,  apart  from  all
considerations  of  interest,  is  some  pledge  for  grateful
and  benevolent  returns.^  But  the  interest  of  the  rep-
resentative, which  naturally  bmds  him  to  his  constitu-
ents, will  be  strengthened  by  motives  of  a  selfish  char-
acter. His  election  is  biennial;  and  he  must  soon
return  to  the  common  rank  of  a  citizen,  unless  he  is
re-elected.  Does  he  desire  oflSce?  Then  that  very
desire  will  secure  his  fidelity.  Does  he  feel  the  value
of  public  distinctions  1  Then  his  pride  and  vanity  will
equally  attach  him  to  a  government,  which  affords  him*
an  opportunity  to  share  in  its  honours  and  distinctions,
and  to  the  people,  who  alone  can  confer  them.*  Be-
sides ;  he  can  make  no  law,  which  will  not  weigh  as
heavily  on  himself  and  his  fiiends,  as  on  others ;  and
he  can  introduce  no  oppression,  which  must  not  be
borne  by  himself,  when  he  sinks  back  to  the  common
level  As  for  usurpation,  or  a  perpetuation  of  his
authority,  independent  of  the  popular  will,  that  is  hope-
less, until  the  period  shall  have  arrived,  in  which  the
people  are  ready  to  barter  their  liberties,  and  are  ready
to  become  the  voluntary  slaves  of  any  despot.'  When-
ever that  period  shall  arrive,  it  will  be  useless  to  speak
of  guardians,  or  of  rights.  Where  all  are  corrupt,  it
is  idle  to  talk  of virtue. Q^is  custodiet  custodes  ?


1  The  Federalist,  No.  57.
9  The  Federalist,  No.  57.
3  The  Federalist,  No.  57 ;  Id.  No.  35,  36.


Digitized  by


Google


CB.  IX.] HO\78S  or  REPRESSlCTATiyfiS.  131

Who  shall  keep  watch  over  the  people,  when  they
choose  to  betray  themselves  1

^  664.  The  objection  itself  is,  in  truth,  utterly  desti-
tute of  any  solid  foundation.  It  applies  with  the  same
force  to  the  state  legislatures,  as  to  that  of  the  Union.
It  attributes  to  talents,  and  wealth,  and  ambition  an
mfluence,  which  may  be  exerted  at  all  times,  and  every-
where. It  speaks  in  no  doubtful  language,  that  repub-
lican government  is  but  a  shadow,  and  incapable  of
preserving  life,  liberty,  or  property  *  It  supposes,  that
the  people  are  always  blind  to  their  true  interests,  and
always  ready  to  betray  them ;  that  they  can  safely
trust  neither  themselves,  nor  others.  If  such  a  doc-
trine be  maintainable,  all  the  constitutions  of  America
are  founded  in  egregious  errors  and  delusions.

^  666.  The  only  perceptible  diflference  between  the
case  of  a  representative  in  congress,  and  in  the  state
legislature,  as  to  this  point,  is,  that  the  one  may  be
elected  by  five  or  six  hundred  citizens,  and  the  other
by  as  many  thousands.^  Even  this  is  true  only  in  par-
ticular states ;  for  the  representatives  in  Massachusetts
(who  are  all  chosen  by  the  towns)  may  be  elected  by
six  thousand  citizens ;  nay,  by  any  larger  number,  ac-
cording to  the  population  of  the  town.  But  giving  the
objection  its  full  force,  could  this  circumstance  make
any  solid  objection?  Are  not  the  senators  in  several
of  the  states  chosen  by  as  large  a  number?  Have  they
been  found  more  corrupt,  than  the  representatives  ?  Is
the  objection  supported  by  reason  ?  Can  it  be  said,
that  five  ot  six  Aousand  citizens  are  more  easily  cor-
rupted, than  five  or  six  hundred?  •  That  the  aggregate


I  The  Pederaliat,  No.  57 ;  Id.  No.  35,  36.

*  The  Federalist,  No.  57.  3  The  Federalist,  No.  S7.


Digitized  by


Google


132  CONSTITUTIOir  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

mass  will  be  more  mider  the  influence  of  intrigue,  than
a  portion  of  it  ?  Is  the  consequence,  deducible  from  the
objection,  admissible  ?  If  it  is,  then  we  must  deprive
the  people  of  all  choice  of  their  public  servants  in  all
cases,  where  numbers  are  not  required.*  What,  then,
is  to  be  done  in  those  states,  where  the  governors  are
by  the  state  constitution  to  be  chosen  by  the  people  1
Is  the  objection  warranted  by  facts  ?  The  represen-
tation in  the  British  house  of  commons  (as  has  been
already  stated)  very  little  exceeds  the  proportion  of
one  for  every  thirty  thousand  inhabitants.*  Is  it  true,
that  the  house  of  commons  have  elevated  themselves
upon  the  ruin  of  the  many  ?  Is  it  true,  that  the  repre-
sentatives of  boroughs  have  been  more  faithful,  or  wise,
or  honest,  or  patriotic,  than  those  of  cities  and  of  coun-
ties 1  Let  us  come  to  our  own  country.  The  districts
in  New-Hampshire,  in  which  the  senators  are  chosen
immediately  by  the  people,  are  neariy  as  large,  as  will
be  necessary  for  her  representatives  in  congress.  Those
in  Massachusetts  come  from  districts  having  a  larger
population ;  and  those  in  New-York  from  districts  still
larger.  In  New- York  and  Albany  the  members  of
assembly  are  elected  by  nearly  as  many  voters,  as  will
be  required  for  a  member  of  congress,  calculating  on
the  number  of  sixty-five  only.  In  some  of  the  coun-
ties of  Pennsylvania  the  state  representatives  are  elect-
ed in  districts  nearly  as  large,  as  those  required  for  the
federal  representatives.  In  the  city  of  Philadelphia
(composed  of  sixty  thousand  inhabitants)  every  elector
has  a  right  to  vote  for  each  of  the  representatives  in
the  state  legislature ;  and  actually  elects  a  single  mem-
ber to  the  executive  council.* These  are  facts,  which

1  The  Federalist,  No.  57.  «  Id.  No.  56,  57.  8  Id.  No.  57.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOirSE  OF  REPRjCSENTATITES.  133

demonstrate  the  fallacy  of  the  objection ;  for  no  one
will  pretend,  that  the  rights  and  liberties  of  these  states
are  not  as  well  maintained,  and  as  well  understood  by
their  senators  and  representatives,  as  those  of  any  other
states  '  in  the  Union  by  theu^.  There  is  yet  one
stronger  case,  that  of  Connecticut ;  for  there  one  branch
of  the  legislature  is  so  constituted,  that  each  member  of
it  is  elected  by  the  whole  state.^

§  666.  The  remaining  objection  was,  that  there  was
no  security,  that  the  niunber  of  members  would  be
augmented  from  time  to  time,  as  the  progress  of  the
population  might  demand.*

§  667.  It  is  obvious,  that  this  objection  is  exclu-
sively founded  upon  the  supposition,  that  the  people
will  be  too  corrupt,  or  too  indiflferent,  to  select  proper
representatives;  or,  that  the  representatives,  when
chosen,  will  totally  disregard  the  true  mterests  of  their
constituents,  or  wilfully  betray  them.  Either  supposi-
tion (if  the  preceding  remarks  are  well  founded)  is
equaUy  madmissible.  There  are,  however,  some  addi-
tional considerations,  which  are  entitled  to  great  weight.
In  the  first  place,  it  is  observable,  that  the  federal  consti-
tution will  not  suffer  in  comparison  with  the  state  consti-
tutions in  regard  to  die  security,^  which  is  provided  for  a
gradual  augmentation  of  the  number  of  representatives.
In  many  of  them  the  subject  has  been  left  to  the  dis-
cretion of  the  legislature ;  and  experience  has  thus  far
demonstrated  not  only,  that  the  power  is  safely  lodged,
but  that  a  gradual  increase  of  representatives  (where
it  could  take  place)  has  kept  pace  with  that  of  the  con-
stituents.* In  the  next  place,  as  a  new  census  is  to

1  The  Federalist,  No.  57.

9  The  Federalist,  No.  58 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  204,  234.

8  The  Federalist,  No.  58.


Digitized  by


Google


134 CONSTITUTIOlf  OF  THE  U*  STATES* [BOOK  III.

take  place  within  every  successive  ten  years,  for  the
avowed  purpose  of  readjusting  the  representation  from
time  to  time,  according  to  the  national  exigencies,  it  is
no  more  to  be  imagined,  that  congress  will  abandon
its  proper  duty  in  this  respect,  than  in  respect  to
any  other  power  confided  to  it.  Every  power  may  be
abused  ;  every  duty  may  be  corruptly  deserted.  But,
as  the  power  to  correct  the  evil  will  recur  at  least  bien-
nially to  the  people,  it  is  impossible,  that  there  can  long
exist  any  public  abuse  or  dereliction  of  duty,  unless
the  people  connive  at,  and  encourage  the  violation.*
In  the  next  place,  there  is  a  peculiarity  in  the  federal
constitution,  which  must  favour  a  constitutional  augmen-
tation of  the  representatives.  One  branch  of  the  na-
tional legislature  is  elected  by  the  people ;  the  other,
by  the  states.  In  the  former,  consequently,  the  large
states  will  have  more  weight ;  in  the  latter,  the  smaller
states  will  have  the  advantage.  From  this  circum-
stance, it  may  be  fairly  inferred,  that  the  larger  states,
and  especially  those  of  a  growing  population,  will  be
strenuous  advocates  for  mcreasmg  the  number  and
weight  of  that  part  of  the  legislature,  in  which  their  in-
fluence predominates.*

^  668.  It  may  be  said,  that  there  will  be  an  antag-
onist influence  in  the  senate  to  prevent  an  augmenta-
tion. But,  upon  a  close  view,  this  objection  will  be
foimd  to  lose  most  of  its  weight  In  the  first  place,  the
house  of  representatives,  being  a  co-ordinate  branch,
and  directly  emanating  from  the  people,  and  speaking
the  known  and  declared  sense  of  the  majority  of  the
people,  will,  upon  every  question  of  this  nature,  have

i  1  Elliot's  Debates,  239.

9  The  Federalist,  No.  58 ;  2  Lloyd's  Debates,  in  1789,  p.  192.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUS£  OF  REPRESENTATIVES.  136

no  small  advantage,  as  to  the  means  of  influence  and
resistance.  In  the  next  place,  the  contest  will  not  be
to  be  decided  merely  by  the  votes  of  great  states  and
small  states,  opposed  to  each  other,  but  by  states  of  in-
termediate sizes,  approaching  the  two  extremes  by
gradual  advances.  They  will  naturally  arrange  them-
selves on  the  one  side,  or  the  other,  according  to  cir-
cumstances ;  and  cannot  be  calculated  upon,  as  identi-
fied permanently  with  either.  Besides;  in  the  new
states,  and  those,  whose  population  is  advancing,  wheth-
er they,  are  great  or  small,  there  will  be  a  constant
tendency  to  favour  augmentations  of  the  representa-
tives ;  and,  indeed,  the  large  states  may  compel  it  by
making  re-apportionments  and  augmentations  mutual
conditions  of  each  other.^  In  the  third  place,  the  house
of  representatives  will  possess  an  exclusive  power  of
proposing  supplies  for  the  s»upport  of  government ;  or,  m
other  w^ords,  it  will  hold  the  purse-strings  of  the  nation.
This  must  for  ever  give  it  a  powerful  influence  in  the
operations  of  the  government ;  and  enable  it  effectu-
ally to  redress  every  serious  grievance.*  The  house
of  representatives  will,  at  all  times,  have  as  deep  an
interest  in  maintaining  the  interests  of  the  people,  as
the  senate  can  have  in  maintaining  that  of  the  states.'

^  669.  Such  is  a  brief  view  of  the  objections  urged
against  this  part  of  the  constitution,  and  of  the  answers
given  to  them.  Time,  as  has  been  already  intimated,
has  already  settled  them  by  its  own  irresistible  demon-
strations. But  it  is  impossible  to  withhold  our  tribute  of
admiration  from  those  enlightened  statesmen,  whose

1  The  Federalist,  No.  58.

s  The  Federalist,  No.  57  ;  1  EUiot's  Debates,  236,  227.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  58;


Digitized  by


Google


136 CONSTITUTIOlf  OP  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

profound  reasoning,  and  mature  wisdom,  enabled  the
people  to  see  the  true  path  of  safety.  What  was  then
prophecy  and  argument  has  now  become  fact  At
each  successive  census,  the  number  of  representatives
has  been  gradually  augmented.^  In  1792,  the  ratio
adopted  was  33.000,  which  gave  an  aggregate  of  one
hundred  and  six  representatives.-  In  1802,  the  same
ratid  was  adopted,  which  gave  an  aggregate  of  one
hundred  and  forty-one  members.  In  1811,  the  ratio
adopted  was  ^5.000,  which  gave  an  aggregate  of  one
hundred  and  eighty-one  members.  In  1822,  the  ratio
adopted  was  40.000,  which  gave  an  aggregate  of  two
hundred  and  ten  members.  In  1832,  the  ratio  adopted
was  47.700,  which  gave  an  aggregate  of  two  hundred
and  forty  members.*

^  670.  In  the  mean  time,  the  house  of  representa-
tives has  silently  acquired  vast  influence  and  power
over  public  opinion  by  its  immediate  connexion  and
sympathy  with  the  people.  No  complaint  has  been
urged,  or  could  now  with  truth  be  urged,  that  it  did  not
understand,  or  did  not  represent,  the  interests  of  the
people,  or  bring  to  the  public  councils  a  competent
knowledge  of,  and  devotion  to,  the  local  interests  and
feelings  of  its  constituents.  Nay ;  so  little  is,  and  so
little  has  the  force  of  this  objection  been  felt,  that
several  states  have  voluntarily  preferred  to  elect  their
representatives  by  a  general  ticket,  rather  than  by  dis-
tricts. And  the  electors  for  president  and  vice-president
are  more  frequently  chosen  in  that,  than  in  any  other
manner. The  representatives  are  not,  and  never  have

I  Act  of  1792,  ch.  23;  Act  of  1802,  ch.  1  ;  Act  of  1811,  cb.  9  ;  Act
of  1822,  ch.  10  ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  190  ;  Rawle  onCk>D8ti-
tutioD,  45.

»  Act  of  22d  May,  1832,  ch.  91.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATITES.  137

been,  chosen  exclusively  from  any  high,  or  privileged
class  of  society.  At  this  moment,  and  at  all  previous
times,  the  house  has  been  composed  of  men  fix)m
almost  every  rank  and  class  of  society ;  planters,  farmers,
manufacturers,  mechanics,  lawyers,  physicians,  and  di-
vines ;  the  rich,  and  the  poor  ;  the  educated,  and  the
uneducated  men  of  genius  ;  the  young,  and  the  (Ad  ;
the  eloquent,  and  the  taciturn ;  the  statesman  of  a  half
century,  and  the  aspirant,  just  released  from  his  aca-
demical studies.  Merit  of  every  sort  has  thus  been
able  to  assert  its  claims,  and  occasionally  to  obtain  its
just  rewards.  And  if  any  complaint  could  justly  be
made,  it  would  be,  that  the  choice  had  sometimes  been
directed  by  a  spirit  of  intolerance,  that  forgot  every
thing  but  its  own  creed ;  or  by  a  spirit  of  party,  that  re-
membered every  thmg  but  its  own  duty.  Such  infirmities,
however,  are  inseparable  from  the  condition  of  human
nature ;  and  their  occurrence  proves  nothing  more,  than
that  the  moral,  like  the  physical  world  is  occasionally
visited  by  a  whirlwind,  or  deluged  by  a  storm.

§  671.  It  remains  only  to  take  notice  of  two  qual-
ifications of  the  general  principle  of  representation,
which  are  engrafted  on  the  clause.  One  is,  that  each
state  shall  have  at  least  one  representative  ;  the  other
is  that  already  quoted,  that  the  number  of  representa-
tives shall  not  exceed  one  for  every  30.000.  The  for-
mer was  indispensable  in  order  to  secure  to  each  state
a  just  representation  in  each  branch  of  the  legislature ;
which,  as  the  powers  of  each  branch  were  not  exactly
co-extensive,  and  especially,  as  the  power  of  originat-
bg  taxation  was  exclusively  vested  in  the  house  of
representatives,  was  indispensable  to  preserve  the
equality  of  the  small  states,  and  to  reconcile  them  to
a  surrender  of  their  sovereignty. This  proviso  was

VOL.  n.  18

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


138 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

omitted  m  the  first  draft  of  the  constitution,  though
proposed  in  one  of  the  preceding  resolutions.?  But  it
was  adopted  without  resistance,  when  the  draft  pass-
ed under  the  solemn  discussion  of  the  convention.*
The  other  was  a  matter  of  more  controversy.  The
original  limitation  proposed  was  40.000;*  and  it  was
not  until  the  very  last  day  of  die  session  of  the  con-
vention, that  the  number  was  reduced  to  30.000.*  The
object  of  fixing  some  limitation  was  to  prevent  the
future  existence  of  a  very  numerous  and  unwieldy
house  of  representatives.  The  friends  of  a  national
government  had  no  fears,  that  the  body  would  ever
become  too  small  for  real,  effective,  protecting  service.
The  danger  was,  that  from  the  natural  impulses  of  the
popular  will,  and  the  desire  of  ambitious  candidates  to
attain  office,  the  number  would  be  soon  swollen  to  an
unreasonable  size,  so  that  it  would  at  once  generate,  and
combine  factions,  obstruct  deliberations,  and  introduce
and  perpetuate  turbulent  and  rash  counsels.*

§  672.  On  this  subject,  let  the  Federalist  speak  in
its  own  fearless  and  expressive  language.  "In  all
legislative  assemblies  the  greater  the  number  compos-
ing them  may  be,  the  fewer  will  the  men  be,  who  will,
m  fact,  direct  their  proceedmgs.^  In  the  first  place,
the  more  numerous  any  assembly  may  be,  of  whatever
characters  composed,  the  greater  is  known  to  be  the


1  Joarn.  of  ConveDtioii,  157, 158, 309, 215.

3  Joum.  of  Conveotion,  8th  Aug.  p.  296.

3  Joum.  of  Convention,  157, 217, 235, 352.

<  Journ.  of  Convention,  17th  Sept  1787,  p.  389.

5  1  Lloyd's  Debates  in  1789,  427,  434  ;  2  Lloyd's  Debates,  183, 185,
186, 188, 189, 190.

8  The  same  thought  is  expressed  with  still  more  force  in  the  Ameri-
can pamphlet,  entitled,  Thoughts  upon  the  Political  situation  of  America.
{Worcester,  1788,)  54.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] uovn  OF  R£pmx8fiirTATiys8.  139

ascendancy  of  passion  over  reason.  In  the  next  place,
the  larger  the  number,  the  greater  will  be  the  propor-
tion of  members  of  limited  information  and  weak
capacities*  Now,  it  is  precisely  on  characters  of  this
description,  that  the  eloquence  and  address  of  the  few
are  known  to  act  with  all  their  force.  In  the  ancient
republics,  where  the  whole  body  of  the  people  assem-
bled in  person,  a  single  orator,  or  an  ardul  statesman^
was  generally  seen  to  rule  with  as  complete  a  sway,  as
if  a  sceptre  had  been  placed  in  hb  single  hand.  On
the  same  principle,  the  more  multitudinous  a  represen-
tative assembly  may  be  rendered,  the  more  it  will  par-
take of  the  in&mities  incident  to  coUective  meetings  <^
the  people.  Ignorance  will  be  the  dupe  of  cunning  ;
and  passion  the  slave  of  sophistry  and  declamation.
The  people  can  never  err  more  than  in  supposing,  that
in  multiplying  their  representatives  beyond  a  certain
limit,  they  strengthen  the  barrier  against  the  govern-
ment of  a  few.  Experience  will  for  ever  admonish
them,  that,  on  the  contrary,  after  securing  a  sufficient
number  for  the  purposes  of  safety,  of  local  information,
and  of  diffiisive  sympathy,  they  will  counteract  their
own  views  by  every  addition  to  their  representatives.
The  countenance  of  the  government  may  become
more  democratic  ;  but  the  soul,  that  animates  it,  will
be  more  oligarchic.  The  machine  will  be  enlarged,
but  the  fewer,  and  often  the  more  secret,  will  be  the
springs,  by  which  its  motions  are  directed.^  *

1  The  Federalist,  No.  58.  — Mr.  Ames,  in  a  debate  in  congress,  in
1789,  on  amending  the  constitution  in  regard  to  representation,  obsery-
ed,  "  By  enlarging  the  representation,  we  lessen  the  chance  of  selecting
men  of  the  greatest  wisdom  and  abilities  ;  because  small  districts  may
be  conducted  by  intrigue ;  but  in  large  districts  nothing  but  real  dignity
of  character  can  secure  an  election."  *  Unfortunately,  the  experience  of

*  9  Lloyd'i  Debates,  183.


Digitized  by


Google


140  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  8TATBS. [boOE  III;

§  673.  As  a  fit  conclusion  of  this  part  of  die  sub-
ject it  may  be  remarked,  that  congress,  at  its  first
session  in  1789,  in  pursuance  of  a  desire  expressed  by
several  of  the  state  conventions,  in  favour  of  further
declaratory  and  restrictive  amendments  to  the  consti-
tution, proposed  twelve  additional  articles.  The  first
was  on  the  very  subject  now  under  consideration,  and
was  expressed  in  the  following  terms :  **  After  the  first
enumeration  required  by  the  first  article  of  the  con-
stitution, there  shall  be  one  representative  for  every
thirty  thousand,  until  the  number  shall  amount  to  one
hundred  ;  after  which  the  proportion  shall  be  so  regu-
lated by  congress,  that  there  shall  not  be  less  than  one
hundred  representatives,  nor  less  than  one  for  every
forty  thousand  persons,  until  the  number  of  represen-
tatives shall  amoimt  to  two  hundred  ;  after  which,  the
proportion  shall  be  so  regulated  by  congress,  that  there
shall  not  be  less  than  two  hundred  representatives,  nor
more  than  one  representative  for  every  fifty  thous-
and.** *  This  amendment  was  never  ratified  by  a  com-
petent number  of  the  states  to  be  incorporated  into  the
constitution.^  It  was  probably  thought,  that  the  whde
subject  was  safe,  where  it  was  already  lodged  ;  and
that  congress  ought  to  be  left  fi*ee  to  exercise  a  sound
discretion,  according  to  the  fiiture  exigencies  of  the
nation,  either  to  increase,  or  diminish  the  number  of
representatives.

§  674.  There  yet  remain  two  practical  questions  of
no  inconsiderable  importance, connected with the

the  United  States  has  not  justified  the  belief,  that  larfife  districts  will
always  choose  men  of  the  greatest  wisdom,  abilities,  and  real  dignity.

1  Journ.  of  Convention,  &c  Suppt  466  to  481.

9  The  debates  in  congress  on  this  amendment  will  be  found  in
2  Lloyd's  Debates,  182  to  194  ;  Id.  250.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  H0U8S  OF  RXPRSBSirTATiyXS«  141

clause  of  the  constitution  now  under  consideration.
One  is,  what  are  to  be  deemed  direct  taxes  within  the
meaning  of  the  clause.  The  other  is,  in  what  manner
the  apportionment  of  representatives  is  to  be  made.
The  first  will  naturally  come  under  review  in  examin-
ing the  powers  of  congress,  and  the  constitutional  lim-
itations upon  those  powers ;  and  may,  therefore,  for  the
present,  be  passed  over.  The  other  was  a  subject  of
much  discussion  at  the  time,  when  the  first  apportion-
ment was  before  congress  after  the  first  census  was
taken  ;  and  has  been  recently  revived  with  new  and
increased  interest  and  ability.  It  deserves,  therefore,
a  very  deliberate  examination.

^  675.  The  language  of  the  constitution  is,  that
<^  representatives  and  du*ect  taxes  shall  be  apportioned
^^  among  the  several  states,  &c.  according  to  ijieir
^^  respective  numbers ;  '^  and  at  the  first  view  it  would
not  seem  to  involve  the  slightest  difficulty.  A
moment's  reflection  will  dissipate  the  illusion,  and
teach  us,  that  there  is  a  difficulty  intrinsic  in  the  very
nature  of  the  subject.  In  regard  to  direct  taxes,  the
natural  course  would  be  to  assume  a  particular  sum  to
be  raised,  as  three  millions  of  dollars ;  and  to  appor-
tion it  among  the  states  according  to  their  relative
numbers.  But  even  here,  there  virill  always  be  a  very
small  firactional  amount  incapable  of  exact  distribution,
since  the  numbers  in  each  state  will  never  exactiy
coincide  with  any  common  divisor,  or  give  an  exact
aliquot  part  for  each  state  without  any  remainder.
But,  as  the  amount  may  be  carried  through  along
series  of  descending  money  fractions,  it  may  be  ulti-
mately reduced  to  the  smidlest  fiaction  of  any  existing,
or  even  imaginary  coin.


Digitized  by


Google


148  COHSTITUTIOK  OJP  TH£  U.  8TAT£8. [bOOK  UI.

^  676.  But  the  difficulty  is  far  otherwise  in  regard
to  representatives.  Here,  there  can  be  no  subdivision  of
the  unit ;  each  state  must  be  entided  to  an  entire  repre-
sentative, and  a  fraction  of  a  representative  is  mcapable
of  i^portionment  Yet  it  will  be  perceived  at  once,
that  it  is  scarcely  possible,  and  certainly  is  wholly  im-
probable, that  the  relative  numbers  in  each  state  should
bear  such  an  exact  proportion  to  the  aggregate,  that
there  should  exist  a  common  divisor  for  all,  which
should  leave  no  fraction  in  any  state.  Such  a  case
never  yet.  has  existed ;  and  in  all  human  probability  it
never  will  Every  common  divisw,  hitherto  applied,
has  left  a  fraction  greater,  or  smaller,  in  every  state  ;^
and  what  has  been  in  the  past  must  continue  to  be  for
the  fiitiu'e.  Assume  the  whole  population  to  be  three,
or  six,  or  nine,  or  twelve  millions,  or  any  other  num-
ber; if  you  follow  the  injunctions  of  the  constitution,
and  attempt  to  apportion  the  representatives  accordmg
to  the  numbers  in  each  state,  it  will  be  found  to  be
absolutdy  impossible.  The  theory,  however  true,
becomes  practically  false  in  its  application.  Each  state
may  have  assigned  a  relative  proportion  oi  representa-
tives up  to  a  given  number,  the  whole  being  divisible
by  some  common  divisor ;  but  the  fraction  oi  popula-
tion belonging  to  each  beyond  that  point  is  left  unpro-
vided for.  So  that  the  apportionment  is,  at  best,  only
an  approximation  to  the  rule  laid  down  by  the  consti-
tution, and  not  a  strict  compliance  with  the  rule.  The
fraction  in  one  state  may  be  ten  times  as  great,  as
that  m  another ;  and  so  may  differ  m  each  state  in
any  assignable  mathematical  proportion.  What  then  is
to  be  done? Is  the  constitution  to  be  wholly  disre-

1  See  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  ch.  5,  p.  319.

.  Digitized  by  VjOO^IC


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  or  R£PR£S£KTATiy£S.  1 43

garded  on  this  point?  Or  is  it  to  be  followed  out  in
its  true  spirit,  though  unavoidably  differing  from  the
letter,  by  the  nearest  approximation  to  it?  If  an  addi-
tional representative  can  be  assigned  to  one  state
beyond  its  relative  proportion  to  the  whole  population,
it  is  equally  true,  that  it  can  be  assigned  to  all,  that  are
in  a  similar  predicament  If  a  fraction  admits  of  rep-
resentation in  any  case,  what  prohibits  the  application
of  the  rule  to  all  fractions  ?  The  only  constitutional
limitation  seems  to  be,  that  no  state  shall  have  more
than  one  representative  for  every  thirty  thousand  per-
sons. Subject  to  this,  the  truest  rule  seems  to  be,
that  the  apportionment  ought  to  be  the  nearest  practi-
cal approximation  to  the  terms  of  the  constitution ;  and
the  rule  ought  to  be  such,  that  it  shall  always  work  the
same  way  in  regard  to  all  the  states,  and  be  as  little
open  to  cavfl,  or  controversy,  or  abuse,  as  possible.

^  677.  But  it  may  be  asked,  what  are  the  first  steps
to  be  taken  in  order  to  arrive  at  a  constitutional  appor-
tionment ?  Plainly,  by  taking  the  aggregate  of  popu-
lation in  all  the  states,  (according  to  the  constitutional
rule,)  and  then  ascertain  the  relative  proportion  of  the
population  of  each  state  to  the  population  of  the  whole.
This  is  necessarily  so  in  regard  to  direct  taxes ;  ^  and


1  ^  By  the  cons^utioD,^  says  Mr.  Chief  Justice  Marshftll  in  deliTeriHg
the  opinion  of  the  court,  '*  direct  taxation,  in  its  iq)plication  to  states,
shall  be  apportioned  to  numbers.  Representation  is  not  made  the  foun-
dation of  taxation.  If,  under  the  enumeration  of  a  representative  for
every  30,000  souls,  one  state  had  been  found  to  contain  59,000  and
another  60,000,  the  first  would  have  been  entitled  to  only  one  repre-
sentative, and  the  last  to  two.  Their  taxes,  however,  would  not  have
been  as  one  to  two,  but  as  fifty-nine  to  sixty."  *  This  is  perfectly  cor-
rect, because  the  constitution  prohibits  more  than  one  representative  fbr
every  90,000. But  if  one  state  contain  100,000  souls,  and« another

«  Imghbonmgk  ▼.  Blak$,  5  Whe^n'i  R.  317, 390.


Digitized  by


Google


144 ' CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

there  is  no  reascm  to  say,  that  it  can,  or  ought  to  be
otherwise  in  regard  to  representatives ;  for  that  would
be  to  contravene  the  very  injunctions  of  the  constitu-
tion, which  require  the  like  rule  of  apportionment
in  each  case.  In  the  one,  the  apportionment  may  be
run  down  below  unity ;  in  the  odier,  it  cannot.  But
this  does  not  change  the  nature  of  the  rule,  but  only
the  extent  of  its  application.

§  678.  In  1790,  a  bill  was  introduced  mto  the  house
of  representatives,  giving  one  representative  for  every
thirty  thousand,  and  leaving  the  fractions  unrepresented ;
thus  producing  an  mequality,  which  was  greatly  com-
plained oil  It  passed  the  house ;  and  was  amended
in  the  senate  by  allowing  an  addi^onal  representative
to  the  states  having  the  largest  fractions.  The  house
finally  concurred  in  the  amendment,  after  a  warm  de-
bate. The  history  of  these  proceedings  is  summarily
stated  by  the  biographer  of  Washington,  as  follows :  —
"  Construing,'*  says  he,  **  the  constitution  to  authorize
a  process,  by  which  the  whole  number  rf  representa-
tives should  be  ascertained  on  the  whole  population  of
the  United  States,  and  afterwards  apportioned  among
the  several  states  according  to  their  respective  num-
bers, the  senate  applied  the  number  thirty  thousand,  as
a  divisor,  to  the  total  population,  and  tsJdng  the  quo-
tient, which  was  one  hundred  and  twenty,  as  the  num-
ber of  representatives  given  by  the  ratio,  which  had
been  adopted  m  the  house,  where  the  bill  originated,
they  apportioned  that  number  among  the  several
states  by  that  ratio,  until  as  many  representatives,  as  it

dOO,000,  there  is  no  lo^^c,  which,  consistently  with  common  sense,  or
Justice,  pould,  upon  any  constitutional  apportionment,  assign  three  rep<-
resentatives  to  one,  and  seven  to  the  other,  any  more  than  it  could  of  a
direct  tax  the  proportion  of  tkree  to  one,  and  seven  to  the  other.


Digitized  by


Google


CH«  IX.] H0U8S  OF  REPRX8S1ITATITS8.  146

would  give,  were  allotted  to  each.  The  residuary
members  were  then  distributed  among  the  states
having  the  highest  fractions.  Without  professing  the
principle,  on  which  this  apportionment  was  made,  the
amendment  of  the  senate  n^erely  allotted  to  the  states
respectively  the  number  of  members,  which  the  process
just  mentioned  would  gi?e.^  The  result  was  a  more
equitable  apportionment  of  representatives  to  popula-
tion, and  a  still  more  exact  accordance,  than  was  found
in  the  original  bill,  with  the  prevailing  sentiment,  which,
both  within  doors  and  without,  seemed  to  require,  that
the  popular  branch  of  the  legislature  should  consist  of
as  many  members,  as  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  gov-
ernment would  admit.  If  the  rule  of  construing  that
mstrument  was  correct,  the  amendment  removed  ob-
jections, which  were  certainly  well  founded,  and  was
not  easily  assailable  by  the  advocates  of  a  numerous
representative  body.  But  the  rule  was  novel,  and
overturned  opinions,  which  had  been  generally  assum-
ed, and  were  supposed  to  be  settled.  In  one  branch
of  the  legislature,  it  had  been  already  rejected ;  and
in  the  other,  the  majority  m  its  favour  was  only  one.^^  •
^  679.  The  debate  in  the  two  houses,  however,  was
purely  political,  and  the  division  of  the  votes  purely
geographical ;  the  southern  states  voting  against  it,
and  the  northern  in  its  favour.'  The  president  returned
the  bill  with  two  objections. "  1.  That  the  constitu-

1  The  words  of  the  hill  were,  "  That  from  and  after  the  the  third  day
of  March,  J 793,  the  house  of  representatives  shall  be  composed  of  one
hundred  and  twenty-seven  members,  elected  within  the  seveiml  suites
according  to  the  following  apportionment,  that  is  to  say,  within  tho  state
of  New -Hampshire,  five,  within  the  state  of  Massachusetts,  sixteen,"
&c.  &c.  enumerating  all  the  states.

s  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  eh.  5,  p.  391, 322.

3  4  Jefferson's  Correspondence,  466.
TOL.  II.  19


Digitized  by


Google


146  CON8TIT17TION  OF  THE  V.  StATSS. [BOOK  111.

tion  has  prescribed,  that  representatives  shall  be  appor-
tioned among  the  several  states  according  to  their  re-
spective numbers ;  and  there  is  no  proportion  or  divisor,
which,  applied  to  the  respective  numbers  of  the  states,
will  yield  the  number  and  allotment  of  representatives
proposed  by  the  bill,  2.  The  constitution  has  also  pro-
vided, that  the  number  of  representatives  shall  not  ex-
ceed one  for  thirty  thousand,  which  restriction  is  by
the  context,  and  by  fair  and  obvious  construction,  to  be
applied  to  the  several  and  respective  numbers  of  the
states,  and  the  bill  has  allotted  to  eight  of  the  states
more  than  one  for  thirty  thousand/'  ^  The  bill  was
accordingly  lost,  two  thirds  of  the  house  not  being  m
its  favoiu*.  It  is  understood,  that  the  president's  cabi-
net was  greatly  divided  on  the  question.*

§  680.  The  second  reason  assigned  by  the  presi-
dent against  the  bill  was  well  founded  in  feet,  and
entirely  conclusive.  The  other,  to  say  the  least  of  it,
is  as  open  to  question,  as  any  one,  which  cem  well  be
imagined  in  a  case  of  real  difficulty  of  construction*  It
assumes,  as  its  basis,  that  a  common  ratio,  or  divisor,
is  to  be  taken,  and  applied  to  each  state,  let  the  frac-
tions and  mequalities  left  be  whatever  they  may.
Now,  this  is  a  plain  departure  from  the  terms  of  the
constitution.  It  is  not  there  said,  that  any  such  ratio
shall  be  taken.  The  language  is,  that  the  representa-
tives shall  be  apportioned  among  the  several  states  ac-
cording to  their  respective  numbers,  that  is,  according
to  the  proportion  of  the  whole  population  of  each  state
to  the  aggregate  of  all  the  states.  To  apportion  ac-
cording to  a  ratio,  short  of  the  whole  number  in  a  state,
is  not  an  apportionment  according  to  the  respective

I  5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  ch.  5,  p.  324,  note.
3  Id.  p.  a2d ;  4  Jefferson's  Correspondence,  466.


Digiti


zed  b^Google


CH*  IX.] H01T8£  OF  RfiPRESEKTATIYfift.  147

numbers  of  the  state«  If  h  is  said,  that  it  is  impractica-
ble to  follow  the  meaning  of  the  terms  literally,  that  ma^
be  admitted ;  but  it  does  not  follow,  that  they  are  to  be
wholly  disregarded,  or  language  substituted  essential-
ly different  in  its  import  and  effect.  If  we  must  depart,
we  must  depart  as  litde  as  practicable.  We  are  to  act
on  the  doctrine  of  cypreSy  or  come  as  nearly  as  possible
to  the  rule  of  the  constitution.  If  we  are  at  liberty  to
adopt  a  rule  varying  from  the  terms  of  the  constitution,
arguing  ab  inconvenieniij  then  it  is  clearly  just  as  open
to  others  to  reason  on  the  other  side  from  opposmg  in-
convenience and  injustice.

^681.  This  question,  which  a  learned  commentator
has  supposed  to  be  now  finally  at  rest,^  has  been  (as  has
been  already  intimated)  recently  revived  and  discussed
with  great  ability.  Instead  of  pursuing  my  own  reason-
mg  upon  this  subject  it  will  be  far  more  satisfactory  to
give  to  the  reader,  in  a  note,  the  arguments  on  each
side,  as  they  are  found  collected  in  the  leading  reports
and  documents  now  forming  a  portion  of  contemporary
history.'

1  Rawle  on  Constitution,  43;  5  Marshairs  Life  of  Washington,  324.

8  Mr.  Jefferson's  opinion,  given  on  the  apportionment  bill  in  1792,
presents  all  the  leading  reasons  against  the  doctrine  of  apportioning  the
representatives  in  any  other  manner  than  by  a  ratio  without  regard  to
fractions. It  is  as  follows :

"  The  constitution  has  declared  that  *  representatives  and  direct  taxes
shall  be  apportioned  among  the  several  states  according  to  their  respec-
tive numbers ;  *  that  *  the  number  of  representatives  shall  not  exceed
one  for  every  30,000,  but  each  state  shall  have,  at  least,  one  represenU-
tive ;  and,  until  such  enumeration  shall  be  made,  the  state  of  New-
Hampshire  shall  be  entitled  to  choose  three,  Massachusetts,*  &c.

"  The  bill  for  apportioning  representatives  among  the  several  states,
without  explaining  any  principle  at  all,  which  may  show  its  conformity
with  the  constitution,  or  guide  future  apportionments,  says,  that  New-
Hampshire  shall  have  three  members,  Massachusetts  sixteen,  &lc.  We
are,  therefore,  to  find  by  experiment  what  has  been  the  principle  of  the


Digitized  by


Google


148 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [bOOK  III,

§  682.  The  next  clause  of  the  second  section  of  the
first  article,  is :  "  When  vacancies  happen  in  the  repre-
"  sentation  of  any  state,  the  executive  authority  thereof
"  shall  issue  writs  of  election  to  fill  such  vacancies.**

§  683.  The  propriety  of  adopting  this  clause  does
not  seem  to  have  furnished  any  matter  of  discussion,
either  in,  or  out  of  the  convention.*  It  was  obvious,
that  the  power  ought  to  reside  somewhere ;  and  must
be  exercised,  either  by  the  state  or  national  government,
or  by  some  department  thereof.  The  fi-iends  of  state
powers  would  naturally  rest  satisfied  with  leaving  it
with  the  state  executive ;  and  the  friends  of  the  national

bill ;  to  do  which,  it  is  proper  to  state  the  federal  or  representable  num-
bers of  each  state,  and  the  members  allotted  to  them  by  the  bilL  They
are  as  follows :


Vermont,

New-Hampshire,

Massachusetts,

Rhode-Island,

Connecticut,

New-York,

New-Jersey,

Pennsylvania,

Delaware,

Maryland,

Virginia,

Kentucky,

North  Carolina,

South  Carolina,

Georgia,


85,532

3

141,833

5

475,387

16

68,444

2

235,941

8

352,915

11

179,55<>

6

432,880

14

55,538

2

278,513

9

630,558

21

68,705

2

a53,521

11

206,236

7

70,843

2

3,636,312

120

It  happens  that  this  representa-
tion, whether  tried  as  between
great  and  small  states,  or  as
between  north  and  south,  yields,
in  the  present  instance,  a  tol-
erably just  result,  and  conse-
quently could  not  be  objected
to  on  that  ground,  if  it  were  ob-
tained by  Uie  process  prescrib-
ed in  the  constitution ;  but,  if
obtained  by  any  process  out  of
that,  it  becomes  inadmissible.


"  The  first  member  of  the  clause  of  the  constitution  above  cited,  is
express  —  that  representatives  shall  be  apportioned  among  the  several
states  according  to  their  respective  numbers ;  that  is  to  say,  they  shall  be
apportioned  by  some  common  ratio,  for  proportion  and  ratio  are  equiva-
lent words ;  and  it  is  the  definition  of  proportion  among  numbers,  that
they  have  a  ratio  common  to  aU,  or,  in  other  words,  a  common  divisor.
Now,  trial  will  show  that  there  is  no  common  ratio,  or  divisor,  which,  ap-
plied to  the  numbers  of  each  state,  will  give  to  them  the  number  of  re-

1  Journal  of  Convention,  217, 237, 352.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  or  REPRCSENTATITSS.


149


goremment  would  acquiesce  in  that  arrangement,  if
other  constitutional  provisions  existed  sufficient  to  pre-
serve its  due  execution.  The  provision,  as  it  stands
has  the  strong  recommendation  of  public  convenience,
and  facile  adaptation  to  the  particular  local  circum-

presentatives  allotted  in  this  bill ;  for,  trying  the  several  ratios  of  29,  30^
31,  32,  33,  the  allotments  would  be  as  follows :


Vermont,

New-Hampshire,

Massachusetts,

Rhode-Island,

Connecticut,

New-York,

New-Jersey,

Pennsylvania,

Delaware,

Maryland,

Virgihia,

Kentucky,

North  Carolina,

South  Carolina,

Georgia,


29

30

31

32

33

The
bUl.

2

2

2 2  1

2

3

4

4

4

4

4

5

16

15

15

14

14

16

2

2

2

2

2

2

8

7

7

7

7

8

12

11

11

11

10

11

6

5

5

5

5

6

14

14

13

13

13

14

1

1

1

1

1

2

9

9

8

8

8

9

21

21

20

19

19

21

2

2

2

2

2

2

12

11

11

11

10

12

7

6

6

6

6

7

2

2

2

2

2

2

118

112

109

Il07

105

120

Then  the  bill  re-
verses the  consti-
tutional precept ;
because,  by  it,  *  re-
presentatives are
not  apportioned
among  the  several
states  according
to  their  respective
numbers.'


'<  It  will  be  taid,  that,  though  for  Utxes  there  may  always  be  found  a
divisor,  which  will  apportion  them  among  the  states  according  to  num-
bers exactly,  without  leaving  any  remainder ;  yet,  for  reprtsadatwtt^
there  can  be  no  such  common  ratio,  or  divisor,  which,  applied  to  the
several  numbers,  will  divide  them  exactly,  without  a  remainder  or  fimc-
tion.  I  answer,  then,  that  iaxts  roust  be  divided  exactly,  and  representn'
Hves  as  nearly  as  the  nearest  ratio  will  admit,  and  the  fractions  must  be
neglected;  because  the  constitution  wills,  absolutely,  that  there  be  an
apportionment,  or  common  ratio ;  and  if  any  fractions  result  fron»tke  op-
eration, it  has  left  them  unprovided  for.  In  fact,  it  could  not  but  fore-
see that  such  fractions  would  result,  and  it  meant  to  submit  to  them.  It
knew  they  would  be  in  favour  of  one  part  of  the  Union  at  one  time,  and
of  another  part  of  it  at  another,  so  as,  in  the  end,  to  balance  occasional
inequalities.  But,  instead  of  such  a  single  common  ratio,  or  uniform
divisor,  as  prescribed  by  the  constitution,  the  bill  has  applied  two  ratios,
at  least,  to  the  different  states,  to  wit,  that  of  30,026  to  the  seven  follow-
ing :  Rhode-Island,  New-York,  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  Virginia,  Ken-
tacky,  and  Georgia ;  and  that  of  27,770  to  the  eight  others ;  namely,


Digitized  by


Google


160 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. , [BOOK  III.

Stances  of  each  state. Any  genersJ  regulation  would
have  worked  with  some  inequality.

^  684.  The  next  clause  is,  that  "  the  house  of  re-
**presentati?es  shall  choose  their  speaker,  and  other


Vermont,  N6w-Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  New-Jersey,
Delaware,  North  Carolina,  and  South  Carolina. As  follows :


?

lAnd

!?

Rhode  Island, -

68,444

u

2

Vermont,

85,532

tMD

3

New  York,

352,915

^

11

New-Hampshire,

141,8  3

?:

5

Pennsylvania,

432,880

S

14

Massachusetts, -

475,337

u

16

Maryland,

•278,513

^

9

1  Connecticut,

235,941

Si

8

Virginia, - -

630,558

>»

21]  New-Jerscy,

179,5  6

>»

6

Kentucky,

68,705

2

Delaware,

55,538

2

Georgia,

70,843

0)

2

North  Carolina,  -

353,521

-g

12

>

South  Carolina, -

206,236

>

'/

Q_

IqI I

"  And  if  two  ratios  may  he  applied,  then^een  may,  and  the  distribu-
tion become  arbitrary,  instead  of  being  apportioned  to  numbers.

«  Another  member  of  the  clause  of  the  constitution,  which  has  been
cited,  says,  <  the  number  of  representatives  shall  not  exceed  one  for
every  30,000,  but  each  state  shall  have,  at  least,  one  representative.'
This  last  phrase  proves  that  it  had  in  contemplation,  that  all  fractions,  or
numbers  hdow  thecommon  ratioy  were  to  be  unrepresented ;  and  it  pro-
vides specially,  that,  in  the  case  of  a  state  whose  whole  number  shall  be
below  Uie  common  ratio,  one  representative  shall  be  given  to  it  This  is
the  single  instance  where  it  allows  representation  to  any  smaller  num-
ber than  the  common  ratio,  and,  by  providing  specially  for  it  in  this,
shows  it  was  understood,  that,  without  special  provision,  the  smaller
number  would,  in  this  case,  be  involved  in  the  general  principle.

<<  The  first  phrase  of  the  above  citation,  that  *  the  number  of  repre-
sentatives shall  not  exceed  one  for  every  30/X)0,'  is  violated  by  this  bill,
which  has  given  to,  eight  states  a  number  exceeding  one  for  every
30,000,  to  wit,  one  for  every  27,770.

<<  In  answer  to  this,  it  is  said,  that  this  phrase  may  mean  either  the
thirty  tkpusands  in  each  stote,  or  the  thirty  thousands  in  the  uihole  VnUm;
and  that,  in  the  latter  case,  it  serves  only  to  pnd  the  amount  of  the  whole
representation,  which,  in  the  present  state  of  population,  is  one  hundred
and  twenty  members.  Suppose  the  phrase  might  bear  both  meanings,
which  will  common  sense  apply  to  it?  Which  did  the  universal  under-
standing of  our  country  apply  to  it  ?  Which  did  the  senate  and  repre-
sentatives apply  to  it  during  the  pendency  of  the  first  bill,  and  even  till
an  advanced  stage  of  this  second  bill,  when  an  ingenious  gentleman
found  out  the  doctrine  of  fractions  —  a  doctrine  so  difficult  and  inobvioos,
as  to  be  rejected,  at  first  sight,  by  the  very  persons  who  afterwards  be-


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]


H0IT8S  OF  REPRXSSNTAT1TS8.


161


^officers,  and  shall  have  the  sole  power  of  impeach-
^ment''

§  685.  Each  of  these  privileges  b  of  great  practical
ralue  and  importance. In  Great  Britain  the  house  of

came  its  most  zealous  advocates  ?  The  phrase  stands  in  the  midst  of  a
number  of  others,  every  one  of  which  relates  to  states  in  their  separate
capacity.  Will  not  plain  common  sense,  then,  understand  it,  like  the
rest  of  its  context,  to  relate  to  states  in  their  separate  capacities  ?

**  But  if  the  phrase  of  one  for  30,000,  is  only  meant  to  give  the  aggre-
gate of  representatives,  and  not  at  all  to  influence  their  apportionment
among  the  states,  then  the  one  hundred  and  twenty  being  once  found,  in
order  to  apportion  them,  we  must  recur  to  the  former  rule,  which  doee
it  according  to  ike  numbers  of  the  respective  states ;  and  we  must  take  the
nearest  common  divisor  as  the  ratio  of  distribution,  that  is  to  say,  that
divisor,  which,  applied  to  every  state,  gives  to  them  such  numbers  asy
added  together,  come  nearest  to  120.  This  nearest  common  ratio  will
be  found  to  be  28,858,  and  will  distribute  119  of  the  120  members,  leav-
ing only  a  single  residuary  one.  It  will  be  found,  too,  to  place  96,648
fractional  numbers  in  the  eight  northernmost  states,  and  105,582,  in  the
southernmost The  following  table  shows  it :


Ratio  of

Fnetiont.

Vermont,

85,532

98,858.

2

27,816

New-Hampshire

141,823

4

26,391

Massachusetts

475,327

16

13,509

Rhode-Island

68,444

2

10,728

Connecticut

235.941

8

5,077

New-York

a52,915

12

6,619

New -Jersey

179,556

6

6,408

Pennsylvania

432,880

15

10

96,648

Delaware

55,538

1

26,680

Maryland

278,513

9

18,791

Virginia

630,558

21

24,540

Kentucky

68,705

o

10,989

•

North  Carolina

353,521

12

7,225

South  Carolina

206>236

7

4,230

Georgia

70,843

2

13,127

105,582

3,636,312

119

202,230

202,230

"  Whatever  may  have  been  the  intention,  the  effect  of  rejecting  the
nearest  divisor,  (which  leaves  but  one  residuary  member,)  and  ado))ting
a  distant  one,  (which  leaves  eight,)  is  merely  to  take  a  member  from
New- York  and  Pennsylvania  each,  and  give  them  to  Vermont  and  New-


Digitized  by


Google


162  CONSTITUTIOK  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

commons  elect  their  own  speaker ;  but  he  must  be  ap-
proved by  the  kirg.^  This  approval  is  now  altogether
a  matter  of  course;  but  anciently, it  seems,  the  king
intimated  his  wish  previously,  in  order  to  avoid  the
necessity  of  a  refusal ;  and  it  was  acceded  to.*  The
very  language  used  by  the  speakers  in  former  times,  in
order  to  procure  the  approval  of  the  crown,  was  such
as  would  not  now  be  tolerated ;  and  indicated,  at  least,

Hampshire.  But  it  will  be  said,  *  this  is  giving  more  than  one  for  30,000.'
True ;  but  has  it  not  been  jost  said,  that  the  one  for  30,000  is  prescribed
only  to  fix  the  aggregate  number,  and  that  we  are  not  to  mind  it  when
we  come  to  apportion  them  among  the  states  ;  that  for  this  we  must  re-
cur to  the  former  rule,  which  distributes  them  according  to  the  numbers
in  each  state  ?  Besides,  does  not  the  bill  itself,  apportion  among  seven
of  the  states  by  the  ratio  of  27,770,  which  is  much  more  than  one  for
30,000?

^  Where  a  phrase  is  susceptible  of  two  meaningfs,  we  ought  certainly
to  adopt  that  which  will  bring  upon  us  the  fewest  inconveniences.  Let
us  weigh  those  resulting  from  both  constructions.

**  From  that  givicg  to  each  state  a  member  for  every  30,000  in  that
state,  results  the  single  inconvenience,  that  there  may  be  large  fractions
unrepresented.  But  it  being  a  mere  hazard  on  which  states  this  will  fall,
hazard  will  equalize  it  in  the  long  run.

**  From  the  other,  results  exactly  the  same  inconvenience.  A  thousand
cases  may  be  imagined  to  prove  it  Take  one ;  suppose  eight  of  the
states  had  45,000  inhabitants  each,  and  the  other  seven  44,999  each,  that
is  to  say,  each  one  less  than  each  of  the  others,  the  aggregate  would
be  674,993,  and  the  number  of  representatives,  at  one  for  :X),000  of  the
aggregate,  would  be  22.  Then,  after  giving  one  member  to  each  state,
distribute  the  seven  residuary  members  among  the  seven  highest  frac-
tions ;  and,  though  the  difference  of  population  be  only  an  unit,  the
representation  would  be  the  double.  Here  a  single  inhabitant  the  more
would  count  as  30,000.  Nor  is  this  case  imaginable  only ;  it  will  resem-
ble the  real  one,  whenever  the  fractions  happen  to  be  pretty  equal
through  the  whole  states.  The  numbers  of  our  census  happen,  by  acci-
dent, to  give  the  fractions  all  very  small  or  very  great,  so  as  to  produce
the  strongest  case  of  inequality  that  could  possibly  have  occurred,  and
which  may  never  occur  again.  The  probability  is,  that  the  fractions
will  generally  descend  gradually  from  39,999  to  I.  The  inconvenience,
then,  of  large  unrepresented  fractions  attends  both  constructions ;  and,

I  1  Black.  Comm.  181.

8  Com.  Dig.  Parliament,  E.  5 ; 4  Inst  8,  Lex.  Pari.  ch.  12,  p.  74.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES.


163


a  disposition  to  undue  subserviency.*  A  similar  power
of  approval  existed  in  the  royal  governors  in  many
of  the  colonies  before  the  revolution. The  exclusive

while  the  most  obvious  construction  is  liable  to  no  other,  that  of  the  bill
incurs  many  and  grievous  ones.


1st -

45,000

2

FncxkmB,

15,000

2d - . . -

45,000

2

15,000 ,

2d - ...

45,000

2

15,000

4th -

45,000

2

15,000

5th -

45,000

2

15,000

6th .

45,000

2

15,000

7th .

45,00(»

2

15,000

8th -

45,000

2

15,000

9th - . -

44,999

14,999

10th  -

44,999

14,999

11th  -

44,999

14,999

12th  .

44,999

14,999

13th  -

44,999

14,999

14th  .
15th  -

uS

14,999
14,999

674,993

**  1.  If  you  permit  the  large  fraction  in  one  state  to  choose  a  repre-
sentative for  one  of  the  small  fractions  in  another  state,  you  take  from
the  latter  its  election,  which  constitutes  real  representation,  and  substi-
tute a  virtual  representation  of  the  disfranchised  fractions;  and  the  ten-
dency of  the  doctrine  of  virtual  representation  has  been  too  well  discuss-
ed and  appreciated  by  reasoning  and  resistance,  on  a  former  great  occa-
sion, to  need  developement  now.

^  2.  The  bill  does  not  say,  that  it  has  given  the  residuary  representa-
tives io  the  greatest  Jhidxons ;  though,  in  fact,  it  has  done  so.  It  seems
to  have  avoided  establishing  that  into  a  rule,  lest  it  might  not  suit  on
another  occasion.  Perhaps  it  may  be  found  the  next  time  more  conve-
nient to  distribute  them  among  the  smaller  states ;  at  another  time  among
Ike  larger  states ;  at  other  tiroes  according  to  any  other  crotchet,  which
ingenuitynnay  invent,  and  the  combination  of  the  day  give  strength  to
carry ;  or  they  may  do  it  arbitrarily,  by  open  bargain  and  cabal.  In
short,  this  construction  introduces  into  congress  a  scramble,  or  a  vendue
for  the  surplus  members.  It  generates  waste  of  time,  hot  blood,  and
may,  at  some  time,  when  the  passions  are  high,  extend  a  disagreement
between  the  two  houses,  to  the  perpetual  loss  of  the  thing,  as  happens

1  See  Christian's  Note  to  1  Black.  Comm.  181 ;  Com.  Dig.  Pariiameni,
£.  5. ;  1  Wilson's  Law  I^ect  159, 160;  4  Co.  Inst.  8.

VOL.  II.  20


Digitized  by


Google


164  CONSTlTUTIOir  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

right  of  choosing  a  speaker,  without  any  appeal  to,  or
approval  by  any  other  department  of  the  government,
is  an  improvement  upon  the  British  system. It  secures

BOW  in  Pennsylyania  assembly :  whereas  the  other  construction  reduces
the  apportionment  always  to  an  arithmetical  operation,  about  which  no
two  men  can  possibly  differ.

^  3.  It  leaves  in  full  force  the  violation  of  the  precept  which  declares,
that  representatives  shall  be  apportioned  among  the  states  according  to
their  numbers,  that  is,  by  some  common  ratio.

'*  Viewing  this  bill  either  as  a  vioUUion  of  the  corutttuHony  or  as  giv-
ing an  ineonvtnierU  exposUxon  to  its  ioorda^  is  it  a  case  wherein  the  presi-
dent ought  to  interpose  his  negative  ? I  think  it  is.

^  1.  The  non-user  of  his  negative  begins  already  to  excite  a  belief,
that  no  president  will  ever  venture  to  use  it ;  and,  consequently,  has
begotten  a  desire  to  raise  up  barriers  in  the  state  legislatures  against
congress  throwing  off  the  control  of  the  constitution.

**  2.  It  cann  ever  be  used  more  pleasingly  to  the  public,  than  in  the  pro*
taction  of  the  constitution.

^  3.  No  invasions  of  the  constitution  are  so  fundamentally  dangerous,
as  the  tricks  played  on  their  own  numbers,  apportionment,  and  other  cir-
cumstances respecting  themselves,  and  affecting  their  legal  qualifications
to  legislate  for  the  Union.

^  4.  The  migorities,by  which  this  bill  has  been  carried,  (to  wit,  of  one
in  the  senate,  and  two  in  the  house  of  representatives,)  show  how  divided
tha  opinions  were  there.

**  5.  The  whole  of  both  houses  admit  the  constitution  will  bear  the  other
escposition ;  whereas  the  minorities  in  both  deny  it  will  bear  that  of  the
bilL

^  6.  The  application  of  any  one  ratio  is  intelligible  to  the  people,  and
will,  therefore,  be  approved ;  whereas  the  complex  operations  of  this  bill
will  never  be  comprehended  by  them ;  and,  though  they  may  acquiesce,
they  cannot  approve,  what  they  do  not  understand."

Mr.  Webster's  report  on  the  same  subject,  in  the  senate  in  April«
1632,  presents  the  leading  arguments  on  the  other  side.

*^  This  bill,  like  all  laws  on  the  same  subject,  must  be  regarded,  as  of
an  interesting  and  delicate  nature.  It  respects  the  distribution  of  politi-
cal power  among  the  states  of  the  Union.  It  is  to  determine  the  num-
ber of  voices,  which,  for  ten  years  to  come,  each  state  is  to  possess  in  the
popular  branch  of  the  legislature.  In  the  opinion  of  the  committee,
there  can  be  few  or  no  questions,  which  it  is  more  desirable  should  be
settled  on  just,  fair,  and  satisfactory  principles,  than  this ;  and,  availing
themselves  of  the  benefit  of  the  discussion,  which  the  bill  has  already
undergone  in  the  senate,  they  have  given  to  it  a  renewed  and  anxious
consideration. The  result  is,  that,  in  their  opinion,  the  bill  ought  to  be


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  or  REPRESENTATIVES.  155

a  more  independent  and  unlimited  choice  on  the  part
of  the  house,  according  to  the  merits  of  the  individual,
and  their  own  sense  of  duty. It  avoids  those  incon-

amended.  Seeing^  the  difficulties,  which  belong  to  the  wholo  subject,
they  are  fully  convinced,  that  the  bill  has  been  framed  and  passed  in  the
other  house,  with  the  sincerost  desire  to  overcome  those  difficulties,  and
to  enact  a  law,  which  should  do  as  much  justice  as  possible  to  all  the
states.  But  the  committee  are  constrained  to  say,  that  this  object  ap-
pears to  them  not  to  have  been  obtained.  The  unequal  operation  of  the
bill  on  some  of  the  states,  should  it  become  a  law,  seems  to  the  commit-
tee most  manifest ;  and  they  cannot  but  express  a  doubt,  whetlier  its
actual  apportionment  of  the  representative  power  among  the  several
states  can  be  considered,  as  conformable  to  the  spirit  of  the  constitution.
The  bin  provides,  that,  from  and  after  the  third  of  Ma^ch,  1833,  the
house  of  representatives  shall  be  composed  of  noembers,  elected  agreea-
bly to  a  ratio  of  one  representative  for  every  forty-seven  thousand  and
seven  hundred  persons  in  each  state,  computed  according  to  the  rule
prescribed  by  the  constitution.  The  addition  of  the  seven  hundred  to
the  forty-seven  thousand,  in  the  composition  of  this  ratio,  produces  no
effect  whatever  in  regard  to  <he  constitution  of  the  house.  It  neither
adds  to,  nor  takes  from,  the  number  of  members  assigned  to  any  state.
Its  only  effect  is,  a  reduction  of  the  apparent  amount  of  the  fractions,  as
they  are  usually  called,  or  residuary  numbers,  after  the  application  of
the  ratio.  For  all  other  purposes,  the  result  is  precisely  the  same,  aa  if
the  ratio  had  been  47,000.

**  As  it  seems  generally  admitted,  that  inequalities  do  exist  in  thisbill,
and  that  injurious  consequences  will  arise  from  its  operation,  which  it
would  be  desirable  to  avert,  if  any  proper  means  of  averting  them,  with-
out producing  others  equally  injurious,  could  be  found,  the  committee  do
not  think  it  necessary  to  go  into  a  full  and  particular  statement  of  these
consequences.  They  will  content  themselves  with  presenting  a  few
examples  only  of  these  results,  and  such  as  they  find  it  most  difficult  to
reconcile  with  justice,  and  the  spirit  of  the  constitution.

^In  exhibiting  these  examples,  the  committee  must  necessarily  speak
of  particular  states ;  but  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  say,  that  they  speak  of
them  as  examples  only,  and  with  the  most  perfect  renpecl,  not  only  for
the  states  themselves,  but  for  all  those,  who  represent  them  here.

"  Althougli  the  bill  does  not  commence  by  fixing  the  whole  number  of
the  proposed  house  of  representatives,  yet  the  process  adopted  -by  it
brings  out  the  number  of  two  hundred  and  forty  members.  Of  these
two  hundred  and  forty  members,  forty  are  assigned  to  the  state  of  New-
York,  that  is  to  say,  precisely  one  sixth  part  of  the  whole.  This  assign-
ment would  seem  to  require,  that  New- York  should  contain  one  sixth
part  of  the  whole  population  of  the  United  States ;  and  would  be  bound


Digitized  by


Google


156  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES, [BOOK  III.

veniences  and  collisions,  which  might  arise  from  the
mterposition  of  a  negative  in  times  of  high  party  ex-
citement. It  extinguishes  a  constant  source  of  jealousy

to  pay  one  sixth  part  of  all  her  direct  taxes.  Yet  neither  of  these  is  the
case.  The  whole  representative  population  of  the  United  States  is
11^,005 ;  that  of  New-York  is  1,918,623,  which  is  less  than  one  sixth
of  the  whole,  hy  nearly  70,000.  Of  a  direct  tax  of  two  hundred  and
forty  thousand  dollars.  New- York  would  pay  only  $88.59.  But  if,  in-
stead of  comparing  the  numbers  assigned  to  New- York  with  the  whole
numbers  of  the  house,  we  compare  her  with  other  states,  the  inequality
is  still  more  evident  and  striking.

^  To  the  state  of  Vermont,  the  bill  assigns  five  members.  It  gives,
therefore,  eight  times  as  many  representatives  to  New- York,  as  to  Ver-
mont ;  but  the  population  of  New- York  is  not  equal  to  eight  times  the
population  of  Vermont,  by  more  than  three  hundred  thousand.  *  Vermont
lias  five  members  only  for  280,657  persons.  If  the  same  proportion  were
to  be  applied  to  New- York,  it  would  reduce  the  number  of  her  members
from  forty  to  thirty-four  —  making  a  difference  more  than  equal  to  the
whole  representation  of  Vermont,  and  more  than  sufilcient  to  overcome
her  whole  power  in  the  bouse  of  representatives.

<*  A  disproportion,  almost  equaHy  striking,  is  manifested,  if  we  com-
pare New- York  with  Alabama.  The  population  of  Alabama  is  262,208;
for  this,  she  is  allowed  five  members.  The  rule  of  proportion,  which
gives  to  her  but  five  members  for  her  number,  would  give  to  New- York
but  thirty-six  for  her  number.  Yet  New- York  receives  forty.  As  com-
pared with  Alabama,  then.  New- York  has  an  excess  of  representation
equal  to  four  fifths  of  the  whole  representation  of  Alabama ;  and  this
excess  itself  will  give  her,  of  course,  as  much  weight  in  the  house,  aa
the  whole  delegation  of  Alabama,  within  a  single  vote.  Can  it  be  said,
then,  that  representatives  are  apportioned  to  these  states  according  to
(heir  respective  numhers  f

^The  ratio  assumed  by  the  bill,  it  will  be  perceived,  leaves  large  frac-
tions, so  called,  or  residuary  numbers,  in  several  of  the  small  states,
to  the  manifest  loss  of  a  part  of  their  just  proportion  of  representative
power.  Such  is  the  operation  of  the  ratio,  in  this  respect,  that  New-
York,  with  a  population  less  than  that  of  New-England  by  thirty  or
thirty-five  thousand,  has  yet  two  more  members,  than  all  the  New-Eng-
land states ;  and  there  are  seven  states  in  the  Union,  whose  members
amount  to  the  number  of  123,  being  a  clear  majority  of  the  whole  house,
whose  aggregate  fractions  altogether  amount  only  to  fifly-three  thou-
sand ;  while  Vermont  and  New- Jersey,  having  together  but  eleven  mem-
bers, have  a  joint  fraction  of  seventy-five  thousand.

'<  Pennsylvania  by  the  bill  will  have,  as  it  happens,  just  as  many  mem-
bers as  Vermont,  New-Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  and  New- Jersey;


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUS£  or  REPRXSEHTATiySS.  167

and  heart-burning ;  and  a  disposition  on  one  side  to
exert  an  undue  influence,  and  on  the  other,  to  assume
a  hostile  opposition.  It  relieves  the  executive  depart-
but  her  population  is  not  equal  to  theirs  by  a  hundred  and  thirty  thoo-
sand ;  and  the  reason  of  this  advantage,  derived  to  her  from  the  prorii-
ions  of  the  bill,  is,  that  her  fraction,  or  residuum,  is  twelve  thouMiid
only,  while  theirs  is  a  hundred  and  forty-four.

"  But  the  subject  is  capable  of  being  presented  in  a  more  exact  and
mathematical  form.  The  house  is  to  consist  of  two  hundred  and  for^
members.  Now  the  precise  proportion  of  power,  out  of  the  whole  mass
represented  by  the  numbers  two  hundred  and  forty,  which  New- York
would  be  entitled  to  according  to  her  population,  is  38.59 ;  that  is  to  say,
she  would  be  entitled  to  thirty-eight  members,  and  would  have  a  resi-
duum, or  fraction  ;  and,  even  if  a  member  were  given  her  for  that  frac-
tion, she  would  still  have  but  thirty-nine ;  but  the  bill  gives  her  forty.

"  These  are  a  part,  and  but  a  part,  of  those  results  produced  by  the
bill  in  its  present  form,  which  the  committee  cannot  bring  themselves  to
approve.  While  it  is  not  to  be  denied,  that,  under  any  rule  of  appor-
tionment, some  degree  of  relative  inequality  must  always  exist,  the
committee  cannot  believe,  that  the  senate  will  sanction  inequality  and
injustice  to  the  extent,  in  which  they  exist  in  this  bill,  if  they  can  be
avoided.  But  recollecting  the  opinions,  which  had  been  expressed  in
the  discussions  of  the  senate,  the  conmiittee  have  diligontiy  sought  to
learn,  whether  there  was  not  some  other  number,  which  might  be  taken
for  a  ratio,  the  application  of  which  would  work  out  more  justice  and
equality.  In  this  pursuit  the  committee  have  not  been  successful.
There  are,  it  is  true,  other  numbers,  tho  adoption  of  which  would
relieve  many  of  the  states,  which  suffer  under  the  present;  but  this
relief  would  be  obtained  only  by  shifting  the  pressure  on  to  other
States,  thus  creating  new  grounds  of  complaint  in  other  quarters,
'i  e  number  f  rty-four  thousand  has  been  generally  spoken  of,  as  the
most  acceptable  substitute  for  forty-seven  thousand  seven  hundred^  but
should  this  be  adopted,  great  relative  inequality  would  fall  on  several
states,  and,  among  them,  on  some  of  the  new  and  growing  states,  whose
relative  disproportion,  thus  already  great,  would  be  constantiy  increas-
ing. The  committee,  therefore,  are  of  opinion,  that  the  bill  should  be
altered  in  the  mode  of  apportionment  They  think,  that  the  process,
which  begins  by  assuming  a  ratio,  should  be  abandoned,  and  that  the
bill  ought  to  be  framed  on  the  principle  of  the  amendment,  which  has
been  the  main  subject  of  discussion  before  the  senate.  The  fairness  of
the  principle  of  this  amendment,  and  the  general  equity  of  its  results,
compared  with  those,  which  flow  from  the  other  process,  seem  plain  and
undeniable.  The  main  question  has  been,  whether  the  principle  itself
be  constitutional ;  and  this  question  the  committee  proceeded  to  exam-


Digitized  by


Google


158 CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  V.  STATES, [sdOK  III.

ment  from  all  the  embarrassments  of  opposing  tbe  pop-
ular will ;  and  the  house  from  all  the  irritation  of  not
consulting  the  cabinet  wishes.

ine,  respectfolly  asking  of  those,  who  have  doubted  its  constitutional
propriety,  to  deem  the  question  of  so  much  importance,  as  to  justify  a
second  reflection.

^  The  words  of  the  constitution  are, '  representatives  and  direct  taxes
shall  be  apportioned  among  the  several  states,  which  may  be  included
within  this  Union,  according  to  their  respective  numbers,  which  shall  be
determined  by  adding  to  the  whole  number  of  free  persons,  including
those  bound  to  service  for  a  term  of  years,  and  excluding  Indians,  fliree
fifths  of  all  other  persons.  The  actual  enumeration  shall  be  made  with-
in three  years  after  the  first  meeting  of  the  congress  of  the  United  States,
and  within  every  subsequent  term  often  years,  in  such  manner,  as  they
shall  by  law  direct  The  number  of  representatives  shall  not  exceed
one  for  every  thirty  thousand,  but  each  state  shall  have  at  least  one
representative.'

**  There  would  seem  to  be  little  difficulty  in  understanding  these  pro-
visions. The  terms  used  are  designed,  doubtless,  to  be  received  in  no
peculiar  or  technical  sense,  but  according  to  their  common  and  popular
acceptation.  To  apportion,  is  to  distribute  by  right  measure  ;  to  set  off^
in  just  parts ;  to  assign  in  due  and  proper  proportion.  These  clauses  of
the  constitution  respect,  not  only  the  portions  of  power,  but  the  portions
of  the  public  burden,  also,  which  should  fall  to  the  several  states ;  and
the  same  language  is  applied  to  both.  Representatives  are  to  be  appor-
tioned among  the  states  according  to  their  respective  numbers,  and  di-
rect tuxes  are  to  be  apportioned  by  the  same  rule.  The  end  aimed  at
is,  that  representation  and  taxation  should  go  hand  in  hand  ;  that  each
state  should  be  represented  in  the  same  extent,  to  which  it  is  made  sub-
ject to  the  public  charges  by  direct  taxation.  But,  between  the  appor-
tionment of  representatives  and  the  apportionment  of  taxes  there  neces-
sarily exists  one  essential  difierence.  Representation,  founded  on
numbers,  must  have  some  limit;  and  being,  from  its  nature,  a  thing  not
capable  of  indefinite  subdivision,  it  cannot  be  made  precisely  equal.  A
tax,  indeed,  cannot  always,  or  often  be  apportioned  with  perfect  exact-
ness ;  as,  in  other  matters  of  account,  there  will  be  fractional  parts  of
the  smallest  coins,  and  the  smallest  denomination  of  money  of  account,
yet,  by  the  usual  subdivisions  of  the  coin,  and  of  the  denomination  of
money,  the  apportionment  of  taxes  is  capable  of  being  made  so  exact,
that  the  inequality  becomes  minute  and  invisible.  But  representation
cannot  be  thus  divided.  Of  representation,  there  can  be  nothing  leas
than  one  representative ;  nor  by  our  constitution,  more  representatives
than  one  for  every  thirty  thousand.  It  is  quite  obvious,  therefore,  that
the  apportionment  of  representative  power  can  never  be  precise  and


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  IX.]. HOUSE  or  BEPRSSEKTATIYES.  169

^  686.  The  other  power,  the  sole  power  of  impeach-
ment, has  a  far  wider  scope  and  operation.  An  im-
peachment, as  described  in  the  common  law  of  England*

perfecL  There  must  always  exiat  aome  degree  of  inequality.  Tboae^
who  framed,  and  thoae,  who  adopted  the  constitution,  were,  of  course,
fully  acquainted  with  this  necessary  operation  of  the  profision.  In  the
senate,  the  states  are  entitled  to  a  fixed  nnmher  of  senators ;  and,  there-
fore, in  regard  to  their  representation,  in  that  body,  there  is  no  conse-
quential or  incidental  inequality  arising.  But,  being  represented  in  the
house  of  representatives  according  to  their  respective  numbers  of  people,
it  is  unavoidable,  that,  in  assigning  to  each  state  its  number  of  members,
the  exact  proportion  of  each,  out  of  a  given  number,  cannot  always  or
often  be  expressed  in  whde  numbers ;  that  is  to  say,  it  will  not  often  be
(bund,  that  there  belongs  to  a  state  exactly  one  tenth,  or  one  twentieth,
or  one  thirtieth  of  the  whole  house ;  and,  therefore,  no  number  of  rep-
resentatives will  exactly  correspond  with  the  right  of  such  state,  or  the
precise  share  of  representation,  which  belongs  to  it,  according  to  its
population.

"  The  constitution,  therefore,  must  be  understood,  not  as  enjoining  an
absolute  relative  equality  —  be'^ause  that  would  be  deoMnding  an  im-
possibility —  but  as  requiring  of  congress  to  itiake  the  apportionment  of
representatives  among  the  several  states,  according  to  their  respectiva
number8,^a#  near  a$  may  he.  That,  which  cannot  be  done  perfectly,  must
be  done  in  a  manner  as  near  perfection,  as  can  be.  If  exactness  cannot,
from  the  nature  of  things,  be  attained,  then  the  greatest  practicable  i^
pioach  to  exactness  ought  to  be  made.

^  Congress  is  not  absolved  from  all  rule,  merely  because  the  rule  of
perfect  justice  cannot  be  applied.  In  such  a  case,  approximation  be*
comes  a  rule ;  it  takes  the  place  of  that  other  rule,  which  would  be
preferable,  but  which  is  found  inapplicable,  ajid  becomes,  itself,  an  obli-
gation of  binding  force.  The  nearest  approximation  to  exact  truth,  or
exact  right,  when  that  exact  truth,  or  that  exact  right  cannot  itself  be
reached,  prevails  in  other  cases,  not  as  matter  of  discretion,  but  as  an
intelligible  and  definite  rule,  dictated  by  justice,  and  conformiug  to  the
common  sense  of  mankind ;  a  rule  of  no  less  binding  force  in  cases,  to
which  it  is  applicable,  and  no  more  to  be  departed  from,  than  any  other
Tul^  or  obligation.

^The  committee  understand  the  constitution,  as  they  would  have
understood  it,  if  it  had  said,  in  so  many  words,  that  representatives
should  be  apportioned  among  the  states,  according  to  their  respective
numbers,  as  ntar  as  may  ht.  If  this  be  not  its  true  mean'mg,  then  it  has
either  given»  on  this  most  delicate  and  important  subject,  a  rule,  which
is  always  impracticable,  or  else  it  has  given  no  rule  at  all ;  because,  if
the  role  be,  that  representatives  shall  be  apportioned  txacUy  according


Digitized  by


Google


160  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES, [BOOK  III.

is  a  presentment  by  the  house  of  commons,  the  most
solemn  grand  inquest  of  the  whole  kingdom,  to  the
house  of  lords,  the  most  high  and  supreme  court  of

to  numbers,  it  is  impracticable  in  every  case  ;  and  if,  for  this  reason,  that
cannot  be  the  rule,  then  there  is  no  rule  whatever,  unless  the  rule  be,
that  they  shall  be  apportioned,  a$  ntar  as  may  he.

^  This  construction,  indeed,  which  the  committee  adopt,  has  not,  to
their  knowledge,  been  denied ;  and  they  proceed  in  the  discussion  of
the  question  before  the  senate,  taking  for  granted,  that  such  is  the  true
and  undeniable  meaning  of  the  constitution.

^The  next  thing  to  be  observed  is,  that  the  constitution  prescribes
no  particular  process,  by  which  this  apportionment  is  to  be  wrought  out.
It  has  plainly  described  the  end  to  be  accomplished,  viz.  the  nearest
approach  to  relative  equality  of  representation  among  the  states  ;  and
whatever  accomplishes  this  end,  and  nothing  else,  is  the  true  process.
In  truth,  if,  without  any  process  whatever,  whether  elaborate  or  easy,
congress  could  perceive  the  exact  proportion  of  representative  power
rightfully  belonging  to  each  state,  it  would  perfectly  fulfil  its  duty  by
conferring  that  portion  on  each,  without  reference  to  any  process  what-
ever. It  would  be  enough,  that  the  proper  end  had  been  attained.  And
it  is  to  be  remarked  further,  that,  whether  this  end  be  attained  best  by
one  process  or  by  another,  it  becomes,  when  each  process  has  been
carried  through,  not  matter  of  opinion,  but  matter  of  mathematical  cer-
tainty. If  the  whole  population  of  the  United  States,  the  population  of
each  state,  and  the  proposed  number  of  the  house  of  representatives,  be
all  given,  then,  between  two  bills  apportioning  the  members  among  the
several  states,  it  can  be  told,  with  absolute  certainty,  which  bill  assigns
to  any  and  every  state  the  number  nearest  to  the  exar.t  proportion  of
that  state  ;  in  other  words,  which  of  the  two  bills,  if  either,  apportions
the  representatives  according  to  the  number  of  the  states,  respectively,
as  near  as  may  be.  If,  therefore,  a  particular  process  of  apportionment
be  adopted,  and  objection  be  made  to  the  injustice  or  inequality  of  its
result,  it  is,  surely,  no  answer  to  such  objection  to  say,  that  the  inequal-
ity necessarily  results  from  the  nature  of  the  process.  Before  such
answer  could  avail,  it  would  be  necessary  to  show,  either  that  the  con-
stitution prescribes  such  process,  and  makes  it  necessary,  or  that  there
is  no  other  mode  of  proceeding,  which  would  produce  less  inequality
and  less  injustice.  If  inequality,  which  might  have  otherwise  been
avoided,  be  produced  by  a  given  process,  then  that  process  is  a  wrong
one. It  is  not  suited  to  the  case,  and  should  be  rejected.

"  Nor  do  the  committee  perceive  how  it  can  be  matter  of  constitu-
tional propriety  or  validity,  or  in  any  way  a  constitutional  question,
whether  the  process,  which  may  be  applied  to  the  case,  be  simple  or
compound,  one  process  or  many  processes ;  since,  in  the  end,  it  may


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  OF  REPRESXlTTATiyES.  161

criminal  jurisdiction  of  the  kingdom.^  The  articles  of
impeachment  are  a  kind  of  bill  of  indictment  found  by
the  commons,  and  tried  by  the  lords,  who  are,  in  cases

always  be  seen,  whether  the  result  be  that,  which  has  been  aimed  at,
namely,  the  nearest  practicable  approach  to  precise  justice  and  relative
inequality.  .The  committee,  indeed,  are  of  opinion,  in  this  case,  that
the  simplest,  and  most  obvious  way  of  proceeding,  is  also  the  true  and
constitutional  way.  To  them  it  appears,  that  in  carrying  into  effect  thit
part  of  the  constitution,  the  first  tiling  naturally  to  be  done  is,  to  decide
on  the  whole  number,  of  which  the  house  is  to  be  composed  ;  as  when,
nnder  the  same  clause  of  the  constitution,  a  tax  is  to  be  apportioned
among  the  states,  the  amount  of  the  whole  tax  is,  in  the  first  place,  to
be  settled.

*'  When  the  whole  number  of  the  proposed  house  is  thus  ascertained,
and  fixed,  it  becomes  the  entire  representative  power  of  all  the  people
in  the  Union.  It  is  then  a  very  simple  matter  to  ascertain  how  much  of
this  representative  power  each,  state  is  entitled  to  by  its  numbers.  If,
for  example,  the  house  is  to  contain  240  members,  then  the  number  340
expresses  the  representative  power  of  all  the  states  ;  and  a  plain  cal-
culation readily  shows  how  much  of  this  power  belongs  to  each  state.
This  portion,  it  is  true,  will  not  always,  nor  oflen,  be  expressed  in  whole
numbers,  but  it  may  always  be  precisely  exhibitod  by  a  decimsl  form
of  expression.  If  the  portion  of  any  state  be  seldom,  or  never,  one  ex-
act tenth,  one  exact  fifteenth,  or  one  exact  twentieth,  it  will  still  alwaye
be  capable  of  precise  decimal  expression,  as  one  tenth  and  two  hund-
redths, one  twelflh  and  four  hundredths,  one  fifteenth  and  six  hund-
redths, and  so  on  ;  and  the  exact  portion  of  the  state,  being  thns  deci-
mally expressed,  will  always  show,  to  mathematical  certainty,  what
integral  number  comes  nearest  to  such  exact  portion.  For  example,
in  a  house  consisting  of  two  hundred  and  forty  members,  the  exact
mathematical  proportion,  to  which  her  numbers  entitle  the  state  of  New-
York,  is  38.59  ;  it  is  certain,  therefore,  that  thirty^nine  is  the  integral
or  whole  number,  nearest  to  her  exact  proportion  of  the  representative
power  of  the  Union.  Why,  then,  should  she  not  have  thirty-nine  ?  and
why  should  she  have  forty  ?  She  is  not  quite  entitled  to  thirty-nine  ;
that  number  is  something  more  than  her  right  But,  allowing  her  thirty-
nine,  from  the  necessity  of  giving  her  whole  numbers,  and  becaose  that
is  the  nearest  whole  number,  is  not  the  constitution  fuUy  obeyed,  when
she  has  received  the  thirty-ninth  number?  Is  not  her  proper  number  of
representatives  then  apportioned  to  her,  as  near  as  may  be  ?  And  ie
not  the  constitution  disregarded,  when  the  bill  goes  further,  and  givee

I  2  Hale's  PI.  Comm.  150;  4  Black.  Comm.250;  2  Wilson's  Law
Lect  165, 166.

VOL.  II.  21


Digitized  by


Google


Itti  CONSTITUTIOIf OF  THfi  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

of  misdemeanors,  considered^  not  only  as  their  own
p^rs,  but  as  the  peers  of  the  whole  nation.^  The
(Migin  and  history  of  the  jurisdiction  of  parliament,  m

her  a  fortieth  member?  For  what  is  such  a  fortieth  member  given?
Not  for  her  absolute  numbers ;  for  her  absolute  numbers  do  not  entitle
her  to  thirty-nine.  Not  for  the  sake  of  apportioning  her  members  to
Ler  numbers,  as  near  as  may  be,  because  thirty-nine  is  a  nearer  ap-
portionment of  members  to  numbers  than  forty.  But  it  is  given,  say  the
advocates  of  the  bill,  because  the  process,  which  has  been  adopted,  give»
it The  answer  is,  no  such  process  is  enjoined  by  the  constitution.

**  The  case  of  New  York  may  be  compared  or  contrasted  with  that
of  Missouri.  The  exact  proportion  of  Missouri,  in  a  general  representa-
tion of  two  hundred  and  forty,  is  twa  and  six  tenths  ;  that  is  to  say,  it
comes  nearer  to  three  members,  than  to  two,  yet  it  is  confined  to  two.
But  why  is  not  Missouri  entitled  to  that  number  of  representatives,
which  comes  nearest  to  her  exact  proportion  ?  Is  the  constitution  ful-
filled as  to  her,  while  that  number  is  withheld,  and  while,  at  the  same
time,  in  another  state,  not  only  is  that  nearest  number  given,  hot  an
additional  tnember  given  also  ?  Is  it  an  answer,  with  which  the  people
of  Missouri  ought  to  be  satisfied,  when  it  is  said,  that  this  obviou9  in-
justice is  the  necessary  result  of  the  process  adopted  by  the  bill  ?  Msy
they  not  say,  with  propriety,  that  since  three  is  the  nearest  whole  num-
ber to  their  exact  right,  to  that  number  they  are  entitled,  and  the  pro-
cess, which  deprives  them  of  it,  must  be  a  wrong  process  ?  A  similar
comparison  might  be  made  between  New- York  and  Vermont  The
exact  proportion,  to  which  Vermont  is  entitled,  in  a  representation  of
two  hundred  and  forty,  is  5.646.  Her  nearest  whole  number,  there-
fore, would  be  six.  Now,  two  things  are  undeniably  true :  first,  that  %^
take  away  the  fortieth  member  from  New- York  would  bring  her  rep-
resentation nearer  to  her  exact  proportion,  than  it  stands  by  leaving  her
that  fortieth  member.  Secondly,  that  giving  the  member,  thus  takeo
from  New- York,  to  Vermont,  would  bring  her  representation  nearer
to  her  exact  right,  than  it  is  by  the  bill  And  both  these  propositions
are  equally  true  of  a  transfer  of  the  twenty-eighth  member  assigned
by  the  bill  to  Pennsylvania,  to  Delaware,  and  of  the  thirtoenth  member
assigned  to  Kentucky,  to  Missouri  ;  in  other  words,  Vermont  has,  by
her  numbers,  more  right  to  six  members,  than  New- York  has  to  forty.
Delaware,  by  her  numbers,  has  more  aright  to  two  members,  than
Pennsylvania  has  to  twenty-eight ;  and,  Missouri,  by  her  numbers,  has
more  right  to  three  members,  than  Kentucky  has  to  thirteen.  Without
disturbing  the  proposed  number  of  the  house,  the  mere  changing  of
these  three  members,  from  and  to  the  six  statos  respectively,  would

1  4  Black.  Comm.  260.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.]  HOUSE  or  RXPRESEirrATirKS.  103

cases  of  impeachment,  are  summarily  given  by  Mr.
Woodeson ;  but  litde  can  be  gathered  from  it,  which  is
now  of  much  interest,  and,  like  most  other  legal  anti-

bring  the  representation  of  each  of  the  whole  six  nearer  to  their  dde
proportion,  according  to  their  respective  numbers,  than  the  bill,  in  fti
present  form  makes  it.  In  the  face  of  this  indisputable  truth,  how  can
it  be  said,  that  the  bill  apportions  these  members  among  those  states,
according  to  their  respective  number,  (u  near  aa  may  ht  1

^  The  principle,  on  which  the  proposed  amendment  is  founded,  is  an
effectual  corrective  fo|r  these,  and  all  other  equally  great  inequalitiess.
It  may  be  applied,  at  all  times,  and  in  all  cases,  and  its  result  will
always  be  the  nearest  approach  to  perfect  justice.  It  is  equally  simple
and  impartial.  As  a  rule  of  apportionment,  it  is  little  other  than  a  trans-
cript of  the  words  of  the  constitution,  and  its  results  are  mathematically
certain.  The  constitution,  as  the  committee  understand  it,  says,  repre-
sentatives shall  be  apportioned  amoug  the  states,  according  to  their
respective  numbers  of  people,  as  near  as  may  be.  The  rule  adopted  by
the  committee  says,  out  of  the  whole  number  of  the  house,  that  number
shall  be  apportioned  to  each  state,  which  comes  nearest  to  its  exact
right,  according  to  its  number  of  people.

**  Where  is  the  repugnancy  between  the  constitution  and  the  rule  ?
The  arguments  against  the  rule  seem  to  assume,  that  there  is  a  necessi-
ty of  instituting  some  process  adopting  some  number  as  the  ratio,  or  as
that  number  of  people,  which  each  member  shall  be  understood  to  rep-
resent ;  but  the  committee  see  no  occasion  for  any  other  process  what-
ever, than  simply  the  ascertainment  of  that  qwtnium^  out  of  the  whole
mass  of  the  representative  power,  which  each  state  may  claim.

*  But  it  is  said,  that,  although  a  state  may  receive  a  number  of  re|>-
resentatives,  which  is  something  less  than  its  exact  proportion  of  repre-
sentation, yet,  that  it  can,  in  no  case,  constitutionally  receive  more.
How  is  this  proposition  proved  ?  How  is  it  shown,  that  the  constitntidn
is  less  perfectly  fulfilled  by  allowing  a  state  a  small  excess,  than  by
subjecting  her  to  a  large  deficiency  ?  What  the  constitution  requires,
is  the  nearest  practicable  approach  to  precise  justice.  The  rule  is
approximation  ;  and  we  ought  to  approach,  therefore,  on  whichever
side  we  can  approach  nearest

"But  there  is  stUl  a  more  conclusive  answer  to  be  given  to  this
suggestion.  The  whole  number  of  representatives,  of  which  the  house
is  to  be  composed,  is,  of  necessity,  limited.  This  number,  whatever  it
is,  is  that  which  is  to  be  apportioned,  and  nothing  else  can  be  apportion-
ed. This  is  the  whole  sum  to  be  distributed.  If,  therefore,  in  making
the  apportionment,  some  state  receive  less  than  their  just  share,  it  must
necessitrily  follow,  that  some  other  states  have  received  more  than  their


Digitized  by


Google


164 COKSTUTITION  OF  THEU.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

quides,  it  is  involved  in  great  obscurity.*  To  what
classes  of  offenders  it  applies,  will  be  more  properly
an  inquiry  hereafter. In  the  constitution  of  the  United

just  share.  If  there  be  one  state  in  the  Union  with  less  than  its  rights
some  other  state  has  more  than  its  right,  so  that  the  argument,  whatever
be  its  force,  applies  to  the  bill  in  its  present  form,  as  strongly  as  it  can
ever  apply  to  any  bill.

'^  Bat  the  objection  most  usually  urged  against  the  principle  of  the
proposed  amendment  ii,  that  it  provides  for  the  representation  of  frac-
tions. Let  this  objection  be  examined  and  considered.  Let  it  be  ascer-
tained, in  the  first  place,  what  these  fractions,  or  fractional  numbers,  or
residuary  numbers,  really  are,  which,  it  is  said,  will  be  represented,
should  the  amendment  prevail.

^  A  fraction  b  the  broken  part  of  some  integral  number.  It  is,  there-
fore, a  relative  or  derivative  idea.  It  implies  the  previous  existence  of
eome  fixed  number,  of  which  it  is  but  a  part,  or  remainder.  If  there  be
no  necessity  for  fixing  or  establishing  such  previous  number,  then  the
fraction,  resulting  from  it,  is  itself  no  matter  of  necessity,  but  matter  of
choice  or  of  accident  Now  the  argument,  which  considers  the  plan
proposed  in  the  amendment,  as  a  representation  of  fractions,  and  there-
fi^re  unconstitutional,  assumes,  as  Its  basis,  that,  according  to  the  con-
etitution,  every  member  of  the  house  of  representatives  represents,  or
ought  to  represent,  the  same,  or  nearly  the  same,  number  of  constituents;
that  this  number  is  to  be  regarded,  as  an  integer ;  and  any  thing  less
than  this  is,  therefore,  called  a  fraction,  or  a  residuum,  and  cannot  be
entitled  to  a  representative.  But  all  this  is  not  the  provision  of  the
constitution  of  the  United  States.  That  constitution  contemplates  no
integer,  or  any  common  number  for  the  constituents  of  a  member  of
the  house  of  representatives.  It  goes  not  at  all  into  these  subdivisons
of  the  population  of  a  state.  It  provides  for  the  apportionment  of  rep-
resentatives among  the  several  states,  according  to  their  respective
numbers,  and  stops  there.  It  makes  no  provision  for  the  representation
of  districts,  of  states,  or  for  the  representation  of  any  portion  of  the
people  of  a  state,  less  than  the  whole.  It  says  nothing  of  ratios  or  of
constituent  numbers.  All  these  things  it  leaves  to  state  legislation.
The  right,  which  each  state  possesses  to  its  own  due  portion  of  the
representative  power,  is  a  state  right,  strictly  ;  it  belongs  to  the  state,
as  a  state ;  and  it  is  to  be  used  and  eipercised,  as  the  state  may  see  fit,
eobject  only  to  the  constitutional  qualifications  of  electors.  In  fact,
the  states  do  make,  and  always  have  made,  different  provisions  for  the
exercise  of  this  power.  In  some,  a  single  member  is  chosen  for  a
certain  defined  district ;  in  others,  two  or  three  members  are  chosen

1  2  Woodeson's  Lect  40,  p.  59G,  &c.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  IX.]  HOUSE  or  R£PR£S£irTATiy£S.  1 66

States,  the  house  of  representatives  exercises  the  fiinc-
tions  of  the  house  of  commons  in  regard  to  impeach-
ments ;  and  the  senate  (as  we  shall  hereafter  see)  the


for  the  same  district;  and,  in  some  again,  as  New-Uampsbire,  Rhode-
Island,  Connecticut,  New-Jersey,  and  Georgfia,  the  whole  representa-
tion of  the  state  is  exerted,  as  a  joint,  undivided  representation.  In
these  last-mentioned  states,  every  member  of  the  house  of  representa-
tives has  for  his  constituents  all  the  people  of  the  state  ;  and  all  the
people  of  those  states  are  consequently  represented  in  that  branch  of
congress.  If  the  bill  before  the  senate  should  paw  into  a  law,  in  its
present  form,  whatever  injustice  it  might  do  to  any  of  those  states,  it
would  not  be  correct  to  say  of  them,  nevertheless,  that  any  portion  of
their  people  was  unrepresented.  The  well-founded  objection  would
be,  as  to  some  of  them  at  least,  that  they  were  not  adequately,  com-
petently, fairly  represented ;  that  they  had  not  as  many  voices  and  as
many  votes  in  the  house  of  representatives,  as  they  were  entitled  to.
This  would  be  the  objection.  There  would  be  no  unrepresented  frac-
tions ;  but  the  state,  as  a  state,  as  a  whole,  would  be  deprived  of  some
part  of  its  just  rights.

"  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  bill  should  pass,  as  it  is  now  proposed  to
be  amended,  there  would  be  no  representation  of  fractions  in  any  state  ;
for  a  fraction  suppo:jes  a  division  and  a  remainder.  All,  that  could
justly  be  said,  would  be,  that  some  of  these  states,  as  states,  possessed
a  portion  of  legislative  power,  a  little  larger  than  their  exact  right ;  as
it  must  be  admitted,  that,  should  the  bill  pass  unamended,  they  would
possess,  of  that  power,  much  less  than  that  exact  right.  The  samo
remarks  are  substantially  true,  if  applied  to  those  states,  which  adopt
the  district  system,  as  most  of  them  do.  In  Missouri^  for  example,  there
will  be  no  fraction  unrepresented,  should  the  bill  become  a  law  in  its
present  form  ;  nor  any  member  for  a  fraction,  should  the  amendment
prevail  ;  because  the  mode  of  apportionment,  which  assigns  to  each
state  that  number,  which  is  nearst  to  its  exact  right,  applies  no  assum-
ed ratios,  makes.no  subdivisions,  and,  of  course,  produces  no  frnctions.
In  the  one  case,  or  in  the  other,  the  state,  as  a  state,  will  have  some-
thing more,  or  something  less,  than  its  exact  proportion  of  representa-
tive power ;  but  she  will  part  out  this  power  among  her  own  people,  in
either  case,  in  such  mode,  as  hhe  may  choose,  or  exercise  it  altogether,
as  an  entire  representation  of  the  people  of  the  state.

"Whether  the  subdivision  of  the  representative  power  within  any
state,  if  there  be  a  subdivision,  be  equal  or  unequal,  or  fairly  or  unfairly
made,  congress  cannot  know,  and  has  no  authority  to  inquire.  It  is
enough,  that  the  state  presents  her  own  representation  on  the  j9oor  of
congress  in  the  mode  she  chooses  to  present  it If  a  state  were  to  give


Digitized  by


Google


166  CO^rSTITUTION  of  the  v.  states, [book  III.

functions  of  the  house  of  lords  in  relation  to  the  trial  of
the  party  accused.  The  principles  of  the  common
law,  so  far  as  the  jurisdiction  is  to  be  exercised,  are


to  one  portion  of  her  territory  a  representative  for  every  twenty-five
tiMQsand  persons,  and  to  the  rest  a  representative  only  for  every  fifty
thouaand,  it  would  be  an  art  of  unjust  legislation,  doubtless,  but  it  would
be  wholly  beyond  redress  by  any  power  in  congress ;  because  the  con-
stitution has  left  all  this  to  the  state  itself.

**  These  considerations,  it  is  thought,  may  show,  that  the  constitution
has  not,  by  any  implication,  or  necessary  construction,  enjoined  that,
which  it  certainly  has  not  ordained  in  terms,  viz.  that  every  member  of
the  house  shall  be  supposed  to  represent  the  same  number  of  constitu-
ents ;  and  therefore,  that  the  assumption  of  a  ratio,  as  representing  the
common  number  of  constituents,  is  not  called  for  by  the  constitution.
All  that  congress  is  at  liberty  to  do,  as  it  would  seem,  is  to  divide  the
whole  representative  power  of  the  Union  into  twenty-four  parts,  assigning  .
one  part  to  each  state,  as  near  as  practicable,  according  to  its  right,
and  leaving  all  subsequent  arrangement,  and  all  subdivisions,  to  the
atate  itself.

**  If  the  view  thus  taken  of  the  rights  of  the  states,  and  the  duties  of
coogress,  be  the  correct  view,  then  the  plan  proposed  in  the  amend-
mem  is,  in  no  just  sense,  a  representation  of  fractions.  But  suppose  it
was  otherwise  ;  suppose  a  direct  division  were  made  for  allowing  a  rep-
resentative to  every  state,  in  whose  population,  fit  being  first  divided  by
a  common  ratio,  there  should  be  found  a  fraction  exceeding  half  the
amount  of  that  ratio,  what  constitutional  objection  could  be  fairly  urged
against  such  a  provision  ?  Let  it  be  always  remembered,  that  the  case
here  supposed  provides  only  for  a  ft'acdon  exceeding  the  moiety  of  the
ratio ;  for  the  committee  admit,  at  once,  that  the  representation  of  frac-
tions, less  than  a  moiety,  is  unconstitutional ;  because,  should  a  mem-
ber be  allowed  to  a  state  for  such  a  fraction,  it  would  be  certain,  that
her  representation  would  not  be  so  near  her  exact  right,  as  it  was  be-
fore. But  the  allowance  of  a  member  for  a  major  fraction  is  a  direct
approximation  towards  justice  and  equality.  There  appears  to  the  com-
mittee to  be  nothing,  either  in  the  letter  or  the  spirit  of  the  constitu-
tion, opposed  to  such  a  mode  of  apportionment  On  the  contrary,  it
seems  entirely  consistent  with  the  very  object,  which  the  constitution
contemplated,  and  well  calculated  to  accomplish  it  The  argument  com-
monly urged  against  it  is,  that  it  is  necessary  to  apply  some  one  com-
mon divisor,  and  to  abide  by  its  results.

**  If,  by  this,  it  be  meant,  that  there  must  be  some  common  rule,  or
common  measure,  applicable,  and  applied  impartially  to  all  the  states,  it  is
quite  true.  But,  if  that  which  is  intended,  be,  that  the  population  of  each


Digitized  by


Google


C&  IX.] HOUSJB  OF  REPRESEXTATIVES.  167

deemed  of  primary  obligation  and  govemmcBt  The
object  of  prosecutions  of  this  sort  m  both  coontries  is
to  reach  high  and  potent  offenders,  such  as  might  be

state  must  be  divided  by  a  fixed  ratio,  and  all  resulting  fractions,  great
or  small,  disregarded,  this  is  but  to  take  for  granted  the  very  thing  ia
controversy.  The  question  is,  whether  it  be  unconstitutioDal  to  make
approximation  to  equality,  by  allowing  representatives  for  major  frac-
tions. The  affirmative  of  this  question  is,  indeed,  denied  ;  but  it  is  not
disproved,  by  saying,  that  we  must  abide  by  the  operation  of  division^
by  an  assumed  ratio,  and  disregard  fractions.  The  question  still  re-
mains, as  it  was  before  ;  and  it  is  still  to  be  shown,  what  there  is  in  the
constitution,  which  rejects  approximation,  as  the  rule  of  apportionment.
But  suppose  it  to  be  necessary  to  find  a  divisor,  and  to  abide  its  results^
What  is  a  divisor  ?  Not  necessarily  a  simple  number.  It  may  be  com*
posed  of  a  whole  number  and  a  fraction  ;  it  may  itself  be  the  result  ofe
previous  process ;  it  majr  be  any  thing,  in  short,  which  produces  ac^*
curate  and  uniform  division :  whatever  does  this,  is  a  common  mle,  e
common  standard,  or,  if  the  word  be  important,  a  common  divisor.  The
committee  refer,  on  this  part  of  the  case,  to  some  observations  by  Pro*
feasor  Dean,  with  a  table,  both  of  which  accompany  this  report

**  As  it  is  not  improbable,  that  opinion  has  been  a  good  deal  infla>-
enced  on  this  subject  by  what  took  place  on  the  passing  of  the  first  act^
making  an  apportionment  of  representatives  among  the  states,  the  com-
mittee have  examined  and  considered  that  precedent  If  it  be  in  point
to  the  present  case,  it  is  certainly  entitled  to  very  great  weight ;  bat  if  it
be  of  questionable  application,  the  text  of  the  constitution,  even  if  it
were  doubtful,  could  not  be  explained  by  a  doubtful  commentary.  In
the  opinion  of  the  committee,  it  is  only  necessary,  that  what  was  said  oa
that  occasion  should  be  understood  in  connexion  with  tlie  subject-mat'
ter  then  under  consideration  ;  and,  in  order  to  see  what  that  subject-
matter  really  was,  the  committee  think  it  necessary  to  state,  shortly,  the
case.

*^  The  two  houses  of  congress  passed  a  bill,  after  tlie  first  enumera-
tion of  the  people,  providing  for  a  house  of  representatives,  which  should
.  consist  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  members.  The  bill  expressed  no-
rule  or  principle,  by  which  these  members  were  assigned  to  the  several^
states.  It  merely  said,  that  New-Hampshire  should  have  five  members,.
Massachusetts  ten,  and  so  on ;  going  through  all  the  states,  and  as-
signing the  whole  number  of  one  hundred  and  twenty.  Now,  by  the
census,  then  recently  taken,  it  appeared,  that  the  whole  representative
population  of  the  United  States  was  8,6I5,9!20  ;  and  it  was  evidently  the
wish  of  congress  to  make  the  house  as  numerous,  as  the  constitution
would  allow. But  the  constitution  has  said,  that  there  should  not  be


Digitized  by


Google


168  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  111.

presumed  to  escape  punishment  m  the  ordmary  tribu-
nals, either  from  their  own  extraordinary  influence,  or
from  the  imperfect  organization  and  powers  of  those

more  than  one  member  for  every  thirty  thousand  persons.  This  prohi-
bition was,  of  course,  to  be  obeyed  ;  but  did  the  constitution  mean,  that
no  states  should  have  more  than  one  member  for  every  thirty  thousand
persons  ?  or  did  it  only  mean,  that  the  whole  house,  ns  compared  with
the  whole  population  of  the  United  States,  should  not  contain  more  than
one  member  for  every  thirty  thousand  persons  ?  If  this  last  were  the
true  construction,  then  the  bill,  in  that  particular,  was  right ;  if  the  first
were  the  true  construction,  then  it  was  wrong  ;  because  so  many  mem-
bers could  not  be  assigned  to  the  states,  without  giving  to  some  of  them
more  members  than  one  for  every  thirty  thousand.  In  fact,  the  bill  did
propose  to  do  this  in  regard  to  several  stntes.

"  President  Washington  adopted  that  construction  of  the  constitution,
which  applied  its  prohibition  to  each  state  individually.  He  thought,
that  no  state  could,  constitutionally,  receive  more  than  one  member  for
every  thirty  thousand  of  her  own  population.  On  this,  therefore,  his
main  objection  to  the  bill  was  founded.  That  objection  he  states  in
these  words :

**  *  The  constitution  has  also  provided,  that  the  number  of  lepresenta-
tifcs  shall  not  exceed  one  for  every  thirty  thousand  ;  which  restriction
is,  by  the  context,  and  by  fair  and  obvious  construction,  to  be  applied  to
the  separate  and  Respective  numbers  of  the  states ;  and  the  bill  has
allotted  to  eight  of  the  states  more  than  one  for  every  thirty  thou-
sand.'

**  It  is  now  necessary  to  see  what  there  was  further  objectionable  in
this  bill.  The  number  of  one  hundred  and  twelve  members  was  all  that
could  be  divided  among  the  states,  without  giving  to  some  of  them  more
.  than  one  member  for  thirty  thousand  inhabitants.  Therefore,  having
allotted  these  one  hundred  and  twelve,  there  still  remained  eight  of  the
one  hundred  and  twenty  to  be  assigned  ;  and  these  eight  the  bill  as-
signed to  the  states  having  the  largest  fractions.  Some  of  these  frac-
tions were  large,  and  some  were  small.  No  regard  was  paid  to  frac-
tions over  a  moiety  of  the  ratio,  any  more  than  to  fractions  under  it.
There  was  no  rule  laid  down,  stiting  what  fractions  should  entitle  the
states,  to  whom  they  might  happen  to  fall,  or  in  whose  population  they
might  happen  to  be  found,  to  a  representative  therefor.  The  assign-
ment was  not  made  on  the  principle,  that  each  state  should  have  a  mem-
ber for  a  fraction  greater  than  half  the  ratio ;  or  that  all  the  states
should  have  a  member  for  a  fraction,  in  all  cases  where  the  allowance  of
such  member  would  bring  her  representation  nearer  to  its  exact  propor-
tion than  its  disallowance. There  was  no  common  measure,  or  common


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  or  REPRESENTATiyES.  169

tribunals.*  These  prosecudons  are,  therefore,  con-
ducted by  the  representatives  of  the  nation,  in  their
public  capacity,  in  the  face  of  the  nation,  and  upon  a

rule,  adopted,  but  the  assignment  was  matter  of  arbitrary  diaeretion.
A  member  was  allowed  to  New-Hampsbire,  for  example,  for  a  fraction
of  less  than  one  half  the  ratio,  thus  placing  her  representation  fhrther
from  her  exact  proportion,  than  it  was  without  such  additional  member ;
while  a  member  was  refused  to  Georgia,  whose  case  closely  resembled
that  of  New-Hampshire,  both  having  what  were  thought  large  fractions,
but  both  still  under  a  moiety  of  the  ratio,  and  distinguished  from  each
other  only^by  a  very  slight  difference  of  absolute  numbers.  The  com-
mittee have  already  fully  expressed  their  opinion  on  such  a  mode  of
apportionment

**  In  regard  to  this  character  of  the  bill.  President  Washington  said :
*  The  constitution  has  prescribed,  that  representatives  shall  .be  appor-
tioned among  the  several  states  according  to  their  respective  numbers ;
and  there  is  no  one  proportion,  or  divisor,  which,  applied  to  the  respec-
tive numbers  of  the  states,  will  yield  the  number  and  allotment  of  rep-
resentatives proposed  by  the  bill.'

^  This  was  all  undoubtedly  true,  and  was,  in  the  judgment  of  the  com-
mittee, a  decisive  objection  against  the  b'dl.  It  is  nevertheless  to  be  ob-
served, that  the  other  objection  completely  covered  the  whole  ground.
There  could,  in  that  bill,  be  no  allowance  for  a  fraction,  great  or  small ;
because  congress  had  token  for  the  ratio  the  lowest  number  allowed  by
the  constitution,  viz.  thirty  thousand.  Whatever  fVartion  a  state  might
have  less  than  that  ratio,  no  member  could  be  allowed  for  it  It  Is
scarcely  necessary  to  observe,  that  no  such  objection  applies  to  the
.ameudroeut  now  proposed.  No  state,  should  the  amendment  prevail,
will  have  a  greater  number  of  members  than  one  for  every  thirty  thou-
sand ;  nor  is  it  likely,  that  that  objection  will  ever  again  occur.  The
whole  force  of  the  precedent,  whatever  it  be,  in  its  application  to  the
present  case,  is  drawn  fVom  the  other  objection.  And  what  is  the  true
import  of  that  objection  ?  Does  it  mean  any  thing  more  than,  that  the
apportionment  was  not  made  on  a  common  rule  or  principle,  applicable,
and  applied  alike  to  all  the  states  ?

"  President  Washington's  words  are,  « there  is  no  one  proportion  or
divisor,  which,  applied  to  the  respective  numbers  of  the  states,  will  yield
the  number  and  allotment  of  representatives  proposed  by  the  bill.'

"  If,  then,  he  could  have  found  a  common  proportion,  it  would  have
removed  thb  objection. He  required  a  proportion  or  divisor. These

1  4  Black.  Comm.  260 ;  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  S2,  p.  )210,  Oil  •
2  Woodeson's  Lect  40,  p.  596,  &c
VOL.  IL  22


Digitized  by


Google


170 COirSTlTUTION  or  the  v.  states. [book  III.

responsibility,  which  is  at  once  felt,  and  reverenced  by
the  whole  community.^  The  notoriety  of  the  proceed-
ings ;  the  solemn  manner,  in  which  they  are  conducted ;

words  be  evidently  uses,  as  explanatory  of  each  other.  lie  meant  by
iKviMrr,  therefore,  no  more  than  by  ftfrpoiriwn.  What  be  sought
was,  some  common  and  equal  rule,  by  which  the  allotment  had  been
made  among  the  several  states ;  he  did  not  find  such  common  rule ;  and
on  that  ground,  he  thought  the  bill  objectionable.

*'In  the  opinion  of  the  committee,  no  such  objection  applies  to  the
amendment  recommended  by  them.  That  amendment  gives  a  rule,
plain,  simple,  just,  uniform,  and  of  universal  application.  Tiie  rule  has
been  frequently  stated.  It  may  be  clearly  expressed  in  either  of  two
ways.  Let  the  rule  be,  that  the  whole  number  of  the  proposed  house
ghall  be  apportioned  among  the  several  states  according  to  their  respec-
tive numbers,  giving  to  each  state  that  number  of  members,  which  comes
nearest  to  her  exact  mathematical  part  or  proportion  ;  or,  let  the  rule
be,  that  the  population  of  each  state  shall  be  divided  by  a  common
divbor,  and  that,  in  addition  to  the  number  of  members  resulting  from
such  division,  a  member  shall  be  allowed  to  each  state,  whose  fraction
exceeds  a  moiety  of  the  divisor.

^  Either  of  these  is,  it  seems  to  the  committee,  a  fair  and  just  rule,
capable  of  uniform  application,  and  operating  with  entire  impartiality.
There  is  no  want  of  a  common  proportion,  or  a  common  divisor ;  there
is  nothing  lefl  to  arbitrary  discretion.  If  the  rule,  in  either  of  these
forms,  be  adopted,  it  can  never  bo  doubtful  how  every  member  of  any
proposed  number  for  a  house  of  representatives  ought  to  be  assigned.
Nothing  will  be  left  in  the  discretion  of  congress ;  the  right  of  each  state
will  be  a  mathematical  right,  easily  ascertained,  about  which  there
can  be  neither  doubt  nor  difficulty ;  and,  in  the  application  of  the  rule,
there  will  be  no  room  for  preference,  partiality,  or  injustice.  In  any
case,  in  all  time  to  come,  it  will  do  all,  that  human  means  can  do^  to
allot  to  every  state  in  the  Union  its  proper  and  just  proportion  of  repre-
sentativo  power.  And  it  is  because  of  this,  its  capability  of  constant
application,  as  well  as  because  of  its  impartiality  and  justice,  that  the
committee  are  earnest  in  recommending  its  adoption  to  congress.  If  it
shall  be  adopted,  they  believe  it  will  remove  a  cause  of  uneasiness  and
dissatisfaction,  recurring,  or  liable  to  recur,  with  every  new  census,  and
place  the  rights  of  the  states,  in  this  respect,  on  a  fixed  basis,  of  which
none  can  with  reason  complain.  It  is  true,  that  there  may  be  some
numbers  assumed  for  the  composition  of  the  house  of  representatives,  to
which,  if  the  rule  were  applied,  the  result  might  give  a  member  to  the

1  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  )23,  p.  209.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  IX.] HOUSE  or  REPRXSISKTATiyES.  171

th^  d  ^  »n  extent,  to  which  they  aflfect  the  reputations  of
the  accused ;  the  ignominy  of  a  conviction,  which  is  to
be  known  through  all  time ;  and  the  glory  of  an  acquittal,
which  ascertains  and  confirms  innocence ;  —  these  are
all  calculated  to  produce  a  vivid  and  lasting  interest  in
the  public  mind ;  and  to  give  to  such  prosecu  on  ,
when  necessary,  a  vast  importance,  both  as  a  check  to
crime,  and  an  incitement  to  virtue.

§  687.  This  subject  will  be  resumed  hereafter,  when
the  other  provisions  of  the  constitution,  m  regard  to
impeachments,  come  under  review.  It  does  not  ap-
pear, that  the  vesting  of  the  power  of  impeachment  in  the
house  of  representatives  was  deemed  a  matter  of  serious
doubt  or  question,  either  in  the  convention,  or  with  the
people.^  If  the  true  spirit  of  the  constitution  is  consulted,
it  would  seem  difficult  to  arrive  at  any  other  CQnclusion,
than  of  its  fitness.  It  is  designed,  as  a  method  of  na-
tional inquest  into  the  conduct  of  public  men.  If  such
is  the  design,  who  can  so  properly  be  the  inquisitors

bouse  more  than  was  proposed.  But  it  will  be  always  easy  to  correct
tbis,  by  altering  the  proposed  number  by  adding  one  to  it,  or  taking  one
from  it ;  so  that  tbis  can  be  considered  no  objection  to  the  rule.

^  The  committee,  in  conclusion,  cannot  admit,  that  it  is  sufficient  rea-
son for  rejecting  tbis  mode  of  apportionment,  that  a  different  process
has  heretofore  prevailed.  The  truth  is,  the  errors  and  inequalities  of
tliat  process  were  at  first  not  obvious  and  startling.  But  they  have
gone  on  increasing ;  they  are  greatly  augmented  and  accumulated  every
new  census;  and  it  is  of  the  very  nature  of  the  process  itself,  that  its
unjust  results  must  grow  greater  and  greater  in  proportion  as  the  popu-
lation of  the  country  enlarges.  What  was  objectionable,  though  toler-
able yesterday,  becomes  intolerable  to-morrow.  A  change,  the  com-
mittee are  persuaded,  must  come,  or  the  whole  just  balance  and  pro-
portion of  representative  power  among  the  states  will  be  disturbed  and
broken  up."

Mr.  Everett  also  made  a  very  able  speech  on  the  same  subject,  in
whieh  ho  pressed  some  additional  arguments  with  great  force  on  the
same  side. See  his  printed  Speech  of  l7Lh  May,  \83r'l.

*  Journal  of  Convention,  p.  69, 121, 137,  225, 226,  236 ;  3  EUiot's  De-
bates, 43, 44, 45, 46.


Digitized  by


Google


172 coNSTiTunoir  of  ths  v.  states, [book  hi.

for  the  nation,  as  the  representatives  of  the  people
themselves  ?  They  must  be  presumed  to  be  watchful
of  the  interests,  alive  to  the  sympathies,  and  ready  to
redress  the  grievances,  of  the  people.  If  it  is  made
their  duty  to  bring  official  delinquents  to  justice,  they
can  scarcely  fail  of  performing  it  without  public  denun-
ciation, and  political  desertion,  on  the  part  of  their  con-
stituents.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATX.  173

CHAPTER  X.

THE  SENATE.

^  638.  The  third  section  of  the  first  article  relates
to  the  organization  and  powers  of  the  senate.

§  689.  In  considering  the  organization  of  the  senate,
our  inquiries  naturally  lead  us  to  ascertain ;  first,  the
nature  of  the  representation  and  vote  of  the  states  there-
in ;  secondly,  the  mode  of  appomtment ;  thirdly,  the
number  of  the  senators ;  fourthly,  their  term  of  service ;
and  fifthly,  their  qualifications.

§  690.  The  first  clause  of  the  third  section  is  in  the
following  words :  "  The  senate  of  the  United  States
^  shall  be  composed  of  two  senators  from  each  state,
^  chosen  by  the  legislature  thereof  for  six  years ;  and
**  each  senator  shall  have  one  vote,'^

§  691.  In  the  first  place,  the  nature  of  the  represen-
tation and  vote  m  the  senate.  Each  state  is  entitled  to
two  senators ;  and  each  senator  is  entitled  to  one  vote.
This,  of  course,  mvolves  in  the  very  constitution  of  this
branch  of  the  legislature  a  perfect  equality  among  all
the  states,  without  any  reference  to  their  respective
size,  population,  wealth,  or  power.  In  this  respect
there  is  a  marked  contrast  between  the  senate  and  the
house  of  representatives.  In  the  latter,  there  is  a  repre-
senation  of  the  people  according  to  the  relative  popu-
lation of  each  state  upon  a  given  basis ;  in  the  former,
each  state  in  its  political  capacity  is  represented  upon
a  footing  of  perfect  equality,  like  a  congress  of  sove-
reigns, or  ambassadors,  or  like  an  assembly  of  peers.
The  only  difference  between  it  and  the  continental
coi^ess  under  the  old  confederation  is,  that  in  this


Digitized  by


Google


174 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V. STATES.  [bOOK  III.

the  vote  was  by  states ;  in  the  senate,  each  senator
has  a  single  vote.  So  that,  though  they  represent
states,  they  vote  as  individuals.  The  vote  of  the  sen-
ate thus  may,  and  often  does,  become  a  mixed  vote,
embracing  a  part  of  the  senators  from  some  of  the  states
on  one  side,  and  another  part  on  the  other.

^  692.  It  is  obvious,  that  this  arrangement  could  only
aH>e  from  a  compromise  between  independent  states ;
and  it  must  have  been  less  the  result  of  theory,  than  "of
a  spirit  of  amity,  and  of  mutual  deference  and  conces-
sion, which  the  peculiarity  of  the  situation  of  the  United
States  rendered  indispensable."  *  It  constituted  one
of  the  great  struggles  between  the  large  and  the  small
states,  which  was  constantly  renewed  in  the  conven-
tion, and  impeded  it  in  every  step  of  its  progress  in  the
formation  of  the  constitution.*  The  struggle  applied  to
the  organization  of  each  branch  of  the  legislature.  The
small  states  insisted  upon  an  equality  of  vote  and  rep-
resentation m  each  branch ;  and  the  large  states  upon
a  vote  in  proportion  to  their  relative  importance  and
population.  Upon  this  vital  question  there  was  so  near
a  balance  of  the  states,  that  a  union  in  any  form  of  gov-
ernment, which  provided  either  for  a  perfect  equality  or
inequality  of  the  states  in  both  branches  of  the  legisla-
ture, became  utterly  hopeless.'  If  the  basis  of  the
senate  was  an  equality  of  representation,  the  basis  of
the,  house  must  be  in  proportion  to  the  relative  popula-
tion of  the  states.^ A  compromise  was,  therefore,  in-

1  Letter  of  the  Convention,  17th  Sept  1787 ;  1  Kent  Comm.  $  11,  p.
210,211.

3  2  Pitkin*8  Hist  233,  245, 247,  248 ;  Yates's  Minutes,  4  £lliot's  De-
bates,  68, 74,  75,  81,  89,  90, 91, 92 ;  Id.  99,  100,  101 ;  Id.  107, 108, 112
to  1*^4;  Id.  125,  126, 127 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  66.

3  2  Pitkin's  Hist  233,  245;  Journal  of  the  Convention,  112.

4  On  this  subject  see  the  Journal  of  the  Convention,  111,  112, 153  to
158, 162, 178, 180,  235,  236,  237,  238 ;  Yate's  Minutes,  4  Ellioes  De-
bates, from  68  to  127.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  175

dispensable,  or  the  convention  must  be  dissolved.  The
small  states  at  length  yielded  the  point,  as  toanequ.tliiy
of  representation  in  the  house,  and  acceded  to  a  repre-
sentation proportionate  to  the  federal  numbers.  But
they  insisted  upon  an  equality  in  the  senate.  To  this
the  large  states  were  unwilling  to  assent ;  and  for  a
time  the  states  were,  on  this  point,  equally  divided.*
Finally,  the  subject  was  referred  to  a  committee,  who
reported  a  scheme,  which  became,  with  some  amend-
ments, the  basis  of  the  representation,  as  it  now  stands.*
^  693.  The  reasoning,  by  which  each  party  in  the
convention  supported  its  own  project,  naturally  grew
out  of  the  relative  situation  and  interests  of  their  respec-
tive states.  On  the  side  of  the  small  states,  it  was
urged,  that  the  general  government  ought  to  be  partly
federal,  and  partly  national,  in  order  to  secure  a  just
balance  of  power  and  sovereignty,  and  influence  among
the  states.  This  is  the  only  means  to  preservfe  small
communities,  when  associating  with  larger,  from  being
overwhelmed,  and  annihilated.  The  large  states,  under
other  circumstances,  would  naturally  pursue  their  own
interests,  and  by  combinations  usurp  the  prerogatives,
or  disregard  the  rights  of  the  smaller.  Hitherto,  all  the
states  had  held  a  fooung  of  equality ;  and  no  one  would
now  be  willing  to  surrender  it.  The  course  now  pro-
posed would  allay  jealousies,  and  produce  tranquillity.
Any  other  would  only  perpetuate  discontents,  and  lead
to  disunion.  There  never  was  a  confederacy  formed,
where  an  equality  of  voice  was  not  a  fundamental  prin-
ciple. It  would  be  a  novel  thing  in  politics,  in  such

1  2  Pitkin's  Hist.  245;  Journal  of  Convention,  2d  July,  p.  156,  158  ;
Id.  162,  175, 178,  180, 21 1 ;  Yates's  Minutes,  4  £lliot's  Debutes,  124  to
127;  2  Amer.  Museum.  «'^9.

*  1  Ellioc'8  Debates,  67 ;  Journal  of  Conventioo,  157.


Digitized  by


Google


176  CONSTITUTIOK  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

cases,  to  permit  the  few  to  control  the  many.  The
large  states,  upon  the  present  plan,  have  a  full  security.
The  small  states  must  possess  the  power  of  self-defence,
or  they  are  ruined.

^  694.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  urged,  that  to  give
an  equality  of  vote  to  all  the  states,  was  adopting  a
principle  of  gross  injustice  and  inequality.  It  is  not
true,  that  all  confederacies  have  been  founded  upon
the  principle  of  equality.  It  was  not  so  in  the  Lycian
confederacy.  Experience  has  shown,  that  the  old  con-
federation is  radically  defective,  and  a  national  govern-
ment is  indispensable.  The  present  plan  will  defeat
that  object  Suppose  the  first  branch  grants  money ;
the  other  branch  (the  senate)  might,  from  mere  state
views,  counteract  it.  In  congress,  the  single  state  of
Delaware  prevented  an  embargo  at  the  time,  when  all
the  other  states  thought  it  absolutely  necessary  for  the
support  of  the  army.  In  short,  the  senate  will  have
the  power  by  its  negative  of  defeating  all  laws.  If  this
plan  prevails,  seven  states  will  control  the  whole ;  and
yet  these  seven  states  are,  in  point  of  population  and
strength,  less  than  one  third  of  the  Union.  So,  that
two  thirds  are  compellable  to  yield  to  one  third.  There
is  no  danger  to  the  small  states  from  the  combination
of  the  large  ones.  A  rivalry,  rather  than  a  confederacy,
will  exist  among  them.  There  can  be  no  monarchy ;
and  an  aristocracy  is  more  likely  to  arise  from  a  com-
bination of  the  small  states.  There  are  two  kinds  of
bad  governments ;  the  one,  which  does  too  much,  and
is  therefore  oppressive ;  and  the  other,  which  does  too
little,  and  is  therefore  weak.  The  present  plan  will
fasten  the  latter  upon  the  country.  The  only  reasona-
ble principle,  on  which  to  found  a  general  government,
is,  that  the  decision  shall  be  by  a  majority  of  members,


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SEN  ATX.  177

and  not  of  states.  No  advantage  can  possibly  be  pro-
posed by  the  large  states  by  swallowing  up  the  smcdler.
The  like  fear  existed  in  Scotland  at  the  time  of  the
union  with  England ;  but  it  has  turned  out  to  be  wholly
without  foundation.  Upon  the  present  plan,  the  smaller
states  may  swallow  up  the  larger.  It  was  added  by
one  most  distinguished  statesman,^  (what  has  hitherto
proved  prophetically  too  true,)  that  the  danger  was  not
between  the  small  and  the  large  states.  **  The  great
danger  to  our  general  government  is,  the  great  southern
and  northern  interests  of  this  continent  bemg  opposed
to  each  other.  Look  to  the  votes  in  congress,  and
most  of  them  stand  divided  by  the  geography  of  the
country,  not  according  to  the  size  of  the  states.***

§  695.  Whatever  may  now  be  thought  of  the  rea-
soning of  the  contendmg  parties,  no  person,  who  pos-
sesses a  smcere  love  of  country,  and  wishes  for  the  per-
manent union  of  the  states,  can  doubt,  that  the  com-
promise actually  made  was  well  founded  m  policy,  and
may  now  be  fully  vindicated  upon  the  highest  principles
of  political  wisdom,  and  the  true  nature  of  the  gov-
ernment, which  was  intended  to  be  established.

^  696.  It  may  not  be  unprofitable  to  review  a  few
of  the  groimds,  upon  which  this  opmion  is  hazarded.
In  the  first  place,  the  very  structure  of  the  general  gov-
ernment contemplated  one  partly  federal,  and  partly
national.  It  not  only  recognised  the  existence  of  die
state  governments ;  but  perpetuated  them,  leaving  them

1  Mr.  iMadison.

^  This  sumraaiy  is  abstracted  principally  from  Yates's  liinutes  of  the
Debates,  and  Lather  Martin's  Letter  and  Speech,  January  37,  1788.
See  Martin's  Letter  in  4  EUliot's  Debates,  1  to  55.  See  Yates's  Minutes
in  4  Elliot's  Debates,  68 ;  Id.  74,  75,  81,  89  to  93, 99  to  10S2, 107, 108,
113  to  137;  3  Pitkin's  Hist  333  to  348.  See  also  The  Federalist,
No.  33.

VOL.  IL  23


Digitized  by


Google


17d CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  IT.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

m  the  enjoyment  of  a  large  portion  of  the  rights  of
sovereignty,  and  giving  to  the  general  government  a
few  powers,  and  those  only,  which  were  necessary  for
national  purposes.  The  general  government  was,
therefore,  upon  the  acknowledged  basis,  one  of  limited
and  circumscribed  powers ;  the  states  were  to  possess
the  residuary  powers.  Admitting,  then,  that  it  is  right,
among  a  people  thoroughly  incorporated  into  one  na-
tion, that  every  district  of  territory  ought  to  have  a  pro-
portional share  of  the  government ;  and  that  among
mdependent  states,  bound  together  by  a  simple  league,
there  ought,  on  the  other  hand,  to  be  an  equal  share  in
the  common  councils,  whatever  might  be  their  relative
size  or  strength,  (both  of  which  propositions  are  not
easily  controverted ;)  it  would  follow,  that  a  compound
republic,  partaking  of  the  character  of  each,  ought  to
be  founded  on  a  mixture  of  proportional,  and  of  equal
representation.^  The  legislative  power  being  that,
which  is  predominant  in  all  governments,  ought  to  be,
above  all,  of  this  character ;  because  there  can  be  no
security  for  the  general  government,  or  the  state  gov-
ernments, without,  an  adequate  representation,  and  an
adequate  check  of  each  in  the  functions  of  legislation.
Whatever  basis,  therefore,  is  assumed  for  one  branch  of
the  legislature,  the  antagonist  basis  should  be  assumed
for  the  other.  If  the  house  is  to  be  proportional  to  the
relative  size,  and  wealth,  and  population  of  the  states,
the  senate  should  be  fixed  upon  an  absolute  equality,
as  the  representative  of  state  sovereignty.  There  is
so  much  reason,  and  justice,  and  security  in  such  a
course,  that  it  can  with  difficulty  be  overlooked  by
those,  who  sincerely  consult  the  public  good,  without

1  The  Pedefalist,  No.  62 ;  2  Amer.  Museum,  376, 379.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  179

being  biassed  by  the  interests  or  prejudices  of  their
peculiar  local  position.  The  equal  vote  allowed  in  the
senate  b,  in  this  view,  at  once  a  constitutional  recogni-  /
tion  of  the  sovereignty  remaining  in  the  states,  and  any
instrument  for  the  preservation  of  it.  It  guards  them
against  (what  they  meant  to  resist,  as  improper)  a  con-
scdidation  of  the  states  into  one  simple  republic ;  ^  and^
on  the  other  hand,  the  weight  of  the  other  branch
counterbalances  an  undue  preponderance  of  state  in-
terests, tending  to  disunion.

§  697.  Another  and  most  important  advantage  aris-
ing from  this  ingredient  is,  the  great  difference,  which
it  creates  in  the  elements  of  the  two  branches  of  the
legislature ;  which  constitutes  a  great  desideratum  in
every  practical  division  of  the  legislative  power.'  In
fact,  this  division  (as  has  been  already  intimated)  is  of
little  or  no  intrinsic  value,  unless  it  is  so  organised,  that
each  can  operate,  as  a  real  check  upon  undue  and  rash
legislation,/ If  each  branch  is  substantially  framed  upon
the  same  plan,  the  advantages  of  the  division  are  shad-
owy and  imaginative ;  the  visions  and  speculations  of
the  brain,  and  not  the  waking  thoughts  of  statesmen,  or
patriots.  It  may  be  safely  asserted,  that  for  all  the
purposes  of  liberty,  and  security,  of  stable  lAws,  and  of
solid  institutions,  of  personal  rights,  and  of  the  protection
of  property,  a  single  branch  is  quite  as  good,  as  two,  if
their  composition  is  the  same,  and  their  spirits  and  im-
pulses the  same.  Each  wdll  act,  as  the  other  does ;
and  each  will  be  led  by  the  same  common  influence  of
ambition,  or  intrigue,  or  passion,  to  the  same  disregard


1  The  Federalist,  No.  62 ;  Rawle  on  Constit  86,  37;  1  EcdU  Comm.
Lect  11,  p.  210,  211 ;  2  Amer.  Museum,  376,  379 ;  1  Tucker's  Black.
Cknnm.  App.  195.

2  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  146, 147, 148.


Digitized  by


Google


180  CONSTITUTION  OF  TlBE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

of  the  public  interests,  and  the  same  indiflference  to,
and  prostration  of  private  rights.  It  will  only  be  a  du-
plication of  the  evils  of  oppression  and  rashness,  with  a
duplication  of  obstructions  to  effective  redress.  In  this
view,  the  organization  of  the  senate  becomes  of  inesti-
mable value.  It  represents  the  voice,  not  of  a  district,
but  of  a  state ;  not  of  one  state,  but  of  all ;  not  of  the
interest  of  one  state,  but  of  all;  not  of  the  chosen  pur-
suits of  a  predominant  population  in  one  state,  but  of
all  the  pursuits  in  all  the  states.

§  6&8.  It  is  a  misfortune  incident  to  republican  gov-
ernments, though  in  a  less  degree  than  to  other  govern-
ments, that  those,  who  administer  it,  may  forget  their
obligations  to  their  constituents,  and  prove  unfaithful  to
their  trusts.  In  this  point  of  view,  a  senate,  as  a  sec-
ond branch  of  le^slative  power,  distinct  fix)m,  and  di-
viding power  with  the  first,  must  always  operate  as  a
salutary  check.  It  doubles  the  security  to  the  people,
by  requiring  the  concurrence  of  two  distinct  bodies  in
any  scheme  of  usurpation  or  perfidy,  where  otherwise
the  ambition  of  a  single  body  would  be  sufficient  The
improbability  of  sinister  combinations  will  always  be  in
proportion  to  the  dissimilarity  of  the  genius  of  the  two
bodies ;  and  therefore  every  circumstance,  consistent
¥dth  harmony  in  all  proper  measures,  which  points  out
a  distinct  organization  of  the  component  materials  of
each,  is  desirable.^

§  699.  No  system  could,  in  this  respect,  be  more
admirably  contrived  to  ensure  due  deliberation  and
mquiry,  and  just  results  m  all  matters  of  legislation.
No  law  or  resolution  can  be  passed  without  the  con-
currence, first  of  a  majority  of  the  people,  and  then  of

1  The  Federalist,  No.  62.

- Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CH.  X.]  THE  SBITATS.  181

a  majority  of  the  states.  The  mterest,  and  passions,
and  prejudices  of  a  district  are  thus  checked  by  the
influence  of  a  whole  state;  the  like ^ interests,  and
passions,  and  prejudices  of  a  state,  or  of  a  majority  of
the  states,  are  met  and  controlled  by  the  voice  of  the
people  of  the  nation.^  It  may  be  thought,  diat  this
complicated  system  of  checks  may  operate,  in  some
instances,  injuriously,  as  well  as  beneficiaUy.  But  if
it  should  occasionally  work  inequally,  or  injuriously,  its
general  operation  will  be  salutary  and  useful.*  The
disease  most  incident  to  free  governments  is  the  facil-
ity and  excess  of  law-making ;'  and  while  it  never  can
be  the  permanent  mterest  of  either  branch  to  interpose
any  undue  restraint  upon  the  exercise  of  all  fit  legis-
lation, a  good  law  had  better  occasionally  fail,  rather
than  bad  laws  be  multiplied  with  a  heedless  and  mis-
chievous frequency.  Even  reforms,  to  be  safe,  must,
in  general,  be  slow  ;  and  there  can  be  little  danger,
that  public  opinion  will  not  sufficiently  stimulate  all
public  bodies  to  changes,  wliich  are  at  once  desirable,
and  politic.  All  experience  proves,  that  the  human
mmd  is  more  eager  and  restless  for  changes,  than
tranquil  and  satisfied  with  existing  institutions.  Besides ;
the  large  states  will  always  be  able,  by  their  power
over  the  supplies,  to  defeat  any  unreasonable  exer-
tions of  this  prerogative  by  the  smaller  states.

§  700.  This  reasoning,  which  theoretically  seems
entitled  to  great  weight,  has,  in  the  progress  of  the
government,  been  fully  realized.  It  has  not  only
been  demonstrated,  that  the  senate,  in  its  actual  or-

1  The  Federalist,  No.  27.

s  The  Federalist,  No.  62 ;  Yates's  Minutes,  4  Elliot's  Debates,  63, 64 ;
3  Wilson's  Law  Lect  146, 147, 148.
3  The  Federalist,  No.  62;  1  Kent's  Comm,  Lect  11,  p.  212,  2ia


Digitized  by


Google


1^  CONSTITUTIOir  OF  THS  U.  STATES. [bOOK  Ul.

ganizatioD,  is  well  adopted  to  the  exigencies  of  the
nation ;  but  that  it  is  a  most  important  and  valuable
part  of  the  system,  and  the  real  balance-wheel,  which
adjusts,  and  regulates  its  movements.*  The  other
auxiliary  provisions  in  the  same  clause,  as  to  the  mode
of  appointment  and  duration  of  oflSce,  will  be  found
to  conduce  very  largely  to  the  same  beneficial  end.^

^701.  Secondly  ;  the  mode  of  appointment  of
the  senators.  They  are  to  be  chosen  by  the  legislature
of  each  state.  Three  schemes  presented  themselves,
as  to  the  mode  of  appointment ;  one  was  by  the  legis-
lature of  each  state ;  another  was  by  the  people  there-
of; and  a  third  was  by  the  other  branch  of  the  nationd
legislature,  either  directly,  or  out  of  a  select  nomination.
The  last  scheme  was  proposed  in  the  convention,  in
what  was  called  the  Virginia  scheme,  one  of  the  res-
olutions, declaring,  ^^  that  the  members  of  the  second
branch  (the  senate)  ought  to  be  elected  by  those  of
the  first  (the  house  of  representatives)  out  of  a  prefer
number  nominated  by  the  individual  legislatures  '^  (of
the  states.)  It  met,  however,  with  no  decided  support,
and  was  negatived,  no  state  voting  in  its  favour,  nine
states  voting  against  it,  and  one  being  divided.*  The
second  scheme,  of  an  election  by  the  people  in  districts,
or  otherwise,  seems  to  have  met  with  as  little  favour.^
The  first  scheme,  that  of  an  election  by  the  legislature,
finally  prevailed  by  an  mianimous  vote.^

1  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  148.

«  The  Federalist,  No.  62.

3  See  Mr.  Randolph's  fifth  Resolution,  Joum.  of  Convention,  67,  86 ;
Yates's  Minutes,  4  Elliot's  Debates,  58,  59.

<  Journ.  of  Convention,  105,  106,  130 ;  Yates's  Minutes,  4  Elliot's
Debates,  58,  59,  63,  64,  99  to  lOa

5  Journ.  of  Convention,  105, 106, 147, 207,  217, 238  ;  Yates's  Minutes,
4  Elliot's  Debates,  63, 64.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SE]7ATfi.  183

§  702  The  reasoning,  by  which  this  mode  of  ap-*
pointment  was  supported,  does  not  appear  at  large  in
any  contemporary  debates.  But  it  may  be  gathered
from  the  imperfect  lights  left  us,  that  the  main  grounds
were,  that  it  would  immediately  connect  the  state  gov-
ernments with  the  national  government,  and  thus  har-
monize the  whole  into  one  universal  system  ;  that  it
would  mtroduce  a  powerful  check  upon  rash  legislation,
in  a  manner  not  unlike  that  created  by  the  different
organizations  of  the  house  of  commons,  and  the  house
of  lords  in  Great  Britain  ;  and  that  it  would  increase
public  confidence  by  securing  the  national  government
from  undue  encroachments  on  the  powers  of  the  states.*
The  Federalist  notices  the  subject  in  the  following
brief  and  summary  manner,  which  at  once  establishes
the  general  consent  to  the  arrangement,  and  the  few
objections,  to  which  it  was  supposed  to  be  obnoxious.
**It  is  unnecessary  to  dilate  on  the  appointment  of
senators  by  the  state  legislatures.  Among  the  various
modes,  which  might  have  been  devised  for  constituting
this  branch  of  the  government,  that  which  has  been
proposed  by  the  convention  is  probably  the  most  con-
genial with  the  public  opinion.  It  is  recommended  by
the  double  advantage  of  favouring  a  select  appointment,
and  of  giving  to  the  state  governments  such  an  agen-
cy in  the  formation  of  the  federal  government,  as  must
secure  the  authority  of  the  former,  and  may  form  a
convenient  link  between  the  two  systems.'*  *  This  is
very  subdued  praise ;  and  indicates  more  doubts,  than
experience  has,  as  yet,  justified.'


1  Yates's  Minutes,  4  Elliot's  Debates,  62, 63, 64  ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  49.
»  The  Federatist,  No.  62, 27 ;  1  Kent's  Comm,  Lect  11,  p.  ?1 1.
3  See  also  The  Federalist,  No,  27.


Digitized  by


Google


184 COKSTITUTIOir  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

^  703.  The  constitution  has  not  provided  for  the
manner,  in  which  the  choice  shall  be  made  by  the
state  legislatures,  whether  by  a  joint,  or  by  a  concur-
rent vote ;  the  latter  is,  where  both  branches  form  one
assembly,  and  give  a  united  vote  numerically  ;  the
fonner  is,  where  each  branch  gives  a  separate  and  inde-
pendent vote.*  As  each  of  the  state  legislatures  now
consists  of  two  branches,  this  is  a  very  important  prac-
tical question.  (Jenerally,  but  not  universally,  die
choice  of  senators  is  made  by  a  concurrent  vote.*
Another  question  might  be  suggested,  whether  the  ex-
ecutive constitutes  a  part  of  the  legislature  for  such  a
purpose,  in  cases  where  the  state  constitution  gives
him  a  qualified  negative  upon  the  laws.  But  this  has
been  silentiy  and  universally  settied  against  the  execu-
tive participation  in  the  appointment

^  704.  Thirdly  ;  the  number  of  senators.  Each
state  is  entitied  to  two  senators.  It  is  obvious,  that  to
ensure  competent  knowledge  and  ability  to  discharge
all  the  functions  entrusted  to  the  senate,  (of  which
more  will  be  said  hereafter,)  it  is  indispensable,  that  it
should  consiist  of  a  number  sufficientiy  large  to  ensure
a  sufficient  variety  of  talents,  experience,  and  practical
skill,  for  the  discharge  of  all  their  duties.  The  legis-
lative power  alone,  for  its  enlightened  and  prudent  ex-
ercise, requh-es  (as  has  been  already  shown)  no  small
share  of  patriotism,  and  knowledge,  and  ability.  In
proportion  to  the  extent  and  variety  of  the  labours  erf

1  Rawle  on  Conat,  37 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  11,  p.  211, 212.

>  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  1 1,  p.  21 1, 212.  -  Mr.  Chancellor  Kent  says,  in  bis
Commentaries,*  that  in  New- York  the  senators  are  elected  by  a  joint
vote,  if  the  two  houses  do  not  separately  concur.  But  bis  own  opinion  is,
that  the  true  construction  of  the  constitution  upon  principle  is,  that  it
should  be  by  a  concurrent  vote.

*  1  Kent*!  Coaua.  L«oi.  11,  p.  319.


Digitized  by


Google


legislation,  there  should  be  members,  who  should  share
them,  in  order,  that  there  may  be  a  punctual  and  per-
fect performance  of  them.  If  the  number  be  very
small,  there  is  danger,  that  some  of  the  proper  duties
will  be  overlooked,  or  neglected,  or  imperfectly  attend-
ed to.  No  human  genius,  or  industry,  is  adequate  to  all
the  vast  concerns  of  government,  if  it  be  not  aided  by
the  power  and  skill  of  numbers.  The  senate  ought,
therefore,  on  this  account  alone,  to  be  somewhat
numerous,  though  it  need  not,  and  indeed  ought  not,  for
other  reasons,  to  be  as  numerous,  as  the  house«
Besides  ;  numbers  are  important  to  give  to  the  body
a  sufficient  firmness  to  resist  the  influence,  which  the
popular  branch  will  ever  be  solicitous  to  exert  over
them.  A  very  small  body  is  more  easy  to  be  over-
awed, and  mtimidated,  and  controlled  by  external  influi-
ences,  than  one  of  a  reasonable  size,  embracing  weight
of  character,  and  dignity  of  talents.  Numbers  alone,
in  many  cases,  confer  power ;  and  what  is  of  not  less
importance,  they  present  more  resistance  to  corruption
and  intrigue.  A  body  of  five  may  be  bribed,  or  over-
borne, when  a  body  of  fifty  would  be  an  irresistible
barrier  to  usurpation.

^  705.  In  addition  to  this  consideration,  it  is  desu*a-
ble,  that  a  state  should  not  be  wholly  unrepresented  in
the  national  councils  by  mere  accident,  or  by  the  tem-
porary absence  of  its  representative.  If  there  be  but
a  single  representative,  sickness  or  casualty  may  de-'
prive  the  state  of  its  vote  on  the  most  important  occa-
sions. It  was  on  this  account,  (as  well  as  others,)
that  the  confederation  entided  each  state  to  send  not
less  than  twoj  nor  more  than  seven  delegates.  In  crit-
ical cases,  too,  it  might  be  of  great  importance  to  have
an  opportunity  of  consultmg  with  a  colleague  or  col-

voL.  II.  24


Digitized  by


Google


186  COKSTITUTION  OF  THE  IT.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

leagues,  having  a  common  interest  and  feeling  for  the
state.  And  if  it  be  not  always  in  the  strictest  sense
true,  that  in  the  multitude  of  counsel  there  is  safety  ;
there  is  a  sufficient  foundation  in  the  infirmity  of  hu-
man nature  to  make  it  desirable  to  gain  the  advantage
of  the  wisdom,  and  information,  and  reflection  of  other
independent  minds,  not  labouring  under  the  suspicion
of  any  unfavourable  bias.  These  reasons  may  be  pre-
sumed to  have  had  their  appropriate  weight  in  the
deliberations  of  the  convention.  If  more  than  one
representative  of  a  state  was  to  be  admitted  into  the
senate,  the  least  practicable  ascending  number  was
that  adopted.  At  that  time  a  single  representative  of
each  state  would  have  made  the  body  too  small  for  all
the  purposes  of  its  institution,  and  all  the  objects  be-
fore explained.  It  would  have  been  composed  but  of
thirteen ;  and  supposing  no  absences,  which  could  not
ordinarily  be  calculated  upon,  seven  would  constitute
a  majority  to  decide  all  the  measures.  Twenty-six
was  not,  at  that  period,  too  large  a  number  for  dignity,
independence,  wisdom,  experience,  and  efficiency.
And,  at  the  present  moment,  when  the  states  have
grown  to  twenty -four,  it  is  found,  that  forty-eight  is  a
number  quite  small  enough  to  perform  the  great  nation-
al functions  confided  to  it,  and  to  embody  the  requisite
skill  and  ability  to  meet  the  increased  exigencies,  and
multiplied  duties  of  the  office.*  There  is  probably  no
legislative  body  on  earth,  whose  duties  are  more  vari-
ous, and  interesting,  and  important  to  the  public  wel-

i  Mr.  Tucker,  (the  learaed  Commentator  on  Blackstone,)  in  1803,
said  :  "  The  whole  number  of  senators  is  at  present  limited  to  thirty-
two.  It  is  not  probable,  that  it  will  ever  exceed  fifty."  *  How  strange-
ly haa  oar  Aational  growth  already  outstripped  all  human  calculation !

*  1  Tuck.  BlMk.  Cmmn.  App.  98S.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  187

fare ;  and  none,  which  calls  for  higher  talents,  and  more
comprehensive  attainments,  and  more  untiring  industry,
and  integrity.

§  706.  In  the  convention  there  was  a  considerable
diversity  of  opinion,  as  to  the  number,  of  which  the
senate  should  consist,  and  the  apportionment  of  the
number  among  the  states.  When  the  principle  of  an
equality  of  representation  was  decided,  the  only  ques-
tion seems  to  have  been,  whether  each  state  should
have  three,  or  two  members.  Three  was  rejected  by
a  vote  of  nine  states  against  one ;  and  two  inserted  by
a  vote  of  nine  states  against  one.^  It  does  not  appear,
that  any  proposition  was  ever  entertained  for  a  less
number  than  two  ;  and  the  silence  of  all  public  discus-
sion on  this  subject  seems  to  indicate,  that  the  public
opinion  decidedly  adopted  the  lowest  number  under
the  confederation  to  be  the  proper  number,  if  an  equal-
ity of  representation  was  to  be  admitted  into  the  sen-
ate. Whatever  may  be  the  future  increase  of  states  in
the  Union,  it  is  scarcely  probable,  that  the  number  will
ever  exceed  that,  which  will  fit  the  senate  for  the  best
performance  of  all  its  exalted  functions.  The  British
house  of  lords,  at  this  moment,  probably  exceeds  any
number,  which  will  ever  belong  to  the  American  senate ;
and  yet,  notwithstanding  the  exaggerated  declamation
of  a  few  ardent  minds,  the  sober  sense  of  the  nation
has  never  felt,  that  its  number  was  either  a  burthen,  or
m  mfirmity  mherent  in  the  constitution.*

§  707.  Fourthly ;  the  term  of  service  of  the  sena-
tors. It  is  for  six  years ;  although,  as  will  be  present-

1  Journal  of  Convention,  2dd  July,  189.  See  also  Id.  156, 162, 175,
178, 180,  198.

s  See  Uie  Remarks  quoted  in  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  223 ;
2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  150.  In  1803  the  house  of  lords  was  said  to  be
composed  of  about  220 ;  it  now  probably  exceeds  350.


Digitized  by


Google


188 coKSTrriTTioir  or  the  v.  states, [book  ni.

]y  seen,  another  element  in  the  composition  of  thtt
body  is,  that  one  third  of  it  is  changed  every  two  years.
What  would  be  the  most  proper  period  of  office  tor
senators,  was  an  inquiry,  admitting  of  a  still  wider  range
of  argument  and  opinion,  than  what  would  be  the  most
proper  for  the  members  of  the  house  of  representatives.
The  subject  was  confessedly  one  full  of  intricacy,  and
doubt,  upon  which  the  wisest  statesmen  might  well  en-
.tertain  very  different  views,  and  the  best  patriots  might
well  ask  for  more  information,  without,  in  the  slightest
degree,  bringing  into  question  their  integrity,  their  love
(rf  liberty,  or  their  devotion  to  a  republican  government.
If,  in  the  present  day,  the  progress  of  public  opinion,  and
the  lights  of  experience,  furnish  us  with  materials  for  a
decided  judgment,  we  ought  to  remember,  that  the
question  was  then  free  to  debate,  and  the  fit  conclusion
was  not  easily  to  be  seen,  or  justly  to  be  measured.
The  problem  to  be  solved  by  the  great  men  of  that
day  was,  what  organization  of  the  legislative  power,  in
It  republican  government,  is  best  adapted  to  give  per-
manency  to  the  Union,  and  security  to  public  liberty.
In  the  convention,  a  great  diversity  of  judgment  was
apparent  among  those,  whose  purity  and  patriotism  were
above  all  suspicion,  and  whose  talents  and  public  ser-^
vices  were  equally  unquestionable*  Various  proposi*-
tions  were  entertamed ;  that  the  period  of  service  of
senators  should  be  during  good  behaviour ;  for  nine
years ;  for  seven  years ;  for  six  years  j  for  five  years ;
for  four  years ;  for  three  years.^  Ail  these  propositions
successively  failed,  except  that  for  seven  years,  which
was  eventually  abandoned  for  six  years  with  the  addi-


i  Journal  of  ConveBtion«  118, 19\^  147, 148 ;  Yates's  Bfiaatea,  4  El-
liot's Debates,  70,  71, 108, 104, 105, 106.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XJ]  THE  •£KATK.  189

^iial  limitation^  that  one  third  should  ^  out  bien-
niaUy.^

^  708.  No  inconsiderable  array  of  objections  was
brought  to  bear  against  this  prolonged  term  of  service
of  the  senators  beyond  that  fixed  for  the  members  of
the  house  of  representatives,  both  in  the  convention,
and  before  the  people,  when  the  constitution  was  under
their  advisement.^  Perhaps  some  of  those  objections
still  linger  in  the  minds  of  many,  who  entertain  a  gen^
eral  jealousy  of  the  powers  of  the  Union ;  and  who
^Lsily  persuade  themselves  on  that  account,  that  power
should  frequently  change  hands  in  order  to  prevent
corruption  and  tyranny.  The  perpetuity  of  a  body  (it
has  been  said)  is  favourable  to  every  stride  it  may  be


1  Journal  of  Convention,  67,  7%  118, 130, 147, 148,  149, 307, 217, 338,
353,373;  Yates's  Minutes,  4  Elliot's  Debates,  70,  71,  JO:),  104,  105,
106.  —  Montesquieu  seems  to  have  been  decidedly  of  opinion,  that  a
senate  ought  to  be  chosen  for  life,  as  was  the  custom  at  Rome,  at  Spar-
ta, and  even  at  Athens.*  It  is  well  known,  that  this  was  Gen.  Hamil-
ton's opinion,  or  rather  his  proposition  was,  that  the  senators  should  h%
chosen  to  serve  during  good  behaviour.  (Journ.  of  Convention,  p.  130 ;
North  American  Review,  Oct  1827,  p  266.)  It  appears  to  have  been
that  of  Mr.  Jay.  (North  American  Review,  Oct  J627,  p.  36a)  Mr.
Madison's  original  opinion  seems  to  have  been,  to  have  a  senate  chosen
for  a  longer  term,  than  the  house  of  representatives.!  But  in  the  con-
vention, H  is  said,  that  he  was  favourably  inclined  to  Mr.  Hamilton'^
pkiLt  In  a  question  of  so  much  difficulty  and  delicacy,  as  the  due  for-
mation of  a  government,  it  is  not  at  all  surprising,  that  such  opinions
should  have  been  held  by  them,  and  many  others  of  the  purest  and  most
enlightened  patriots.  They  wished  durability  and  success  to  a  republican
government,  and  were,  therefore,  urgent  to  secure  it  against  the  imbe-
cility resulting  from  what  they  deemed  too  frequent  changes  in  the  ad-
ministration of  its  powers.  To  hold  such  opinions  was  not  then  deemed
a  just  matter  of  tisproach,  though  from  the  practical  operations  of  the
constitution  they  may  now  be  deemed  unsound.

3  2  American  Museum,  547.

"*  HontMqaien*!  Spirit  of  Lawi,  B.  5.  eh.  7.
t  North  American  Reriew,  Oct.  18t9f7,  p.  SMS.
I  9  Pitkin*!  Bitt.  959,  note.


Digiti


zed  by  Google


190 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  III.

disposed  to  make  towards  extending  its  own  power  and
influence  in  the  government.  Such  a  tendency  is  to  be
discovered  in  all  bodies,  however  constituted,  and  to
which  no  effectual  check  can  be  opposed,  but  frequent
dissolutions  and  elections.*  The  truth  of  this  remark  may
be  admitted  ;  but  there  are  many  circumstances,  which
may  justly  vary  its  force  and  application.  While,  on  the
one  hand,  perpetuity  in  a  body  may  be  objectionable,
on  the  other  hand,  continual  fluctuations  may  be  no  less
so,  with  reference  to  its  duties  and  functions,  its  powers,
and  its  efficiency.  There  are  dangers  arising  from  too
great  frequency  in  elections,  as  well  as  from  too  small
The  path  of  true  wisdom  is  probably  best  attained  by  a
moderation,  which  avoids  either  extreme.  It  may  be
said  of  too  much  jealousy,  and  of  too  much  confidence,
that,  when  either  is  too  freely  admitted  into  public
councils,  it  betrays  like  treason.

§  709.  It  seems  paradoxical  to  assert,  (as  has  been
already  intimated,)  but  it  is  theoretically,  as  well  as  prac-
tically true,  that  a  deep-felt  responsibility  is  incompati-
ble with  great  frequency  of  elections.*  Men  can  feel
litde  interest  in  power,  which  slips  away  almost  as  soon,
as  it  is  grasped ;  and  in  measures,  which  they  can
scarcely  do  more  than  begin,  without  hopmg  to  perfect
Few  measures  hare  an  immediate  and  sensible  opera-
tion, exactly  according  to  their  wisdom  or  policy.  For
the  most  part,  they  are  dependent  upon  other  meas-
ures, or  upon  time,  and  gradual  intermixtures  with  the
business  of  life,  and  the  general  institutions  of  society.'
The  first  superficial  view  may  shock  popular  prejudices,
or  errors ;  while  the  ultimate  results  may  be  as  admh^-

1  Tucker's  &ack.  Corom.  App.  196.

s  See  ante,  §  567,  &c.  on  the  same  point

9  The  Federaliflt,  No.  63.


Digitized  by


Google


r

/


CH.  X.]  THE  SEITATE.  191

ble  and  excellent,  as  they  are  profound  and  distant.
Who  can  take  much  interest  in  weaving  a  single  thread
into  a  measure,  which  becomes  an  evanescent  quantity
in  the  main  fabric,  whose  texture  requires  constant  skill,
and  many  adaptations  from  the  same  hand,  before  its
perfection  can  be  secured,  or  even  be  prophesied  1

§  710.  The  objections  to  the  senatorial  terra  of  office
all  resolve  themselves  into  a  single  argument,  however
varied  in  its  forms,  or  illustrations.  That  argument  is,
that  political  power  is  liable  to  be  abused  ;  and  that  the
great  security  for  public  liberty  consists  in  bringing
home  responsibility,  and  dependence  in  those,  who  are
entrusted  with  office ;  and  these  are  best  attained  by
ehort  periods  of  office,  and  frequent  expressions  of  pub-
lic opinion  in  the  choice  of  officers.  If  the  argument  is
admitted  in  its  most  ample  scope,  it  still  leaves  the
question  open  to  much  discussion,  what  is  the  proper
period  of  office,  and  how  frequent  the  elections  should
be.  This  question  must,  in  its  nature,  be  complicated ;
and  may  admit,  if  it  does  not  absolutely  require,  different
answers,  as  applicable  to  different  functionaries.  Without
wandering  into  ingenious  speculations  upon  the  topic  in
its  most  general  form,  our  object  will  be  to  present  the
reasons,  which  have  been,  or  may  be  relied  on,  to  estab-
lish the  sound  policy  and  wisdom  of  the  duration  of
office  of  the  senators  as  fixed  by  the  constitution.  In  so
doing,  it  will  become  necessary  to  glance  at  some  sug-
gestions, which  have  already  occurred  in  considering
the  organization  of  the  other  branch  of  the  legislature.
It  may  be  proper,  however,  to  premise,  that  the  whole
reasoning  applies  to  a  moderate  duration  only  in  office ;
and  that  it  assumes,  as  its  basis,  the  absolute  necessity
of  short  limitations  of  office,  as  constituting  indispensa-
ble checks  to  power  m  all  republican  governments. It


Digitized  by


Google


\


192 CONSTITUTION  OF  THS  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III*

would  almost  be  useless  to  descant  upon  such  a  basis,
because  it  is  universally  admitted  in  the  United  States
as  a  fundamental  principle  of  all  their  constitutions  of
government

^  711.  In  the  first  place,  then,  all  the  reasons,  which
apply  to  the  duration  of  the  legislative  office  generally,
founded  upon  the  advantages  of  various  knowledge,  and
experience  in  the  principles  and  duties  of  legislation,
may  be  urged  with  increased  force  in  regard  to  the
senate.  A  good  government  implies  two  things ;  first,
fidelity  to  the  object  of  government,  which  is  the  hap-
piness of  the  people ;  secondly,  a  knowledge  of  the
means,  by  which  that  object  is  to  be  attained.  Some
governments  are  deficient  in  both  these  qualities ;  most
are  deficient  in  the  first.  Some  of  our  wisest  states*
men  have  not  scrupled  to  assert,  that  m  the  American
governments  too  litde  attention  has  been  paid  to  the
latter.^  It  is  utterly  impossible  for  any  assembly
of  men,  called  for  the  most  part  from  the  pursuits  of  pri-
vate life,  continued  in  appointment  for  a  short  time,  and
led  by  no  permanent  motive  to  devote  the  intervals  of
public  occupation  to  the  study  of  the  nature  and  opera-
tions of  government,  to  escape  from  the  commission  of
many  errors  in  the  discharge  of  their  legislative  func-
tions.*  In  proportion  to  the  extent  and  variety  of  these
functions,  the  national  interests,  which  they  involve,  and
the  national  duties,  which  they  imply,  ought  to  rise  the
intellectual  qualifications,  and  solid  attainments  of  the
members.  Even  in  our  domestic  concerns,  what  are
our  voluminous,  and  even  changing  codes,  but  monu-

>  The  Federalist,  No.  65 ;  2  Wilsonls  Law  Lect  14(5, 147, 14a

9  The  FeHeralist,  No.  62 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  65,  66;  Id.  269  to  284 ;

3  Elliot's  Debates,  50, 51 ;  2  Wilsoii'i  Law  Lect  152 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.

Lect  11,  p.  212.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X«]  THJi  SCICATE.  198

ments  of  deficient  wisdom,  hasty  resolves,  and  still
more  hasty  repeals  ?  What  are  they,  but  admonitions
to  the  people  of  the  dangers  of  rash,  and  premature  leg-
islation,^ of  ignorance,  that  knows  not  its  own  mistakes,
or  of  overweening  confidence,  which  heeds  not  its  own
foUies?

^  712.  A  well  constituted  senate,  then,  which  should
interpose  some  restraints  upon  the  sudden  impulses  of  .
a  more  numerous  branch,  would,  on  this  account,  be  of
great  value.*  But  its  value  would  be  incalculably  in*
creased  by  making  its  term  of  office  such,  that  with
moderate  industry,  talents,  and  devotion  to  the  public
service,  its  members  could  scarcely  fail  of  having  the
reasonable  information,  which  would  guard  them  against
gross  errors,  and  the  reasonable  firmness,  which  would
enable  them  to  resist  visionary  speculations,  and  popu-
lar excitements.  If  public  men  know,  that  they  may
safely  wait  for  the  gradual  action  of  a  sound  public
opinion,  to  decide  upon  the  merit  of  their  actions  and
measures,  before  they  can  be  struck  down,  they  will
be  more  ready  to  assume  responsibility,  and  pretermit
present  popularity  for  future  solid  reputation.'  If  they
are  designed,  by  the  very  structure  of  the  government,
to  secure  the  states  against  encroachments  upon  their
rights  and  liberties,  this  very  permanence  of  office  adds
new  means  to  effectuate  the  object  Popular  opinion
may,  perhaps,  in  its  occasional  extravagant  sallies,  at
the  instance  of  a  fawning  demagogue,  or  a  favorite  chief,
incline  to  overleap  the  constitutional  barriers,  m  order

1  The  Federalist,  No.  62.

9  The  Federalist,  No.  63 ;  1  EUiot's  Debates,  359,  260,  261,  269  to
284  ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  146, 147, 148, 152 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  212.

3  See  1  fiUiot's  Debates,  263,  264, 269  to  278  ;  3  Elliof  s  Debates,  48
to  51,

.  VOL.  IL  26

Digitized  by  VjOOQI^


194  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

to  aid  their  advaacement,  or  gratify  their  ambition.  But
the  solid  judgment  of  a  senate  may  stay  the  evil,  if  its
own  duration  of  power  exceeds  that  of  the  other
branches  of  the  government,  or  if  it  combines  the  joint
durability  of  both.  In  point  of  fact,  the  senate  has  this
desirable  limit.  It  combines  the  period  of  office  of  the
executive  with  that  of  the  members  of  the  house ;  while
at  the  same  time,  from  its  own  biennial  changes,  (as  we
shall  presendy  see,)  it  is  silently  subjected  to  the  de-
liberate voice  of  the  states.

^713*  In  the  next  place,  mutability  in  the  public
councils,  arising  from  a  rapid  succession  of  new  mem-
bers, is  found  by  experience  to  work,  even  in  domestic
concerns,  serious  mischiefs.  It  is  a  known  fact  in  the
history  of  the  states,  that  every  new  election  changes
nearly  or  quite  one  half  of  its  representatives ;  ^  and  in
the  nadonsd  government  changes  less  frequent,  or  less
numerous  can  scarcely  be  expected.  From  this  change
of  men,  there  must  unavoidably  arise  a  change  of  opin*
ions ;  and  with  this  change  of  opinions  a  correspondent
change  of  measures.  Now  experience  demonstrates,
that  a  continual  change,  even  of  good  measures,  is  in-
consistent with  every  rule  of  prudence  and  every  pros-
pect of  success.^  In  all  human  affairs,  dme  is  required
to  consolidate  the  elements  of  the  best  concerted  meas-
ures, and  to  adjust  the  litde  interferences,  which  are
incident  to  all  legislation.  Perpetual  changes  in  public
institutions  not  only  occasion  intolerable  controversies,
and  sacrifices  of  private  interests ;  but  check  the  growth
of  that  steady  industry  and  enterprise,  which,  by  wise
forecast,  lay  up  the  means  of  future  prosperity.  Be-
sides ;  the  instability  of  public  councils  gives  an  unrea-

1  The  Federalist,  No.  62.

s  The  Federalist,  No.  63 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  213, 2ia


Digitized  by


Google


CH.X.]  THE SENATE.  195

sonable  advantage  to  the  sagacious,  the  ctiniung,  and
the  monied  capitalists.  Every  new  regulation  concern-
ing commerce,  or  revenue,  or  manufactures,  or  agricul-
ture,  or  in^  any  manner  affecting  the  relative  value  of
the  different  species  of  property,  presents  a  new  har-  '
vest  to  those,  who  watch  the  change,  and  can  trace  the
consequences ;  a  harvest,  which  is  torn  from  the  hand  of
the  honest  labourer,  or  the  confiding  artban,  to  enrich
those,  who  coolly  look  on  to  reap  profit,  where  they
have  sown  nothing.^  In  short,  such  a  state  of  things
generates  the  worst  passions  of  selfishness,  and  the
worst  spirit  of  gaming.  However  paradoxical  it  may
seem,  it  is  nevertheless  true,  that  in  affairs  of  govern-
ment, the  best  measures,  to  be  safe,  must  be  slowly
mtroduced ;  and  the  wisest  councils  are  those,  which  j
proceed  by  sjeps,  and  reach,  circuitously,  their  conclu-
sion. It  is,  then,  important  in  this  general  view,  that
all  the  public  functionaries  should  not  terminate  their
offices  at  the  same  period.  The  gradual  infusion  of
new  elements,  which  may  mingle  with  the  old,  secures
a  gradual  renovation,  and  a  permanent  union  of  the
whole.

^714  But  the  ill  effects  of  a  mutable  government
are  still  more  strongly  felt  in  the  mtercourse  with  for-
eign nations.  It  forfeits  the  respect  and  confidence  of
foreign  nations,  and  all  the  advantages  connected  with
national  character.*  It  not  only  lays  its  measures  open
to  the  silent  operations  of  foreign  intrigue  and  man-
agement; but  it  subjects  its  whole  policy  to  be
counteracted  by  the  wiser  and  more  stable  policy  of  its
foreign  rivals  and  adversaries.  One  nation  is  to  an-
other, what  one  individual  is  to  another,  with  this  mel-

1  The  FederaliBt,  No.  62.

9  The  Federalist,  No.  62 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  268,  269.


Digitized  by


Google


196  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

ancholj  distinction  perhaps,  that  the  former,  with  fewer
benevolent  emotions  than  the  latter,  are  under  fewer
restraints  also  from  taking  undue  advantages  of  the
indiscretions  of  each  other.^  If  a  nation  is  perpetually
fluctuating  in  its  measures,  as  to  the  protection  of  agri-
culture, commerce,  and  manufactures,  it  exposes  all  its
infirmities  of  purpose  to  foreign  nations ;  and  the  latter
with  a  systematical  sagacity  will  sap  all  the  foundations
of  its  prosperity.  Prom  this  cause,  under  the  confede-
ration, America  suffered  the  most  serious  evils.  ^^  She
finds,"  said  the  Federalist,*  with  unusual  boldness  and
freedom,  "  that  she  is  held  in  no  respect  by  her  friends ;
that  she  is  the  derision  of  her  enemies ;  and  that  she
is  a  prey  to  every  nation,  which  has  an  interest  in
speculating  on  her  fluctuating  councils,  and  embarrassed
adfairs."

^  716.  Further;  foreign  governments  can  never
safely  enter  into  any  permanent  arrangements  with
one,  whose  councils  and  government  are  perpetually
fluctuating.  It  was  not  unreasonable,  therefore,  for
them  to  object  to  the  continental  congress,  that  they
could  not  guaranty  the  fulfihnent  of  any  treaty ;  and
therefore  it  was  useless  to  negotiate  any.  To  secure
the  respect  of  foreign  nations,  there  must  be  power  to
fulfil  engagements  ;  confidence  to  sustain  them  ;  and
durability  to  ensure  their  execution  on  the  part  of  the
government.  National  character  in  cases  of  this  sort  is
inestimable.  It  is  not  sufiicient,  that  there  should  be
a  sense  of  justice,  and  disposition  to  act  right ;  but
there  must  be  an  enlightened  permanency  in  the  policy


1  The  Federalist,  No.  62 ;  1  Elljot's  Debates,  269, 270  to  273 ;  1  Kent
Comm.212,21d.
3  The  Federalist,  No.  62.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  197

of  the  govemment.^  Caprice  18  just  as  mischievous,  as
folly,  and  corruption  scarcely  worse,  than  perpetual  in-
decision and  fluctuation.  In  this  view,  independent  of
its  legislative  functions,  the  participation  of  the  senate
in  the  functions  of  the  executive,  in  q>pointing  ambas-
sadors, and  in  forming  treaties  with  foreign  nations,
gives  additional  weight  to  the  reasoning  in  favour  of  its
prolonged  term  of  service.  A  more  full  survey  of  its
other  functions  will  make  that  reasonmg  absolutely
irresistible,  if  the  object  is,  that  they  should  be  per-
f(H*med  with  independence,  with  judgment,  and  with
scrupulous  integrity  and  dignity.

^716.  In  answer  to  all  reasoning  of  this  sort,  it  has
been  strenuously  urged,  that  a  senate,  constituted,  not
immediately  by  the  people,  for  six  years,  may  gradually
acquire  a  dangerous  pre-eminence  in  the  government,
and  eventually  transform  itself  mto  an  aristocracy.*
Certainly,  such  a  case  is  possible ;  but  it  is  scarcely
within  the  range  of  probability,  while  the  people,  or  the
government,  are  worthy  of  protection  or  confidence.
Liberty  may  be  endangered  by  the  abuses  of  Hberty,
as  well  as  by  the  abuses  of  power.  There  are  quite
as  numerous  instances  of  the  former,  as  of  the  latter.'
Yet,  who  would  reason,  that  there  should  be  no  liberty,
because  it  had  been,  or  it  might  be,  abused  ?  Tyranny
itself  would  nof  desire  a  more  cogent  argument,  than
that  the  danger  of  abuse  was  a  ground  for  the  denial  of
a  right.

^717.  But  the  irresistible  reply  to  all  such  reason-
ing is,  that  before  such  a  revolution  can  be  eflTected,  the


1  See  1  ElUot»8  Debates,  269, 972,  273, 274

9  See  2  Amer.  Museum,  547.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  63;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  269, 273.


Digitized  by


Google


196 coirsTiTUTioir  of  the  v.  states, [book  hi.

senate  must,  in  the  first  place,  corrupt  itself;  it  must
next  corrupt  the  state  legislatures ;  it  must  then  cor-
rupt the  house  of  representatives ;  and,  lastly,  it  must
corrupt  the  people  at  large.  Unless  all  these  things
are  done,  and  continued,  the  usurpation  of  the  senate
would  be  as  vain,  as  it  would  be  transient.  The  peri-
odical change  of  its  members  would  otherwise  regene-
rate the  whole  body.  And  if  such  universal  corruption
should  prevail,  it  is  quite  idle  to  talk  of  usurpation  and
aristocracy ;  for  the  government  would  then  be  exactly,
what  the  people  would  choose  it  to  be.  It  would  rep-
resent exactly,  what  they  would  deem  fit  It  would
perpetuate  power  in  the  very  form,  which  they  would
advise.  No  form  of  government  ever  proposed  to  con-
trive a  method,  by  which  the  will  of  the  people  should
be  at  once  represented,  and  defeated ;  by  which  it
should  choose  to  be  enslaved,  and  at  the  same  time,  by
which  it  should  be  protected  in  its  fi-eedom.  Private
and  public  virtue  is  the  foundation  of  republics ;  and  it
is  foUy,  if  it  is  not  madness,  to  expect,  that  rulers  vdll
not  buy,  what  the  people  are  eager  to  sell.  The  people
may  guard  themselves  against  the  oppressions  of  their
governors ;  but  who  shall  guard  them  against  their  own
oppression  of  themselves  ?

§  718.  But  experience  is,  after  all,  the  best  test  upon
all  subjects  of  this  sort  Time,  whiqh  dissolves  the
fi^  fabrics  of  men's  opinions,  serves  but  to  confirm  the
judgments  of  nature.  What  are  the  lessons,  which  the
history  of  our  own  and  other  mstitutions  teach  us  ?  In
Great-Britam,  the  house  of  lords  is  hereditary ;  and
yet  it  has  never  hitherto  been  able  successfully  to  assail
the  public  liberties ;  and  it  has  not  unfi^quently  pre-
served, or  enforced  them.  The  house  of  commons  is
now  chosen  for  seven  years. Is  it  now  less  an  organ


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SEITATE.  199

of  the  popular  opinion,  and  less  jealous  of  the  public
rights,  than  it  was  during  annual,  or  triennial  parlia-
ments? In  Virginia,  the  house  of  delegates  before
the  revolution,  was  chosen  for  seven  years ;  and  m  some
of  the  other  colonies  for  three  years.*  Were  they  then
subservient  to  the  crown,  or  faithless  to  the  people  1
In  the  present  constitutions  of  the  states  of  America,
there  is  a  great  diversity  in  the  terms  of  oflSce,  as  well
as  the  qualifications,  of  the  state  senates.  In  New- York,
Virginia,  Pennsylvania,  and  Kentucky  the  senate  is
chosen  for  four  years;*  in  Delaware,  Mississippi,  and
Alabama,  for  three  years ;  in  South-Carolina,  Tennes-
see, Ohio,  Missouri,  and  Louisiana,  biennially ;  in  Ma-
ryland, for  five  years ;  in  the  other  states  annually.'
These  diversities  are  as  striking  in  the  constitutions,
which  were  framed  as  long  ago,  as  the  times  of  the
revolution,  as  in  those,  which  are  the  growth,  as  it  were,
of  yesterday.  No  one,  with  any  show  of  reason  or  fact,
can  pretend,  that  the  liberties  of  the  people  have  not
been  quite  as  safe,  and  the  legislation  quite  as  enlight-
ened and  pure  in  those  states,  where  the  senate  is  cho-
sen for  a  long,  as  for  a  short  period.

§  719.  If  there  were  any  thing  in  the  nature  of  the
objections,  which  have  been  under  consideration,  or
in  general  theory  to  warrant  any  conclusion,  it  would
be,  that  the  circumstances  of  the  states  being  nearly
equal,  apd  the  objects  of  legislation  the  same,  the
same  duration  of  oflice  ought  to  be  applied  to  all.
Yet  this  diversity  has  existed  without  any  assignable
inconvenience  in  its  practical  results. It  is  manifest,

1  1  Elliot's  Debates,  272.
»  The  Federalist,  No.  39.

3  Dr.  Lieber's  Encycl.  Americana,  art.  CorutUtUions  of  the  States ;
The  Federalist,  No.  39.


Digitized  by


Google


200 constitution;  of  the  u.  states,  [book  hi.

then,  that  the  diflTerent  manners,  habits,  institutions,  and
other  circumstances  of  a  society,  may  admit,  if  they  do
not  require,  many  different  modifications  of  its  legislative
department,  without  danger  to  liberty  on  the  one  hand,
or  gross  imbecility  on  the  other.  There  are  many
guards  and  checks,  which  are  silently  in  operation,  to
fortify  the  benefits,  or  to  retard  the  mischiefs  of  an  im-
perfect system.  In  the  choice  of  organizations,  it  may
be  affirmed,  that  that  is  on  the  whole  best,  which
secures  in  practice  the  most  zeal,  experience,  J^kill,
and  fidelity  in  the  discharge  of  the  legislative  fimc-
tions.  The  example  of  Maryland  is  perhaps  more
striking  and  instructive,  than  any  one,  which  has  been
brought  under  review ;  for  it  is  more  at  variance  with
all  the  objections  raised  agamst  the  national  senate.
In  Maryland,  the  senate  is  not  only  chosen  for  five
years ;  but  it  possesses  the  exclusive  right  to  fill  all
vacancies  in  its  own  body,  and  has  no  rotation  during
the  term.*  What  a  fruitful  source  might  not  this  be  of
theoretical  objections,  and  colourable  alarms,  for  the
safety  of  the  public  liberties?  Yet,  Maryland  con-
tinues to  enjoy  all  the  blessings  of  good  government,
and  rational  fi-eedom,  without  molestation,  and  without
dread.  If  examples  are  sought  from  antiquity,  the
illustrations  are  not  less  striking.  In  Sparta,  the  ephori,
the  annual  representadves  of  the  people,  were  found  an
over-match  for  a  senate  for  life ;  continually  gaining
authority ;  and  finally  drawing  all  power  into  their  own
hands.  The  tribunes  of  Rome,  who  were  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  people,  prevailed,  in  almost  every  con-
test, with  the  senate  for  life ;  and  in  the  end  gained  a
complete  triumph  over  it,  notwithstanding  unanimity

.  1  The  Federalist,  No.  63.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATJB.  201

among  the  tribunes  was  indispensable.  This  &ct
prores  the  irresistible  force  possessed  by  that  branch
of  the  government,  which  represents  the  popular  wilL^

§  720.  Considering,  then,  the  various  functions  of
the  senate,  the  qualifications  of  skill,  experience,  and
information,  which  are  required  to  discharge  them,  and
the  importance  of  interposing,  not  a  nominal,  but  a  real
check,  in  order  to  guard  the  states  from  usurpations
upon  their  authority,  and  the  people  from  becoming  the
victims  of  violent  paroxysms  in  legislation ;  the  term  of
six  years  would  seem  to  hit  the  just  medium  between
a  duration  of  office,  which  would  too  much  resbt,  and
a  like  duration,  which  would  too  much  invite  those
changes  of  policy,  foreign  and  domestic,  which  the
best  interests  of  the  country  may  require  to  be  delib-
erately weighed,  and  gradually  intix>duced.  If  the
state  governments  are  found  tranquil,  and  prosperous,
aofl  safe,  with  a  senate  of  two,  three,  four,  and  five
years'  duration,  it  v^ould  seem'impossible  for  the  Union
to  be  in  danger  from  a  term  of  service  of  six  years.*

^721.  But,  as  if  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure,;
and  take  a  bond  of  fate,  in  order  to  quiet  the  last  Ung-
ering  scruples  of  jealousy,  the  succeeding  clause  of4the
constitution  has  interposed  an  intermediate  change  in
the  elements  oi  the  body,  which  would  seem  to  make  it
absolutely  above  exception,  tf  reason,  and  not  fear,  is
to  prevail ;  and  if  government  is  to  be  a  reality,  and  not
a  vision.

§722.  It  declares,  "Immediately  after  they  (the
"  senators)  shall  be  assembled,  in  consequence  of  the  •
"first  election,  they  shall  be  divided,  as  eqtialfy  as  may
"be,  into  three  classes. The  seats  of  the  senators  of

1  The  Federalist,  No.  63 ;  Id^  No.  34.

>  1  ElUofB  Deb.  64  to  06 ;  Id.  91 ;  1  KentVConm).  Lect  11,  p.  313»  2ia

VOL.  II.  26


Digitized  by


Google


202 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V. STATES. [BOOK  III.

^^  the  first  class  shall  be  vacated  at  the  expiration  of
^  the  second  year  ;  of  the  second  class,  at  the  expira-
"  tion  of  the  fourth  year  ;  and  of  the  third  class,  at  the
^  expiration  of  the  sixth  year,  so  that  one  third  may  be
^  chosen  every  second  year.''  A  proposition  was  made
in  the  convention,  that  the  senators  should  be  chosen
for  nine  years,  one  third  to  go  out  biennially,  and  was
lost,  three  states  voting  in  the  affirmative,  and  eight  in
the  negative  ;  and  then  the  present  limitation  was
adopted  by  a  vote  of  seven  states  against  four.^  Here,
then,  is  a  clause,  which,  without  impairing  the  efficien*
cy  o(  the  senate  for  the  discharge  of  its  high  functions,,
gradually  changes  its  members,  and  introduces  a  bien-
nial appeal  to  the  states,  which  must  for  ever  prohibit
any  permanent  combination  for  sinister  purposes.  No
person  would  probably  propose  a  less  duration  of  office
for  the  senate,  than  double  the  period  of  the  house*
In  effect,  this  provision  changes  the  composition  of  two
thirds  of  that  body  within  that  period.*

^  723.  And  here,  again,  it  is  proper  to  remark,  that
experience  has  established  the  fact  beyond  all  contro-
versy, that  the  term  of  the  senate  is  not  too  long,  either
for  its  own  security,  or  that  of  the  states.  The  rea-
soning of  those  exalted  minds,  which  framed  the  con-
stitution, has  been  fully  realized  in  practice.  While
the  house  of  representatives  has  gone  on  increasing,  and
deepening  its  influence  with  the  people  with  an  irre-
sistible power,  the  senate  has,  at  all  times,  felt  the  im-

i  Journ.  of  Convention,  26th  June,  1787,  p.  149  ;  Yates's  Minutes,
4  Elliot's  Debates,  108  to  106.

a  1  Elliot's  Deb.  64  to  66 ;  Id.  91, 92 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  11,  p.  213,
214. — A  power  to  recall  the  senators  was  proposed  as  an  amendment  in
some  of  the  state  conventions ;  but  it  does  not  seem  to  have  obtained
genera]  favour.*  Many  potent  reasons  might  be  urged  against  it.

*  lElUot'fDtbatai,957,95eto9M,965to87Si3]SUMi>fD«bfttei,a03.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  TU£  SENATE. •  203

pulses  of  the  popular  wiU,  and  has  never  been  found  to
resist  any  solid  improvements.  Let  it  be  added^  that
it  has  given  a  dignity,  a  solidity,  and  an  enlightened
spirit  to  the  operations  of  the  government,  which  have
maintamed  respect  abroad,  and  confidence  at  hcmie.

§  724.  At  Uie  first  session  of  congress  under  the
constitution,  the  division  of  the  senators  into  three
classes  was  made  in  the  following  manner.  The  sena-
tors present  were  divided  into  three  classes  by  name,
the  first  consisting  of  six  persons,  the  second  of  seven,
and  the  third  of  six.  Three  papers  of  an  equal  size,
numbered  one,  two,  and  three,  were,  by  the  secretary,
rolled  up,  and  put  into  a  box,  and  drawn  by  a  commit-
tee of  three  persons,  chosen  for  the  purpose  in  behalf  of
the  respective  classes,  in  which  each  of  them  was
placed ;  and  the  classes  were  to  vacate  their  seats  in
the  senate,  according  to  the  order  of  the  numbers
drawn  for  them,  beginning  with  number  one.  It  was
also  provided,  that  when  senators  should  take  their
seats  fixim  states,  which  had  not  then  appointed  sena-
tors, they  should  be  placed  by  lot  in  the  foregcMng
classes,  but  in  such  a  manner,  as  should  keep  the
classes  as  nearly  equal,  as  possible.^  In  arranging  the
original  classes,  care  was  taken,  that  both  senators
fi*om  the  same  state  should  not  be  in  the  same  class,  so
that  there  never  should  be  a  vacancy,  at  the  same  time,
of  the  seats  of  both  senators.

^  726.  As  vacancies  might  occur  in  the  senate  dur-
ing the  recess  of  the  state  legislature,  it  became  mdis-
pensable  to  provide  for  that  exigency.  Accordingly  the
same  clause  proceeds  to  declare:  ^  And  if  vacancies
**  happen  by  resignation,  or  otherwise,  during  the  recess

i  Journals  of  the  Senate,  ISth  May,  1789,  p.  25, 26,  (edit  1820.)


Digitized  by


Google


204 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

^  of  the  legislature  of  a^y  state,  the  executive  thereof
'^may  make  temporary  appomtments  until  the  next
*^  meeting  of  the  legislature,  which  shall  then  fill  such
^vacancies.''  It  does  not  appear,  that  any  strong  objec-
tion was  urged,  in  the  convention,  against  this  proposi-
tion, although  it  w)as  not  adopted  without  some  opposi-
tion.^ There  seem  to  have  been  three  courses  presented
for  the  consideration  of  the  convention  ;  either  to  leave
the  vacancies  unfilled  until  the  meeting  of  the  state
legislature  ;  or  to  allow  the  state  legislatures  to  provide
at  their  pleasure,  prospectively  for  the  occurrence  ;  or
to  confide  a  temporary  appomtment  to  some  select
state  functionary  or  body.  The  latter  was  deemed
the  most  satisfactory  and  convenient  course.  Con-
fidence might  justly  be  reposed  in  the  state  executive,
W  representing  at  once  the  interests  and  wishes  of  the
state,  and  enjoying  all  the  proper  measures  of  knowl-
edge and  responsibility,  to  ensure  a  judicious  ap-
pointment^

§  726.  Fifdily  ;  the  qualifications  of  senators. The
constitution  declares,  that  ^^No  person  shall  be  a  sen-

.1  Journ.  of  Convention,  9th  Aug.  937, 238.

^  In  the  case  of  Mr.  Lanman^  u  senator  from  Connecticut,  a  question
occurred,  whether  the  state  executive  could  make  an  appointment  in
the  leceis  of  the  state  legislature  in  anticipation  of  the  expiration  of
the  term  of  oQce  of  an  existing  senator.  It  was  decided  by  the  senate,
that  he  could  not  make  such  an  appointment  The  facts  were,  that
Mr.  Lanman's  term  of  service,  as  senator,  expired  on  the  third  of  March,
1825.  The  president  had  convoked  the  senate  to  meet  on  the  fouith  of
March.  The  governor  of  Connecticut  in  the  recess  of  the  legislature,
(whose  session  would  be  in  May,)  on  the  ninth  of  the  preceding  Feb-
ruary appointed  Mr.  Lanman,  as  senator,  to  sit  in  the  senate  after  the
third  of  March.  The  senate,  by  a  vote  of  23  to  18,  decided,  that  the
appointment  could  not  be  constitutionally  made,  until  after  the  vacancy
had  actuaUy  occurred.  See  Gordon's  Digest  of  the  Laws  of  the  United
Spates,  1827,  Appendix*  Note  ),  B.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XO  'ITHE  8£irAT£«  206

^  ator,  who  shall  not  have  attained  the  age  of  thirty
^  years,  and  been  nine  years  a  citizen  of  the  United
^  States,  and  who  shall  not,  when  elected,  be  an  inhab-
^itant  of  that  state,  for  which  he  shall  be  chosen."
As  the  nature  of  the  duties  of  a  senator  require  more
experience,  knowledge,  and  stability  of  character,  than
those  of  a  representative,  the  qualification  in  point  of
age  is  raised. A  person  may  be  a  representative  at
twenty -five ;  but  he  cannot  be  a  senator  until  thirty.
A  similar  qualification  of  age  was  required  of  the  mem-
»  bers  6(  the  Roman  senate.^ It  would  have  been  a
Bomewhat  singular  anomaly  in  the  history  of  fi-ee  gov-
ernments, to  have  found  persons  actually  exercising
the  highest  fimctions  of  government,  who,  in  some  en-
lightened and  polished  countries,  would  not  be  deem-
ed to  have  arrived  at  an  age  sufficiently  mature  to
be  entitled  to  all  the  private  and municipal  privi-
leges of  manhood. In  Rome  persons  were  not  deem-
ed at  full  age  until  twenty-five  ;  and  that  continues
to  be  the  rule  in  France,  and  Holland,  and  other
civil  law  countries ;  and  in  France,  by  the  old  law,  in
regard  to  marriage  full  age  was  not  attained  until
thirty.* It  has  since  been  varied,  and  the  term  dimm-
ished.'

^  727.  The  age  of  senators  was  fixed  in  the  consti-
tution at  first  by  a  vote  of  seven  states  against  four ;
and  finally,  by  an  unanimous  vote.^  Perhaps  no  one,  in
our  day,  is  disposed  to  question  the  propriety  of  this
limitation ;  and  it  is,  therefore,  useless  to  discuss  a
point,  which  is  so  purely  speculative.  If  coimsels  are
to  be  wise,  the  ardour,  and  impetuosity,  and  confi-

1  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  11,  p.  214. »  1  Black.  Coium.  469;  464.

9  Code  Civil,  art  388.

4  Journ.  of  Conyention,  118, 147-


Digitized  by


Google


206  CONSTITUTIOir  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

dence  of  youth  must  be  chastised  by  the  sober  lessons
of  experience ;  and  if  knowledge,  and  solid  judgment,
and  tried  integrity,  are  to  be  deemed  indispensable
qualifications  for  senatorial  service,  it  would  be  rash-
ness to  affirm,  that  thirty  years  is  too  long  a  period  for
a  due  maturity  and  probation.^

^  728.  The  next  qualification  is  citizenship.  The
propriety  of  some  limitation  upon  admissions  to  office,
after  naturalization,  cannot  well  be  doubted.  The
senate  is  to  participate  largely  in  transactions  with  for-
eign governments ;  and  it  seems  indispensable,  that
time  should  have  elapsed  sufficient  to  wean  a  senator
from  all  prejudices,  resentments,  and  partialities,  in
relation  to  the  land  of  his  nativity,  before  he  should  be
entrusted  with  such  high  and  delicate  fimctions.^
Besides ;  it  can  scarcely  be  presumed,  that  any  for-
eigner can  have  acquired  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the
institutions  and  interests  of  a  country,  until  he  has
been  permanently  incorporated  mto  its  society,  and  has
acquired  by  the  habits  and  intercourse  of  life  the  feel-
ings and  the  duties  of  a  citizen.  And  if  he  has  acquired
the  requisite  knowledge,  he  can  scarcely  feel  that
devoted  attachment  to  them,  which  constitutes  the
great  security  for  fidelity  and  promptitude  in  the  dis-
charge of  official  duties.  If  eminent  exceptions  could
be  stated,  they  would  furnish  no  safe  rule  ;  and  should
rather  teach  us  to  fear  our  being  misled  by  brilliancy
of  talent,  or  disinterested  patriotism,  into  a  confidence,
which  might  betray,  or  an  acquiescence,  which  might
weaken,  tiiat  jealousy  of  foreign  influence,  which  is  one
of  the  main  supports  of  republics. In  the  convention

1  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  37 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  11,  p.  314  ;
1  Tuck.  Black,  dmm,  App.  22a
s  The  Federalist,  No.  62.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THS  SEHATE.  207

it  was  at  first  proposed,  that  the  limitation  should  be
four  years  ;  and  it  was  finally  altered  by  a  vote  of  six
states  against  four,  one  being  divided,  which  was  after-
wards confirmed  by  a  vote  of  eight  states  to  three.*
This  subject  has  been  already  somewhat  considered  in
another  place  ;  and  it  may  be  concluded,  by  adopting
the  language  of  the  Federalist  on  the  same  clause.
**The  term  of  nine  years  appears  to  be  a  prudent
mediocrity  between  a  total  exclusion  of  adopted  citi-
zens, whose  merit  and  talents  may  claim  a  share  in
the  public  confidence,  and  an  indiscriminate  and  hasty
admission  of  them,  which  might  create  a  channel  for
foreign  influence  in  the  national  councils/'  *

^  729.  The  only  other  qualification  is,  that  the  sen-
ator shall,  when  elected,  be  an  inhabitant  of  the  state,
for  which  he  is  chosen.  This  scarcely  requires  any
comment ;  for  it  is  manifesdy  proper,  that  a  state
should  be  represented  by  one,  who,  besides  an  inti-
mate knowledge  of  all  its  wants  and  wishes,  and  local
pursuits,  should  have  a  personal  and  immediate  interest
m  all  measures  touching  its  sovereignty,  its  rights,  or
its  influence.  The  only  surprise  is,  that  provision  was
not  made  for  his  ceasing  to  represent  the  state  m  the
senate,  as  soon  as  he  should  cease  to  be  an  inhabitant.
There  does  not  seem  to  have  been  any  debate  in  the
convention  on  the  propriety  of  inserting  the  clause,  as
it  now  stands.

§  730.  In  concluding  thb  topic,  it  is  proper  to  re-
mark, that  no  qualification  whatsoever  of  property  is
established  in  regard  to  senators,  as  none  had  been
established  in  regard  to  representatives. Merit,  there-

1  Journ.  of  Convention,2I8, 238,  239, 248,  249.
8  The  Federalist,  No.  G2  ;  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  37  ;  1  Kent's
Coiiim.Lectll,p.214.


Digitized  by


Google


208 coNSTiTimoir  of  thk  u.  states,  [book  ih.

fore,  and  talent  have  the  freest  access  open  to  them  into
'  every  department  of  office  under  the  national  govern-
ment Under  such  circumstances,  if  the  choice  of  the
people  is  but  directed  by  a  suitable  sobriety  of  judgment,
the  senate  cannot  fail  of  being  distinguished  for  wisdom,
for  learning,  for  exalted  patriotism,  for  incorruptible
integrity,  and  for  inflexible  independence.^

§731.  The  next  clause  of  the  third  section  of  the  first
article  respects  the  person,  who  shall  preside  in  the
senate.  It  declares,  that  "the  Vice  President  of  the
**  United  States  shall  be  president  of  the  senate ;  but
"  shall  have  no  vote,  unless  they  be  equally  divided ;  *'
and  the  succeeding  clause,  that  "  the  senate  shall  choose
"  their  other,  officers,  and  also  a  president  pro  tempore,
"  in  the  absence  of  the  vice  president,  or  when  he  shall
"  exercise  the  office  of  president  of  the  United  States.**

§  732.  The  original  article,  as  first  reported,  author-
ized the  senate  to  choose  its  own  president,  and  other
officers ;  and  this  was  adopted  in  the  convention.^  But
the  same  draft  authorized  the  president  of  the  senate,
in  case  of  the  removal,  death,  resignation,'  or  disability
of  the  president,  to  discharge  his  duties.  When  at  a
late  period  of  the  convention  it  was  deemed  advisable,
that  there  should  be  a  vice  president,  the  propriety
of  retaming  him,  as  presidmg  officer  of  the  senate,  seems
to  have  met  with  general  favour,  eight  states  voting  in
the  affirmative,  and  two  only  in  the  negative.*

^  733.  Some  objections  have  been  taken  to  the
appointment  of  the  vice  president  to  preside  in  the
senate. It  was  suggested  in  the  state  conventions,


I  See  the  Federalist,  No.  27.

*  Journal  of  Convention,  p.  218, 240.

3  Ibid,  225, 226.

4  Journal  of  Convention,  325, 338.


Digitized  by


Googfe


OH.  X.]  THB  SENATE.  209

that  the  oflScer  was  not  only  unnecessary,  but  dianger-
ous ;  that  it  is  contrary  to  the  usual  course  of  parliamen*
tary  proceedings  to  have  a  presiding  officer,  who  is  not
a  member;  and  that  the  state,  from  which  he  comes,
may  thus  have  two  votes,  mstead  of  one.^  It  has  also
been  coldly  remarked  by  a  learned  commentator,  that
"the  necessity  of  providing  for  the  case  of  a  vacancy  in
the  office  of  president  doubtless  gave  rise  to  the  creation
of  that  officer ;  and  for  want  of  something  else  for  him
to  do,  whilst  there  is  a  president  in  office,  he  seems  to
have  been  placed,  with  no  very  great  propriety,  in  the
chair  of  the  senate.^*  *

^  734.  The  propriety  of  creating  the  office  of  vice
president  will  be  reserved  for  future  consideration,
when,  in  the  progress  of  these  commentaries,  the  con-
stitution of  the  executive  department  comes  under
review.'  The  reasons,  why  he  was  authorized  to
preside  in  the  senate,  belong  appropriately  to  this  place.

§  736.  There  is  no  novelty  in  the  appomtment  of  a
person  to  preside,  as  speaker,  who  is  not  a  constituent
member  of  the  body,  over  which  he  is  to  preside.  In
the  house  of  lords  in  England  the  presiding  officer  is
the  lord  chancellor,  or  lord  keeper  of  the  great  seal,

1  2  Elliot's  Debates,  «359,  361 ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  37,  3a
9  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  Appx.,  224 ;  Id.  199,  200.  —  It  is  a  some-
what curious  circumstance  in  the  history  of  congress,  that  the  exercise
of  the  power  of  the  vice  president  in  defeating  a  bill  for  the  apportion-
ment of  representatives  in  1792,  has  been  censured,  because  such  a
bill  seemed  (if  any)  almost  exclusively  fit  for  the  house  of  representa-
tives to  decide  upon;*  and  that  a  like  bill,  to  which  the  senate
interposed  a  strong  opposition,  in  183*2,  has  been  deemed  by  some  of  the
states  so  exceptionable,  that  this  resistance  has  been  thought  worthy  of
high  praise.  There  is  some  danger  in  drawing  conclusions  from  a  single
exercise  of  any  power  against  its  general  utility  or  policy.
3  See  2  Amer.  Museum,  557 ;  The  Federalist,  No.  68.


*  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  199,  900,  335.

VOL.  II.  27


Digitized  by


Google


210 CONSTUTITIOK  OF  THE  V.  STATEsl [bOOK  UU

or  other  person  appointed  by  the  king's  commbsion ;
and  if  none  such  be  so  appointed,  then  it  is  said,  that
the  lords  may  elect.  But  it  is  by  no  rneaas  necessary,
that  the  person  appointed  by  the  king  should  be  a  peer
of  the  realm  or  lord  of  parliament.^  Nor  has  this
appointment  by  the  king  ever  been  complained  of,  as  a
grievance,  nor  has  it  operated  with  inconvenience  or
oppression  in  practice.  It  is  on  the  contrary  deemed  an
important  advantage,  both  to  the  officer,  and  to  the  house
of  peers,  adding  dignity  and  weight  to  the  former,  and
securing  great  legal  ability  and  talent  in  aid  of  the  latter. .
This  consideration  alone  might  have  had  some  influence
in  the  convention.  The  vice  president  being  himself
chosen  by  the  states,  might  well  be  deemed,  m  point  of
age,  character,  and  dignity,  worthy  to  preside  over  the
deliberations  of  the  senate,  in  which  the  states  were
all  assembled  and  represented.  His  impartiality  m  the
discharge  of  its  duties  might  be  fairly  presumed ;  and
the  employment  would  not  only  bring  his  character  in
review  before  the  public ;  but  enable  him  to  justify  the
public  confidence,  by  performing  his  public  functions
with  independence,  and  firmness,  and  sound  discretion.
A  citizen,  who  was  deemed  worthy  of  being  one  of  the
competitors  for  the  presidency,  could  scarcely  fail  of
being  distinguished  by  private  virtues,  by  comprehen-
sive acquirements,  and  by  eminent  services.  In  aU
questions  before  the  senate  he  might  safely  be  appealed
to,  as  a  fit  arbiter  upon  an  equal  division,  in  which  case
alone  he  is  entrusted  with  a  vote.

^  736.  But  the  strong  motive  for  this  appointment
was  of  another  sort,  founded  upon  state  jealousy,  and
state  equality  in  the  senate. If  the  speaker  of  the

1  1  Black.  Comtn.  181 ;  3  Black.  Comm.  47; 1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.
App.,  224.


, Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  211

senate  was  to  be  chosen  from  its  own  members,  the
state,  upon  whom  the  choice  would  fall,  might  possess
either  more  or  less,  than  its  due  share  of  influence.  If
the  speaker  were  not  allowed  to  vote,  except  where
there  was  an  equal  division,  independent  of  his  own
vote,  then  the  state  might  lose  its  own  voice;*  if  he
were  albwed  to  give  his  vote,  and  also  a  casting  vote,
then  the  state  might,  in  efiect,  possess  a  double  vote.
Either  alternative  would  of  itself  present  a  predicament
sufficiendy  embarrassing.  On  the  other  hand,  ii^no
casting  vote  were  allowed  in  any  cstse,  then  the  inde-
cision and  inconvenience  might  be  very  prejudicial  to
the  public  interests,  in  case  of  an  equality  of  votes.'
It  might  give  rise  to  dangerous  feuds,  or  intrigues,
and  create  sectional  and  state  agitations.  The  smaller
states  might  well  suppose,  that  their  interests  were  less
secure,  and  less  guarded,  than  they  ought  to  be.  Under
such  circumstances,  the  vice  president  would  seem  to
be  the  most  fit  arbiter  to  decide,  because  he  would  be
the  representative,  not  of  one  state  only,  but  of  all ;  and
must  be  presumed  to  feel  a  lively  interest  in  promoting
all  measures  for  the  public  good.  This  reasoning  ap-
pears to  have  been  decisive  in  the  convention,  and  sat-
isfactory to  the  people.'  It  establishes,  that  there  was- a
manifest  propriety  in  making  the  arrangement  conducive
to  the  harmony  of  the  states,  and  the  dignity  of  the
general  government.  And  as  the  senate  possesses  the
power  to  make  rules  for  its  own  proceedings,  there  is
Uttie  danger,  that  there  can  ever  arise  any  abuse  of  the
jM^siding  power.  The  danger,  if  any,  is  rather  the
other  way,  that  the  presiding  power  will  be  either
silendy  weakened,  or  openly  surrendered,  so  as  to  leave

1  The  Federalist,  Na  68.  s  The  Federalist,  No.  6a

3  2  Elliot's  Debates,  359, 360,  36!  ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  37, 38, 51,  53.


Digitized  by


Google


212  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  HI.

the  office  litde  more,  than  the  barren  honour  of  a  place,
without  influence  and  without  action.

§  737.  A  question,  mvolving  the  authority  of  the  vice
president,  as  presiding  officer  in  the  senate,  has  been
much  discussed  in  consequence  of  a  decision  recendy
made  by  that  officer.  Hitherto  the  power  of  preserving
order  during  the  deliberations  of  the  senate  in  all-cases,
where  the  rules  of  the  senate  did  not  specially  prescribe
another  mode,  had  been  siiendy  supposed  to  belong  to
the  vice  president,  as  an  incident  of  office.  It  had
never  been  doubted,  much  less  denied,  from  the  first
organization  of  the  senate ;  and  its  existence  had  been
assumed,  as  an  inherent  quality,  constitutionally  delegat-
ed, subject  only  to  such  rules,  as  the  senate  should  irom
time  to  time  prescribe.  In  the  winter  session  of  1826,
the  vice  president  decided  in  effect,  that,  as  president
of  the  senate,  he  had  no  power  of  preserving  order,  or  of
calling  any  member  to  order,  for  words  spoken  in  the
course  of  debate,  upon  his  own  authority,  but  only  so  far,
as  it  was  given,  and  regulated  by  the  rules  of  the  senate.^
Thb  was  a  virtual  surrender  of  the  presiding  power  (if
not  universally,  at  least  in  that  case)  into  the  hands  of  the
senate;  and  disarmed  the  officereven  of  the  powerof  self-
protection  from  insult  or  abuse,  unless  the  senate  should
choose  to  make  provision  for  it  If,  therefore,  the  senate
should  decline  to  confer  the  power  of  preserving  order,
the  vice  president  might  become  a  mere  pageant  and
cipher  in  that  body.  I^  mdeed,  the  vice  president  had
not  this  power  virtute  offidiy  there  was  nothing  to  pre-
vent the  senate  from  confiding  it  to  any  other  officer
chosen  by  itself!  Nay,  if  the  power  to  preside  had  not
this  incident,  it  was  difficult  to  perceive,  what  other

1  I  American  Annual  Register,  86,  87 ;  3  American  Annual  Register,
99 ;  4  Elliot'd  Debates,  31 1  to  315.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  213

incident  it  had.  The  power  to  put  questions,  or  to
declare  votes,^  might  just  as  well,  upon  similar  reason-
ing, be  denied,  unless  it  was  expressly  conferred.  The
power  of  the  senate  to  prescribe  rules  could  not  be
deemed  omnipotent.  It  must  be  construed  with  refer-
ence to,  and  ia  connexion  with  the  power  to  preside ;  and
the  latter,  according  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind,
and  of  public  bodies,  was  always  understood  to  include
the  power  to  keep  order ;  upon  the  clear  ground,  that
the  grant  of  a  power  includes  the  authority  to  make  it
effectual,  and  also  of  self-preservation.

^  738.  The  subject  at  that  time  attracted  a  good
deal  of  discussion ;  and  was  finally,  as  a  practical  in-
quiry, put  an  end  to  in  1828,  by  a  rule  made  by  the
senate,  that  "  every  question  of  order  shall  be  decided
by  the  president  without  debate,  subject  to  a{^eal  to
the  senate.*'  ^  But  still  the  question,  as  one  of  consti-
tutional right  and  duty,  liable  to  be  regulated,  but  not  to
be  destroyed  by  the  senate,  deserves,  and  should  re-
ceive, the  most  profound  investigation  of  every  man
solicitous  for  the  permanent  dignity  and  independence
of  the  vice  presidency.*

^  739.  The  propriety  of  entrusting  the  senate  with
the  choice  of  its  other  officers,  and  also  of  a  president
pro  tempore  in  the  absence  of  the  vice  president,
or  when  he  exercises  the  office  of  president,  seems
never  to  have  been  questioned;  and  indeed  is  so
obvious,  that  it  is  wholly  unnecessary  to  vindicate  it
Confidence  between  the  senate  and  its  officers,  and
the  power  to  make  a  suitable  •  choice,  and  to  secure  a
suitable  responsibility  for  the  faithful  discharge  of  the
duties  of  office,  are  so  indispensable  for  the  public  good,

^  3  American  Annual  Register,  99.
<  See  Jefferson's  Manual,  §  15, 17.


Digitized  by


Google


214  COirSTITUTIOW  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III*

that  the  provision  will  command  miiycrsal  assent,  as
soon  as  it  is  mentioned*  It  has  grown  into  a  general
practice  for  the  vice  president  to  vacate  the  sena-
torial chair  a  short  time  before  the  termination  of  each
session,  in  order  to  enable  the  senate  to  choose  a
president  pro  tempore,  who  might  already  be  in  office,
if  the  vice  president  in  the  recess  should  be  called
to  the  chair  of  state.  The  practice  is  founded  in
wisdom  and  sound  policy,  as  it  immediately  provides
for  an  exigency,  which  may  well  be  expected  to  occur
at  any  time ;  and  prevents  the  choice  from  bemg
influenced  by  temporary  excitements  or  intrigues,
arising  from  the  actual  existence  of  a  vacancy.  As  it
is  useful  in  peace  to  provide  for  war;  so  it  is  likewise
usefrd  m  times  of  profound  tranquillity  to  provide  (or
political  agitations,  which  may  disturb  the  public  har-
mony.

^  740.  The  next  clause  of  the  third  section  of  the
first  article  respects  the  subject  of  impeachment.  It  is
as  folbws:  ^The  senate  shall  have  the  sole  power  to
^  try  all  impeachments.  ^  When  sitting  for  that  purpose,
**they  shall  be  on  oath  or  affirmation.  When  the  presi-
**dent  of  the  United  States  is  tried,  the  chief  justice
**  shall  preside.  And  no  person  shall  be  convicted  with-
**  out  the  concurrence  of  two  thirds  of  the  members
**  present'*

^  741.  Upon  the  subject  of  impeachments  something
has  already  been  said,  in  treating  of  that  branch
of  the  constitution,  which  delegates  to  the  house  of
representatives  the  sole  power  of  impeachment  Upon
the  propriety  of  delegating  the  power  it  b  unneces-
sary to  enlarge.  But  the  next  inquiry  naturally  pre-
sented is,  by  what  tribunal  shall  an  impeachment  be
tried  ? It  is  obviously  mcorrect  in  theory,  and  against


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  TH£  SEiriTS.  216

■  /

the  general  principles  of  justice,  that  the  same  tribunal
should  at  once  be  the  accusers  and  the  judges ;  that
they  should  first  decide  upon  the  verity  of  the  accusa-
tion, and  then  try  the  oflTenders.*  The  first  object  in
the  administration  of  justice  is,  or  ought  to  be,  to  se-
cure an  impartial  trial  This  is  so  fundamental  a
rule  in  all  republican  governments,  that  it  can  require
little  reasoning  to  support  it ;  and  the  only  surprise  is,
that  it  could  ever  have  been  overlooked.

^  742.  The  practice  of  impeachments  seems  to^^have
been  originally  derived  into  the  common  law  from  the
Germans,  who,  in  their  great  councils,  sometimes  tried
capital  accusations  relating  to  the  public.  Licet  cq^ud
concilium  accuiare^  quoque  et  discrimen  capitis  iniendere.^
When  it  was  adopted  in  England,  it  received  material
improvements.  In  Germany,  and  also  in  the  Grecian
and  Roman  republics,  the  people  were,  at  the  same  time,
the  accusers  and  the  judges ;  thus  trampling  down,  at
the  outset,  the  best  safeguards  of  the  rights  and  lives  of
the  citizens.^  But  in  England,  the  house  of  commons
is  invested  with  the  sole  power  of  impeachment,  and  the
house  of  lords  with  the  sole  power  of  trial.  Thus,  a
tribunal  of  high  dignity,  independence,  and  intelligence,
and  not  likely  to  be  unduly  swayed  by  the  influence  of
popular  opinion,  is  established  to  protect  the  accused,
and  secure  to  him  a  favourable  hearing.*  Montesquieu
has  deemed  such  a  tribunal  worthy  of  the  highest
praise.^  Machiavel  has  ascribed  the  ruin  of  the  repub-
lic of  Florence  to  the  want  of  a  mode  of  providing  by

1  Rawle  on  Const  ch.  22,  p.  209,  210.

«  4  Black.  Comm.  260 ;  Tacit  de  Morib.  Genu.  12,

3  4  Black.  Comm.  261 ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  164, 165, 16a

4  4  Black.  Comm.  261 ;  but  see  Faley's  Moral  Philosophy,  B.  6,  ch.8;
1  Wilson's  Law  Lect  450, 451.

5  Montesq.  Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  11,  cb.  6.


Digitized  by


Google


216  CONSTITUTIOK  or  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  HI.

impeachment  against  those,  who  offend  against  the
state.  An  American  commentator  has  hazarded  the
extraordinary  remark,  that,  **  If  the  want  of  a  proper
tribunal  for  the  trial  of  impeachments  can  endanger  the
liberties  of  the  United  States,  some  future  Machiavel
may  perhaps  trace  their  destruction  to  the  same
source/^  ^  The  model,  fix)m  which  the  national  court  of
unpeadhments  is  borrowed,  is,  doubdess,  that  of  Great
Britain  ;  and  a  simUar  constitutional  distribution  of  the
power  exists  in  many  of  the  state  governments.*

§  743.  The  great  objects,  to  be  attamed  m  the  selec-
tion of  a  tribunal  for  the  trial  of  impeachments,  are,
impartiality,  integrity,  mtelligence,  and  independence.
If  either  of  these  is  wanting,  the  trial  must  be  radically
imperfecj.  To  ensure  impartiality,  the  body  must  be
in  some  degree  removed  from  popular  power  and  pas-
sions, from  the  influence  of  sectional  prejudice,  and  from
the  more  dangerous  hxfluence  of  mere  party  spirit  To
secure  integrity,  there  must  be  a  lofty  sense  of  duty,  and
a  deep  responsibility  to  future  times,  as  well  as  to  God.
To  secure  intelligence,  there  must  be  age,  experience,
and  high  intellectual  powers,  as  well  as  attainments.
To  secure  independence,  there  must  be  numbers,  as
well  as  talents,  and  a  confidence  resulting  at  once  from
permanency  of  place,  and  dignity  of  station,  and  enlight-
ened patriotism.  Does  the  senate  combine,  in  a  suita-
ble degree,  all  these  qualifications  ?  Does  it  combine
them  more  perfectly,  than  any  other  tribunal,  which
could  be  constituted  ?  What  other  tribunal  could  be
entrusted  with  the  authority  ?  These  are  questions  of
the  highest  importance,  and  of  the  most  frequent  occur-
rence. They  arose  in  the  convention,  and  underwent

I  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  348.
9  The  Federalist,  No.  65,  66.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  TH£  SENATE.  217

a  full  discussion  there.  They  were  again  deliberately
debated  in  the  state  conventions  ;  and  they  have  been
at  various  times  since  agitated  by  jurists  and  statesmen^
and  political  bodies.  Few  parts  of  the  constitution
have  been  assailed  vnth  more  vigour ;  and  few  have
been  defended  with  more  ability.  A  learned  commen-
tator, at  a  considerable  distance  of  time  after  the  adop-
tion' of  the  constitution,  did  not  scruple  to  declare,  that
it  was  a  most  inordinate  power,  and  in  some  mstances
utterly  incompatible  with  the  other  functions  of  the  sen-
ate ;  ^  and*  a  similar  opinion  has  often  been  propagated
with  an  abundance  of  zeaL*  The  journal  of  the  con-
vention bears  testimony  also  to  no  inconsiderable  diver-
sity of  judgment  on  the  subject  in  that  body.

§  744.  The  subject  is  itself  full  of  intrinsic  difficulty
in  a  government  purely  elective.  The  jurisdiction  is
to  be  exercised  over  offences,  which  are  committed  by
public  men  in  violation  of  their  public  trust  and  duties.
Those  duties  are,  in  many  cases,  political ;  and,  indeed,
in  other  cases,  to  which  the  power  of  impeachment  will
probably  be  applied,  they  will  respect  functionaries  of  a
high  character,  where  the  remedy  would  otherwise  be
wholly  inadequate,  and  the  grievance  be  incapable  of  re-
dress. Strictly  speaking,  then,  the  power  partakes  of  a
political  character,  ^s  it  respects  injuries  to  the  society
in  its  political  character ;  and,  on  this  account,  it  requires
to  be  guarded  in  its  exercise  against  the  spirit  of  faction,
the  intolerance  of  party,  and  the  sudden  movements  of
popular  feeling.  The  prosecution  will  seldom  fail  to
agitate  •  the  passions  of  the  whole  community,  and  to


^  1  Tucker's  Black.  Coram.  App.  200 ;  Id,  335,  336, 387.

2  9  Amer.  Museum,  549 ;  3  Amer.  Museum,  71 ;  The  Federalist,  No.
65,  66;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  337 ;  Jour,  of  CoDventioo,  Supple-
ment, p.  4!<5, 437.

VOL.  II.  28


Digitized  by


Google


218 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

divide  it  into  parties,  more  or  less  friendly,  or  hostile
to  the  accused.  The  press,  with  its  unsparing  vigi-
lance, will  arrange  itself  on  either  side,  to  control,  and
influence  public  opinion ;  and  there  will  always  be  some
danger,  that  the  decision  will  be  regulated  more  by  the
comparative  strength  of  parties,  than  by  the  real  proofs
of  innocence  or  guilt.*

^  745.  On  the  other  hand,  the  delicacy  and  magni-
tude of  a  trust,  which  so  deeply  concerns  the  political
existence  and  reputation  of  every  man  engaged  in  the
administration  of  public  affairs,  cannot  be  overlooked.*
It  ought  not  to  be  a  power  so  operative  and  instant,
that  it  may  intimidate  a  modest  and  conscientious
statesman,  or  other  functionary  from  accepting  office ;
nor  so  weak  and  torpid,  as  to  be  capable  of  lulling  offend-
ers into  a  general  security  and  indifference.  The  difli-
culty  of  placing  it  rightly  in  a  government,  resting  en-
tirely on  the  basis  of  periodical  elections,  wilf  be  more
strikingly  perceived,  when  it  is  considered,  that  the
ambitious  and  the  cunning  will  often  make  strong  accu-
sations against  public  men  the  means  of  their  own  ele-
vation to  office ;  and  thus  give  an  impulse  to  the  power
of  impeachment,  by  pre-occupying  the  public  opinion.
The  convention  appears  to  have  been  very  strongly  im-
pressed with  the  difficulty  of  constituting  a  suitable
tribunal ;  and  finally  came  to  the  result,  that  the  senate
was  the  most  fit  depositary  of  this  exalted  trust.  In  so
doing,  they  had  the  example  before  them  of  several  of
i&e  best  considered  state  constitutions ;  and  the  exam-
ple, in  some  measure,  of  Great  Britain.  The  most  stren-
uous opponent  cannot,  therefore,  allege,  that  it  was  a
rash  and  novel  experiment ;  the  most  unequivocal  friend

I  The  Federalist,  No.  65.

«  The  Federalist,  No.  65  ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  165.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  219

must,  at  the  same  time,  admit,  that  it  is  not  free  from
all  plausible  objections.*

§  746.  It  will  be  well,  therefore,  to  review  the
ground,  and  ascertain,  how  far  the  objections  are  well
founded ;  and  whether  any  other  scheme  would  have
been  more  unexceptionable.  The  principal  objections
were  as  follows :  (1.)  That  the  provision  confounds  the
legislative  and  judiciary  authorities  in  the  same  body,
in  violation  of  the  well  known  maxim,  which  requires  a
separation  of  them.  (2.)  That  it  accumulates  an  undue
proportion  of  power  in  the  senate,  which  has  a  tenden-
cy to  make  it  too  aristocratic.  (3.)  That  the  efficiency
of  the  court  will  be  impaired  by  the  circumstances,  that
the  senate  has  an  agency  in  appointment  to  office.
(4.)  That  its  efficiency  is  still  further  impaired  by  its
participation  in  the  functions  of  the  treaty -making  pow-
er.*

§  747.  The  first  objection,  which  relates  to  the  sup-
posed necessity  of  an  entire  separation  of  the  legisla-
tive and  judicial  powers,  has  been  already  discussed  in
its  most  general  form  in  another  place.  It  has  been
sjiiown,  that  the  maxim  does  not  apply  to  partial  inter-
mixtures of  these  powers ;  and  that  such  an  intermix-
ture is  not  only  unobjectionable,  but  is,  in  many  cases,
indispensable  for  the  purpose  of  preserving  the  due
mdependence  of  the  diflFerent  departments  of  govern-
ment, and  their  harmony  and  healthy  operation  in  the
advancement  of  the  public  interests,  and  the  preserva-
tion of  the  public  liberties.'  The  question  is  not  so
much,  whether  any  intermixture  is  allowable,  as  wheth-
er the  intermixture  of  the  authority  to  try  impeach-
ments with  the  other  functions  of  the  senate  is  salutary


I  The  Federalist,  No.  65, 66.  «  Id.  No.  66,

3  Ante,  vol.  ii.  §  524  to  540 ;  Rawle  on  Constitution,  ch.  22,  p.  212.


Digitized  by


Google


220  CONSTITUTION  OF  Tfii:  U.  STATES. [BOOK  lit*

and  usefiiL  Now,  some  of  these  functions  constitute
a  sound  reason  for  the  investment  of  the  power  in  this
branch.  The  offences,  which  the  power  of  impeach-
ment is  designed  principally  to  reach,  are  those  of  a
political,  or  of  a  judicial  character.  They  are  not  those,
which  lie  within  the  scope  of  the  ordinary  municipal
jurisprudence  of  a  country.  They  are  founded  on  dif-
ferent principles ;  are  governed  by  different  maxims ;
are  directed  to  different  objects  ;  and  require  different
remedies  from  those,  which  ordinarily  apply  to  crimes.*
So  far  as  they  are  of  a.  judicial  character,  ic  is  obviously
more  safe  to  the  public  to  confide  them  to  the  senate,
than  to  a  mere  court  of  law.  The  senate  may  be  pre-
sumed always  to  contain  a  number  of  distinguished
lawyers,  and  probably  some  persons,  who  have  held
judicial  stations.  At  the  same  time  they  will  not  have
any  undue  and  unmediate  sympathy  with  the  accused
from  that  common  professional,  or  corporation  spirit,
which  is  apt  to  pervade  those,  who  are  engaged  in  simi-
lar pursuits  and  duties.

^  748.  In  regard  to  political  offences,  the  selection  of
the  senators  has  some  positive  advantages.  In  the  first
place,  they  may  be  fairly  presumed  to  have  a  more
enlarged  knowledge,  than  persons  in  other  situations,  of
political  functions,  and  their  difficulties,  and  embar-
rassments; of  the  nature  of  diplomatic  rights  and
duties ;  of  the  extent,  lunits,  and  variety  of  executive
powers  and  operations ;  and  of  the  sources  of  involun-
tary error,  and  undesigned  excess,  as  contradistinguish-
ed from  those  of  meditated  and  violent  disregard  of  duty
and  right  On  the  one  hand,  this  very  experience  and
knowledge  will  bring  them  to  the  trial  with  a  spirit  of
candour  and  intelligence,  and  an  ability  to  comprehend,

1 1  WUson's  Law  Lect  451,  453.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH. X.]  THE  SENATE.  221

and  scrutinize  the  charges  agamst  the  accused ;  and,  on
the  other  hand,  their  connection  with,  and  dependence
on,  the  states,  will  make  them  feel  a  just  regard  for  the
defence  of  the  rights,  and  the  interests  of  the  states
and  the  people.  And  this  may  properly  lead  to  anoth-
er remari£ ;  that  the  power  of  impeachment  is  peculiarly
well  fitted  to  be  left  to  the  final  decision  of  a  tribunsd
composed  of  representatives  of  all  the  states,  havmg  a
c(Hnmon  interest  to  maintain  the  rights  of  all ;  and  yet^
beyond  the  reach  of  local  and  sectional  prejudices.
Surely,  it  will  not  readily  be  admitted  by  the  zealous
defenders  of  state  rights  and  state  jealousies,  that  the
power  is  not  safe  in  the  hands  of  all  the  states,  to  be
used  for  their  own  protection  and  honour.

§  749.  The  next  objection  regards  the  undue  accu*
mulation  of  power  m  the  senate  fit)m  this  source  connect-
ed with  other  sources.  So  far  as  any  other  powers  are
mcompatible  with,  and  obstructive  of,  the  proper  exer-
cise of  the  power  of  impeachment,  they  will  fall  under
consideration  under  another  head.  But  it  is  not  easy  to
perceive,  what  the  precise  nature  and  extent  of  the  ob-
jection is.  What  is  the  due  measure  or  criterion  of
power  to  be  given  to  the  senate  1  What  is  the  stan-
dard, which  is  to  be  assumed  ?  If  we  are  to  regard
dieory,  no  power  in  any  department  of  government  is
undue,  which  is  safe  and  useful  in  its  actual  operations,
which  is  not  dangerous  in  its  form,  or  too  wide  in  its
extent  It  is  incumbent,  then,  on  those,  who  press  the
objection,  to  establish,  by  some  sound  reasoning,  that
the  power  is  not  safe,  but  mischievous  or  dangerous.*
Now,  the  power  of  impeachment  is  not  one  expected
in  any  government  to  be  in  constant  or  frequent  exer-
cise. It  is  rather  intended  for  occasional  and  extraor-


1  The  FederaliBt,  No.  66.


Digitized  by


Google


222 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

dinary  cases,  where  a  superiour  power,  acting  for  the
whole  people,  is  put  into  operation  to  protect  their  rights,
and  to  rescue  their  Uberties  from  violation.  Such  a
power  cannot,  if  its  actual  exercise  is  properly  guarded,
in  the  hands  of  functionaries,  responsible  and  wise,  be
justly  said  to  be  unsafe  or  dangerous ;  unless  we  are  to
say,  that  no  power,  which  is  liable  to  abuse,  should  be,
under  any  circumstances,  delegated.  The  senators  can-
not be  presumed  in  ordinary  decency,  not  to  be  a  body
of  sufficient  wisdom  to  be  capable  of  executing  the
power ;  and  their  responsibility  arises  from  the  moder-
ate duration  of  their  office,  and  their  general  stake  in  the
interests  of  the  community,  as  well  as  their  own  sense
of  duty  and  reputation.  If,  passing  from  theory,  resort
is  had  to  the  history  of  other  governments,  there  is  no
reason  to  suppose,  that  the  possession  of  the  power  of
trying  impeachments  has  ever  been  a  source  of  undue
aristocratical  authority,  or  of  dangerous  influence.  The
history  of  Great  Britain  has  not  established,  that  the
house  of  lords  has  become  a  dangerous  depositary  of
influence  of  any  sort  from  its  being  a  high  court  of  im-
peachments. If  the  power  of  impeachment  has  ever
been  abused,  it  has  not  trampled  upon  popular  rights.
If  it  has  struck  down  high  victims,  it  has  followed,  rath-
er than  led,  the  popular  opinion.  If  it  has  been  an
instrument  of  injustice,  it  has  been  from  yielding  too
much,  and  not  too  little.  If  it  has  sometimes  suffered
an  offender  to  escape,  it  has  far  more  frequendy  puri-
fied the  fountains  of  justice,  and  brought  down  the
favourite  of  courts,  and  the  perverter  of  patronage  to
public  humiliation  and  disgrace.  And  to  bring  the  case
home  to  our  own  state  governments,  the  power  in  our
state  senates  has  hitherto  been  without  danger,  though
certainly  not  without  efficiency.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  223

^  750.  The  next  objection  is,  that  the  power  is  not
eflScient  or  safe  in  connexion  with  the  agency  of  the
senate  in  appointments.  The  argument  is,  that  sena-
tors, who  have  concurred  in  an  appointment,  will  be
too  indulgent  judges  of  the  conduct  of  the  men,  in
whose  efficient  creation  they  have  participated.^  The
same  objection  lies  with  equal  force  against  all  govern-
ments, which  entrust  the  power  of  appointment  to  any
persons,  who  have  a  right  to  remove  them  at  pleasure.
It  might  in  such  cases  be  urged,  that  the  favouritism
of  the  appointor  would  always  screen  the  misbehaviour
of  the  appointees.  Yet  no  one  doubts  the  fitness  of
entrusting  such  a  power;  and  confidence  is  reposed,
and  properly  reposed,  in  the  character  and  responsi-
bility of  those,  who  make  the  appointment.*  The  ob-
jection is  greatly  diminished  in  its  force  by  the  consid-
eration, that  the  senate  has  but  a  slight  participation  in
the  appointments  to  office.  The  president  is  to  nomi-
nate and  appoint;  and  the  senate  are  called  upon
merely  to  confirm,  or  reject  the  nomination.  They
have  no  right  of  choice ;  and  therefore  must  feel  less
solicitude,  as  to  the  individual,  who  is  appointed.^  But,
in  fact,  the  objection  is  itself  not  well  founded ;  for  it
will  rarely  occur,  that  the  persons,  who  have  concurred
in  the  appointment,  will  be  members  of  the  senate  at
the  time  of  the  trial.  As  one  third  is,  or  may  be,
changed  every  two  years,  the  case  is  highly  improba-  *
ble ;  and  still  more  rarely  can  the  fact  of  the  appoint-
ment operate  upon  the  minds  of  any  considerable  num-
ber of  the  senators.  What  possible  operation  could  it
have  upon  the  judgment  of  a  man  of  i-easonable  intelli-
gence and  integrity,  that  he  had  assented  to  the  ap-

1  The  Federalist,  No.  66.1d. a  No.  66. 3  id.  Na  66*.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


S24  CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

pointment  of  any  individual,  of  whom  he  ordinarily
could  have  little,  or  no  personal  knowledge,  and  in
whose  appointment  he  had  concurred  upon  the  judg-
ment and  recommendation  of  others  1  Such  an  influ-
ence is  too  remote  to  be  of  much  weight  in  human
affairs ;  and  if  it  exists  at  all,  it  is  too  common  to  form
a  just  exception  to  the  competency  of  any  forum.

§  761.  The  next  objection  is  to  the  inconvenience
of  the  union  of  the  power  with  that  of  making  treaties.
It  has  been  strongly  urged,  that  ambassadors  are  ap-
pointed by  the  president,  with  the  concurrence  of  the
senate ;  and  if  he  makes  a  treaty,  which  is  ratified  by
two  thirds  of  the  senate,  however  corrupt  or  excep-
tionable his  conduct  may  have  been,  th^e  can  be  litde
chance  of  redress  by  an  impeachment  If  the  treaty
be  ratified,  and  the  minister  be  impeached  for  conclud-
ing it,  because  it  is  derogatory  to  the  honour,  the  inter-
est, or  perhaps  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  nation,  who
(it  is  said)  are  to  be  his  judges  1  The  senate,  by
whom  it  has  been  approved  and  ratified  ?  If  the  presi-
dent be  impeached  for  giving  improper  instructiqns  to
the  minister,  and  for  ratifying  the  treaty  pursuant  to  his
instructions,  who  are  to  be  his  judges  ?  The  senate,
to  whom  the  treaty  has  been  submitted,  and  by  whom
it  has  been  approved  and  ratified  ?  ^  This  would  be  to
constitute  the  senators  their  own  judges  in  every  case
of  a  corrupt  or  perfidious  execution  of  their  trust.*

§  762.  Such  is  the  objection  pressed  with  unusual
earnestness,  and  certainly  having  a  more  plausible
foundation,  than  either  of  the  preceding.  It  jH-e-sup-
poses,  however,  a  state  of  facts  of  a  very  extracH^dinary
character,  and  having  put  an  extreme  case,  argues  frcwn

I  1  Tucker's  Black.  Conun.  App.  335, 336. ^  The  Federalist,  No.  66.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


I


CH.  X.]  THE  8£irATE.  226

it  against  the  propriety  of  any  delegation  of  the  power,
which  m  such  a  case  might  be  abused.  This  is  not
just  reasoning  m  any  case ;  and  least  of  aD  in  cases
respecting  the  polity  and  organization  of  gOTemments ;
for  in  all  such  cases  there  must  be  power  reposed  in
some  person  or  body ;  and  wherever  it  is  reposed,  it
may  be  abused.  Now,  the  case  put  is  either  one,  where
the  senate  has  ratified  an  appointment  or  treaty,  inno-
cently believing  it  to  be  unexceptionable,  and  beneficial
to  the  country ;  or  where  the  senate  has  corruptf y  rati-
fied it,  and  basely  betrayed  their  trust  In  the  former
case,  the  senate  having  acted  with  fidelity,  according
to  their  best  sense  of  duty,  would  feel  no  sympathy  for
a  corrupt  executive  or  minister,  who  had  acted  with
fi*aud  or  dishonour  unknown  to  them.  If  the  treaty
were  good,  they  might  still  desire  to  punish  those,  who
had  acted  basely  or  corruptly  in  negotiating  it.  If  bad,
they  would  feel  indignation  for  the  imposition  practised
upon  them  by  an  executive,  or  minister,  in  whom  they
placed  confidence,  mstead  of  sympathy  for  his  mis-
conduct. They  would  feel,  that  they  had  been  betray-
ed into  an  error ;  and  would  rather  have  a  bias  against,
than  in  favour  of  the  deceiver.

§  763.  I(  on  the  other  hand,  the  senate  had  cor-
ruptiy  assented  to  the  appointment  and  treaty,  it  is
certain,  that  there  would  remwn  no  effectual  remedy
by  impeachment,  so  long  as  the  same  persons  remained
members  of  the  senate.  But  even  here,  two  years
might  remove  a  large  number  of  the  guilty  conspirators ;
and  public  indignation  would  probably  compel  the  re-
signation of  all  But  is  such  a  case  supposable  ?  If  it
be,  then  there  are  others  quite  witiim  the  same  range
of  supposition,  and  equally  mischievous,  for  which  there
can  be  no  remedy. Suppose  a  majority  of  the  senate,

VOL.  II.  29


Digitized  by


Google


fl&6  COirSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [bOOK  HI.

or  house  of  representatives,  corruptly  pass  any  law>  or
violate  the  constitution,  where  is,  th§  remedy  1  Sup-
pose the  house  of  representatives  carry  into  effect  and
appropriate  money  corruptly  m  aid  of  such  a  corrupt
treaty,  where  is  the  remedy  ?  Why  might  it  not  be  as
well  urged,  that  the  house  of  representatives  ought  not
to  be  entrusted  with  the  power  of  impeachment,  be-
cause they  might  comipdy  concur  with  the  executive
in  an  injurious  or  unconsututional  measure?  or  might
comipdy  aid  the  executive  in  negotiating  a  treaty  by
public  resolves,  or  secret  instructions'?  The  truth  is,
that  all  arguments  of  this  sc^rt,  which  suppose  a  combi-
nation of  the  public  functionaries  to  destroy  the  liberty
of  the  people,  and  the  powers  of  the  government,  are
80  extravagant,  that  they  go  to  the  overthrow  of  all  del*
egated  power ;  or  they  are  so  rare,  and  remote  in  prac-
tice, that  they  ought  not  to  enter,  as  elements,  into  any
structure  of  a  free  government.  The  constituticm  sup*
po9eS|  that  men  may  be  trusted  with  power  under  rea-
sonable guards.  It  presumes,  that  the  senate  and  the
executive  wiU  no  more  conspire  to  ov^throw  the  gov-
enunent,  than  the  house  of  representatives.  It  suppos-
es the  best  pledges  for  fiddity  to  be  in  the  character
of  the  individuab,  and  in  the  collective  wisdom  of  the
people  m  the  choice  of  agents.  It  does  not  in  decency
presume,  that  the  two  thirds  of  the  senate,  representing
the  states,  will  corrupdy  unite  with  the  executive,  or
abuse  their  power.  Neither  does  it  suppose,  that  a
mi^ty  of  the  house  of  r^resentatives  will  c(»Tuptly
refuse  to  impeach,  or  corrupUy  pass  a  law.^

^  764.  But  passing  by,  for  the  present,  this  general
reascming  on  the  objections  stated,  let  us  see,  if  any


1  The  Federalist,  No.  66.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  X.J  THX  SEITATX.  227

Other  and  better  practical  scheme  for  the  trial  of  hn-
peachments  can  be  devised.  One  scheme  might  be  to
entrust  it  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States ;
another,  to  entrust  it  to  that  court,  and  the  senate  jointly;
a  third,  t9  entrust  it  to  a  special  tribunal  appointed  per-
manently, or  temporarily  for  the  purpose.  V  it  shall
appear,  that  to  all  of  these  schemes  equally  strong  ob-
jections may  be  made,  (and  probably  none  more  imex-
ceptionable  could  be  suggested,)  the  argument  in  favour
of  the  senate  will  acquire  more  persuasive  cogency.

^  766.  First,  the  entrusting  of  the  trial  of  impeach-
ments to  the  Supreme  Court.  This  was,  in  fact,  the
original  project  in  the  convention.^  It  was  at  first
agreed,  that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  national  judiciary
should  extend  to  impeachments  of  national  officers.*
Afterwards  this  clause  was  struck  out  ;•  and  the  power
to  impeach  was  given  to  the  house  of  representatives;^
and  the  jurisdiction  of  the  trial  of  impeachments  was
also  given  to  the  Supreme  Court*  Ultimately,  the
same  jurisdiction  was  assigned  to  the  senate  by  the
vote  of  nine  states  agamst  two.*

^  756.  The  principal  reasons,  which  prevailed  m
the  convention  in  favour  of  the  final  decision,  and  against
vesting  the  jurisdiction  in  the  Supreme  Court,  may
fairly  be  presumed  to  have  been  those,  which  are  stated
m  the  Federalist.  Its  language  is  as  foDows :  **  Where
else,  than  in  the  senate,  could  have  been  found  a  tribu-
nal sufficiently "  dignified,  or  sufficiently  independent?
What  other  body  would  be  likely  to  feel  confidence
enough  in  its  own  situation,  to  preserve,  unawed  and

1  Journal  of  Convention,  69, 131, 137, 189,  317, 996,  334,  395,  »tO,
d44  346.
«'ld.  69, 121, 137. 3  Id.  189. <  id.  217, 236. *  Id.  2S6.
•  Journal  of  Convention,  324, 326, 346.


Digitized  by


Google


2S8 COirSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  Ul.

uninfluenced,  the  necessary  impartiality  between  an  in-
dividual accused,  and  the  representatives  of  the  people,
his  accusers  ?  Could  the  Supreme  Court  have  been
relied  upon,  as  answering  this  description  1  It  is  much
to  be  doubted,  whether  the  members  of  that  tribunal
would,  at  all  times,  be  endowed  with  so  eminent  a  por-
tion of  fortitude,  as  would  be  called  for  in  the  exercise
of  so  difficult  a  task.  And  it  is  still  more  to  be  doubted,
whether  they  would  possess  a  degree  of  credit  and
authority,  which  might,  on  certam  occasions,  be  indis-
pensable towards  reconciling  the  people  to  a  decision,
which  should  happen  to  clash  with  an  accusation  brought
by  their  immediate  representatives.  A  deficiency  in
the  first  would  be  fatal  to  the  accused ;  in  the  last,  dan-
gerous to  the  public  tranquillity.  The  hazard  in  both
these  respects  could  only  be  avoided  by  rendering  that
tribunal  more  numerous,  than  would  consist  with  a
reasonable  attention  to  economy.  The  necessity  of  a
numerous  court  for  the  trial  of  impeachments  is  equally
dictated  by  the  nature  of  the  proceeding.  This  can
never  be  tied  dpwn  to  such  strict  rules,  either  in  the
delineation  of  the  olBfence  by  the  prosecutors,  or  m  the
construction  of  it  by  the  judges,  as  in  common  cases
serve  to  limit  the  discretion  of  courts  in  favour  of  per-
sonal secmity.  There  will  be  no  jury  to  stand  be-
tween the  judges,  who  are  to  pronounce  the  sentence
of  the  law,  and  the  party,  who  is  to  receive,  or  suffer  it.
The  fi^wful  discretion,  which  a  court  of  impeachments
must  necessarily  have,  to  doom  to  honour  or  to  infamy
the  most  confidential,  and  the  most  distinguished  char-
acters of  the  community,  forbids  the  commitment  of
the  trust  to  a  small  number  of  persons.  These  con-
siderations seem  alone  to  authorize  a  conclusion,  that
the  Supreme  Court  would  have  been  an  improper  sub-
stitute for  the  senate,  as  a  court  of  impeachments.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SBITATC.  229

§  757.  ^  There  remains  a  further  consideration,  which
will  not  a  little  strengthen  this  conclusion.  It  is  this.
The  punishment,  which  may  be  the  consequence  of
conviction  upon  impeachment,  is  not  to  termmate  the
chastisement  of  the  offender.  After  having  been  sen-
tenced to  a  perpetual  ostracism  from  the  esteem,  and
confidence,  and  honours,  and  emoluments  of  his  coun-
try, he  will  still  be  liable  to  prosecution  and  punishment
in  the  ordinary  course  of  law.  Would  it  be  proper,
that  the  persons,  who  had  disposed  of  his  fame,  and  his
most  valuable  rights,  as  a  citizen,  in  one  trial,  should,  in
another  trial,  for  the  same  offence,  be  also  the  disposers
of  his  life  and  fortune  ?  Would  there  not  be  the  greatest
reason  to  apprehend,  that  error  in  the  first  sentence
would  be  the  parent  of  error  in  the  second  sentence  ?
That  the  strong  bias  of  one  decision  would  be  apt  to
overrule  the  influence  of  any  new  lights,  which  might
be  brought  to  vary  the  complexion  of  another  decision?
Those,  who  know  any  thing  of  human  nature,  will  not
hesitate  to  answer  these  questions  in  the  affirmative ;
and  will  be  at  no  loss  to  perceive,  that  by  making  the
same  persons  judges  in  both  cases,  those,  who  might
happen  to  be  the  objects  of  prosecution,  would,  in  a
great  measure,  be  deprived  of  the  double  security  in-
tended them  by  a  double  trial.  The  loss  of  life  and
estate  would  often  be  virtually  included  in  a  sentence,
which  in  its  terms  imported  nothing  more,  than  dis-
mission fit)m  a  present,  and  disqualification  for  a  fu-
ture office.  It  may  be  said,  that  the  intervention  of
a  jury  in  the  second  mstance  would  obviate  the  danger.
But  juries  are  frequently  influenced  by  the  opmions  of
judges.  They  are  sometimes  induced  to  find  special
verdicts,  which  refer  the  main  question  to  the  decision
of  the  court Who  would  be  willing  to  stake  his  life


Digitized  by


Google


230 coNSTiTimoir  or  the  v.  states,  [book  ni.

and  bis  estate  upon  a  verdict  of  a  jury  acting  under
the  auspices  of  judges,  who  had  predetermined  his
guUtr^

^  768.  That  there  is  great  force  in  this  reasoning  aH
persons  of  common  candour  must  allow  ;  that  it  is  in
every  rfespect  satisfactory  and  unanswerable,  has  been
denied,  and  may  be  fairly  questioned.  That  part  of  it,
which  is  addressed  to  the  trial  at  law  by  the  same
judges  might  have  been  in  some  degree  obviated  by
confiding  the  jurisdiction  at  law  over  the  offence  (as  in
£atct  it  is  now  confided)  to  an  inferior  tribunal,  and  ex-
cluding any  judge,  who  sat  at  the  impeachment,  fix>m
sitting  in  the  court  of  trial.  Still,  however,  it  cannot  be
denied,  that  even  in  such  a  case  the  prior  judgment  of
the  Supreme  Court,  if  an  appeal  to  it  were  not  allow-
able, would  have  very  great  weight  upon  the  mmds  of
inferior  Judges.  But  that  part  of  the  reasoning,  which
is  addressed  to  the  importance  of  numbers  in  giving
weight  to  the  decision,  and  especiaUy  that,  which  is
addressed  to  the  public  confidence  and  respect,  which
ought  to  follow  upon  a  decision,  are  entiUed  to  very
great  weight  It  is  fit,  however,  to  give  the  answer  to
the  whole  reasoning  by  the  other  side  in  the  words  of
a  learned  commentator,  who  has  embodied  it  with  no
small  share  of  ability  and  skill.  The  reasoning  ''seems,**
says  he,  "to  have  forgotten,  that  senators  may  be  dis-
continued from  their  seats,  merely  from  the  effect  of
popular  diapprobation,  but  that  the  judges  of  the  Su-
preme Court  cannot  It  seems  also  to  have  forgotten,
that  whenever  the  president  of  the  United  States  b  im-
peached, the  constitution  expressly  requires,  that  the
chief  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  shall  preside  at  the

1  The  Federalist,  No.  65. — But  aee  Rawle  on  the  CoDstatotioii«  ch.  92|
p.  211, 312.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X«]  THE  8ENATS.  231

trial  Are  all  the  confidence,  all  the  firmness,  and  all
the  impartiality  of  that  court,  supposed  to  be  concentred
in  the  chief  justice,  and  to  reside  in  his  breast  only  1
If  that  court  could  not  be  relied  on  for  the  trial  of  im-

4>eachments,  much  less  would  it  seem  worthy  of  reliance
for  the  determination  of  any  question  between  the
United  States  and  a  particidar  state;  much  less  to

/decide  upon  the  life  and  death  of  a  person,  whose
crimes  might  subject  him  to  impeachment,  but  whose

'  influence  might  avert  a  conviction.  Yet  the  courts  of
the  United  States,  are  by  the  constitution  regarded,  as

'  the  proper  tribunals,  where  a  party,  convicted  upon  an
impeachment,  may  receive  that  condign  punbhment,
which  the  nature  of  his  crimes  may  require ;  for  it  must
not  be  forgotten,  that  a  person,  convicted  upon  an  im*
peachment,  will  nevertheless  be  liable  to  indictment,
trial,  judgment,  and  punishment  accordmg  to  law,  &c*
The  question,  then,  might  be  retorted ;  can  it  be  sup-
posed, that  the  senate,  a  part  of  whom  must  have  been
ekiher  particq>s  criminiawith  the  person  impeached,  by
advising  the  measure,  for  which  he  is  to  be  tried,  or
must  have  joined  the  opposition  to  that  measure,  when
proposed  and  debated  in  the  senate,  would  be  a  more
independent,  or  a  more  unprejudiced  tribunal,  than  a
court,  composed  of  judges,  holding  their  offices  during
good  behaviour ;  and  who  could  neither  be  presumed
to  have  participated  in  the  crime,  nor  to  have  prejudged
the  crimuial  ?  '*  *

^  769.  This  reasoning  also  has  much  force  in  it;
but  in  candour  also  it  must  be  admitted  to  be  not
wholly  unexceptionable.  That  part,  which  is  addressed
to  the  circumstance  of  the  chief  justice's  presidmg  at
the  trial  of  the  president  of  the  United  States,  was  (as

1  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  237.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


232 coirsTiTUTioN  of  th£  u.  states, [book  ni.

we  shall  hereafter  see)  not  founded  on  any  supposition,
that  the  chief  justice  would  be  superior  in  confidence,
and  firmness,  and  impartiality,  to  the  residue  of  the
judges,  (though  in  talents  and  public  respect,  and
acquirements,  he  might  fairly  be  presumed  their
superior ;)  but  on  the  necessity  of  excluding  the  vice
president  Grom  the  chah^,  when  he  might  have  a  mani-
fest interest,  which  would  destroy  his  impartiality.  That
part,  which  is  addressed  to  the  supposition  of  the  sena-
tors being  partidpes  criminis,  is  siill  more  exceptiona-
ble; for  it  is  not  only  incorrect  to  affirm,  that  the
senators  must  be,  in  such  a  predicament,  but  in  all
probability  the  senators  would,  in  almost  all  cases,
be  without  any  .participation  in  the  offence.  The
offences,  which  would  be.  generally  prosecuted  by
impeachment,  would  be  those  only  of  a  high  character,
and  belonging  to  persons  in  eminent  stations, — such
as  a  head  of  department,  a  foreign  minister,  a  judge,
a  vice  president,  or  a  president.  Over  the  con-
duct of  such  persons  the  senate  could  ordinarily  have
no  control ;  and  a  corrupt  combination  with  them,  in
the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  their  respective  offices,
could  scarcely  be  presumed.  Any  of  these  officers
might  be  bribed,  or  commit  gross  misdemeanours,  with-
out a  single  senator  having  the  least  knowledge,  or
participation  in  the  offence.  And,  indeed,  very  few  of
the  senators  could,  at  any  time,  be  presumed  to  be  in
habits  of  intimate  personal  confidence,  or  connexion
with  many  of  these  officers.  And  so  far,  as  public
responsibility  is  concerned,  or  public  confidence  is
required,  the  tenure  of  office  of  the  judges  would  have
no  strong  tendency  to  secure  the  former,  or  to  assuage
public  jealousies,  so  as  peculiarly  to  encourage  the  lat-
ter. It  is,  perhaps,  one  of  the  circumstances,  most


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE SClTATfi*  StSS

important  in  the  discbarge  of  judicial  duties,  that  they
rarely  carry  with  them  any  strong  popular  &Tour,  of
popular  influence.  The  influence,  if  any,  is  of  a  differ-*
ent  sort,  arising  from  dignity  of  life  and  conduct,  absti<*
nence  from  political  contests,  exclusive  devotion  to  the
advancement  of  the  law,  and  a  firm  administration  of
justice ;  cu-cumstances,  which  are  felt  more  by  the  pro-
fession, than  they  can  be  expected  to  be  praised  by  the
public.

^  760.  Besides ;  it  ought  not  to  be  overlooked,  that
such  an  additional  accumulation  of  power  in  the  judicial
department  would  not  only  furnish  pretexts  for  clamour
against  it,  but  might  create  a  general  dread  of  its  influ**
ence,  which  could  hardly  fail  to  disturb  the  salutary
effects  of  its  ordinary  functions.*  There  is  nothing,  of
which  a  free  people  are  so  apt  to  be  jealous,  as  of  the
existence  of  political  functions,  and  political  checks,  in
those,  who  are  not  appointed  by,  and  made  directly
responsible  to  themselves.  The  judicial  tenure  of  oflSce
during  good  behaviour,  though  in  some  respects  most
favourable  for  an  independent  discharge  of  these  func-
tions and  checks,  is  at  the  same  time  obnoxious  to
some  strong  objections,  as  a  remedy  for  impeachable
offences.

§  761.  There  are,  however,  reasons  of  great  weighti
besides  those,  which  have  beenah-eady  alluded  to,
which  fully  justify  the  conclusion,  that  the  Supreme
Court  is  not  the  most  appropriate  tribunal  to  be  invest-
ed with  authority  to  try  impeachments.

§  762.  In  the  first  place,  the  nature  of  the  fimctions
to  be  performed.  The  offences,  to  which  the  power  of
impeachment  has  been,  and  is  ordinarily  applied,  as  a
remedy,  are  of  a  political  character. Not  but  that


1  The  Federalist,  No.  65.

VOL.  II.  30


Digitized  by


Google


S34  CONSTITUTIOK  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  IIL

t

crimes  of  a  strictly  legal  character  fall  within  the  scope
ci  the  power,  (for,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  treason,
bribery,  and  other  high  crimes  and  misdemeanom*s  are
expressly  within  it ;)  but  that  it  has  a  more  enlarged
operation,  and  reaches,  what  are  aptly  termed,  political
offences,  growing  out  of  personal  misconduct,  or  gross
neglect,  or  usurpation,  or  habitual  disregard  of  the  pub-
lic interests,  m  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  political
office*  These  are  so  various  in  their  character,  and  so
indefinable  in  their  actual  involutions,  that  it  is  almost
impossible  to  provide  systematically  for  them  by  posi-
tive law.  They  must  be  examined  upon  very  broad
and  comprehensive  principles  of  public  policy  and  duty.
They  must  be  judged  of  by  the  habits,  and  rules,  and
principles  of  diplomacy,  of  departmental  operations  and
arrangements,  of  parliamentary  practice,  of  executive
customs  and  negotiations,  of  foreign,  as  well  as  of
domestic  political  movements ;  and  in  short,  by  a  great
yariety  of  circumstances,  as  well  those,  which  aggravate,
as  those,  which  extenuate,  or  justify  the  offensive
^ts,  which  do  not  properly  belong  to  the  judicial
character  in  the  ordinary  administration  of  justice,  and
are  far  removed  from  the  reach  of  municipal  jurispru-
dence. They  are  duties,  which  are  easily  imderstood
by  statesmen,  and  are  rarely  known  to  judges.  A
tribunal,  composed  of  the  former,  would  therefore  be
&r  more  competent,  in  point  of  intelligence  and  ability,
than  the  latter,  for  the  discharge  of  the  functions,  all
other  circumstances  being  equal  And  surely,  in  such
grave  affairs,  the  competency  of  the  tribunal  to  discharge
the  duties  in  the  best  manner  is  an  indispensable  qual-
ification.

^  763.  In  the  next  place,  it  is  obvious,  that  the
strictness  of  the  forms  of  proceeding  in  cases  of  offen-


Digitized  by


Google


CH. X.]  THE  8£NAT£.  235

I

ces  at  common  law  are  ill  adapted  to  impeachments.
The  very  habits  growing  out  of  judicial  emplojrments ;
the  rigid  manner,  in  which  the  discretion  of  judges  is
limited,  and  fenced  in  on  all  sides,  in  order  to  protect
persons  accused  of  crimes  by  rules  and  precedents  ;
and  the  adherence  to  technicad  principles,  which,  per-
haps, distinguishes  this  branch  of  the  law,  more  than
any  other,  are  all  ill  adapted  to  the  trial  of  political  of-
fences in  the  broad  course  of  impeachments.  And  it
has  been  observed  with  great  propriety,  that  a  tribund
of  a  liberal  and  comprehensive  character,  confined,  as
little  as  possible,  to  strict  forms,  enabled  to  continue  its
session  as  long,  as  the  nature  of  the  law  may  require,
qualified  to  view  the  charge  in  all  its  bearings  and  de-
pendencies, and  to  appropriate  on  sound  principles  d[
public  policy  the  defence  of  the  accused,  seems  indis-^
pensable  to  the  value  of  the  trial.*  The  history  of  im*
peachments,  both  in  England  and  America,  justifies  the
remark.  There  is  little  technical  in  the  mode  of  pro-
ceeding ;  the  charges  are  suflSiciently  clear,  and  yet  in  '
a  general  form  ;  there  are  few  exceptions,  which  arise
m  the  application  of  the  evidence,  which  grow  out  of
mere  technical  rules,  and  quibbles.  And  it  has  repeat-
edly been  seen,  that  the  functions  have  been  better  un-
derstood, and  more  liberally  and  justly  expounded  by
statesmen,  than  by  mere  lawyers.  An  illustrious  in-
stance of  this  sort  is  upon  record  in  the  case  of  the
trial  of  Warren  Hastings,  where  the  question,  whether
an  impeachment  was  abated  by  a  dissolution  of  pariia-
ment,  was  decided  in  the  negative  by  the  house  of  lords,
as  well  as  the  house  of  commons,  against  what  seemed
to  be  the  weight  of  professional  opinion.'


1  Rawle  OD  the  Constitution,  ch.  22,  p.  212.
9  4  Black.  Comm,  400,  Christian's  Note.


Digitized  by


Google


886 coirsTiTUTioN  of  the  u.  states, [book  hi.

§  764.  In  the  next  place,  the  very  functions,  in-
voMng  political  interests  and  connexions,  are  pre-
cisely those,  which  it  seems  most  important  to  exclude
from  the  cognizance  and  participation  of  the  judges  of
the  Supreme  Court.  Much  of  the  reverence  and  re-
spect, belonging  to  the  judicial  character,  arise  from  the
belief,  that  the  tribunal  is  impartial,  as  well  as  enlighten-
ed ;  just,  as  well  as  searching.  It  is  of  very  great  conse-
quence, that  judges  should  not  only  be,  in  fact,  above
all  exception  in  this  respect ;  but  that  they  should  be
generally  believed  to  be  so.  They  should  not  only  be
pure ;  but,  if  possible,  above  suspicion.  Many  of  the
offences,  which  will  be  charged  against  public  men,
will  be  generated  by  the  heats  and  animosities  of  party;
and  the  very  circumstances,  that  judges  should  be  call-
ed to  sit,  as  umpires,  in  the  controversies  of  party,
would  inevitably  involve  them  in  the  common  odium
of  partizans,  and  place  them  in  public  opinion,  if  not
in  fact,  at  least  in  form,  in  the  array  on  one  side,  or  the
other.  The  habits,  too,  arising  from  such  functions,
will  lead  them  to  take  a  more  ardent  part  in  public
discussions,  and  in  the  vindication  of  their  own  political
decisions,  than  seems  desirable  for  those,  who  are
daily  called  upon  to  decide  upon  the  private  rights
and  claims  of  men,  distinguished  for  their  political^con-
sequence,  zeal,  or  activity,  in  the  ranks  of  party.  In  a
free  government,  like  ours,  there  is  a  peculiar  propriety
in  withdrawing,  as  much  as  possible,  all  judicial  func-
tionaries from  the  contests  of  mere  party  strife.  With
all  their  efforts  to  avoid  them,  from  the  free  intercourse,
and  constant  changes  in  a  republican  government,  both
of  men  and  measures,  there  is,  at  all  times,  the  most
imminent  danger,  that  all  classes  of  society  will  be
drawn  mto  the  vortex  of  politics. Whatever  shall  have


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  8£KAT£.  237

a  tendency  to  secure,  in  tribunals  of  justice,  a  spirit  of
moderation  and  exclusive  devotion  to  juridical  duties  is
of  inestimable  value.  What  can  more  surely  advance
this  object,  than  the  exemption  of  them  from  all  partici-
pation in,  and  control  over,  the  acts  of  political  men
in  their  official  duties?  Where,  indeed,  those  acts
fall  within  the  character  of  known  crimes  at  common
law,  or  by  positive  statute,  there  is  litde  difficulty  in
the  duty,  because  the  rule  is  known,  and  equally  ap-
plies to  all  persons  in  and  out  of  office  ;  and  the  facts
are  to  be  tried  by  a  jury,  according  to  the  habitual
course  of  investigation  in  common  cases.  The  remark
of  Mr.  Woodeson  on  this  subject  is  equally  just  and
appropriate.  After  having  enumerated  some  of  the
cases,  in  which  impeachments  have  been  tried  for  polit-
ical offences,  he  adds,  that  from  these  "it  is  apparent,
how  litde  the  ordinary  tribunals  are  calculated  to  take
cognizance  of  such  offences,  or  to  investigate  and  re-
form the  general  polity  of  the  state."  *

§  765.  In  the  next  place,  the  judges  of  the  Supreme
Court  are  appointed  by  the  executive  ;  and  will  nat-
urally feel  some  sympathy  and  attachment  for  the  per-
son, to  whom  they  owe  this  honour,  and  for  those,
whom  he  selects,  as  his  confidential  advisers  in  the
departments.  Yet  the  president  himself,  and  those
confidential  advisers,  are  the  very  persons,  who  are
eminenfly  the  objects  to  be  reached  by  the  power  of
impeachment  The  very  circumstance,  that  some,
perhaps  a  majority  of  the  court,  owe  their  elevation  to
the  same  chief  magistrate,  whose  acts,  or  those  of  his
confidential  advisers,  are  on  trial,  would  have  some
tendency  to  diminish  the  public  confidence  in  the
impartiality  and  independence  of  the  tribunal.

1  2  Woodeeon,  Lect.  40,  p.  602.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


238 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES, [bOOK  III.

§  766.  But,  in  the  next  place,  a  far  more  weighty
consideration  is,  that  some  of  the  members  of  the  judir
cial  department  may  be  impeached  for  malconduct  in
office ;  and  thus,  that  spirit,  which,  for  want  of  a  better
term,  has  been  called  the  corporation  spirit  of  organized
tribunals  and  societies,  will  naturally  be  brought  into
play.  Suppose  a  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  should
.  himself  be  impeached  ;  the  number  of  his  triors  would
not  only  be  diminished ;  but  all  the  attachments,  and
partialities,  or  it  may  be  the  rivalries  and  jealousies  of
peers  on  the  same  bench,  may  be,  or  (what  is  practi-
cally almost  as  mischievous)  may  be  suspected  to  be
put  in  operation  to  screen  or  exaggerate  the  offence.
Would  any  person  soberly  decide,  that  the  judges  of
the  Supreme  Court  Would  be  the  safest  and  the  best
of  all  tribunals  for  the  trial  of  a  brother  judge,  taking
human  feelings,  as  they  are,  and  human  infirmity,  as  it
is?  If  not,  would  there  not  be,  even  in  relation  to
inferior  judges,  a  sense  of  indulgence,  or  a  bias  of  opin-
ion, upon  certain  judicial  acts  and  practices,  which
might  incline  their  minds  to  undue  extenuation,  or  to
imdue  harshness  1  And  if  there  should  be,  in  fact,  no
danger  fix)m  such  a  source,*  is  there  not  some  danger,
imder  such  circumstances,  that  a  jealousy  of  the  opera-
tions of  judicial  tribunals  over  judicial  offences,  would
create  in  the  minds  of  the  community  a  broad  distinc-
tion in  regard  to  convictions  and  punishments,  between
them  and  merely  political  offences  ?  Would  not  the
power  of  impeachment  cease  to  possess  its  just  rever-
ence and  authority,  if  such  a  distinction  should  prevail ;
and  especially,  if  political  victims  rarely  escaped,  and
judicial  officers  as  rarely  suffered  ?  Can  it  be  desira-
ble thus  to  create  any  tendency  in  the  public  mind


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  2S9

towards  the  judicial  department,  which  may.  impair  its
general  respect  and  daily  utility  ?  *

§  767.  Considerations  of  this  sort  cannot  be  over-
looked in  inquiries  of  this  nature ;  and  if  to  some  minds
they  may  not  seem  wholly  satisfactory,  they,  at  least,
establish,  that  the  Supreme  Court  is  not  a  tribunal  for
the  trial  of  impeachment,  wholly  above  all  reasonable
exceptions.  But  if,  to  considerations  of  this  sort,  it  is
added,  that  the  common  practice  of  free  governments,
and  especially  of  England,  and  of  the  states  composing
the  Union,  has  been,  to  confide  this  power  to  one  de-
partment of  the  legislative  body,  upon  the  accusadon
of  another  ;  and  that  this  has  been  found  to  work  well,
and  to  adjust  itself  to  the  public  feelings  and  prejudices,
to  the  dignity  of  the  legislature,  and  to  the  tranquillity  of
the  state,  the  inference  in  its  favour  cannot  but  be
gready  strengthened  and  confirmed.

§  768.  To  those,  who  felt  diflSculties  in  confiding  to
the  Supreme  Court  alone  the  trial  of  impeachments,  the
scheme  might  present  itself^  of  uniting  that  court  with
the  senate  jointly  for  this  purpose.  To  this  union  many
of  the  objections  already  stated,  and  especially  those,
founded  on  the  peculiar  functions  of  the  judicial  depart-
ment, would  apply  with  the  same  force,  as  they  do  tovest-
mg  the  Supreme  Court  with  the  exclusive  jurisdiction.
In  some  other  respects  there  would  result  advantages
from  the  union  ;  but  they  would  scarcely  overbalance
the  disadvantages.^  If  the  judges,  compared  with  the
whole  body  of  the  senate,  were  few  in  number,  their
weight  would  scarcely  be  felt  in  that  body.  The
habits of co-operation in common daily duties

I  But  see  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  22,  p.  214.
«  The  Federalist,  No.  65.


'Digitized  by


Google


240 CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

would  create  among  the  senators  an  habitual  confi-
dence, and  sympathy  with  each  other ;  and  the  same
habits  would  produce  a  correspondent  influence  among
the  judges.  There  would,  therefore,  be  two  distinct
bodies,  acting  together  pro  re  natOj  which  wer^  in  a
great  measure  strangers  to  each  other,  and  with  feel-
ings, pursuits,  and  modes  of  reasoning  wholly  distinct
from  each  other.  Great  contrariety  of  opinion  might
naturally  be  presumed  under  such  circumstances  to
spring  up,  and,  in  all  probability,  would  become  quite
marked  in  the  action  of  the  two  bodies.  Suppose,  upon
an  impeachment,  the  senators  should  be  on  one  side,
and  the  judges  on  the  other;  suppose  a  minority  compos-
ed of  all  the  judges,  and  a  considerable  number  of  the
senators  ;  or  suppose  a  majority  made  by  the  co-oper-
ation of  all  the  judges ;  in  these,  and  many  other  cases,
there  might  be  no  inconsiderable  difficulty  in  satisfy-
ing the  public  mind,  as  to  the  result  of  the  impeachment.
Judicial  opinion  might  go  urgently  one  way,  and  politi-
cal character  and  opinion,  as  urgently  another  way.
Such  a  state  of  things  would  have  littie  tendency  to
add  weight,  or  dignity  to  the  court,  in  the  opinion  of  the
community.  And  perhaps  a  lurking  suspicion  might
pervade  many  minds,  that  one  body,  or  the  other,  had
possessed  an  imdue  preponderance  of  mfluence  in  the
actual  decision.  Even  jealousies  and  discontents  might
grow  up  in  the  bosoms  of  the  component  bodies  them-
selves, from  their  own  difference  of  structure,  and
habits,  and  occupations,  and  duties.  The  practice  of
governments  has  not  hitherto  established  any  great
value,  as  attached  to  the  intermixture  of  different  bodies
for  single  occasions,  or  temporary  objects.

§  769.  A  third  scheme  might  be,  to  entrust  the  trial
of  impeachments  to  a  special  tribunal,  constituted  for


Digitized  by


Google


C  H.  X.]  THE  SfNATf.  241

that  sole  purpose.  But  whatever  arguments  may  be
found  in  favour  of  such  a  plan,  there  will  he  found  to
be  correspondent  objections  and  difficulties.  It  would
tend  to  increase  the  complexity  of  the  political  machine,
and  add  a  new  spring  to  the  operations  of  the  govern-
ment, the  utility  of  which  would  be  at  least  question-
able, and  might  clog  its  just  movements.*  A  court  of
this  nature  would  be  attended  with  heavy  expenses  ;
and  might,  in  practice,  be  subject  to  many  casualties
and  inconveniences.  It  must  consist  either  of  per-
manent officers,  stationary  at  the  seat  of  government,
and  of  course  entitled  to  fixed  and  regular  stipends  ;
or  of  national  officers,  called  to  the  duties  for  the  occa-
sion, though  previously  designated  by  office,  or  rank  ;
or  of  officers  of  the  state  governments,  selected  when
the  impeachment  was  actually  depending.*  Now,
either  of  these  alternatives  would  be  found  full  of  em-
barrassment and  intricacy,  when  an  attempt  should  be
made  to  give  it  a  definite  form  and  organization.  The
eourt,  in  order  to  be  efficient  and  mdependent,  ought
to  be  numerous.  It  ought  to  possess  talents,  experi-
ence, dignity,  and  weight  of  character,  in  order  to
obtain,  or  to  hold,  the  confidence  of  the  nation.  What
national  officers,  not  belonging  to  either  of  the  great
departments  of  the  government,  legislative,  executive,
or  judicial,  could  be  found,  embracing  all  these  requisite
quaUfications  ?  And  if  they  could  be,  what  compensa-
tion is  to  be  made  to  them,  in  order  to  mamtain  their
characters  and  unportance,  and  to  secure  their  services  ?
If  the  court  is  to  be  selected  from  the  state  fimctiona-
ries,  in  what  manner  is  this  to  be  accomplished  ?  How
can  their  acceptance,  or  performance  of  the  duties,  be


1  The  Federalist,  No.  64.  «  Id.  No.  05.

VOL.  II.  31


Digitized  by


Google


242 coNSTiTirrioir  of  the  u.^ates. [book  iji.

either  secured,  or  compelled?  Does  it  not  at  once  sub-
mit the  whole  power  of  impeachment  to  the  control  of
the  state  governments,  and  thus  surrender  into  their
hands  all  the  means  of  making  it  efficient  and  satisfac-
tory 1  In  political  contests  it  cannot  be  supposed,  that
either  the  states,  or  the  state  functionaries,  wUl  not  be-
come partisans,  and  deeply  interested  in  the  success,  or
defeat  of  measures,  in  the  triumph,  or  the  rum  of  rivals,
or  opponents.  Parties  will  naturaUy  desire  to  screen
a  friend,  or  overwhelm  an  adversary  ;  to  secure  the
predominance  of  a  local  policy^  or  a  state  party ;  and  if
so,  what  guarantee  is  there  for  any  extraordinary  fidel-
ity, independence,  or  impartiality,  in  a  tribunal  so  com-
posed, beyond  all  others  1  Descending  from  such  gen-
eral inquiries  to  more  practical  considerations,  it  may
be  asked,  how  shall  such  a  tribunal  be  composed?
Shall  it  be  composed  of  state  executives,  or  state  legis-
latoi*s,  or  state  judges,  or  of  a  mixture  of  all,  or  a  selec-
tion from  all  1  If  the  body  is  very  large,  it  will  become
unwieldy,  and  feeble  from  its  own  weight.  If  it  be  a
mixture  of  all,  it  will  possess  too  many  elements  of
discord  and  diversities  of  judgment,  and  local  and  pro-
fessional opinion.  If  it  be  homogeneous  in  its  charac-
ter, as  if  it  consist  altogether  of  one  class  of  men,  as  of
the  executives  of  all  the  states,  or  the  judges  of  the
Supreme  Courts  of  all  the  states,  can  it  be  supposed,
(even  if  an  equality  m  all  other  respects  could  be  cer-
tainly obtained,)  that  persons,  selected  mamly  by  the
states  for  local  and  peculiar  objects,  could  best  admin-
ister the  highest  and  most  difficult  functions  of  the
national  government  1

^  770.  The  Federalist  has  spoken  with  unusual
fi*eedom  and  directness  on  this  subject.  "The  first
scheme,**  (that  is,  of  vesting  the  power  in  some  per-


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  X.]  THE  8£NAT£.  243

manent  national  officers,)  "  will  be  reprobated  by  every
man,  who  can  compare  the  extent  of  the  public  wants
with  the  means  of  supplying  them.  The  second/'
(that  is,  of  vesting  it  m  state  officers,)  "  will  be  espoused
with  caution  by  those,  who  will  seriously  consider  the
difficulties  of  collecting  men  dispersed  over  the  whole
Union ;  the  injury  to  the  innocent  from  the  jMt)-
crastinated  determination  of  the  charges,  which  might
be  brought  agamst  them ;  the  advantage  to  the  guilty
from  the  opportunites,  which  delay  would  afford  for
intrigue  and  corruption ;  and  in  some  cases  the  detrir
ment  to  the  state  from  the  prolonged  inaction  of  men,
whose  firm  and  faithful  execution  of  their  duty  might
have  exposed  them  to  the  persecution  of  an  intemper-
ate or  designing  majority  in  the  house  of  representa-
tives. Though  this  latter  supposition  may.  seem  harsh,
and  might  not  be  likely  often  to  be  verified ;  yet  it
ought  not  to  be  forgotten,  that  the  demon  of  faction
will,  at  certain  seasons,  extend  his  sceptre  over  all
numerous  bodies  of  men.*'  And  the  subject  is  conclud-
ed with  the  following  reflection.  ^' If  mankind  were  to
resolve  to  agree  in  no  institution  of  government,  until
every  part  of  it  had  been  adjusted  to  the  most  exact
standard  of  perfection,  society  would  soon  become  a
general  scene  of  anarchy,  and  the  worid  a  desert'*  *

§  771.  A  scheme  somewhat  different  fit)m  either
of  the  foregoing  has  been  recommended  by  a  learned
commentator,*  drawn  from  the  Virginia  constitution,  by
which,  in  that  state,  all  impeachments  are  to  be  tried  in
the  courts  of  law,  "  according  to  the  laws  of  the  land ;"
and  by  the  state  laws  the  facts,  as  in  other  cases,  are  to
be  tried  by  a  jury. But  the  objections  to  this  course


1 The  Federalist,  No.  65.

«  1  Tucker's  Black.  Coram.  App.  337, 338.


Digitized  by


Google


244  COirflTITUTIOlf  of  the  v.  states, [book  III.

would  be  very  serious,  not  only  from  the  consid-
erations already  urged,  but  from  the  difficulty  of
impanneling  a  suitable  jury  for  such  purposes.  From
what  state  or  states  is  such  a  jury  to  be  drawn  1  How
is  it  to  be  selected,  or  composed  ?  What  are  to  be  the
qualifications  of  the  jurors  1  Would  it  be  safe  to  en-
trust the  political  interests  of  a  whole  people  to  a  com-
mon panel  1  Would  any  jury  in  times  of  party  excite-
ment by  foimd  sufficiently  firm  to  give  a  true  verdict,
unaffected  by  the  popularity  or  odium  of  the  measure,
when  the  nation  was  the  accuser  1  These  questions
are  more  easily  put,  than  they  can  be  satisfactorily
answered.  And,  indeed,  the  very  circumstance,  that
the  example  of  Virginia  has  found  little  favour  in  o^er
states,  furnishes  decisive  proofs  that  it  is  not  deemed
better  than  others,  to  which  the  national  constitution
bears  the  closest  analogy.

§  772  When  the  subject  was  before  the  state  con-
ventions, although  here  and  there  an  objection  was
started  against  the  plan,  three  states  only  formally  pro-
jposed  any  amendment  Virginia  and  North-Carolina
recommended,  **  that  some  tribunal,  pther  thai;i  the  sen-
ate, be  provided  for  trying  impeachments  of  senators^  ^
leaving  the  provision  in  all  other  respects,  as  it  stood.
New-York  alone  recommended  an  amendment,  that
the  senate,  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court,  and  the
first  or  senior  judge  of  the  highest  state  court  of  gen-
eral or  ordinary  common  law  jurisdiction  in  each  state
should  constitute  a  court  for  the  trial  of  impeachments.*
This  recommendation  does  not  change  the  posture  of  a
single  objection.  It  received  no  support  elsewhere ;
and  the  subject  has  since  silentiy  slept  without  any
effort  to  revive  it.


^  Journ.  of  CoDventioD,  Supp.  435,  448.  »  Id.  437.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  246

§  773.  The  conclusion,  to  which,  upon  a  large  sur-
vey of  the  whole  subject,  our  judgments  are  naturally
led,  is,  that  the  power  has  been  wisely  deposited  with
the  senate.* In  the  language  of  a  learned  commentator,
it  may  be  said,  that  of  all  the  departments  of  the  gov-
ernment, **  none  will  be  found  more  suitable  to  exercise
this  peculiar  jurisdiction,  than  the  senate. Although,
like  their  accusers,  they  are  representatives  of  the  peo-
ple ;  yet  they  are  by  a  degree  more  removed,  and  hold
their  stations  for  a  longer  term. They  are,  therefore,
more  independent  of  the  people,  and  being  chosen  with
the  knowledge,  that  they  may,  while  in  office,  be  called
upon  to  exercise  this  high  function,  they  bring  with
them  the  confidence  of  their  constituents,  that  they  will
iiedthfully  execute  it,  and  the  implied  compact  on  their
own  part,  that  it  shall  be  honestly  discharged. Pre-
cluded from  ever  becoming  accusers  themselves,  it  is
theur  duty  not  to  lend  themselves  to  the  animosities  of
party,  or  the  prejudices  agamst  individuals,  which  may
sometimes  unconsciously  mduce  the  house  of  represen-
tatives to  the  acts  of  accusation. Habituated  to  com-
prehensive views  of  the  great  political  relations  of  the
country,  they  are  naturally  the  best  "qualified  to  decide
on  those  charges,  which  may  have  any  connexion  with
transactions  abroad,  or  great  political  interests  at  home.
And  although  we  cannot  say,  that,  like  the  English
house  of  lords,  they  form  a  distinct  body,  wholly  unin-
fluenced by  the  passions,  and  remote  fix)m  the  inter-
ests, of  the  people ; yet  we  can  discover  m  no  other
division  of  the  government  a  greater  probability  of  im-
partiality and  independence.^'  *

^  774. The  remaining  parts  of  the  clause  of  the
constitution  now  under  consideration  will  not  require  an


'  The  Fedepolist,  No.  65.

s  RawleontheConstch.22,p.312,213.


Digitized  by


Googk


246 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES* [bOOK  III.

daborate  commentary.  The  •first  is,  that  the  senate,
when  sitting  as  a  court  of  impeachment,'^  shall  be  on  oath
or  affirmation ;  '*  a  provision,  which,  as  it  appeals  to  the
conscience  and  integrity  of  the  members  by  the  same
sanctions,  which  apply  to  judges  and  jurors,  who  sit  in
other  trials,  will  commend  itself  to  all  persons,  who  deem
the  highest  trusts,  rights,  and  duties,  worthy  of  the  same
protection  and  security,  at  least,  as  those  of  the  hum-
blest order.  It  would,  indeed,  be  a  monstrous  anomaly,
that  the  highest  officers  might  be  conyicted  of  the
worst  crimes,  without  any  sanction  being  interposed
against  the  exercise  of  the  most  vindictive  passions ;
while  the  humblest  individual  has  a  right  to  demand  an
oath  of  fidelity  from  those,  who  are  his  peers,  and  his
triors.  In  England,  however,  upon  the  trial  of  impeach-
ments, the  house  of  lords  are  not  under  oath ;  but  only
make  a  declaration  upon  their  honour.*  This  is  a  strange
anomaly,  as  in  all  civil  and  criminal  trials  by  a  jury,  the
jurors  are  under  oath;  and  there  seems  no  reason,  why
a  sanction  equally  obligatory  upon  the  consciences  of
the  triors  should  not  exist  m  trials  for  capital  or  other
offences  before  ever^  other  tribunal.  What  is  there  in
the  honour  of  a  peer,  which  necessarily  raises  it  above
the  honour  of  a  commoner  1  The  anomaly  is  rendered
still  more  glaring  by  the  fact,  that  a  peer  cannot  give
testimony,  as  a  witness,  except  on  oath  ;  for,  here,  his
honour  is  not  trusted.  The  maxim  of  the  law,  in  such
a  case,  is  injudicio  rum  credilur^  nisi  juratis.^  Why
should  the  obligation  of  a  judge  be  less  solemn,  than  the
obligation  of  a  witness  1  The  truth  is,  that  it  is  a  privi-
lege of  power,  conceded  in  barbarous  times,  and  founded
on  feudal  sovereignty,  more  than  on  justice,  or  princi-
ple.

1 1  Black.  Comm.  403 ;  4  Inst  49 ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  5a
9  1  Black.  Comm.  4(J2.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATC.  247

^  775.  The  next  provision  is :  "  When  the  president
"of  ,the  United  States  is  tried,  the  chief  justice  shall
^  preside.*'  The  reason  of  this  clause  has  been  already
adverted  to.  It  was  to  •  preclude  the  vice  president,
who  might  be  supposed  to  have  a  natural  desire  to  suc-
ceed to  the  office,  from  being  instrumental  in  procuring
the  conviction  of  the  chief  magistrate.*  Under  such
circumstances,  who  could  be  deemed  more  suitable  to
preside,  than  the  highest  judicial  magistrate  of  the
Union.  *  His  impartiality  and  independence  could  be  as
little  suspected,  as  those  of  any  person  in  the  country.
And  the  dignity  of  his  station  might  well  be  deemed
an  adequate  pledge  for  the  possession  of  the  highest
accomplishments.

^  776.  It  is  added,  "  And  no  person  shall  be  convict-
**ed,  without  the  concurrence  of  two  thirds  of  the
"members  present*'  Although  very  numerous  objec-
tions were  taken  to  the  constitution,  none  seems  to  have
presented  itself  against  this  particular  quorum  required
for  a  conviction ;  and  yet  it  might  have  been  fairiy
thought  to  be  open  to  attack  on  various  sides  from  its
supposed  theoretical  inconvenience  and  incongruity.
It  might  have  been  said  with  some  plausibility,  that  it
deserted  the  general  principles  even  of  courts  of  jus-
tice, where  a  mere  majority  make  the  decision ;  and,  of
all  legislative  bodies,  where  a  similar  rule  is  adopted ;
and,  that  the  requisition  of  two  thirds- would  reduce  the
power  of  impeachment  to  a  mere  nullity.  Besides ;
upon  the  trial  of  impeachments  in  the  house  of  lords
the  conviction  or  acquittal  is  by  a  mere  majority ;  *  so
that  there  is  a  failure  •of  any  analogy  to  support  the
precedent.

1  Rawle  on  Const,  ch.  22,  p.  216.

9  Com.  Dig.  Parliament,  L.  16^  17 ;  2^  Woodeson  Lect  40,  p.  612.


Digitized  by


Google


248  CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

^  777.  It  does  not  appear  from  any  authentic  memo-
rials, what  were  the  precise  grounds,  upon  which  thb
limitation  was  interposed.  But  it  may  well  be  conjec-
tured, that  the  real  grounds  were,  to  secme  an  impartial
trial,  and  to  guard  public  men  from  being  sacrificed  to
the  immediate  impulses  of  popular  resentment  or  party
predommance.  In  England,  the  house  of  lords,  from  its
very  structure  and  hereditary  independence,  furnishes
a  sufficient  barrier  against  such  oppression  and  injus-
tice. Mr.  Justice  Blackstone  has  remarked,  with  mani-
fest satisfaction,  that  the  nobility  ^^have  neither  the
same  bterests,  nor  the  same  passions,  as  popular  asseqi-
blies ;  and,  that  "  it  is  proper,  that  the  nobility  should
judge,  to  insure  justice  to  the  accused ;  as  it  is  proper^
that  the  people  should  accuse,  to  insure  justice  to  the
commonwealth.*'  *  Our  senate  is,  from  the  very  theory
of  the  constitution,  founded  upon  a  more  popular  basis ;
and  it  was  desirable  to  prevent  any  combination  of  a
mere  majority  of  the  states  to  displace,  or  to  destroy  a
meritorious  public  officer.  If  a  mere  majority  were
sufficient  to  convict,  there  would  be  danger,  in  times  of
high  popular  commotion  or  party  spirit,  that  the  influ-
ence of  the  house  of  representatives  would  be  found
irresistible.  The  only  practicable  check  seemed  to  be,
the  introduction  of  the  clause  of  two  thirds,  which
would  thus  require  an  union  of  opinion  and  interest,
rare,  except  in  cases  where  guilt  was  manifest,  and  in-
nocence scarcely  presumable.  Nor  could  the  limitation
be  justly  complained  of;  for,  in  common  cases,  the  law
not  only  presumes  every  man  innocent,  until  he  is  prov-
ed guilty ;  but  unanimity  in  the  verdict  of  the  jury  is
indispensable.  Here,  an  intermediate  scale  is  adopted
between  unanimity,  and  a  mere  majority. And  if  the

1  4  Black.  Comm.  261.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  X.]  THE  SEKATE.  249

guilt  of  a  public  oflScer  cannot  be  established  to  the  sat-
isfaction of  two  thirds  of  a  body  of  high  talents  and
acquirements,  which  sympathizes  with  the  people,  and
represents  the  states,  after  a  full  investigation  of  the
&cts,  it  must  be,  that  the  evidence  is  too  infirm,  and  too
loose  to  justify  a  convic.tion.  Under  such  circum-
stances, it  would  be  far  more  consonant  to  the  notions
of  justice  in  a  republic,  that  a  guilty  person  should
escape,  than  that  an  innocent  person  should  ^become
the  victim  of  injustice  from  popular  odium,  or  party
combinations.

^  778.  At  the  distance  of  forty  years,  we  may  look
back  upon  this  reasoning  with  entire  satisfaction.  The
senate  has  been  found  a  safe  and  efiective  depositary  of
the  trial  of  impeachments.  During  that  period  but  four
cases  have  occurred,  requiring  this  high  remedy.  In
three  there  have  been  acquittals ;  and  in  one  a  convic-
tion. Whatever  may  have  been  the  opinions  of  zeal-
ous partisans  at  the  times  of  their  occurrence,  the  sober
judgment  of  the  nation  sanctioned  these  results,  at  least,
on  the  side  of  the  acquittals,  as  soon  as  they  became
matters  of  history,  removed  from  the  immediate  influ-
ences of  the  prosecutions.  The  unanimity  of  the  awards
of  public  opinion,  in  its  final  action  on  these  controver-
sies, has  been  as  great,  and  as  satisfactory,  as  can  be
attributed  to  any,  which  involve  real  doubt,  or  enlist
warm  prejudices  and  predilections  on  either  side.*  No
reproach  has  ever  reached  he  senate  for  its  unfaithful
discharge  of  these  high  functions ;  and  the  voice  of  a

1  The  trials,  here  alluded  to,  were  of  William  Blouot  in  1799,  of  Sam-
uel Chase  in  1805,  of  John  Pickering  in  1803,  and  of  James  H.  Peck  in
1831.  The  three  former  are  alluded  to  in  Rawle  on  the  Const  ch.  2SI,
p.  215.  See  also  4  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  261,  note ;  Id.  App.  57,  and
Senate  Journals  of  the  respective  years.  Hawle  on  Const  cL  22,  p.  215 ;
Seijeant  on  Constitutional  Law,  ch.  29,  p.  363,  364.

VOL.  II.  32


Digitized  by


Google


250  CONSTITUTION  OF  THB  17.  STATES. [bOOK  Ut«

state  has  rardy,  if  ever,  displaced  a  single  senatw  for
his  vote  on  such  an  occasion.  What  more  could  be
asked  in  the  progress  of  any  government  ?  What  more
could  experience  produce  to  justify  confidaice  in  the
institution  ?

§  779.  The  next  clause  is^  that  ^  Judgment  in  cases
*^  of  impeachment  shall  not  extend  further,  than  to  re-
^moval  from  office,  and  disqualification  to  hdd  and
^^  enjoy  any  office  of  honour,  trust,  or  profit,  uivler  the
**  United  States.  But  the  party  convicted  shall  never-
**theless  be  liable  and  subject  to  indictment,  trial,  judg-
ement, and  punishment,  according  to  law.''

^  780.  It  is  obvious,  that,  upon  trials  on  impeach-
ments, one  of  two  courses  must  be  adopted  m  case
of  a  conviction ;  either  for  the  court  to  proceed  to  jmx)-
nounce  a  full  and  complete  sentence  of  punbhment  for
the  offence  according  to  the  law  of  the  land  in  like
cases,  pending  in  the  common  tribunals  of  justice,  su-
peradding the  removal  from  office,  and  the  consequent
disabilities ;  or,  to  confine  its  sentence  to  the  removal
fix)m  office  and  other  disabilities.  If  the  £uiner  duty
be  a  part  of  the  constitutional  functions  of  the  courts
then,  in  case  of  an  acquittal,  there  cannot  be  another
trial  of  the  party  for  the  same  offence  in  the  common
tribunals  of  justice,  because  it  is  repugnant  to  the  whole
theory  of  the  common  law,  that  a  man  should  be
brought  into  jeopardy  of  life  or  limb  more  than  once  for
the  same  offence.^  A  plea  of  acquittal  is,  therefore,  an
absolute  bar  against  any  second  prosecution  for  the
same  offence.  If  the  court  of  impeachments  is  merely
to  pronounce  a  sentence  of  removal  from  office  and  the
other  disabilities ;  then  it  is  indispensable,  that  provi-
sion should  be  made,  that  the  common  tribunals  of  jus-


1  4  Black.  Comm.  335, 261  ;  Hcwk.  P.  C^  B.  2,  ch.  35.

y  Google


Digitized  by*


CH.  X.]  THE  8£irATB.  251

tice  should  be  at  liberty  to  entertain  jurisdiction  of
the  offence,  for  the  purpose  of  inflicting  the  common
punishment  applicable  to  unoflScial  offenders.  0th*
erwise,  it  might  be  matter  of  extreme  doubt,  whether,
consistendy  with  the  great  maxim  abore  mentioned,
established  for  the  security  of  the  life  and  limbs  and
Kberty  of  the  citizen,  a  second  trial  for  the  same  of-
fence could  be  had,  either  after  an  acquittal,  or  a
eonviction  in  the  court  of  impeachments.  And  if  no
such  second  trial  could  be  had,  then  the  grossest  official
offenders  might  escape  without  any  substantial  punish-
ment, even  for  crimes,  which  would  subject  their  feUow
citiz^is  to  capital  punishment

§781.  The  constitution,  then,  having  provided,  that
judgment  upon  impeachments  shall  not  extend  fiulher,
than  to  removal  from  office,  and  disqualification  to  hold
office,  (which,  however  afflictive  to  an  ambitious  and
elevated  mind,  would  be  scarcely  felt,  as  a  punishment,
by  the  proffigate  and  the  base,)  has  vrisely  subjected
the  party  to  trial  in  the  common  criminal  tribimals,
^  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  such  punishment,  as  ordi-
narily belongs  to  the  offence.  Thus,  for  ms^tance^
treason,  which  by  our  laws  is  a  capital  offence,  may
receive  its  appropriate  punishment ;  and  bribery  in  high
officers,  which  otherwise  would  be  a  mere  disqualifica-
tion from  office,  may  have  the  measure  of  its  infamy
dedt  out  to  it  with  the  same  unsparing  severity,  which
attends  upon  other  and  humbler  offenders.

^  782.  In  England,  the  judgment  upon  impeach-
ments is  not  confined  to  mer^  removal  from  office ;  but
extends  to  the  whole  punishment  attached  by  law  to
the  offence.  The  house  of  lords,  therefore,  upon  a
conviction,  may,  by  its  sentence,  inflict  capital  punish-
Vfkent;  or  perpetusd  banishment;  or  forfeiture  of  goods


Digitized  by


Google


262 CONSTITUTION  OW  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  III.

and  lands ;  or  fine  and  ransom  ;  or  imprisonment ;  as'
well  as  removal  from  office,  and  incapacity  to  hold  office,
according  to  the  nature  and  aggravation  of  the  offence.^
§  783.  As  the  ofiences,  to  which  the  remedy  of  im-
peachment has  been,  and  will  continue  to  be  principally
applied,  are  of  a  political  nature,'  it  is  natural  to  sup-
pose, that  they  will  be  often  exaggerated  by  party
spirit,  and  the  prosecutions  be  sometimes  dictated  by
party  resentments,  as  well  as  by  a  sense  of  the  pub-
lic good.  There  is  danger,  therefore,  that  in  cases
of  conviction  the  punishment  may  be  whoUy  out  of
proportion  to  the  offence,  and  pressed  as  much  by
popular  odium,  as  by  aggravated  crime.  From  the
nature  of  such  offences,  it  is  impossible  to  fix  any  exact
grade,  or  measure,  either  in  the  offences,  or  the  punish-
ments ;  and  a  very  large  discretion  must  unavoidably
be  vested  in  the  court  of  impeachments,  as  to  both.
Any  attempt  to  define  the  offences,  or  to  affix  to  every
grade  of  distinction  its  appropriate  measure  of  punish-
ment, would  probably  tend  to  more  injustice  and  incon-
venience, than  it  would  correct ;  and  perhaps  would
render  the  power  at  once  inefficient  and  unwieldy.
The  discredon,  then,  if  confided  at  all,  being  peculiarly
subject  to  abuse,  and  connecting  itself  with  state  par-
ties, and  state  contentions,  and  state  animosities,  it  was
deemed  most  advisable  by  the  convention,  that  the
power  of  the  senate  to  inflict  punishment  should  merely
reach  the  right  and  qualifications  to  office ;  and  thus
take  away  the  temptation  in  factious  times  to  sacrifice
good  and  great  men  upon  the  altar  of  party. History

\  Com.  Dig.  Parliament,  L.  44;  2  Woodeson,  Lect  40,  p.  611  to
614.
9. 2  WoodesoD,  Lect  40,  p.  601, 601


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SEITATE.  253

had  sufficiently  admonished  them,  that  the  power  of
impeachment  had  been  thus  mischievously  and  inor-
dinately applied  in  other  ages ;  and  it  was  not  safe  to
disregaa*d  those  lessons,  which  it  had  left  for  our  in-
struction, written  not  unfrequently  in  blood.  Lord
Strafford,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  the  First,  and  Lord
Stafford,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second,  were  both
convicted,  and  punished  capitally  by  the  house  of  lords ;
and  both  have  been  supposed  to  have  been  rather  vic-
tims to  the  spirit  of  the  times,  than  offenders  meriting
such  high  punishments.^  And  other  cases  have  occur-
red, in  which  whatever  may  have  been  the  demerits  of
the  accused,  his  final  overthrow  has  been  the  result  of
poUtical  resentments  and  hatreds,  far  more  than  of  any
desire  to  promote  public  justice.*

§  784.  There  is  wisdom,  and  sound  poUcy,  and  in-
trinsic justice  in  this  separation  of  the  offence,  at  least
so  far,  as  the  jurisdiction  and  trial  are  concerned,  into
its  proper  elements,  bringing  the  political  part  under
the  power  of  the  political  department  of  the  govern-
ment, and  retaining  the  civil  part  for  presentment  and
trial  in  the  ordinary  forum.  A  jury  might  well  be
entrusted  with  the  latter ;  while  the  former  should  meet
its  appropriate  trial  and  punishment  before  the  senate.
If  it  should  be  asked,  why  separate  trials  should  thus
be  successively  had ;  Bnd  why,  if  a  conviction  should
take  place  in  a  court  of  law,  that  court  might  not  be  en-
trusted vnth  the  power  to  pronounce  a  removal  from
office,  and  the  disqualification  to  office,  as  a  part  of  its
sentence,  the  answer  has  been  already  given  in  the

1  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  22,  p.  217;  2  Woodeson,  Lect  40,  p.
608  609

s'  Com.  Dig.  Parliament,  L.  28  to  39 ;  2  Woodeson,  Lect  40,  p.  619,
620.


Digitized  by


Google


254  CONST  ITUTIOK  OF  THE  17.  STATES. [bOOK  in.

reasoning  against  vesting  any  court  of  law  with  merdjr
political  functions.  In  the  ordinary  course  of  the  ad-
ministration of  criminal  justice^  no  court  is  authorized
to  remove,  or  disqualify  an  offender,  as  a  part  of  its
regular  judgment  If  it  results  at  all,  it  results  as  a
consequence,  and  not  as  a  part  of  the  sentence.  But
it  may  be  properly  urged,  that  the  vesting  of  such  a
high  and  delicate  power,  to  be  exercised  by  a  court  of
law  at  its  discretion,  would,  in  relation  to  the  distin-
guished functionaries  (^  the  govemi&ent,  be  peculiarly
unfit  and  inexpedient  What  could  be  more  embar*^
rassing,  than  for  a  court  of  law  to  pr(Miounce  for  a  re«
moval  upon  the  mere  ground  of  pditicai  usurpation,  or
malversation  in  office,  admitting  of  endless  varieties^
from  the  slightest  guilt  up  to  the  most  flagrant  corrup-
ti(Mi?  Ought  a  president  to  be  removed  from  office  at
the  mere  will  of  a  court  for  political  misdemeanours  1
Is  not  a  political  body,  like  the  senate,  fix)m  its  superior
information  in  regard  to  executtre  fimctions,  br  better
qualified  to  judge,  how  far  the  public  weal  might  be
promoted  by  such  a  punishment  in  a  given  case,  than  a
mere  juridical  tribunal?  Suppose  the  senate  should
still  deem  the  judgment  irregular,  or  unjustifiaUe,  how
is  the  removal  to  take  effect,  and  how  is  it  to  be  en-
forced? A  separation  of  the  removing  power  alto-
gether from  the  appointing  power  might  create  many
pl*actical  difficulties,  which  ought  not,  except  upon  the
most  urgent  reasons,  to  be  mtroduced  into  matters  of
government  Without  attempting  to  maintain,  that  the
difficulties  would  be  insuperable,  it  is  sufficient  to  sbowy
that  they  might  be  highly  inconvenient  in  practice.

§  785.  It  does  not  appear  fix)m  the  Journal  of  the
Convention,  that  the  provision  thus  limiting  the  sen-
tence upon  impeachments  to  removal  and  disqualifica-


Digitizetl  by


Google


OB.  X.]  TH£  8EI7ATB.  265

tkm  ix>in  office,  attracted  much  attention,  until  a  late
period  of  its  deliberations.^  The  adoption  of  it  was  not,
howerer,  without  some  difference  of  opinion;  for  it
passed  only  by  the  vote  of  seven  states  against  three.'
The  reasons,  on  which  this  exposition  was  founded,  do
not  appear ;  and  in  the  state  conventbns  no  doubt  of
the  propriety  o[  the  provision  s^ms  to  have  been  seri-
ously entertained.

^  786.  In  order  to  complete  our  review  of  the  con-
stitutional provisions  cm  the  subject  of  impeachmeuts,
k  is  necessary  to  ascertain,  who  are  the  persons  liable
to  be  impeached ;  and  what  are  impeachable  offences.
By  some  strange  inadvertence,  this  part  of  the  consti-
tution has  been  taken  from  its  natural  connexion,  and
with  no  great  propriety  arranged  under  that  head,  which
embraces  the  oiganization,  and  rights,  and  duties  of  the
esecttdve  department.  To  prevent  the  necessity  of
agab  recurring  to  this  subject,  the  general  method  pre^
scribed  in  these  commentaries  will,  in  this  instance,  be
departed  from,  and  the  only  remaining  provision  on
impeachments  be  here  introduced.

^  787.  The  fourth  section  of  the  second  article  is  a»
Mows:  **The  president,  vice-president,  and  all  civil
**  officers  of  the  United  States,  shall  be  removed  from
^office  on  isppeachment  for,  and  conviction  of,  treason,
•*lMibery,  or  other  high  crimes  and  misdemeanours.*"

§  788.  From  this  clause  it  appears,  that  the  remedy

>  Jotmial  of  the  Convention,  p.  227, 308, 36a

»  Joonial  of  the  Convention,  p,  227, 902. See  3  Elliot's  Debates,  4a
to  46;  Id.  53  to  57 ;  Id.  107, 108.

3  In  the  contention,  the  clause,  making  the  president  liable  to  removal
from  ofice  •»  hnpeachroent  and  conviction,  was  not  unanimously  a§preod
to ;  but  patted  by  a  vote  of  eight  states  against  two.*
•  JoonuLl  of  C«iveatkm»p.  94,  lM,7lh


Digitized  by


Google


256  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  I1I«

by  impeachment  is  strictly  confined  to  civil  oflScers  of
the  United  States,  including  the  president  and  vice-
presidenL  In  this  respect,  it  differs  materially  from  the
law  and  practice  of  Great-Britain.  In  that  kingdom,
all  the  king's  subjects,  whether  peers  or  commoners,
are  impeachable  in  parliament ;  though  it  is  asserted,
that  commoners  cannot  now  be  impeached  for  capital
offences,  but  for  misdemeanours  only.^  Such  kind  of
misdeeds,  however,  as  peculiarly  injure  the  common-
wealth by  the  abuse  of  high  offices  of  trust,  are  the  most
proper,  and  have  been  the  most  usual  grounds  for  this
kind  of  prosecution  in  parliament.'  There  seems  a  pe-
culiar propriety,  in  a  republican  government  at  least,  in
confining  the  impeaching  power  to  persons  holding
office.  In  such  a  government  all  the  citizens  are  equal,
and  ought  to  have  the  same  security  of  a  trial  by  jury
for  all  crimes  and  offences  laid  to  their  charge,  when  not
holding  any  official  character.  To  subject  them  to  im-
peachment would  not  only  be  extremely  oppressive  and
expensive,  but  would  endanger  their  lives  and  liberties,
by  exposing  them  against  their  wills  to  persecution  for
their  conduct  in  exercising  their  political  rights  and  privi-
leges. Dear  as  the  trial  by  jury  justly  is  in  civfl  cases,
its  value,  as  a  protection  against  the  resentment  and
violence  of  rulers  and  factions  in  criminal  prosecutions,
makes  it  inestimable.  It  is  there,  and  there  only,  that
a  citizen,  in  the  sympathy,  the  impartiality,  the  intelli-
gence, and  incorruptible  integrity  of  his  fellows,  impan-
elled to  try  the  accusation,  may  indulge  a  well-founded
confidence  to  sustain  and  cheer  him.  If  he  should  choose


1  4  Black.  Corom.  260,  and  Christian's  note ;  2  Woodeson,  I^ct.  4(V
p.  601,  &c. ;  Com.  Dig,  ParliameDt,  L.  28  to  40.
9  2  Woodeson,  Lect  40,  p.  601, 602.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THJ&  8£NAT£.  257

to  accept  oflSce,  he  would  voluntarily  incur  all  the  addi-
tional responsibility  growing  out  of  iL  If  impeached
for  his  conduct,  while  in  office,  he  could  not  justly  com-
plain, since  he  was  placed  in  that  predicament  by  his
own  choice ;  and  in  accepting  oflSce  he  submitted  to  all
the  consequences.  Indeed,  the  moment  it  was  decid-
ed, that  the  judgment  upon  impeachments  should  be
limited  to  removal  and  disqualification  from  office,  it
followed,  as  a  natural  result,  that  it  ought  not  to  reach
any  but  officers  of  the  United  States.  It  seems
to  have  been  the  original  object  of  the  friends  of  the
national  government  to  confine  it  to  these  limits ;  for  in
the  original  resolutions  proposed  to  the  convention,  and
in  all  the  subsequent  proceedings,  the  power  was  ex-
pressly limited  to  national  officers.^

^  789.  Who  are  "civil  officers,''  within  the  meaning
of  this  constitutional  provision,  is  an  inquiry,  which  natu-
rally presents  itself;  and  the  answer  cannot,  perhaps^
be  deemed  setded  by  any  solemn  adjudication.  The
term  "civil"  has  various  significations.  It  is  some-
times used  in  contradistinction  to  barbarous,  or  savage,
to  indicate  a  state  of  society  reduced  to  order  and  reg-
ular government.  Thus,  we  speak  of  civil  life,  civil
society,  civil  government,  and  civil  liberty ;  in  which  it
is  nearly  equivalent  in  meaning  to  political^  It  is  some-
times used  in  contradistinction  to  criminal,  to  indicate
the  private  rights  and  remedies  of  men,  as  members  of
the  community,  in  contrast  to  those,  which  are  public,
and  relate  to  the  government.  Thus,  we  speak  of
civil  process  and  crimmal  process,  civil  jurisdiction  and

I  Journal  of  Convention,  69, 121, 137, 226.

9  Johnson's  Dictionary,  CivU ;  1  Black.  Comm.  6, 125, 251 ;  Montesq.
Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  1,  ch.  3 ;  Rutherforth's  Inst  B.  2,  ch.  2,  p.  23 ;  Id.
ch.  3,  p.  52;  Id.  cb.  8,  p.  359 ;  Heinec.  Elem.  Juris.  Nat.  B.  2,  ch.  6.
VOL.  IL  33


Digitized  by


Google


266 coirsTiTUTioN  or  the  u.  states, [book  hi.

criminal  jurisdiction.  It  is  sometimes  used  in  contra-
distinction to  military  or  ecclesiasticcUy  to  natural  or
foreign.  Thus,  we  speak  of  a  civil  station,  as  opposed
to  a  military  or  ecclesiastical  station ;  a  civil  death,  as
opposed  to  a  natural  death ;  a  civil  war,  as  opposed  to  a
foreign  war.  The  sense,  in  which  the  term  is  used  in
the  constitution,  seems  to  be  in  contradistinction  to  mili-
tart/f  to  indicate  the  rights  and  duties  relating  to  citi-
zens generally,  in  contradistinction  to  those  of  persons
engaged  in  the  land  or  naval  service  of  the  govern-
ment. It  is  in  this  sense,  that  Blackstone  speaks  of
the  laity  in  England,  as  divided  into  three  distinct
states ;  the  civil,  the  military,  and  the  maritime ;  the
two  latter  embracing  the  land  and  naval  forces  of  the
government^  And  in  the  same  sense  the  expenses  of
the  civil  list  of  oflScers  are  spoken  of,  in  contradistinc-
tion to  those  of  the  army  and  navy.*

§  790.  All  oflScers  of  the  United  States,^  therefore,
who  hold  their  appomtments  under  the  national  govern-
ment, whether  their  duties  are  executive  or  judicial,  in
the  highest  or  in  the  lowest  departments  of  the  gov-
ernment, with  the  exception  of  oflScers  in  the  army
and  navy,  are  properly  civil  oflScers  withm  the  meaning
of  the  constitution,  and  liable  to  impeachment'  The
reason  for  exceptmg  military  and  naval  oflScers  is,  that
they  are  subject  to  trial  and  punishment  according  to
a  peculiar  military  code,  the  laws,  rules,  and  usages  of
war.  The  very  nature  and  eflSciency  of  military  duties
and  discipline  require  this  summary  and  exclusive  ju-
risdiction ;  and  the  promptitude  of  its  operations  are
not  only  better  suited  to  the  notions  of  military  men  ;

1  1  Black.  Coram.  396,  408,  417 ;  De  Lolme,  B.  2,  ch.  17,  p-  446.

«  1  Black.  Coram.  332.

3  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  22,  p.  213.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  TUfi  SENATE.  960

but  they  deem  their  honour  and  their  reputation  more
safe  in  the  hands  of  their  brother  ojfBcers,  than  in  any
meijely  civil  tribunal  Indeed,  in  military  and  naval
affairs  it  is  quite  clear,  that  the  senate  could  scarcely
possess  competent  knowledge  or  experience  to  decide
upon  the  acts  of  miUtary  n>en ;  so  much  are  these  acts
to  be  governed  by  mere  usage,  and  custom,  by  military
discipline,  and  military  discretion,  that  the  constitution
has  wisely  committed  the  whole  trust  to  the  decision
of  courts-martiaL

^791.  A  question  arose  upon  an  impeachment  be-
fore the  senate  in  1799,  whether  a  senator  was  a  civil
officer  of  the  United  States,  within  the  purview  of  the
constituiton ;  and  it  was  decided  by  the  senate,  that  he
was  not ;  ^  and  the  like  principle  must  apply  to  the
members  of  the  house  of  representatives*  This  decision,
upon  which  the  senate  itself  was  gready  divided,  seems
not  to  have  been  quite  satisfactory  (as  it  may  be  gath-
ered) to  the  minds  of  some  learned  commentators.'
The  reasoning,  by  which  it  was  sustained  in  the  senate,
does  not  appear,  their  deliberations  having  been  private.
But  it  was  probably  held,  that  "  civil  officers  of  the
United  States ''  meant  such,  as  derived  their  appoint-
ment from,  and  under  the  national  government,  and  not
those  persons,  who,  though  members  of  the  government^
derived  their  appointment  from  the  states,  or  the  peo-
ple of  the  states.  In  this  view,  the  enumeration  of  the
president  and  vice  president,  as  impeachable  officers,
was  indispensable;  for  they  derive,  or  may  derive,  their


1  The  decision  was  made  by  a  vote  of  14  against  11.  See  Senata
Journal,  10  January,  1799 ;  4  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  57,  58 ;  Rawle
on  Const,  ch.  22,  p.  213,  214.

•  4  Tuck.  Black.  Coram.  App.  57,  58 ;  Rawle  on  the  Const  ch.  22>
p.  213, 214,  218,  219.  ^


Digitized  by


Google


260 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

office  from  a  source  paramount  to  the  national  govern-
ment. And  the  clause  of  the  constitution,  now  xmder
consideration,  does  not  even  affect  to  consider  them
officers  of  the  United  States. It  says,  "  the  jwesident,
vice-president,  and  all  civil  officers  (not  all  other  civil
officers)  shall  be  removed,^'  &c. The  language  of  the
clause,  therefore,  would  rather  lead  to  the  conclusion,
that they were enumerated,  as contradistinguished
from,  rather  than  as  included  in  the  description  of,  civil
officers  of  the  United  States. Other  clauses  of  the
constitution  would  seem  to  favoiu*  the  same  result;
particularly  the  clause,  respecting  appointment  of  offi-
cers of  the  United  States  by  the  executive,  who  is  to
**  commission  all  the  officers  of  the  United  States;"  and
the  6th  section  of  the  first  article,  which  declares,  that
^  no  person,  holding  any  office  under  the  United  Stales^
**  shall  be  a  member  of  either  house  during  his  contin-
**  uance  in  office ;  ^  and  the  first  section  of  the  second
article,  which  declares,  that  "  no  senator  or  representa-
**  tive,  or  person  holding  an  office  of  trust  or  profit
**  under  the  United  States,  shall  be  appointed  an  elect-
**or.''  * It  is  far  from  being  certain,  that  the  convention
itself  ever  contemplated,  that  senators  or  representa-
tives should  be  subjected  to  impeachment ;  *  and  it  is
very  far  from  being  clear,  that  such  a  subjection  would
have  been  either  politic  or  desirable.

§  792.  The  reasoning  of  the  Federalist  on  this  sub-
ject, in  answer  to  some  objections  to  vesting  the  trial  of
impeachments  in  the  senate,  does  not  lead  to  the  con-
clusion, that  the  learned  author  thought  the  senators
liable  to  impeachment. Some  parts  of  it  would  rather

1  See  Blount's  Trial,  p.  34, 3*5 ;  Id.  49,  50,  51, 52.
«  But  see  South-Carolina  Debates  on  the  Constitution,  January,  1788,
(printed  in  Charieston,  1831,)  p.  11, 12,  la


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SEITATE.  261

incline  the  Other  way.  "The  convention  might  tcith
proprietyj^  it  is  said, "  have  meditated  the  punishment  of
the  executive  for  a  deviation  from  the  instructions  of
the  senate,  or  a  want  of  integrity  in  the  conduct  of  the
negotiations  committed  to  him.  They  might  also  have
had  in  view  the  punishment  of  a  few  leading  individuals
in  the  senate,  who  should  have  prostituted  their  influ-
ence in  that  body,  a3  the  mercenary  instruments  of
foreign  corruption.  But  they  could  not  with  more,  or
with  equal  propriety,  have  contemplated  the  impeach-
ment and  punishment  of  two- thirds  of  the  senate,  con-
senting to  an  improper  treaty,  than  of  a  majority  of
thaty  or  of  the  other  branch  of  the  legislature,  consenting
to  a  pernicious  or  unconstitutionaJ  law;  a  principle^
which  I  believe  has  never  been  admitted  into  any  govern-
menty^  &LC.  "And  yet,  what  reason  is  there,  that  a
majority  of  the  house  of  representatives,  sacrificing  the
interests  of  the  society  by  an  unjust  and  tyrannical  act
of  legislation,  should  escape  with  impunity,  more  than
two-thirds  of  the  senate  sacrificing  the  same  interests
in  an  injurious  treaty  with  a  foreign  power?  The  truth
is,  that  in  all  such  cases,  it  is  essential  to  the  freedom,
and  to  the  necessary  independence  of  the  deliberations
of  the  body,  that  the  members  of  it  should  be  exempt  from
punishment  for  acts  done  in  a  collective  capacity ;  and
thesecurity  to  the  society  must  depend  on  the  care,  which
is  taken,  to  confide  the  trust  to  proper  hands ;  to  make  it
their  interest  to  execute  it  with  fidelity ;  and  to  make
it  as  diflScult,  as  possible,  for  them  to  combine  in  any
interest,  opposite  to  that  of  the  public  good."  *  And  it
is  certsdn,  that  in  some  of  the  state  conventions  the
members  of  congress  were  admitted  by  the  friends  of

1  The  Federalist,  No.  m.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


262  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [bOOK  lU.

the  constitution,  not  to  be  objects  of  the  unpeaching
power.^

^  793.  It  may  be  admitted,  that  a  breach  of  duty  is
as  reprehensible  in  a  legislator,  as  in  an  executive,  or
judicial  officer ;  but  it  does  not  follow,  that  the  same
remedy  should  be  applied  in  each  case;  or  that  a
remedy  applicable  to  the  one  may  not  be  unfit,  or  in-
convenient in  the  other.  Senators  and  representatives
are  at  short  periods  made  responsible  to  the  people,
and  may  be  rejected  by  them.  And  for  personal
offences,  not  purely  political,  they  are  responsible  to
the  common  tribunals  of  justice,  and  the  laws  of.  the
land.  If  a  member  of  congress  were  liable  to  be  im-
peached for  conduct  in  his  legislative  capacity,  at  the
will  of  a  majority,  it  might  furnish  many  pretexts  for  an
irritated  and  predominant  faction  to  destroy  the  char-
acter, and  intercept  the  influence  of  the  wisest  and
most  exalted  patriots,  who  were  resistmg  their  oppres-
sions, or  developing  their  profligacy.  It  is,  therefore,
with  great  reason  urged,  that  a  legislator  should  be
.  above  all  fear  and  influence  of  this  sort  in  his  public
conduct  The  imf>eachment  of  a  legislator,  for  his
official  acts,  has  hitherto  been  unacknowledged,  as  mat-
ter of  right,  in  the  annalsQf  England  )aid  America.  A
silence  of  this  sort  is  conclusiv^las  to  the  state  of  pub-
lic opinion  in  relation  to  the  impolicy  and  danger  of  con-
ferring the  power.*  j^  ^^^  ^

§  794.  The  next  inquiry  is,  what  are  impeachable  of-
fences? They  are  "treason,  bribery,  or  other  high  crimes
and  misdemeanours." For  the  definition  of  treason,

1  3  Elliot's  Debates,  43,  44,  45,  46,  56,  57.

2  The  arguments  ofcounhp],  for  and  against  a  senator's  being  an  im-
peachable officer,  will  be  found  at  lar^e,  in  the  printed  trial  of  William
Blount,  on  his  impeachment (Pbilad.  1799.)


Digitized  by


Google


CH«  X.]  THE  8ENAT£.  263

resort  may  be  had  to  tHe  constitution  itself ;  biit  for  the
definition  of  bribery,  resort  is  naturally  and  necessarily
had  to  the  common  law ;  for  that,  as  the  common  basis  of
our  jurisprudence,  can  alone  furnish  the  proper  expo-
sition of  the  nature  and  limits  of  this  ofience.  The
only  practical  question  is,  what  are  to  be  deemed  high
crimes  and  misdemeanours  ?  Now,  neither  the  constitu-
tion, nor  any  statute  of  the  United  States  has  in  any
manner  defined  any  crimes,  except  treason  and  bribery,
to  be  high  crimes  and  misdemeanours,  and  as  such  im-
peachable. In  what  manner,  then,  are  they  to  be  ascer-
tained 1  Is  the  silence  of  the  statute  book  to  be  deemed
conclusive  in  favour  of  the  party,  until  congress  have
made  a  legislative  declaration  and  enumeration  of  the
ofiences,  which  shall  be  deemed  high  crimes  and  mis-
demeanours 1  If  so,  then,  as  has  been  truly  remarked,*
the  power  of  impeachment,  except  as  to  the  two  ex-
pressed cases,  is  a  complete  nullity  ;  and  the  party  is
wholly  dispunishable,  however  enormous  may  be  his
corruption  or  criminality.*  .  It  will  not  be  sufficient  to
say,  that  in  the  casjes,  where  any  offence  is  punished  by
any  statute  of  the  United  States,  it  may,  and  ought  to
be,  deemed  an  impeachable  offence. It  is  not  every

1  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  29,  p.  273.

3  Upon  the  trial  of  Mr.  Justice  Chase,  in  1805,  it  was  contended  in
his  answer  and  defence,  that  no  civil  officer  was  impeachable,  but  "  for
treason,  bribery,  corruption,  or  some  high  crime  or  misdemeanour,  cofi'
sisting  in  some  ad  done  or  omitted,  in  violation  of  lauf,  forbidding  or
commanding  it"  "  Hence  it  clearly  results,  that  no  civil  officer  of  the
United  States  can  be  impeached,  except  for  some  offence,  for  which  he
may  be  indicted  at  law;  and  that  no  evidence  can  be  received  on  an
impeachroent,  except  such,  as,  on  an  indictment  at  law  for  the  same  of-
fence, would  be  admissible."  *  The  same  doctrine  was  insisted  on  by
his  counsel,  f


*  1  Chaie's  Trial,  p.  47, 48.

t  S  Chaie's  Trial,  p.  9  to  18 ;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  963.


Digitized  by


Google


264  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

offence,  that  by  the  constitution  is  so  impeachable.  It
must  not  only  be  an  offence,  but  a  high  crime  and  mis-
demeanour. Besides ;  there  are  many  most  flagrant
offences,  which,  by  the  statutes  of  the  United  States,  are
punishable  only,  when  committed  in  special  places,  and
within  peculiar  jurisdictions,  as,  for  instance,  on  the  high
seas,  or  in  forts,  navy -yards,  and  arsenals  ceded  to  the
United  States.  Suppose  the  offence  is  committed  in
some' other,  than  these  privileged  places,  or  under  cir-
cumstances not  reached  by  any  statute  of  the  United
States,  would  it  be  impeachable  7

^  795.  Again,  there  are  many  offences,  purely  polit-
ical, which  have  been  held  to  be  within  the  reach  of
parliamentary  impeachments,  not  one  of  which  is  in  the
slightest  manner  alluded  to  in  our  statute  book.  And,
indeed,  political  offences  are  of  so  various  and  complex
a  character,  so  utterly  incapable  of  being  defined,
or  classified,  that  the  task  of  positive  legislation  would  be
impracticable,  if  it  were  not  almost  absurd  to  attempt
it  What,  for  instance,  could  positive  legislation  do  in
cases  of  impeachment  like  the  charges  against  Warren
Hastings,  in  1788?  Resort,  then,  must  be  had  either
to  parliamentary  practice,  and  the  common  law,  in
order  to  ascertain,  what  are  high  crimes  and  misdemean-
ours ;  or  the  whole  subject  must  be  left  to  the  arbitrary
discretion  of  the  senate,  for  the  time  being.  The  latter
is  so  incompatible  with  the  genius  of  our  institutions,
that  no  lawyer  or  statesman  would  be  inclined  to  coun-
tenance so  absolute  a  despotism  of  opinion  and  practice,
which  might  make  that  a  crime  at  one  time,  or  in  one
person,  which  would  be  deemed  innocent  at  another
time,  or  m  another  person.  The  only  safe  guide  in
such  cases  must  be  the  common  law,  which  is  the
guardian  at  once  of  private  rights  and public  liberties


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  265

And  however  much  it  may  fall  in  with  the  political  the-
ories of  certadn  statesmen  and  jurists,  to  deny  the  exist-
ence of  a  common  law  belonging  to,  and  applicable  to  the
nation  m  ordinary  cases,  no  one  has  as  yet  been  bold
enough  to  assert,  that  the  power  of  impeachment  is
limited  to  oflfences  positively  defined  in  the  statute  book
of  the  Union,  as  impeachable  high  crimes  and  misde-
meanours.

§  796.  The  doctrine,  indeed,  would  be  truly  alarm-
ing, that  the  common  law  did  not  regulate,  interpret,
and  control  the  powers  and  duties  of  the  court  of  im-
peachment What,  otherwise,  would  become  of  the  rules
of  evidence,  the  legal  notions  of  crimes,  and  the  appli-
cation of  principles  of  public  or  municipal  jurisprudence
to  the  charges  against  the  accused?  It  would  be  a
,  most  extraordinary  anomaly,  that  while  every  citizen  of
every  state,  originally  composing  the  Union,  would  be
entitled  to  the  common  law,  as  his  birth-right,  and  at  once
his  protector  and  guide ;  as  a  citizen  of  the  Union,  or
an  officer  of  the  Union,  he  would  be  subjected  to  no
law,  to  no  principles,  to  no  rules  of  evidence.  It  is  the
boast  of  English  jurisprudence,  and  without  it  the  power
of  impeachment  would  be  an  intolerable  grievance,  that
in  trials  by  impeachment  the  law  differs  not  m  essentials
from  criminal  prosecutions  before  mferior  courts.  The
«ame  rules  of  evidence,  the  same  legal  notions  of  crimes
and  punishments  prevail.  For  impeachments  are  not
framed  to  alter  the  law;  but  to  carry  it  into  more  effectual
execution,  where  it  might  be  obstructed  by  the  influence
of  too  powerful  delinquents,  or  not  easily  discerned  in
the  ordinary  course  of  jurisdiction,  by  reason  of  the
peculiar  quality  of  the  aJleged  crimes.^ Those,  who

1  2  WoodesoD,  Lect  40,  p.  611, 613 ;  4  Black.  Comm.  261,  ChrLstion's
note,  (2.)

VOL.  II,  34

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


266 coNSTiTUTioir  or  the  u.  states,  [book  ni.

believe,  that  the  common  law,  so  far  as  it  is  applicable,
constitutes  a  part  of  the  law  of  the  United  States  in
then*  sovereign  character,  as  a  nation,  not  as  a  source
of  jurisdiction,  but  as  a  guide,  and  check,  and  expositor
in  the  administration  of  the  righ'ts,  duties,  and  jurisdic-
tion conferred  by  the  constitution  and  laws,  will  find  no
difficulty  in  affirming  the  same  doctrines  to  be  applica-
ble to  the  senate,  as  a  court  of  impeachments.  Those,
who  denounce  the  common  law,  as  having  any  applica-
tion or  existence  in  regard  to  the  national  government,
must  be  necessarily  driven  to  maintain,  that  the  power
of  impeachment  is,  until  congress  shall  legislate,  a  mere
nullity,  or  that  it  is  despotic,  both  in  its  reach,  and  in  its
proceedings.^  It  is  remarkable,  that  the  first  congress,
assembled  in  October,  1774,  in  their  famous  declara-
tion of  the  rights  of  the  colonies,  asserted,  "  that  the
respective  colonies  are  entitled  to  the  common  law  of
England;**  and  "that  they  are  entitled  to  the  benefit
of  such  of  the  English  statutes,  as  existed  at  the  time
of  their  colonization,  and  which  they  have  by  experi-
ence respectively  found  to  be  applicable  to  their  seve-
ral local  and  other  circumstances."  *  It  would  be  sin-
gular enough,  if,  in  framing  a  national  government,  that
common  law,  so  justly  dear  to  the  colonies,  as  their
guide  and  protection,  should  cease  to  have  any  exist-


1  It  is  DOt  my  desigD  in  this  place  to  enter  upon  the  discussion  of  the
much  controverted  question,  whether  the  common  law  constitutes  a  part
of  the  national  jurisprudence,  in  contradistinction  to  that  of  the  states.
The  learned  reader  will  find  the  subject  amply  discussed  in  the  works,
to  which  he  has  been  already  referred,  viz.  1  Tuck,  filack.  Comm.  App.
Note  E.  p.  378,  &c. ;  in  the  Report  of  the  Virginia  Legislature  of  1799,
1800 ;  in  Rawle  on  the  Constit  ch.  90,  p.  258,  &.C.,  and  in  Duponceau  on
Jurisdiction,  and  the  authorities  there  cited.  J  Kent.  Comm.  Lect  16,
p.  31 1  e<  seq, ;  North  American  Review,  July,  1825 ;  Mr.  Bayard's  Speech,
Debate  on  the  Judiciary  in  1802,  p.  372.

9  1  Journal  of  Congress,  Oct  1774,  p.  29.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  267

ence,  as  applicable  to  the  powers,  rights,  and  privileges
of  the  people,  or  the  obligations,  and  duties,  and  pow-
ers of  the  departments  of  the  national  government.  If
the  common  law  has  no  existence,  as  to  the  Union,  as
a  rule  or  guide,  the  whole  proceedings  are  completely
at  the  arbitrary  pleasure  of  the  government,  and  its
functionaries  in  ail  its  departments.

§  797.  Congress  have  unhesitatingly  adopted  the
conclusion,  that  no  previous  statute  is  necessary  to
authorize  an  impeachment  for  any  official  misconduct ;
and  the  rules  of  proceeding,  and  the  rules  of  evidence,
as  well  as  the  principles  of  decision,  have  been  uni-
formly regulated  by  the  known  doctrines  of  the  com-
mon law  and  parliamentary  usage.  In  the  few  cases  of
impeachment,  which  have  hitherto  been  tried,  no  one
of  the  charges  has  rested  upon  any  statutable  misdemea-
nours.^ It  seems,  then,  to  be  the  settled  doctrine  of
the  high  court  of  unpeachment,  that  though  the  com-
mon law  cannot  be  a  foundation  of  a  jurisdiction  not
given  by  the  constitution,  or  laws,  that  jurisdiction,
wh^i  given,  attaches,  and  is  to  be  exercised  according
to  the  rules  of  the  common  law ;  and  that,  what  are,  and
what  are  not  high  crimes  and  misdemeanours,  is  to  be  as-
certained by  a  recurrence  to  that  great  basis  of  Ameri-
can jurisprudence.* The  reasoning,  by  which  the

1  It  may  be  supposed,  that  the  first  charge  Id  the  articles  of  impeach-
ment  against  William  Blount  was  a  statutable  ofTence ;  but  on  an  ac-
curate examination  of  the  act  of  congress,  of  1794,  it  will  be  found  not
to  have  been  so.

s  See  Jefferson^s  Manual,  §  59,  title,  Impeachment ;  Blount's  Trial  on
Impeachment,  p.  29  to  31 ;  Id.  75  to  80,  (Philadelphia,  1799.)  But  see
Id.  p.  42  to  46.  —  In  another  clause  of  the  constitution  power  is  given  to
the  president  to  grant  reprieves  and  pardons  for  offences  agaimt  the
United  States,  except  in  cases  of  impeachment ;  thus  showing,  that  im-
peachable offisnces  are  deemed  offences  against  the  United  States.  If
the  senate  may  then  declare,  what  are  ofibnces  against  the  United


Digitized  by


Google


268  CONSTITUTIOri  of  the  U.  states, [book  III.

power  of  the  house  of  representatives  to  punish  for
contempts,  (which  are  breaches  of  privUeges,  and  offen-
ces not  defined  by  any  positive  laws,)  has  been  upheld
by  the  Supreme  Court,  stands  upon  similar  grounds ;
for  if  the  house  had  no-  jurisdiction  to  punish  for  con-
tempts, until  the  acts  had  been  previously  defined,  and
ascertained  by  positive  law,  it  is  clear,  that  the  process
of  arrest  would  be  illegal^

§  798.  In  examining  the  parliamentary  history  of
impeachments,  it  will  be  found,  that  many  offences,  not
easily  definable  by  law,  and  many  of  a  purely  political
character,  have  been  deemed  high  crimes  and  misde-
meanours worthy  of  this  extraordinary  remedy.  Thus,
lord  chancellors,  and  judges,  and  other  magistrates,
have  not  only  been  impeached  for  bribery,  and  acting
grossly  contrary  to  the  duties  of  their  office;  but  for
misleading  their  sovereign  by  unconstitutional  opinions,
and  for  attempts  to  subvert  the  fundamental  laws,  and
introduce  arbitrary  power.*  So,  where  a  lord  chan-
cellor has  been  thought  to  have  put  the  great  seal  to  an
ignominious  treaty  ;  a  lord  admiral  to  have  ne^ected
the  safe-guard  of  the  sea ;  an  ambassador  to  have  be-
trayed his  trust ;  a  privy  counsellor  to  have  propound-
ed, or  supported  pernicious  and  dishonom*able  mea-
sures ;  or  a  confidential  adviser  of  his  sovereign  to  have
obtained  exorbitant  grants,  or  incompatible  employ-
ments;—  these  have  been  all  deemed  impeachable


States  by  recurrence  to  the  common  law,  why  may  not  the  courts  of  the
United  States,  under  the  express  delegation  of  jurisdiction  over  ^  all
crimes  and  offences  cognizable  under  the  authority  of  the  United  States,**
by  the  act  of  1789,  ch.  20,  §  11,  act  in  the  same  manner  ?

1  Dunn  V.  Jbider^wfi,  6  Wh«at  R.  204 ;  Rawle  on  Constit  ch.  99,
p.  271,  -^72.

s  2  Woodeeon,  Lecrt.  40,  p.  602;  Com.  Dig.  title  PaWiamen<,  L. 28 to
40.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.}  THE  8£NATfi.  269

offences,*  Some  of  the  offences,  indeed,  for  which
persons  were  impeached  m  the  early  ages  of  British
jurisprudence,  would  now  seem  harsh  and  severe ;  but
perhaps  they  were  rendered  neqessaryby  existing  cor-
ruptions, ^and  the  importance  of  suppressing  a  spirit  of
favouritism,  and  court  intrigue.  .  Thui^  persons  have
been  impeached  for  givmg  bad  counsel  to  the  king ;  ad-
vising a  prejudicial  peace;  enticing  the  king  to  act
against  the  advice  of  pariiament ;  purchasing  offices  i
giving  medicine  to  the  king  without  advice  of  physi-
cians ;  preventing  other  persons  from  giving  counsel  to
the  king,  except  in  their  presence ;  and  procuring  ex-
orbitant personal  grants  from  the  king.^  But  others,
again,  were  founded  in  the  most  salutary  public  justice ;
such  as  impeachments  for  malversations  and  neglects
in  office ;  for  encouraging  pirates ;  for  official  oppres-
sion, extortions^  and  deceits ;  and  especially  for  putting
good  magistrates  out  of  office,  and  advancing  bad.*
One  cannot,  but  be  struck,  in  this  slight  enumeration,
with  the  utter  unfitness  of  the  common  tribunals  of
justice  to  take  cognizance  of  such  offences  ;  and  with
the  entire  propriety  of  confiding  the  jurisdiction  over
them  to  a  tribunal  capable  of  understanding,  and  re-
forming, and  scrutinizing  the  polity  of  the  state,^  and  of
sufficient  dignity  to  mamtain  the  independence  and
reputation  of  worthy  public  officers.

§  799.  Another  mquiry,  growing  out  of  this  subject,
is,  whether,  under  the  constitution,  any  acts  are  im-
peachable, except  such,  as  are  committed  under  col-
our of  office ;  and  whether  the  party  can  be  impeached

1  2  WoodesoD,  Lect.  40,  p.  602 ;  Com.  Dig.  Parliament,  L.  28  to  40.
«  Com.  Dig.  Parliament,  L.  28  to  40.
9  Com.  Dig.  Parliament,  L.  28  to  40.
<  2  Woodeeon,  Lect  40,  p.  602.


Digitized  by


Google


270  CONSTITUTlOlf  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  UU

therefor,  after  he  has  ceased  to  hold  office.  A  learned
commentator  seems  to  have  taken  it  for  granted,  that
the  liability  to  impeachment  extends  to  all,  who  have
been,  as  well  as  to  all,  who  are  in  public  office.^  Upon
the  other  point  his  language  is  as  follows :  ^^  The  legiti-
mate causes  of  impeachment  have  been  already  briefly
noticed.  They  can  have  reference  only  to  public  char-
acter, and  official  duty.  The  words  of  the  text  are,  *  trea-
son, bribery,  and  other  high  crimes  and  misdemeanours.'
The  treason  contemplated  must  be  against  the  United
States.  In  general,  those  offences,  which  may  be  ccwn-
mitted  equally  by  a  private  person,  as  a  public  officer,
are  not  the  subjects  of  impeachment.  Murder,  bur-
glary, robbery,  and  indeed  all  offences  not  immediately
connected  with  office,  except  the  two  expressly  men-
tioned, are  left  to  the  ordinary  course  of  judicial  pro-
ceed'mg ;  and  neither  house  can  regularly  inquire  mto
them,  except  for  the  purpose  of  expelling  a  member.''  *
§  800.  It  does  not  appear,  that  either  of  these  points
has  been  judicially  settled  by  the  court  having,  proper-
ly, cognizance  of  them.  In  the  case  of  William  Blount,
the  plea  of  the  defendant  expressly  put  both  of  them,
as  exceptions  to  the  jurisdiction,  alleging,  that^  at  the
time  of  the  impeachment,  he,  Blount,  was  not  a  sen-
ator, (though  he  was  at  the  time  of  the  charges  laid
agamst  him,)  and  that  he  was  not  charged  by  the  arti-
cles of  impeachment  with  having  committed  any  crime,
or  misdemeanour,  in  the  execution  of  any  civil  office
held  under  the  United  States ;  nor  with  any  malccm-
duct  in  a  civil  office,  or  abuse  of  any  public  trust  in  the


1  Rawle  on  Conatit  ch.  22,  p.  213 ;  Blount's  Trial,  p.  49,  50,  (PhUadel-
phia,  1799.)
>  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  22,  p.  215.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  271

execution  thereof,*  The  decision,  however,  turned
upon  another  point,  viz.,  that  a  senator  was  not  an
impeachable  officer,*

^801.  As  it  is  declared  in  one  clause  of  the
constitution,  that  "judgment,  in  cases  of  imperch-
"ment,  shall  not  extend  further,  than  a  removal
"  fix^m  office,  and  disqualification  to  hold  any  office  of
**  honour,  trust,  or  profit,  under  the  United  States  ;  ^
and  in  another  clause,  that  "  the  president,  vice  presi-
**  dent,  and  all  civil  officers  of  the  United  States,  shall
"be  removed  fi^om  office  on  impeachment  for,  and  con*
"  viction  oi,  treason,  bribery,  or  other  high  crimes  or
"misdemeanoiu^;'*  it  would  seem  to  follow,  that  the
senate,  on  the  conviction,  were  bound,  in  all  cases,  to
enter  a  judgment  of  removal  from  office,  though  it  has
a  discretion,  as  to  inflicting  the  punishment  of  disquali-
fication.' Ifi  then,  there  must  be  a  judgment  of  re-
moval fix>m  office,  it  would  seem  to  follow,  that  the
constitution  contemplated,  that  the  party  was  still  in
office  at  the  time  of  the  impeachment.  If  he  was  not^
his  offence  was  still  liable  to  be  tried  and  punished  in
the  ordinary  tribunals  of  justice.  And  it  might  be
argued  with  some  force,  that  it  would  be  a  vain  exer*
cise  of  authority  to  try  a  delinquent  for  an  impeachable
offence,  when  the  most  important  object,  for  which  the
remedy  was  given,  was  no  longer  necessary,  or  attaina-
ble. And  although  a  judgment  of  disqualification  might
still  be  pronounced,  the  language  of  the  constitution

1  See  Senate  Journal,  14th  Jan.  1799 ;  4  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.
App.  57,  58.

^  Sergeant  on  Const  Law,  ch.  39,  p.  363.

9  Upon  the  impeachment  and  conviction  of  John  Pickering  (12th  of
March,  1804,)  the  only  punishment  awarded  by  the  senate  was  a  removal
from  office.  See  also  Blount*s  Trial,  64  to  66  ;  Id.  79,  82»  83,  (Philad.
1799*;)  Sergeant  on  Const  Law,  ch.  29,  p.  364.


Digitized  by


Google


272  CONSTITUTIOir  op  the  U.  states, [book  III.

may  create  some  doubt,  whether  it  can  be  pronoimced
without  bemg  coupled  with  a  removal  from  office.^
There  is  also  much  force  in  the  remark,  that  an  impeach-
ment is  a  proceeding  purely  of  a  political  nature.  It  is
not  se  much  designed  to  punish  an  offender,  as  to  secure
the  state  against  gross  official  misdemeanors^  It  touch-
es neither  his  person,  nor  his  property  ;  but  simply
divests  him  of  his  political  capacity.*
.  §  802.  The  other  point  is  one  of  more  difficulty.  In
the  argument  upon  Blount^s  impeachment,  it  was  press-
ed with  great  earnestness,  that  there  is  not  a  syllable
m  the  constitution,  which  confines  impeachments  to  offi-
cial acts,  and  it  is  against  the  plainest  dictates  of  com-
mon sense^  that  such  restraint  should  be  imposed  upon
it  Suppose  a  judge  should  countenance,  or  aid  insur-
gents in  a  meditated  conspiracy  or  insurrection  against
the  government  This  is  not  a  judicial  act ;  and  yet  it
ought  certainly  to  be  impeachable.  He  may  be  called
upon  to  try  die  very  persons,  whom  he  has  aided.'
Suppose  a  judge  or  other  officer  to  receive  a  bribe  not
connected  with  his  judicial  office ;  could  he  be  entitled
to  any  public  confidence  ?  Would  not  these  reasons
for  his  removal  be  just  as  strong,  as  if  it  were  a  case
of  an  official  tribe  ?  The  argimient  on  the  other  side
was,  that  the  power  of  impeachment  was  strictly  con-
fined to  civU  officers  of  the  United  States,  and  this  ne-
cessarily implied,  that  it  must  be  limited  to  malconduct
in  office.*

1  See  Blount's  Trial,  47,  48 ;  Id.  64  to  68,  (Philad.  1799 ;)  Id.  82.

»  Mr.  Bayard.  Blount's  Trial,  28,  (PhUaJ.  1799.) See  Id.  80,  81.

»  Blount's  Trial,  39,  40,  (Phila.  1799  ;)  Id.  80.

<  Blount's  Trial,  46  to  49  ;  Id  62,  64  to  68,  (Philadelphia,  1799.)
—  Wniiam  Blount  was  expelled  from  the  senate  a  few  days  before
this  impeachment,  (being  then  a  member,)  ond  on  that  occasion  he  was^
by  a  resolution  of  the  senate,*  declared  to  be  '^  guilty  of  a  Mgh  mUdt-

*  Yo««,95jNay,  L


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  TH£  BEJX^TX.  273

§  803.  It  is  not  intended  to  express  any  opinion  in
these  commentaries,  as  to  which  is  the  true  exposition
of  the  constitution  on  the  points  above  stated.  They
are  brought  before  the  learned  reader,  as  matters  still
subjudice^  the  final  decision  of  which  may  be  reason-
ably left  to  the  high  tribunal,  constituting  the  court  of
impeachment,  when  the  occasion  shall  arise.

§  804.  This  subject  may  be  concluded  by  a  sum-
mary statement  of  the  mode  of  proceeding  in  the  in-
stitution and  trial  of  impeachments,  as  it  is  of  rare  oc-
currence, and  not  governed  by  the  formalities  of  the
ordinary  prosecutions  in  courts  at  law.

§  805.  When,  then,  an  officer  is  known  or  suspect-
ed to  be  guilty  of  malversation  in  office,  some  member  of
the  house  of  representatives  usually  brings  forward  a  res-
olution to  accuse  the  party,  or  for  the  appointment  of  a
committee,  to  consider  and  report  upon  the  charges  laid
against  him.  The  latter  is  the  ordinary  course ;  and
the  report  of  the  committee  usually  contains,  if  adverse
to  the  party,  a  statement  of  the  charges,  and  recom-
mends a  resolution,  that  he  be  impeached)  therefor.  If
the  resolution  is  adopted  by  the  house,  a  committee  is
then  appointed  to  impeach  the  party  at  the  bar  of  the
senate,  and  to  state,  that  (he  articles  against,  him  will  be
exhibited  in  due  time,  and  made  good  before  the  sen-
ate ;  and  to  demand,  that  the  senate  take  (^der  for  the
appearance  of  the  party  to  answer  to  the  impeach-

mtcmor  entirely  inconsistent  with  his  public  tnist  and  duty,  as  a  senator."
The  offence  charged  was  not  defined  by  any  statute  of  the  United
States.  It  was  for  an  attempt  to  seduce  an  United  States'  Indian  inter-
preter from  his  duty,  and  to  alienate  the  affections  and  confidence  of
the  Indians  from  the  public  officers  residing  among  them,  &c.  Journ.
of  Senate,  8th  July,  1797 ;  Sergeant  on  Const.  Law,  ch.  28,  p.  286,  287.

1  Com.  Dig.  ParliamerU,  L.  20  ;  2  Woodeson,  Lect  40,  p.  603,  604 ;
Jefferson's  Manual,  sect  53.

VOL,  11.  35


Digitized  by


Google


274 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

ment^  This  being  accordingly  done,  the  senate  signi-
fy their  willingness  to  take  such  order ;  and  articles  are
Aen  prepared  by  a  committee,  under  the  direction  of  the
house  of  representatives,  which,  when  reported  to,  and
approved  by  the  house,  are  then  presented  in  the  like
manner  to  the  senate  ;  and  a  committee  of  managers
are  appointed  to  conduct  the  impeachment^  As  soon
as  the  articles  are  thus  presented,  the  senate  issue  a
process,  summoning  the  party  to  appear  at  a  given
di^r  before  them,  to  answer  the  articles.*  The  process
is  served  by  the  sergeant-at-arms  of  the  senate,  and
due  return  is  made  thereof  under  oath.

§  806.  The  articles  thus  exhibited  need  not,  and
indeed  do  not,  pursue  the  strict  form  and  accuracy  of
an  indictment^  They  are  sometimes  quite  general  in
the  form  of  the  allegations  ;  but  always  contain,  or
ought  to  contain,  so  much  certamty,  as  to  enable  the
party  to  put  himself  upon  the  proper  defence,  and^so,
in  case  of  an  acquittal,  to  avail  himself  of  it,  as  a  bar  to
another  impeachment.  Additional  articles  may  be  exhib-
ited, perhaps,  at  any  stage  of  the  prosecution.*

^  807.  When  the  return  day  of  the  process  for
appearance  has  arrived,  the  senate  resolve  themselves
into  a  court  of  impeachment^  and  the  senators  are  at
that  time,  or  before,  solemnly  sworn,  or  aflirmed,  to  do
impartial  justice  upon  the  impeachment,  according  to
the  constitution  and  laws  of  the  United  States. The

1  Com.  Dig.  PaHiammtj  L.  30;  2  Woodeaon,  Lect  40,  p.  603, 604  ;
Jefferson's  Manual,  sect  53.

s  Com.  Dig.  PaHtament,  L.  21 ;  Jefferson's  Manual,  sect  53.

3  Com.  Dig.  Parlia$nefU,  L.  14,  18,  19,  20 ;  Jefferson's  Manual,
sect  53.

<2  Woodeson,  Lect  40,  p.  605, 606 ;  Com.  Dig.  Pofiiwwii^  L.  21 ;
Foster  on  Crown  Law,  389, 39a

5  Rawle  on  Const  ch.  22,  p.  216.


Digitized  by


Google


CH. X.]  THE  SfiKATE.  276

person  impeached  is  then  caUed  to  appear  and  answer
the  articles.  If  he  does  not  appear  in  person,  or  by
attorney,  his  default  is  recorded,  and  the  senate  may
proceed  ex  parte  to  the  trial  of  the  impeachment  If
he  does  appear  in  person,  or  by  attorney,  his  appear-
ance is  recorded.  Counsel  for  the  parties  are  admit-
ted to  appear,  and  to  be  heard  upon  an  impeachment.^

§  808.  When  the  party  appears,  he  is  entided  to  be
furnished  with  a  copy  of  the  articles  of  impeachment,
and  time  is  allowed  him  to  prepare  his  answer  thereto.
The  answer,  like  the  articles,  is  exempted  from  the
necessity  of  observing  great  strictness  of  form.  The
parXy  may  plead,  that  he  is  not  guilty,  as  to  part,  and
make  a  further  defence,  as  to  the  residue  ;  or  he  may,
in  a  few  words,  saving  all  exceptions,  deny  the  whole
charge  or  charges ;  *  or  he  may  plead  specially,  in  jus-
tification or  excuse  of  the  supposed  ofiences,  all  the
circumstance  attendant  upon  the  case.  And  he  is  also
mdulged  with  the  liberty  of  offering  argumentative  rea-
sons, as  well  as  facts,  against  the  charges  in  support,
and  as  part,  of  his  answer,  to  repel  them.  It  is  usual  to
give  a  full  and  particular  answer  separately  to  each
article  of  the  accusation.'

§  809.  When  the  answer  is  prepared  and  given  m,
the  next  regular  proceeding  is,  for  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives to  file  a  replication  to  the  answer  in  writing,
in  substance  denying  the  truth  and  validity  of  the  de-
fence stated  in  the  answer,  and  averring  the  truth
and  suflSciency  of  the  charges,  and  the  readiness  of  the
house  to  prove  them  at  such  convenient  time  and  place,

1  Jefferson's  Manual,  sect  53.

«  2  Woodeson,  Lect  40,  p.  606, 607  ;  Com.  Dig.  Parliament,  L.  93.

>  2  Woodeson,  Lect  40,  p.  607 ;  Jefferson's  Manual,  sect  53.


Digitized  by


Google


276 CONSTITUTIOlf  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III,

as  shall  be  aj^inted  for  that  purpose  by  the  senate.^
A  time  is  then  assigned  for  the  trial ;  and  the  senate,
at  that  period  or  before,  adjust  the  prelimmaries  and
other  proceedmgs  proper  to  be  had,  before  and  at  the
trial,  by  fixed  regulations  ;  which  are  made  known  to
the  house  of  representatives,  and  to  the  party  accused,*
On  the  day  appointed  for  the  trial,  the  house  of  rep-
resentatives appear  at  the  bar  of  the  senate,  either  in  a
body,  or  by  the  managers  selected  for  that  purpose,  to
proceed  with  the  trial.'  -  Process  to  compel  the  attend-
ance of  witnesses  is  previously  issued  at  the  request  of
either  party,  by  order  of  the  senate  ;  and  at  the  time
and  place  appointed,  they  are  bound  to  appear  and
give  testimony.  On  the  day  of  trial,  the  parties  being
ready,  the  managers  to  conduct  the  prosecution  open
it  on  behalf  of  the  house  of  representatives,  one  or
more  of  them  delivering  an  explanatory  speech,  either
of  the  whole  charges,  or  of  one  or  more  of  them.  The
proceedings  are  then  conducted  substantially,  as  they
are  upon  common  judicial  trials,  as  to  the  admission  or
rejection  of  testimony,  the  exammation  and  cross-ex-
amination of  witnesses,  the  rules  of  evidence,  and  the
legal  doctrines,  as  to  crimes  and  misdemeanours.^  When
the  whole  evidence  has  been  gone  through,  and  the
parties  on  each  side  have  been  fully  heard,  the  senate
then  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  the  case.  If  any
debates  arise,  they  are  conducted  in  secret ;  if  none
arise,  or  after  they  are  ended,  a  day  is  assigned  for  a
final  public  decision  by  yeas  and  nays  upon  each  sep-
arate charge  in  the  articles  of  impeachment.  When
the  court  is  assembled  for  this  purpose,  the  question  is

1  See  2  Woodeson,  Lect  40,  p.  607 ;  Com.  Dig.  ParHameni,  L.  24.
3  See  3  Woodeson,  Lect  40,  p.  610.

3  Jefferson's  Manual,  sect.  53.

4  2  Woodeson,  Lect.  611 ;  Jefferson's  Manual,  sect  53.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  977

propounded  to  each  member  of  the  senate  by  name^
by  the  president  of  the  senate,  in  the  following  man-
ner, upon  each  article,  the  same  being  first  read  by  the

secretary'of  the  senate. "  Mr. ,  how  say  you,  is

the  respondent  guilty,  or  not  guilty  of  a  high  crime  and
misdemeanour,  as  charged  in  the article  of  im-
peachment?'' Whereupon  the  member  rises  in  his
place,  and  answers  guilty,  or  not  guilty,  as  his  opinion
is.  If  upon  no  one  article  two  thirds  of  the  senate  de-
cide, that  the  party  is  guilty,  he  is  then  entitled  to  an
acquittal,  and  is  declared  accordingly  to  be  acquitted
by  the  president  of  the  senate.  If  he  is  convicted  of
all,  or  any  of  the  ^u'ticles,  the  senate  then  proceed  to
fix,  and  declare  the  proper  punishment.*  The  pardon-
ing power  of  the  president  does  not,  as  will  be  pres-
ently seen,  extend  to  judgments  upon  impeachment ;
and  hence,  when  once  pronounced,  they  become  abso-
lute and  U'reversible.^

^810.  Havmg  thus  gone  through  the  whole  subject
of  impeachments,  it  only  remains  to  observe,  that  a
close  survey  of  the  system,  unless  we  are  egregiously
deceived,  will  completely  demonstrate  the  wisdom  of
the  arrangements  made  in  every  part  of  it.  The  juris-
diction to  impeach  is  placed,  where  it  should  be,  in  the
possession  and  power  of  the  immediate  representatives
of  the  people.  The  trial  is  before  a  body  of  great  dig-
nity, and  ability,  and  independence,  possessing  the
requisite  knowledge  and  firmness  to  act  with  vigour,

^  This  summary,  when  no  othor  authority  is  cited,  has  been  drawn
up  from  the  practice,  in  the  cases  of  impeachment  already  tried  by  the
senate  of  the  United  States,  viz.  of  William  Blount,  in  1798;  of  John
Pickering,  in  Ic04  ;  of  Samuel  Chase,  in  1804  ;  and  of  James  H.  Peck,
in  1831.  See  the  Senate  Journals  of  those  Trials.  See  also  Jefferson's
Manual,  sect.  202.  ^

*  Art  2f  sect  2,  clause,  1.


Digitized  by


Google


278 COXSTITUTION  OF  THE  F.  STATES. [BOOK  UI.

and  to  decide  with  impartiality  upon  the  charges.  The
persons  subjected  to  the  trial  are  oflScers  of  the  nation-
al government ;  and  the  offences  are  such,  as  may
affect  the  rights,  duties,  and  relations  of  the  party  ac-
cused to  the  public  in  his  political  or  official  character,
either  directly  or  remotely.  The  general  rules  of  law
and  evidence,  applicable  to  common  trials,  are  interpos-
ed, to  protect  the  party  against  the  exercise  of  wanton
oppression,  and  arbitrary  power,r  And  the  final  judg-
ment is  confined  to  a  removal  fi-om,  and  disqualification
for,  office ;  thus  limiting  the  punishment  to  such  modes
of  redress,  as  are  peculiarly  fit  for  a  political  tribunal  to
administer,  and  as  will  secure  the  public  against  politi-
cal injuries.  In  other  respects  the  offence  is  left  to  be
disposed  of  by  the  common  tribunals  of  justice,  accord-
ing to  the  laws  of  the  land,  upon  an  indictment  found
by  a  grand  jury,  and  a  trial  by  a  jury  of  peers,  before
whom  the  party  is  to  stand  for  his  final  deliverance,  like
his  fellow  citizens.

^811.  In  respect  to  the  impeachment  of  the  presi-
dent, and  vice  president,  it  may  be  remarked,  that  they
are,  upon  motives  of  high  state  policy,  made  liable  to
impeachment,  while  they  yet  remain  in  office.  In
England  the  constitutional  maxim  is,  that  the  king  can
do  no  wrong.  His  ministers  and  advisers  may  be  im-
peached and  punished  ;  but  he  is,  by  his  prerogative,
placed  above  all  personal  amenability  to  the  laws  for
his  acts.^  In  some  of  the  state  constitutions,  no  expli-
cit provision  is  made  for  the  impeachment  of  the  chief
magistrate ;  and  in  Delaware  and  Virginia,  he  was  not
(under  their  old  constitutions)  impeachable,  until  he
was  out  of  office.* So  that  no  immediate  remedy  in

I  1  Black.  Coinm.  246, 347.  «  The  Federalist,  No.  99.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  X.]  THE  SENATE.  279

those  states  was  provided  for  gross  malversations  and
corruptions  in  oflSce  ;  and  the  only  redress  lay  in  the
elective  power,  followed  up  by  prosecutions  after  the
party  had  ceased  to  hold  his  office.  Yet  cases  may  be
imagined,  where  a  momentary  delusion  might  induce  a
majority  of  the  people  to  re-elect  a  corrupt  chief  mag-
istrate ;  and  thus  the  remedy  would  be  at  once  distant
and  uncertain.  The  provision  in  the  constitution  of
the  United  States,  on  the  other  hand,  holds  out  a  deep
and  immediate  responsibility,  as  a  check  upon  arbitra-
ry power ;  and  compels  the  chief  magistrate,  as  well
as  the  humblest  citizen,  to  bend  to  the  majesty  of
the  laws.


Digitized  by


Google


280 ^ CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  IT.  STATES, f  BOOK  III.

CHAPTER  XL

ELECTIONS  AND  MEETINGS  OF  CONGRESS.

§  812.  The  first  clause  of  the  fourth  section  of  the
first  article  is  as  follows :  ^*  The  times,  places,  and  man-
^  ner  of  holding  elections  for  senators  and  representa-
**  lives  shall  be  prescribed  in  each  state  by  the  legisla-
^  ture  thereof.  But  the  congress  may,  at  any  time,  by
**law,  make  or  alter  such  regulations,  except  as  to  the
**  place  of  choosmg  senatoi^.*^

^813.  This  clause  does  not  appear  to  have  attracted
much  attention,  or  to  have  encountered  much  opposi-
tion in  the  convention,  at  least  so  far,  as  can  be  gather-
ed from  the  journal  of  that  body.*  But  it  was  afterwards
assailed  by  the  opponents  of  the  constitution,  both  in
and  out  of  the  state  conventions,  with  uncommon  zeal
and  virulence.  The  objection  was  qot  to  that  part  of
the  clause,  which  vests  in  the  state  legislatures  the  pow-
er of  prescribing  the  times,  places,  and  manner  of  hold-
ing elections ;  for,  so  far,  it  was  a  surrender  of  power  to
the  state  governments.  But  it  was,  to  the  superintend-
ing power  of  congress  to  make,  or  alter  such  regulations.
It  was  said,  that  such  a  superintending  power  would  be
dangerous  to  the  liberties  of  the  people,  and  to  a  just
exercise  of  their  privileges  in  elections.  Congress
might  prescribe  the  times  of  election  so  unreasonably,
as  to  prevent  the  attendance  of  the  electors ;  or  the
place  at  so  inconvenient  a  distance  fi'om  the  body  of
the  electors,  as  to  prevent  a  due  exercise  of  the  right
of  choice.  And  congress  might  contrive  the  manner  of
holding  elections,  so  as  to  exclude  all  but  their  own

1  Journal  of  ConventioD,  318, 340 ;  Id.  354, 374.

•  Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CSL  XI.]  ELECTIONS.  281

favourites  from  office.  They  might  modify  the  right  of
election,  as  they  please ;  they  might  regulate,the  number
of  votes  by  the  quantity  of  property,  without  involving
any  repugnancy  to  the  constitution.*  These,  and  other
suggestions  of  a  similar  nature;  calculated  to  spread  ter-
ror and  alarm  among  the  people,  were  dwelt  on  with
peculiar  emphasis.

§  814.  In  answer  to  all  such  reasoning,  it  was  urged,
that  there  was  not  a  single  article  in  the  whole  system
more  completely  defensible.  Its  propriety  rested  upon
this  plain  proposition,  that  every  government  ought  to
contain,  in  itself  the  means  of  its  own  preservation.*  If,
in  the  constitution,  there  were  some  departures  from
this  principle,  (as  it  might  be  admitted  there  were,)  they
•were  matters  of  regret,  and  dictated  by  a  controlling
moral  or  political  necessity ;  and  they  ought  not  to  be
extended.  It  was  obviously  impracticable  to  frame,  and
insert  in  the  constitution  an  election  law,  which  would
be  applicable  to  all  possible  changes  in  the  situation  of
the  country,  and  convenient  for  all  the  states.  A  dis-
cretionary power  over  elections  must  be  vested  some-
where. There  seemed  but  three  ways,  in  which  it
could  be  reasonably  organized.  It  might  be  lodged
either  wholly  m  the  national  legislature ;  or  wholly  m  the
state  legislatures ;  or  primarily  in  the  latter,  and  ulti-
mately in  the  former.  The  last  was  the  mode  adopted
by  the  convention.  The  regulation  of  elections  is
submitted,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  local  govern-
ments, which,  in  ordinary  cases,  and  when  no  improper
views  prevail,  may  both  conveniently  and  satisfactorily

1  1  Elliot's  Debates,  43  to  50 ;  Id.  53  to  68 ;  2  Elliot's  Debates;38, 39.
72»  149, 150;  3  EHiot's  Debates,  57  to  74  ;  2  American  Museoim  438  ;
Id.  435; Id.  545;  3  American  Museum,  423;  2  Elliot's  Debates,
277.

9  The  Federalist,  No.  59 ;  2  EHiot's  Debates,  276, 277.

VOL.  II.  36


Digitized  by


Google


^82 CONSTITUTION  OF  THIS  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

be  by  them  exercised.  But,  in  extraordinary  circum-
stances, the  power  is  reserved  to  the  national  govern-
ment ;  so  that  it  may  not  be  abused,  and  thus  hazard  the
safety  and  permanence  of  the  Union.*  Nor  let  it  be
thought,  that  such  an  occurrence  is  wholly  imaginary.
It  is  a  known  fact,  that,  under  the  confederation,
Rhode-Island,  at  a  very  critical  period,  withdrew  her
delegates  from  congress ;  and  thus  prevented  some  im-
portant measures  from  being  carried.*

^815.  Nothing  can  be  more  evident,  than  that  an
exclusive  power  in  the  state  legislatures  to  regulate
elections  for  the  national  government  would  leave  the
existence  of  the  Union  entirely  at  thefr  mercy.  They
could,  at  any  time,  annihilate  it,  by  neglecting  to  provide
for  the  choice  of  persons  to  administer  its  affairs.  It  is
no  sufficient  answer,  that  such  an  abuse  of  power  is  not
probablel  Its  possibility  is,  m  a  constitutional  view,
decisive  against  taking  such  a  risk ;  and  there  is  no  ret-*
fion  for  taking  it.  The  constitution  ought  to  be  safe
against  fears  of  this  sort ;  and  against  temptations  to
undertake  such  a  project  It  is  true,  that  the  state  legis*
latures  may,  by  refusing  to  choose  senators,  interrupt
the  operations  of  the  national  government,  and  thus  in-
volve the  country  m  general  ruin.  But,  because,  with
a  view  to  the  establishment  of  the  constitution,  this  risk
was  necessarily  taken,  when  the  appointment  of  sena-
tors was  vested  m  the  state  legislatures ;  still  it  did  not
follow,  that  a  power  so  dangerous  ought  to  be  conceded
m  cases,  where  the  same  necessity  did  not  exist  On
the  contrary,  it  became  the  duty  of  the  convention,  on
this  very  account,  not  to  multiply  the  chances  of  mis-
chievous attempts  of  this  sort The  risk,  too,  would  be

i  The  Federalist,  No.  59 ;  2  ElUot'a  Debates,  38, 39 ;  Id.  276, 277.
t  1  £lUot'8  Debates,  44,45;  The  Federalist^  No.  22.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XI.]  ELECTIONS.  283

much  greater  in  regard  to  an  exclusive  power  over  the
elections  of  representatives,  than  over  the  appomtment
of  senators.  The  latter  are  chosen  for  six  years ;  the
representatives  for  two  years.  There  is  a  gradual  ro*
tation  of  oflSce  in  the  senate,  every  two  years,  of  one
third  of  the  body ;  and  a  quorum  is  to  consist  of  a  mere
majority.  The  result  of  these  circumstances  would
naturally  be,  that  a  combination  of  a  few  states,  for  a
short  period,  to  intermit  the  appointment  of  senators
would  not  in):errupt  the  operations  or  annihilate  the  ex-
istence of  that  body.  And  it  is  not  against  permanent^
but  agamst  temporary  combinations  of  the  states,  that
there  is  any  necessity  to  provide.  A  temporary  com-
bination might  proceed  altogether  from  the  sinister
designs  and  intrigues  of  a  few  leading  members  of  the
state  legislatures.  A  permanent  combination  could
only  arise  from  the  deep-rooted  disaffection  of  a  great
majority  oi  the  people ;  and,  under  such  circumstances,
the  existence  of  such  a  national  government  would
neither  be  desirable,  nor  practicable.*  The  very  short-
ness of  the  period  of  the  elections  of  the  house  of
representatives  might,  on  the  other  hand,  furnish  means
and  motives  to  temporary  combinations  to  destroy  the
national  government;  and  every  returning  election
might  produce  a  delicate  crisis  in  our  national  affairs,
subversive  of  the  public  tranquillity,  and  encouraging  to
every  sort  of  faction.*

§  816.  There  is  a  great  distmction  between  the
objects  and  interests  of  the  people,  and  the  political
objects  and  interests  of  their  rulers.  The  people  may
be  warmly  attached  to  the  Union,  and  its  powers,  and
its  operations ;  while  their  representatives,  stimulated  by
the  natural  rivalship  of  power,  and  the  hopes  of  personal

1  The  Federalist,  No.  59.  s  id.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


284 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V. STATES. [bOOK  III.

aggrandisement,  may  be  in  a  very  opposite  temper,
and  artfully  using  all  their  influence  to  cripple,  or  de-
stroy the  national  government^  Their  motives  and
objects  may  not,  at  first,  be  clearly  discerned ;  but  time
and  reflection  will  enable  the  people  to  understand  their
own  true  interests,  and  to  guard  themselves  against
insidious  factions.  Besides  ;  there  will  be  occasions,
in  which  the  people  will  be  excited  to  undue  resent-
ments against  the  national  government  With  so  effec-
tual a  weapon  in  their  hands,  as  the  exclusive  power
of  regulating  elections  for  the  national  government,  the
combination  of  a  few  men  in  some  of  the  lai^e  states
might,  by  seizing  the  opportunity  of  some  casual  dis-
affection among  the  people,  accomplish  the  destruction
of  the  Union.  And  it  ought  not  to  be  overlooked,  that
as  a  solid  government  will  make  us  more  and  more  an
object  of  jealousy  to  the  nations  of  Europe,  so  there
will  be  a  perpetual  temptation,  on  their  part,  to  gene-
rate mtrigues  of  this  sort  for  the  purpose  of  subverting
it*

§  817.  There  is,  too,  in  the  nature  of  such  a  provi-
sion, something  incongruous,  if  not  absurd.  What  would
be  said  of  a  clause  introduced  into  the  national  consti-
tution to  regulate  the  state  elections  of  the  members  of
the  state  legislatures  ?  It  would  be  deemed  a  most
unwarrantable  transfer  of  power,  indicating  a  premedi-
tated design  to  destroy  the  state  governments.*  It
would  be  deemed  so  flagrant  a  violation  of  principle,  as
to  require  no  comment  It  would  be  said,  and  justly,
that  the  state  governments  ought  to  possess  the  power
of  self-existence  and  self-organization,  independent  of

1  The  Federalist,  No.  59; I  Elliot's  Debates,  43  to  55 ;  Id.  67,  68 ;
3  Elliot's  Debates,  65.
*  The  Federalist,  No.  59.  >  Id.


Digitized  by


Google


OH. XI.]  ELECTIOHS.  286

the  pleasure  of  the  national  government.  Why  does
not  the  same  reasonmg  apply  to  the  national  govern-
ment ?  What  reason  is  there  to  suppose,  that  the  state
governments  will  be  more  true  to  the  Union,  than.the
national  government  will  be  to  the  state  governments  1
^818.  li,  then,  there  is  no  peculiar  fitness  m  dele-
gating such  a  power  to  the  state  legislatures ;  if  it  might
be  hazardous  and  inconvenient ;  let  us  see,  whether
there  are  any  solid  dangers  from  confiding  the  super-
intending and  ultimate  power  over  elections  to  the
national  government  There  is  no  pretence  to  say,
that  the  power  in  the  national  government  can  be  used,
so  as  to  exclude  any  state  from  its  share  in  the  repre-
sentation in  congress.  Nor  can  it  be  said,  with  cor-
rectness, that  congress  can,  in  any  way,  alter  the  rights,
or  qualifications  of  voters.  The  most,  that  can  be  urged,
with  any  show  of  argument,  is,  that  the  power  might,  in  a
given  case,  be  employed  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  promote
die  election  of  some  favourite  candidate,  or  favourite  class
of  men,  in  exclusion  of  others,  by  confining  the  places
of  election  to  particular  districts,  and  rendering  it  im-
practicable for  the  citizens  at  large  to  partake  in  the
choice.  The  whole  argument  proceeds  upon  a  suppo-
sition the  most  chimerical.  There  are  no  rational  cal-
culations, on  which  it  can  rest,  and  every  probability  is
against  it.  Who  are  to  pass  the  laws  for  regulating
elections  ?  The  congress  of  the  United  States,  com-
posed of  a  senate  chosen  by  the  state  legislatures,  and
of  representatives  chosen  by  the  people  of  the  states.
Can  it  be  imagined,  that  these  persons  will  combine  to
defraud  their  constituents  of  their  rights,  or  to  overthrow
the  state  authorities,  or  the  state  influence  ?  The  very
attempt  would  rouse  universal  indignation,  and  produce
an  immediate  revolt  among  the  great  mass  of  the  peo-


Digitized  by


Google


ifS6 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  UI.

pie,  headed  and  directed  by  the  state  goyemments.^
And  what  motive  could  there  be,  in  congress,  to  pro*
duce  such  results?  The  very  dissimilarity  m  the
ingredients,  composing  the  national  government,  forbid
even  the  supposition  of  any  effectual  combination  for
such  a  purpose.  The  interests,  the  habits,  the  mstitu-
tions,  the  local  employments,  the  state  of  property,  the .
genius,  and  the  manners,  of  the  people  of  the  different
states,  are  so  various,  and  even  opposite,  that  it  would
be  impossible  to  bring  a  majority  of  either  house  to
agree  upon  any  plan  of  elections,  which  should  favour
any  particular  man,  or  class  of  men,  in  any  state.  In
some  states,  commerce  is,  or  may  be,  the  predominant
interest ;  in  others,  manufactures ;  in  others,  agricul-
ture. Physical,  as  well  as  moral  causes  will  necessarily
nourish,  in  different  states,  different  mclinations  and
propensities  on  all  subjects  of  this  sort.  If  there  is  any
class,  which  is  likely  to  have  a  predominant  influence^
it  must  be  either  the  commercial,  or  the  landed  class.
If  either  of  these  could  acquire  such  an  influence,  it  is
infinitely  more  probable,  that  it  would  be  acquired  m
the  state,  than  in  the  national,  councils.^  In  the  latter,
there  will  be  such  a  mixture  of  all  mteresis,  that  it  will
be  impracticable  to  adopt  any  rule  for  all  the  states,
giving  any  preference  to  classes  or  interests,  founded
upon  sectional  or  personal  considerations.  What  might
suit  a  few  states  well,  would  find  a  general  resistance
fix>m  all  the  other  states.

»  ,  §  819.  If  it  is  said,  that  the  elections  might  be  so
managed^  as  to  give  a  predominant  influence  to  the
wealthy,  and  the  well-bom,  (as  they  are  insidiously
called,)  the  supposition  is  not  less  visionary.  What
possible  mode  is  there  to  accomplish  such  a  purpose  1

1  The  Federalist,  No.  60.  mI

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  XI.]  ELECTIOirS,  287

The  wealthy, and  the  well-born  are  not  confined  to  any
particular  spots  in  any  state ;  nor  are  their  mterests
permanently  fixed  any  where.  Their  property  may
consist  of  stock,  or  other  personal  property,  as  well  as
of  land ;  of  manufactories  on  great  streams,  or  on  nar-
row rivulets,  or  in  sequestered  dells.  Their  wealth
may  consist  of  large  plantations  in  the  bosom  of  the
country,  or  farms  on  the  borders  of  the  ocean.  How
vain  must  it  be,  to  legislate  upon  the  regulation  of  elec-
tions with  reference  to  circumstances  so  infinitely
varied,  and  so  infinitely  variable.  The  very  suggestion
is  preposterous.  No  possible  method  of  regulating  the
time,  mode,  or  place  of  elections,  could  give  to  the  rich,
or  elevated,  a  general,  or  permanent  advantage  in  the
elections.  The  only  practical  mode  of  accomplishing
it,  (that  of  a  property  qualification  of  voters,  or  candi-
dates,) is  excluded  in  the  scheme  of  the  national  govern-
ment.^ And  if  it  were  possible,  that  such  a  design
could  be  accomplished  to  the  injury  of  the  people  at  a
smgle  election,  it  is  certam,  that  the  unpopularity  of  the
measure  would  immediately  drive  the  members  from
office,  who  aided  in  it ;  and  they  would  be  succeeded  by
others,  who  would  more  justly  represent  the  public  will
and  the  public  interests.  A  cunning,  so  shallow,  would
be  easily  detected ;  and  would  be  as  contemptible  from
its  folly,  as  it  would  be  difficult  in  its  operations.

^  820.  Other  considerations  are  entitled  to  great
weight  The  constitution  gives  to  the  state  legislatures
the  power  to  regulate  the  time,  place,  and  manner  of
holding  elections ;  and  this  will  be  so  desirable  a  boon
in  their  possession,  on  account  of  their  ability  to  adapt
the  regulation,  fi-om  time  to  time,  to  the  peculiar  local,
or  political  convenience  of  the  states,  that  its  represen-

1  The  Federalist,  No.  60.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


288 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V. STATES.  [BOOK  III.

tatives  in  congress  will  not  be  brought  to  assent  to  any
general  system  by  congress,  unless  from  an  extreme
necessity,  or  a  very  urgent  exigency.  Indeed,  the
danger  rather  is,  that  when  such  necessity  or  exigency
actually  arises,  the  measure  will  be  postponed,  and
perhaps  defeated,  by  the  unpopularity  of  the  exercise
of  the  power.  All  the  states  will,  under  common  cir-
cumstances, have  a  local  interest,  and  local  pride,  in
preventing  any  interference  by  congress ;  and  it  is  in-
credible, that  this  influence  should  not  be  felt,  as  well
in  the  senate,  as  in  the  house.  It  is  not  too  much,
therefore,  to  presume,  that  it  will  not  be  resorted  to  by
congress,  until  there  has  been  some  extraordinary  abuse,
or  danger  in  leaving  it  to  the  discretion  of  the  states
respectively.  And  it  is  no  small  recommendation  of
this  supervismg  power,  that  it  will  naturally  operate,  as  a
check  upon  undue  state  legislation;  since  the  latter  might
precipitate  the  very  evil,  which  the  popular  opinion
would  be  most  solicitous  to  avoid.  A  preventive  of
this  sort,  addressed  a  priori  to  state  jealousy,  and  state
interest,  would  become  a  most  salutary  remedy,  not
fix>m  its  actual  application,  but  from  its  moral  influence.
§  821.  It  was  said,  that  the  constitution  might  have
provided,  that  the  elections  should  be  in  counties.  This
was  true ;  but  it  would,  as  a  general  rule,  afford  very
litde  relief  agamst  a  possible  abuse ;  for  counties  differ
greatly  in  size,  in  roads,  and  in  accommodations  for
elections ;  and  the  argument,  6rom  possible  abuse,  is
just  as  strong,  even  after  such  a  provision  should  be
made,  as  before.  If  an  elector  were  compellable  to  go
thirty,  or  fifty  miles,  it  would  discourage  his  vote,  as
much,  as  if  it  were  one  hundred,  or  five  hundred  miles.*

1  The  Federalist,  No.  61.  —  The  full  force  of  this  reasoning  will  not
be  perceived,  without  adverting  to  the  fact,  that  though  in  New-England


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XI.]  ELECTIONS.  289

The  truth  is,  that  congress  could  never  resort  to  a  mea-
sure of  this  sort  for  purposes  of  oppression,  or  party
triumph,  until  that  body  had  ceased  to  represent  the
will  of  the  states  and  the  people ;  and  if,  under  such
circumstances,  the  members  could  still  hold  office,  it
would  be,  because  a  general  and  hremediable  corrup-
tion, or  indifference  pervaded  the  whole  community.
No  republican  constitution  could  pretend  to  afford  any
remedy  for  such  a  state  of  things.^

^  822.  But  why  did  not  a  similar  objection  occur
against  the  state  constitutions '?  The  subject  of  elec-
tions, the  time,  place,  and  manner  of  holding  them,  is
in  many  cases  left  entirely  to  legislative  discretion.  In
New-York,  the  senators  are  chosen  from  four  districts
of  great  territorial  extent,  each  comprehending  several
counties ;  and  it  is  not  defined,  where  the  elections  shall
be  had.  Suppose  the  legislature  should  compel  aD  the
electors  to  come  to  one  spot  in  the  district,  as,  for  in-
stance, to  Albany,  the  evil  would  be  great ;  but  the
measure  would  not  be  unconstitutional.*  Yet  no  one
practically  entertains  the  slightest  dread  of  such  legis-
lation. In  truth,  all  reasoning  from  such  extreme  pos-
sible cases  is  ill  adapted  to  convince  the  judgment,
though  it  may  alarm  our  prejudices.  Such  a  legislative
discretion  is  not  deemed  an  infirmity  in  the  delegation
of  constitutional  power.  It  is  deemed  safe,  because  it
can  never  be  used  oppressively  for  any  length  of  time,

the  voters  generally  give  their  votes  in  the  townships,  where  they  reside.
In  the  southern  and  western  states,  there  are  few  towns,  and  the  elee*
tioDS  are  held  in  the  counties,  where  the  population  is  sparse,  and  spread
over  large  plantation  districts.*

I  2  Elliot's  Debates,  88, 39.

s  The  Federalist,  No.  61.


*  1  KUiot*f  Debates,  68.

VOL.  II.  37


Digitized  by


Google


290  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  UI#

unless  the  people  themselves  choose  to  aid  in  their  owa
degradation.

§  823.  The  objections,  then,  to  the  provision  are  not
sound,  or  tenable.  The  reasons  in  its  favour  are,  on
the  other  hand,  of  great  force  and  importance.  In  the
first  place,  the  power  may  be  applied  by  congress  to
correct  any  negligence  in  a  state  in  regard  to  elections,
as  well  as  to  prevent  a  dissolution  of  the  government
by  designing  and  refractory  states,  urged  on  by  some  .
temporary  excitements.  In  the  next  place,  it  will  ope-
rate as  a  check  in  flavour  of  the  people  agamst  any  de-
signs of  a  federal  senate,  and  their  constituents,  to  de-
prive the  people  of  the  state  of  their  right  to  choose
representatives.  In  the  next  place,  it  provides  a  rem-
edy for  the  evil,  if  any  state,  by  reason  of  invaa^ion,  or
other  cause,  cannot  have  it  in  its  power  to  appoint  a
place,  where  the  citizens  can  safely  meet  to  choose
representatives.^  In  the  last  place,  (as  the  plan  is
but  an  experiment,)  it  may  hereafter  become  important,
with  a  view  to  the  regular  operations  of  the  general
government,  that  there  should  be  a  uniformity  in  the
time  and  manner  of  electing  representatives  and  sena-
tors, so  as  to  prevent  vacancies,  when  there  may  be
calls  for  extraordinary  sessions  of  congress.  If  su^h  a
time  should  occur,  or  such  a  uniformity  be  hereafter
desirable,  congress  is  the  only  body  possessing  the
means  to  produce  it.*

^  824.  Such  were  the  objections,  and  such  was  the
reasonmg,  by  which  they  were  met,  at  the  time  of  the
adoption  of  the  constitution.  A  period  of  forty  years
has  since  passed  by,  without  any  attempt  by  congress


1  See  1  Elliot's  Debates,  44,  47,  48,  49 ;  Id.  55;  Id.  67.
s  The  Federalist,  No.  61 ;  2  Elliot'^  Debates,  38, 39.


Digitized  by


Google


cfi.  xl]  elections.  201

to  make  any  regulations,  or  interfere  in  tbe  slightest
degree  with  the  elections  of  members  of  congress. If,
therefore,  experience  can  demonstrate  any  thing,  it  is
the  entire  safety  of  the  power  in  congress,  which  it  is
scarcely  possible  (reasoning  fix)m  the  past)  should  be
exerted,  unless  upon  very  urgent  occasions. The  states
now  regulate  the  time,  the  place,  and  the  manner  of
elections,  in  a  practical  sense,  exclusively. The  manner
is  very  various ;  and  perhaps  the  power  has  been  ex*
erted,  in  some  instances,  under  the  influence  of  local
or  party  feelings,  to  an  extent,  which  is  indefensible  A
principle  and  policy. There  is  no  uniformity  in  the
choice,  or  in  the  mode  of  election. In  some  states  the
representatives  are  chosen  by  a  general  ticket  for  the
whole  state ;  in  others  they  are  chosen  singly  in  dis-
tricts ;  in  others  they  are  chosen  in  districts  composed
of  a  population  sufficient  to  elect  two  or  three  represent
tatives ;  and  in  others  the  districts  are  sometimes  sin«
gle,  and  sometimes  united  in  the  choice. In  some
states  the  candidate  must  have  a  majority  of  all  the
votes  to  entitle  him  to  be  deemed  elected ;  in  others
(as  it  is  in  England)  it  is  sufficient,  if  he  has  a  plurality
of  votes. In  some  of  the  states  the  choice  is  by  the
voters  tm?a  voce^  (as  it  is  in  England;)  in  others  it  is
by  ballot^ The  times  of  the  elections  are  quite  as  va-
rious ;  sometimes  before,  and  sometimes  after  the  regu-
Iv  period,  at  which  the  office  becomes  vacant. That
this  want  of  uniformity,  as  to  the  time  and  mode  of
election,  has  been  productive  of  some  inconveniences  to
the  public  service,  cannot  be  doubted ;  for  it  has  some-
times occurred,  that  at  an  extra  session  a  whole  state
has  been  deprived  of  its  vote ;  and  at  the  regular  ses-

1  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comin.  App.  l9fL

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


292 CONSTITUTIOW  OP  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  IIL

sions  some  districts  have  failed  of  being  represented
upon  questions  vital  to  their  interests.  Still,  so  strong
has  been  the  sense  of  congress  of  the  importance  of
leaving  these  matters  to  state  regulation,  that  no  effort
has  been  hitherto  made  to  cure  these  evils ;  and  public
opinion  has  almost  irresistibly  settled  down  in  favour  of
the  existing  system.^

§  825.  Several  of  the  states,  at  the  time  of  adopting
the  constitution,  proposed  amendments  on  this  subject ;
but  none  were  ever  subsequently  proposed  by  congress
to  the  people ;  so  that  the  public  mind  ultimately  ac-
quiesced in  the  reasonableness  of  the  existing  provis-
ion. It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  none  of  the
amendments  proposed  in  the  state  conventions  pur-
ported to  take  away  entirely  the  superintending  power
of  congress ;  but  only  restricted  it  to  cases,  where  a
state  neglected,  refused,  or  was  disabled  to  exercise
the  power  of  regulating  elections.*

i^  826.  It  remains  only  to  notice  an  exception  to  the
power  of  congress  in  this  clause.  It  is,  that  congress
cannot  alter,  or  make  regulations,  ^  as  to  the  place  of
choosing  senators.'*  This  exception  is  highly  reasona-
ble. The  choice  is  to  be  made  by  the  state  legislature ;
and  it  would  not  be  either  necessary,  or  becoming  in
congress  to  prescribe  the  place,  where  it  should  sit
This  exception  was  not  m  the  revised  draft  of  the  con-
stitution ;  and  was  adopted  almost  at  the  close  of  the
convention;  not,  however,  without  some  opposition,  for
nine  states  were  in  its  favour,  one  against  it,  and  one
was  divided.*


1  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comnu  App.  191, 192.

9  See  Journal  of  Convention,  Supplement,  p.  402,  411,  418,  425, 433,
447,  454.
^  Journal  of  Convention,  354, 374.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XI.]  MEETINGS  OF  COXORESS.  29S

^  827.  The  second  clause  of  the  fourth  section  of  the
first  article  is  as  follows :  "The  congress  shall  assemble  at
"least  once  in  every  year;  and  such  meeting  shall  be  on
"  the  first  Monday  in  December,  unless  they  shall  by  law
"  appoint  a  different  day."  This  clause,  for  the  first  time,
made  its  appearance  in  the  revised  draft  of  the  constitution
near  the  close  of  the  convention ;  and  was  silently  adopt-
ed, and,  so  far  as  can  be  perceived,  without  opposition.
Annual  parliaments  had  been  long  a  favourite  opinion
and  practice  with  the  people  of  England ;  and  in  Amer-
ica, under  the  colonial  governments,  they  were  justly
deemed  a  great  security  to  public  liberty.  The  pres-
ent provision  could  hardly  be  overlooked  by  a  fi'ee
people,  jealous  of  theh*  rights ;  and  therefore  the  con-
stitution fixed  a  constitutional  period,  at  which  congress
should  assemble  in  every  year,  unless  some  other  day
was  specially  prescribed.  Thus,  the  legislative  discre-
tion was  necessarily  bounded;  and  annual  sessions
were  placed  equaUy  beyond  the  power  of  faction,  and
.of  party,  of  power,  and  of  corruption.  In  two  of  the
states*  a  more  frequent  assemblage  of  the  legislature
was  known  to  exist.  But  it  was  obvious,  that  fi'om  the
nature  of  their  duties,  and  the  distance  of  their  abodes,
the  members  of  congress  ought  not  to  be  brought  to-
gether at  shorter  periods,  unless  upon  the  most  press-
ing exigencies.  A  provision,  so  universally  acceptable,
requires  no  vindication,  or  commentary.*

^  828.  Under  the  Bridsh  constitution,  the  king  has
the  sole  right  to  convene,  and  prorogue,  and  dissolve
parliament.  And  although  it  is  now  usual  for  parlia-
ment to  assemble  annually,  the  power  of  prorogation
may  be  applied  at  the  kmg's  pleasure,  so  as  to  prevent

1  The  Pederaliat,  No.  52.


Digitized  by


Google


904 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

any  business  from  being  done.  And  it  is  usual  for  the
king,  when  he  means,  that  parliament  should  assemble
•  to  do  business,  to  give  notice  by  proclamation  accord-
ingly ;  otherwise  a  prorogation  is  of  course  on  the  first
day  of  the  session.^

§  829.  The  fifth  section  of  the  first  article  embraces
provisions  principally  applicable  to  the  powers,  rights,
and  duties  of  each  house  in  its  separate  corporate  char-
acter. These  will  not  require  much  illustration  or  com-
mentary, as  they  are  such,  as  are  usually  delegated  to
all  legislative  bodies  in  free  governments ;  and  were  in
practice  in  Great-Britain  at  the  time  of  the  emigration
of  our  ancestors ;  and  were  exercised  under  the  colonial
•governments,  and  have  been  secured  and  recognised
in  the  present  state  constitutions.

§  830.  The  first  clause  declares,  that  **each  bouse
**  shall  be  the  judge  of  the  elections,  returns,  and  quali-
"  fications  of  its  own  members,  and  a  majority  of  each
^  shall  constitute  a  quorum  to  do  business ;  but  a  smaller
•*  number  may  adjourn  from  day  to  day,  and  may  be
**  authorized  to  compel  the  attendance  of  absent  mem-
**  bers,  in  such  manner,  and  under  such  penalties,  as
**each  house  may  provide.^

^831.  It  is  obvious,  that  a  power  must  be  lodged
somewhere  to  judge  of  the  elections,  returns,  and  quali-
fications of  the  members  of  each  house  composing  the
legislature ;  for  otherwise  there  could  be  no  certainty,
as  to  who  were  legitimately  chosen  members,  and  any
intruder,  or  usurper,  might  claim  a  seat,  and  thus  tram-
ple upon  the  rights,  and  privileges,  and  Uberties  of  the
people. Indeed,  elections  would,  become,  under  such


1  1  Black.  Comm.  187,  188,  and  Christian's  Note ;  3  V^ilson's  Law
Lect  154, 1^*


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XI.]  MEETINGS  OF  C0K6RE8S.  206

circumstances,  a  mere  mockery;  and  legislation  the
exercise  of  sovereignty  by  any  self-constituted  body.
The  only  possible  question  on  such  a  subject  is,  as  to
the  body,  in  which  such  a  power  shall  be  lodged.  If
lodged  in  any  other,  than  the  legislative  body  itself  its
independence,  its  purity,  and  even  its  existence  and
action  may  be  destroyed,  or  put  into  imminent  danger.
No  other  body,  but  itself,  can  have  the  same  motives  to
preserve  and  perpetuate  these  attributes;  no  other
body  can  be  so  perpetually  watchful  to  guard  its  own
rights  and  privileges  from  infringement,  to  purify  and  vin-
dicate its  own  character,  and  to  preserve  the  rights,  and
sustain  the  free  choice  of  its  constituents.  Accordingly,
the  power  has  always  been  lodged  in  the  legislative
body  by  the  uniform  practice  of  England  and  America.*
'^  832.  The  propriety  of  establishing  a  rule  for  a
quorum  for  the  despatch  of  business  is  equally  clear ;
siacG  otherwise  the  concerns  of  the  nation  might  be
decided  by  a  very  smaU  number  of  the  members  of
each  body.  In  England,  where  the  house  of  commons
consists  of  nearly  six  hundred  members,  the  number  of
forty-five  constitutes  a  quorum  to  do  business.^  In
some  of  the  state  constitutions  a  particular  number  of
the  members  constitutes  a  quorum  to  do  business ;  in
others,  a  majority  is  required.  The  constitution  of  the
United  States  has  wisely  adopted  the  latter  course ;
and  thus,  by  requiring  a  majority  for  a  quorum,  has
secured  the  public  from  any  hazard  of  passing  laws  by
surprise,  or  against  the  deliberate  opinion  of  a  majority
of  the  representative  body.

1  1  Black.  Comm.  163,  178,  179;  Rawle  on  tiie  ConstitutioD^  ch.  4,
p.  46 ;  1  Kent  Comm.  220 ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  153, 154.

9  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  201, 202^  203, 229.  —  I  have  not  been
able  to  find  in  any  books  within  my  reach,  whether  any  particular  quo-
rum is  required  in  the  house  of  lords.


Digitized  by


Google


296  CONSTICPUTION  OF  THE  0.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

^  833.  It  may  seem  strange,  but  it  is  only  one  of
many  proofs  of  the  extreme  jealousy,  with  which  every
provision  in  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  was
watched  and  scanned,  that  though  the  ordinary  quo-
rum in  the  state  legislatures  is  sometimes  less,  and
rarely  more,  than  a  majority;  yet  it  was  saicL  that  in
the  congress  of  the  United  States  more  than  a  majority
ought  to  have  been  required  ;  and  in  particular  cases,
if  not  in  all,  more  than  a  majority  of  a  quorum  should
be  necessary  for  a  decision.  Traces  of  this  opinion,
though  very  obscure,  may  perhaps  be  found  in  the  con-
vention itself.^  To  require  such  an  extraordinary  quo-
rum for  the  decision  of  questions  would,  in  effect,  be  to
give  the  rule  to  the  minority,  instead  of  the  majority ;
and. thus  to  subvert  the  fundamental  principle  of  a  re-
publican government  If  such  a  course  were  generally
allowed,  it  might  be  extremely  prejudicial  to  the  public
interests  in  cases,  which  required  new  laws  to  be  pass-
ed, or  old  ones  modified,  to  preserve  the  general,  in
contradistinction  to  local,  or  special  interests.  If  it
were  even  confined  to  particular  cases,  the  privilege
might  enable  an  interested  minority  to  screen  them-
selves from  equitable  sacrifices  to  the  general  weal ;  or,
in  particular  cases,  to  extort  undue  indulgences.  It
would  also  have  a  tendency  to  foster  and  facilitate  the
baneful  practice  of  secession,  a  practice,  which  has
shown  itself  even  in  states,  where  a  majority  only  is
required,  which  is  subversive  of  all  the  principles  of  or-
der and  regular  government,  and  which  leads  direcdy
to  public  convulsions,  and  the  ruin  of  republican  insti-
tutions.'


1  The  Federalist,  No.  58 ;  Journal  of  Convention,  218, 243.
9  The  Federalist,  No.  22, 58.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XI.]  MIETIKOS  OF  OOIIORCSS.  297

§  834.  But,  as  a  danger  of  an  opposite  sort  required
equally  to  be  guarded  against,  a  smaller  number  is  au-
thorized to  adjourn  from  day  to  day,  thus  to  prevent  a
legal  dissolution  of  the  body,  and  also  to  compel  the
attendance  of  absent  members.^  Thus,  the  interests
of  the  nation,  and  the  despatch  of  business,  are  not  sub-
ject to  the  caprice,  or  perversity,  or  negligence  of  the
minority.  It  was  a  defect  in  the  articles  of  confedera-
tion, sometimes  productive  of  great  public  mischief  that
no  vote,  except  for  an  adjournment,  could  be  deter*
mined,  unless  by  the  votes  of  a  majority  of  the  states ; '
and  no  power  of  compelling  the  attendance  of  the  re-
quisite number  existed.

1  Journal  of  Conventioii,  318,  24Q ;  4  Instit  43,  49.
9  Confederation,  art  9;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  44,  45;  The  Federalist,
No.  22.


VOL.  II.  38


Digitized  by


Google


298  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  IIU


CHAPTER  Xn.

PRIYILEOES  AND  POWERS OF  BOTH HOUSES  OF  CON-

ORESS.

§  836.  The  next  clause  is,  "  each  house  may  deter-
^mme  the  rules  of  its  proceedings,  punish  its  members
**for  disorderly  behaviour,  and,  with  the  concurrence  of
**  two  thirds,  expel  a  member/'  No  person  can  doubt
the  propriety  of  the  provision  authorizing  eachliouse  to
determine  the  rules  of  its  own  proceedings.  If  the  power
did  not  exist,  it  would  be  utterly  impracticable  to  trans-
act the  business  of  the  nation,  either  at  all,  or  at  least
with  decency,  deliberation,  and  order.  The  humblest
assembly  of  men  b  understood  to  possess  this  power ;
and  it  would  be  absurd  to  deprive  the  councils  of  the
nation  of  a  like  authority.  But  the  power  to  make
rules  would  be  nugatory,  unless  it  was  coupled  with
a  power  to  punish  for  disorderly  behaviour,  or  disobe-
dience to  those  rules.  And  as  a  member  might  be  so
lost  to  all  sense  of  dignity  and  duty,  as  to  disgrace  the
house  by  the  grossness  of  his  conduct,  or  interrupt  its
deliberations  by  perpetual  violence  or  clamour,  the
power  to  expel  for  very  aggravated  misconduct  was
also  indispensable,  not  as  a  common,  but  as  an  ultimate
redress  for  the  grievance.  But  such  a  power,  so  sum-
mary, and  at  the  same  time  so  subversive  of  the  rights
of  the  people,  it  was  foreseen,  might  be  exerted  for
mere  purposes  of  faction  or  party,  to  remove  a  patriot,
or  to  aid  a  corrupt  measure ;  and  it  has  therefore  been
wisely  guarded  by  the  restriction,  that  there  shall  be
a  concurrence  of  two  thirds  of  the  members,  to  justify


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XII.]  PRIVIUBOSS  OF  COKORMS.  299

an  expulsion.^ This  clause,  requiring  a  concurrence  of
two  thirds,  was  not  in  the  original  draft  of  the  constitu-
tion, but  it  was  inserted  by  a  vote  of  ten  states,  one
being  divided.* A  like  general  authority  to  expel,  ex-
ists in  the  British  house  of  commons ;  and  in  the  legis-
lative bodies  of  many  of  the  states  composing  the  Union.
^  836.  What  must  be  the  disorderly  behaviour,  which
the  house  may  punish,  and  what  punishment,  other
than  expulsion,  may  be  inflicted,  do  not  appear  to  have
been  setded  by  any  authoritative  adjudication  of  either
house  of  congress. A  learned  commentator  sup[)oses,
that  members  can  only  be  punished  for  misbehaviour
committed  during  the  session  of  congress,  either  widiin,
or  without  the  walls  of  the  house ;  though  he  is  also  of
opinion,  that  expulsion  may  be  inflicted  for  criminal
conduct  committed  in  any  place.' He  does  not  say,
whether  it  must  be  committed  during  the  session  of
congress  or  otherwise. In  July,  1797,  WUliam  Blount
was  expelled  fix)m  the  senate,  for  **  a  high  misdemean-
our, entirely  inconsistent  with  his  public  trust  and  duty
as  9i  senator." The  offence  charged  against  him  was
an  attempt  to  seduce  an  American  agent  among  the
Indians  from  his  duty,  and  to  alienate  the  affections  and
confidence  of  the  Indians  from  the  public  authorities  of
the  United  States,  and  a  negotiation  for  services  m  be-
half of  the  British  government  among  the  Indians. It
was  not  a  statuteable  offence ;  nor  was  it  committed  in
his  official  character ;  nor  was  it  committed  during  the
session  of  congress ;  nor  at  the  seat  of  government


1  Mr.  J.  Q.  Adamses  Report  to  the  senate  in  the  case  of  John  Smith,
31  Dec.  1807 ;  1  Hall's  Law  Journ.  459 ;  Sergeant  on  Const  Law,  eh.  28,
p.  287, 288.

2  Journal  of  Convention,  218,  243.

3  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  4,  p.  47.


Digitized  by


Google


300 coirsTiTirrioii  or  the  v.  states,  [book  m.

Yet  by  an  almost  unanimous  vote*  he  was  expelled
from  that  body  ;  and  he  was  afterwards  impeached  (as
has  been  already  stated)  for  this,  among  other  charges.'
It  seems,  therefore,  to  be  setded  by  the  senate  upon
full  deliberation,  that  expulsion  may  be  for  any  misde-
meanour, which,  though  not  punishable  by  any  statute,
is  inconsistent  with  the  trust  and  duty  of  a  senator.  In
die  case  of  John  Smith  (a  senator)  in  April,  1808,  the
charge  against  him  was  for  participation  in  the  supposed
treasonable  conspiracy  of  Colonel  Burr.  But  Ae  mo-
tion to  expel  him  was  lost  by  a  want  of  the  constitu-
tkmal  majority  of  two  thirds  of  the  members  of  the
senate.'  The  precise  ground  of  the  failure  of  the  mo-
tion (k)es  not  appear ;  but  it  may  be  gathered  from  the
arguments  of  his  counsel,  that  it  did  not  turn  upon  any
doubt,  that  the  power  of  the  senate  extended  to  cases
dT' misdemeanour,  not  done  in  the  presence  or  view  of
the  body;  but  most  probably  it  was  decided  upon
some  doubt  as  to  the  facts/  It  may  be  thought  difficult
to  draw  a  clear  line  of  distmction  between  the  right  to
inflict  the  punishment  of  expulsion^and  any  oli>er  pun-
ishment upon  a  member,  founded  on  the  time,  place,  or
nature  of  the  offence.  The  power  to  expel  a  member
is  not  in  the  British  house  of  commons  confined  to  of-
fences committed  by  the  party  as  a  member,  or  during
the  session'  of  parliament ;  but  it  extends  to  all  cases.


1  Yeas  25,  nay  1.

*  See  Journal  of  Senate,  8  July,  1797 ;  Sergt^aut's  Const  Law,  ch.  dS,
p.  286 ;  1  HaU'8  Law  Journ.  459,  47i .

3  Yeas  19. Nays  10.

4  1  Hall's  Law  Journ.  459,471 ;  Journ.  of  Senatt,  9  April,  1808;  Ser-
geant's  Const  Law,  ch.  28,  p.  287, 288.  See  also  proceedings  of  the  sen-
ate in  the  case  of  Humphrey  Marshall,  22  March,  1796 ;  Sergeant's
Const  Law,  ch.  28,  p.  285.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XIL]  PRIVILEOSS  of COHGRS88.  301

where  the  offence  is  such,  as,  m  the  judgment  of  the
house,  unfits  him  for  parliamentary  duties.^

^  837.  The  next  clause  is,  ^  each  house  shall  keep
^  a  journal  of  its  proceedings,  and  from  time  to  time
^  publish  the  same,  except  such  parts,  as  may  m  their
'^judgment  require  secrecy.  And  the  yeas  and  nays  of
^  the  members  of  either  house  on  any  question  shall,  at
^  the  desire  of  one  fifth  of  those  present,  be  entered  on
"  the  journal.**

§  838.  This  clause  in  its  actual  form  did  not  pass  in
the  convention  without  some  struggle  and  some  prc^x>si-
tions  of  amendment.  The  first  part  finally  passed  by  an
unanimous  rote ;  the  exception  was  carried  by  a  dose
vote  of  six  states  against  four,  one  being  dirided ;  and
the  remaining  clause,  after  an  ineffectual  effort  to  strike
out  "one  fifth,**  and  insert  in  its  stead,  "if  every  mem-
ber present,**  was  finally  adopted  by  an  unanimous
vote.*  The  object  of  the  whole  clause  is  to  ensure  pub-
licity to  the  proceedings  of  the  legislature,  and  a  cor-
respcmdent  responsibility  of  the  members  to  their  re-
q)ective  constituents.  And  it  is  founded  m  sound
policy  and  deep  political  foresight.  Intrigue  and  cabal
are  dius  deprived  of  some  of  their  main  resources,  by
plotting  and  devising  measures  in  secrecy.*  The  pub-
fic  mind  is  enlightened  by  an  attentive  examination  of
the  public  measures;  patriotism,  and  integrity,  and
wisdom  obtain  their  due  reward ;  and  votes  are  ascer-
tained, not  by  vague  conjecture,  but  by  positive  fects.
Mr.  Justice  Blackstone  seems,  mdeed,  to  suppose,  that


1  1  Black.  Cemm.  163,  and  Christian'f  note ;  Id.  167  and  note.  See
also  RexY.  WUkt$^  %  Wilson's  R.  351 ;  Cotn.  Dig, PorZiomeii^,  G.  5.  See
1  Hall's  Uw  Term,  459, 466.

«  Journal  of  the  Convention,  p.  219,  243, 244,  ?45, 354,  37a
'  3  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  204, 205;  2  W^ilson's  Lect  157, 15a


■  Digitized  by


Google


302 coNSTiTUTioir  or  the  v.  states, [book  hi.

votes  openly  and  publicly  given  are  more  liable  to
intrigue  and  combination,  than  those  given  privately  and
by  ballot.  "  This  latter  method/*  says  he,  "  may  be
serviceable  to  prevent  intrigues  and  unconstitutional
combinations.  But  it  is  impossible  to  be  practised 'with
us,  at  least  in  the  house  of  commons,  where  every
member's  conduct  is  subject  to  the  future  censure  of
his  constituents,  and  therefore  should  be  openly  sub-
mitted to  their  inspection.*'^

§  839.  The  history  of  public  assemblies,  or  of  private
votes,  does  not  seem  to  confirm  the  former  suggestion
of  the  learned  author.  Intrigue  and  combination  are
more  commonly  found  connected  with  secret  sessions,
than  vdth  public  debates,  with  the  workings  of  the  bal-
lot box,  than  with  the  manliness  of  viva  voce  votes.
At  least,  it  may  be  questioned,  if  the  vote  by  ballot  has,
in  the  opinion  of  a  majority  of  the  American  people,
obtained  any  decisive  preference  over  viva  voce  voting,
even  at  elections.  The  practice  in  New  England  is  one
way,  and  at  the  South  another  way.  And  as  to  the
votes  of  representatives  and  senators  in  congress,  no
man  has  yet  been  bold  enough  to  vindicate  a  secret  or
ballot  vote,  as  either  more  safe,  or  more  wise,  more
promotive  of  independence  in  the  members,  or  more
beneficial  to  their  constituents.  So  long  as  known  and
open  responsibility  is  valuable  as  a  check,  or  an  incen-
tive among  the  representatives  of  a  fi:^ee  people,  so  long
a  journal  of  their  proceedings,  and  their  votes,  pub-
lished m  the  face  of  the  world,  will  continue  to  enjoy
public  favour,  and  be  demanded  by  public  opin-
ion. When  the  people  become  indiflTerent  to  the
acts  of  their  representatives,  they  will  have  ceased  to
take  much  interest  in  the  preservation  of  their  liberties.

~  1  1  Black.  Comm.  181, 182.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  XII.]  PRIVILEGES  OF  CONGRESS.  303

When  the  joumab  shall  excite  no  public  interest,  it
will  not  be  matter  of  surprise,  if  the  constitution  itself  is
silently  forgotten,  or  deliberately  violated.

^  840.  The  restriction  of  calls  of  the  yeas  and  nays
to  one  fifth  is  founded  upon  the  necessity  of  preventing
too  frequent  a  recurrence  to  this  mode  of  ascertaining  the
votes,  at  the  mere  caprice  of  an  individual  A  call  con-
sumes a  great  deal  of  time,  and  oflen  embarrasses  the  just
progress  of  beneficial  measures.  It  is  said  to  have  been
oflen  used  to  excess  in  the  congress  under  the  confed-
eration ;  *  and  even  imder  the  present  constitution  it  is
notoriously  used,  as  an  occasional  annoyance,  by  a  dis-
satisfied minority,  to  retard  the  passage  of  measures,
which  are  sanctioned  by  the  approbation  of  a  strong
majority.  The  check,  therefore,  is  not  merely  theoret-
ical ;  and  experience  shows,  that  it  has  been  resorted
to,  at  once  to  admonish,  and  to  control  members,  in  this
abuse  of  the  public  patience  and  the  public  indulgence.

^841.  The  next  clause  is,  "neither  house,  during
"  the  session  of  congress,  shall,  without  the  consent ^of
^  the  other,  adjourn  *  for  more  than  three  days,  nor  to
"  any  other  place,  than  that,  in  which  the  two  houses
"shall  be  sitting.''*  It  is  observable,  that  the  duration
of  each  session  of  congress,  (subject  to  the  constitutional
termination  of  their  official  agency,)  depends  solely
upon  their  own  will  and  pleasure,  with  the  single  ex-
ception, as  wOl  be  presently  seen,  of  cases,  in  which  the
two  houses  disagree  in  respect  to  the  time  of  adjourn-
ment In  no  other  case  is  the  president  aUowed  to
interfere  with  the  time  and  extent  of  their  deliberations.
And  thus  their  independence  is  efiectually  guarded

1  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  205,  206.

3  See  Journ.  of  Convention,  319, 24a See  also  2  Elliot's  Debates,  276,
277.


Digitized  by


Google


304 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

against  any  encroachment  on  the  part  of- the  executive.^
Very  different  is  the  situation  of  paiiiament  under  the
British  constitution ;  for  the  king  may,  at  any  tune,  put
an  end  to  a  session  by  a  prorogation  of  parliament,  or
terminate  the  existence  of  parliament  by  a  dissdution^
and  a  call  of  a  new  parliament.  It  is  true,  that  each
house  has  authority  to  adjourn  itself  separately ;  and
this  is  commonly  done  from  day  to  day,  and  sometimes
foE.  a  week  or  a  moi^th  together,  as  at  Christmas  and
Easter,  or  upon  other  particular  occasions.  But  the  ad^
joumment  of  one  house  is  not  the  adjournment  of  the
other.  And  it  is  usual,  when  the  king  signifies  his  pleas-
ure, that  both,  or  either  of  the  houses  should  adjourn
themselves  to  a  certain  day,  to  obey  the  king's  pleasure,
and  adjourn  accordingly ;  for  otherwise  a  prorogation
would  certainly  follow.*

^  842.  Under  the  colonial  governments,  the  undue
exercise  of  the  same  power  by  the  royal  governors
constituted  a  great  public  grievance,  and  was  one  of  the
n^imerous  cases  of  misrule,  upon  which  the  declaration
of  independence  strenuously  relied.  It  was  there  sol-
emnly charged  against  the  king,  that  he  had  called  to-
gether legislative  [cdonial]  bodies  at  places,  unusual,
uncomfortable,  and  distant  from  the  repository  of  the
public  records;  that  he  had  dissolved  representative
bodies,  for  opposmg  his  invasions  of  the  rights  of  the
people ;  and  after  such  dissolutions,  he  had  refused  to
reassemble  them  for  a  long  period  of  time.  It  was  natural,
therefore,  that  the  people  of  the  United  States  should
entertain  a  strong  jeabusy  on  this  subject,  and  should
interpose  a  constitutional  barrier  against  any  such  abuse

1  1  Tucker'f  Black.  Comm.  App.  906, 907.

8  1  Black.  Comm.  185  to  190;  9  Wilson's  Law  Lect  154, 155;  Com.
Dig.  ParUamefU,  L.  M.  N.  O.  P.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XII.]  PRITILE0S8  OF  CONORS88.  305

by  the  prerogative  of  the  executive.  The  state  consti-
tutions generally  contain  some  provision  on  the  same
subject,  as  a  security  to  the  independence  of  the  legis-
lature.

^  842. These  are  all  the  powers  and  privileges,
which  are  expressly  vested  in  each  house  of  congress
by  the  constitution. What  further  powers  and  privi-
leges they  incidentally  possess  has  been  a  question  much
discussed,  and  may  hereafter  be  open,  as  new  cases
arise,  to  still  further  discussion.  It  is  remarkable,  that  no
power  is  conferred  to  punish  for  any  contempts  com-
mitted against  either  house ;  and  yet  it  is  obvious,  that,
unless  such  a  power,  to  some  extent,  exists  by  impli-
cation, it  is  utterly  impossible  for  either  house  to  per-
form its  constitutional  functions. For  instance,  how  is
either  house  to  conduct  its  own  deliberations,  if  it  may
not  keep  out,  or  expel  intruders?  If  it  may  not  require
and  enforce  upon  strangers  silence  and  decorum  in  its
presence  ? If  it  may  not  enable  its  own  members  to
have  free  ingress,  egress,  and  regress  to  its  own  hall  ol
legislation  1 And  if  the  power  exists,  by  implication,  to
require  the  duty,  it  is  wholly  nugatory,  unless  it  draws
after  it  the  incidental  authority  to  compel  obedience,
and  to  punish  violations  of  it. It  has  been  suggested
by  a  learned  commentator,  quoting  the  language  of
Lord  Bacon,*  that,  as  exception  strengthens  the  force
of  a  law  in  cases  not  excepted,  so  enumeration  weakens
it  in  cases  not  enumerated ;  and  hence  he  deduces  the
conclusion,  that,  as  the  power  to  punish  contempts  is
not  among  those  enumerated,  as  belongmg  to  either
house,  it  does  not  exist* Now,  however  wise  or
correct  the  maxim  of  Lord  Bacon  is  in  a  general  sense,

I  Advancement  of  Ijearning ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  App.  200,  note.
«  1  Tuckex'f  Black,  aoo.

VOL.  II.  39

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


806  CONSTITUTIOlf  or  the  U.  states, [book  III.

as  a  means  of  mterpretation,  it  is  not  the  sole  rule.  It
is  no  more  true,  than  another  maxim  of  a  directly  oppo-
site character,  that  where  the  end  is  required,  the
means  are,  by  implication,  given.  Congress  are  requir-
ed to  exercise  the  powers  of  legislation  and  delibera-
tion. The  safety  of  the  rights  of  the  nation  require
this ;  and  yet,  because  it  is  not  expressly  said,  that
congress  shall  possess  the  appropriate  means  to  accom-
plish this  end,  the  means  are  denied,  and  the  end  may
be  defeated.  Does  not  this  show,  that  rules  of  mter-
pretation,  however  correct  m  a  general  sense,  must
admit  of  many  qualifications  and  modifications  in  their
application  to  the  actual  business  of  human  life  and  hu-
man laws  1  Men  do  not  frame  constitutions  of  govern-
ment to  suspend  its  vital  interests,  and  powers,  and
duties,  upon  metaphysical  doubts,  or  ingenious  refine-
ments. Such  instruments  must  be  construed  reasona-
bly, and  fau-ly,  according  to  the  scope  of  their  purposes,
and  to  ^ve  them  effect  and  operation,  not  to  cripple
and  destroy  them.  They  must  be  construed  according
to  the  common  sense  applied  to  instruments  of  a  like
nature ;  and  in  furtherance  of  the  fundamental  objects
proposed  to  be  attained ;  and  according  to  the  known
practice  and  incidents  of  bodies  of  a  like  nature.

§  843.  We  may  resort  to  the  common  law  to  aid  us
in  interpreting  such  instruments,  and  their  powers ;  for
that  law  is  the  common  rule,  by  which  all  our  legisla-
tion is  mterpreted.  It  is  known,  and  acted  upon,  and
revered  by  the  people.  It  furnishes  principles  equally
for  civil  and  criminal  justice,  for  public  privileges,  and
private  rights.  Now,  by  the  common  law,  the  power
to  punish  contempts  of  this  nature  belongs  incidentally
to  courts  of  justice,  and  to  each  house  of  parliament.
No  man  ever  doubted,  or  denied  its  existence,  as  to  our


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XII.]  PRITILEOE8  OF  CONORESS.  307

colonial  assemblies  in  general,  whatever  may  have  been
thought,  as  to  particular  exercises  of  it*  Nor  is  this
power  to  be  viewed  in  an  unfavourable  light  It  is  a
privilege,  not  of  the  members  of  either  house ;  but,  like
all  other  privileges  of  congress,  mainly  intended  as  a
privilege  of  t\ie  people,  and  for  their  benefit*  Mn  Jus-
tice Blackstone  has,  with  great  force,  said,  that  "laws,
without  a  competent  authority  to  secure  their  adminis-
tration from  disobedience  and  contempt,  would  be  vain
and  nugatory.  A  power,  therefore,  in  the  supreme
courts  of  justice  to  suppress  such  contempts,  &c.,
results  from  the  first  principles  of  judicial  establishments,
and  must  be  an  inseparable  attendant  upon  every  supe-
rior tribunal.'*  ^  And  the  same  reasoning  has  been
applied,  with  equal  force,  by  another  learned  commen-
tator to  legislative  bodies.  "It  would,*'  says  he,  "be
inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  such  a  body  to  deny  it
the  power  of  protecting  itself  from  injury,  or  insult  If
its  deliberations  are  not  perfectly  free,  its  constituents
are  eventually  mjured.  This  power  has  never  been
denied  in  any  country,  and  is  incidental  to  the  nature  of
all  legislative  bodies.  If  it  possesses  such  a  power  in  the
case  of  an  immediate  insult  or  disturbance,  preventing
the  exercise  of  its  ordinary  fimctions,  it  is  impossible
to  deny  it  in  other  cases,  which,  although  less  immedi-
ate or  violent,  partake  of  the  same  character,  by  having
a  tendency  to  impair  the  firm  and  honest  discharge  of
public  duties.'*  *

§  844.  This  subject  has  of  late  undergone  a  great
deal  of  discussion  both  m  England  and  America ;  and

1  4  Black.  Comm.  283,  284, 285, 286 ;  1  Black.  Qomm.  164, 165 ;  Com.
Dig.  ParUament,  G.  2,  5  ;  Burdett  v.  Abbott,  14  East  R.  1 ;  BurdtU  v.
Colman,  14  East  R.  163;  S.  C.  5  Dow.  ParL  Cases,  165, 199.

8  Christito's  note,  1  Black.  Comm.  164. 9  4  Black.  Comm.  266.

4  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  4,  p.  48;  1  Kent's  Comm.  (2d  edit)
Lect  11,  p.  221,  235.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


808  CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

has  finally  received  the  adjudication  of  the  highest  judi-
cial tribunals  in  each  country.  In  each  country
upon  the  fullest  consideration  the  result  was  the  same,
viz.  that  the  power  did  exist,  and  that  the  legislative
body  was  the  proper  and  exclusive  forum  to  de-
cide, when  the  contempt  existed,  and  when  there
was  a  breach  of  its  privileges ;  and,  that  the  power  to
punish  followed,  as  a  necessary  incident  to  the  power  to
take  cognizance  of  the  offence.* The  judgment  of  the

^  The  learned  reader  is  referred  to  BurdeU  v.  AbhoU,  14  East  R.  1 ;
BurdeU  v.  Cdman,  14  East  R.  163 ;  S.  C.  5  Dow.  Pari.  R.  165,  199  ;
and  Ander$on  v.  Dtmny  6  Wheat  R.  204.  The  question  is  also  much
discussed  in  Jefferson's  Manual,  §  3,  and  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  A  pp.
note,  p.  900  to  205.  See  also  1  Black.  Comm.  164,  165.— Mr.  Jeffer-
86n,  in  his  Manual,  (§  3,)  in  commenting  on  the  case  of  William
Duane  for  a  political  libel,  has  summed  up  the  reasoning  on  each
side  with  a  manifest  leaning  against  the  power*  It  presents  the
strength  of  the  argument  on  that  side,  and,  on  that  account,  deserves  to
be  cited  at  large.

*^  In  debating  the  legality  of  this  order,  it  was  insistedi  in  support  of  it,
that  everjr  man,  by  the  law  of  nature,  and  every  body  of  men,  possesses
the  right  of  self-defence ;  that  all  public  functionaries  are  essentially
invested  with  the  powers  of  self-preservation ;  that  they  have  an  inhe-
rent right  to  do  all  acti^  necessary  to  keep  themselves  in  a  condition  to
discharge  the  trusts  confided  to  them ;  that  whenever  authorities  are
given,  the  means  of  carrying  them  into  execution  are  given  by  necessary
implication ;  that  thus  we  see  the  British  parliament  exercise  the  right
of  puaishing  contempts ;  all  the  state  legislatures  exercise  the  same
power ;  and  every  court  does  the  same ;  that,  if  we  have  it  not,  we  sit
at  the  mercy  of  every  intruder,  who  may 'enter  our  doors,  or  gallery,  and,
by  noise  and  tumult,  render  proceeding  in  business  impracticable ;  that
if  our  tranquillity  is  to  be  perpetually  disturbed  by  newspaper  defalca-
tion, it  will  not  be  possible  to  exercise  our  functions  with  the  requisite
coolness  and  deliberation ;  and  that  we  must  therefore  have  a  power  to
punish  these  disturbers  of  our  peace  and  proceedings.  To  this'it  was
answered,  that  the  parliament  and  courts  of  England  have  cognizance  of
contempts  by  the  express  provisions  of  their  law  ;  that  the  state  legisla-
tures have  equal  authority,  because  their  powers  are  plenary ;  they
represent  their  constituents  completely,  and  possess  all  their  powers,
except  such,  as  their  constitutions  have  expressly  denied  them ;  that  the
courts  of  the  several  states  have  the  same  powers  by  the  laws  of  their
states,  and  those  of  the  federal  government  by  the  same  state  laws


Digitized  by


Googk


CH.  VIII.]  PRIVILEGES  OF  CONGRESS.  309

Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  m  the  case  aUuded
to,  contains  so  elaborate  and  exact  a  consideration  of
the  whole  argument  on  each  side,  that  it  will  be  far
more  satisfactory  to  give  it  in  a  note,  as  it  stands  in,  the
printed  opinion,  than  to  hazard,  by  any  abridgment,  im-
pairing the  just  force  of  the  reasoning.*

adopted  in  each  state,  by  a  law  of  congress;  that  none  of  these  bodies,
therefore,  derive  those  powers  from  natural  or  necessary  right,  but  from
express  law  ;  that  congress  have  no  such  natural  or  necessary  power,
or  any  powers,  but  such  as  are  given  them  by  the  constitution  ;  that  that
ha9  given  them,  directly,  exemption  from  personal  arrest,  exemption
from  question  elsewhere,  for  what  b  said  in  their  house,  and  power  over
their  own'members  and  proceedings ;  for  these  no  further  law  is  neces-
sary, the  constitution  being  the  law ;  that,  moreover,  by  that  article  of
the  constitution,  which  authorizes  them  *  to  make  all  laws  necessary  and
proper  for  carrpng  into  execution  the  powers  vested  by  the  constitution
In  them,'  they  may  provide  by  law  for  an  undisturbed  exercise  of  their
ibnctions,  for  example,  for  the  punishment  of  contempts,  of  affrays  or  tu-
mult in  their  presence,  &c ;  but,  till  the  law  be  made,  it  does  not  exist,  and
does  not  exist,  from  their  own  neglect ;  that,  in  the  mean  time,  however,
they  are  not  unprotected,  the  ordinary  magistrates  and  courts  of  law
being  open  and  competent  to  punish  all  unjustifiable  disturbances  or
defamations ;  and  even  their  own  sergeant,  who  may  appoint  deputies  ad
libitum  to  aid  him,  is  equal  to  soaall  disturbances  ;  that  in  requiring  a
a  previous  law,  the  constitution  had  regard  to  the  inviolability  of  the
citizen,  as  well  as  of  the  member ;  as,  should  one  house  in  the  regular
form  of  a  bill,  aim  at  too  broad  privileges,  it  may  be  checked  by  the
other,  and  both  by  the  president ;  and  also  as,  the  law  being  promulgat-
ed, the  citizen  will  know  how  to  avoid  offence.  But  if  one  branch  may
assume  its  own  privileges  without  control ;  if  it  may  do  it  on  the  spur  of
the  occasion,  conceal  the  law  in  its  own  breast,  and,  after  the  fact  com-
mitted, makes  its  sentence  both  the  law  and  the  judgment  on  that  fact ;
if  the  offence  is  to  be  kept  undefined,  and  to  be  declared  only  ex  re  naiOy
and,  according  to  the  passions  of  the  moment,  and  there  be  no  limitation
either  in  the  manner  or  measure  of  the  punishment,  the  condition  of  the
citizen  will  be  perilous  indeed."

The  reasoning  of  Lord  Chief  Justice  De  Grey  in  Rex  v.  Brasa  Crosby^
(3  Wilson's  R.  188,)  and  of  Lord  EUenborough  in  Burddl  v.  MhoU,  (14
East  R.  1,)  is  exceedingly  cogent  and  striking  against  that  favoured  by
Mr.  Jefferson.  It  deserves,  and  will  requite  an  attentive  perusal.  See
idso  Burdett  v.  Mhoit,  4  Taunt  R.  401 ;  4  Dow's  Pari.  Rep.  165.

1  It  is  necessary  to  premise,  that  the  suit  was  brought  for  false  im-
prisonment by  a  party,  who  had  been  arrested  under  a  warrant  of  the


Digitized  by


Google


310 ooNSTiTirrioir  of  ths  v.  states,  [book  in«

§  845.  This  is  not  the  only  case,  in  which  the  house
of  representatives  has  exerted  the  power  to  arrest,  and
punish  for  a  contempt  committed  within  the  walls  of  the

speaker  of  the  house  of  representativeB,  by  the  sergeant-at-arms,  for  an
alleged  contempt  of  the  house,  (an  attempt  to  bribe  a  member,)  and  the
cause  was  decided  upon  a  demurrer  to  tbe  justification  set  up  by  the
officer.  After  a  preliminary  remark  upon  the  range  of  tbe  argument  by
the  counsel,  Mr.  Justice  Johnson,  in  delivering  tbe  opinion  of  the  Court
proceeded  as  follows :

^  The  pleadings  have  narrowed  them  down  to  the  simple  inquiry,
whether  the  house  of  representatives  can  take  cognizance  of  contempts
committed  against  themselves,  under  any  circumstances  ?  The  duress
complained  of  was  sustained  under  a  warrant  issued  to  compel  tbe  par-
ty's appearance,  not  for  the  actual  infliction  of  punishment  for  an  offence
committed.  Yet  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  the  power  to  institute  a  prose-
cution must  be  dependent  upon  the  power  to  punish.  If  the  bouse  of
representatives  possessed  no  authority  to  punish  for  contempt,  the  initiat-
ing process  issued  in  the  assertion  of  tiiat  authority  must  have  been
illegal ;  there  was  a  want  of  jurisdiction  to  justify  it

*'  It  is  certainly  true,  that  there  is  no  power  given  by  the  constitution
to  either  house  to  punish  for  contempts,  except  when  committed  by  their
own  members.  Nor  does  the  judicial  or  criminal  power  given  to  the
United  States,  in  any  part,  expressly  extend  to  the  infliction  of  punish-
ment for  contempt  of  cither  house,  or  any  one  co-ordinate  branch  of  the
government Shall  we,  therefore,  decide,  that  no  such  power  exists  ?

**  It  is  true,  that  such  a  power,  if  it  exists,  must  be  derived  from  ^impli-
cation, and  the  genius  and  spirit  of  our  institutions  are  hostile  to  the
exercise  of  implied  powers.  Had  the  faculties  of  man  been  competent
to  the  fVaming  of  a  system  of  government,  which  would  have  lefl  noth-
ing to  implication,  it  cannot  be  doubted,  that  the  eflfbrt  would  have  been
made  by  the  framers  of  the  constitution.  But  what  is  the  fact?  There
'  it  not  in  the  whole  of  that  admirable  instrument  a  grant  of  powers,
which  does  not  draw  after  it  others,  not  expressed,  but  vital  to  their
exercise  ;  not  substantive  and  independent,  indeed,  but  auxiliary  and
•ubordinate.

**  The  idea  is  Utopian,  that  government  can  exist  without  leaving  the
exercise  of  discretion  somewhere.  Public  security  against  the  abuse  of
such  discretion  must  rest  on  responsibility,  and  stated  appeals  to  public
approbation.  Where  all  power  is  derived  from  the  people,  and  public
functionaries,  at  short  intervals,  deposite  it  at  the  feet  of  the  people,  to
be  resumed  again  only  at  their  will,  individual  fears  may  be  alarmed  by
the  mociten  of  imagination,  but  individual  liberty  can  be  in  little  dan-
ger.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XII.3  PRIYILSOSS  OF  COITGRUS.  811

house.  The  power  was  exerted  *  m  the  case  of  Rob-
ert Randall)  m  December,  1795,  for  an  attempt  to  cor-
rupt a  member ; '  in  1796,  in  the  case  of ^  a  chal-

"  No  one  is  to  visionaiy,  is  to  dispute  the  ateertioo,  that  the  pole  end
and  aim  of  all  oar  institutions  is  the  safety  and  happiness  of  the  citiaen.
But  the  relation  hetween  the  action  and  the  end  is  not  always  so  direc:!
and  palpahle,  as  to  strike  the  eye  of  every  obsenrer.  The  science
of  government  is  the  most  abstruse  of  all  sciences  i  if,  indeed,  that  caa
be  called  a  science,  which  has  but  few  fixed  principles,  and  prsctically
consists  in  little  more,  than  the  exercise  of  a  sound  discretion,  applied  to
the  exigencies  of  the  state,  as  they  ariae.  It  is  the  science  of  experi-
ment.

**  But  if  there  is  one  maxim,  which  necessarily  rides  over  all  others,  in
the  practical  application  of  government,  it  is,  that  the  public  functiona*
ries  roust  be  left  at  liberty  to  exercise  the  powers,  which  the  peofde
have  intrusted  to  them.  The  interests  and  dignity  of  those,  who  created
them,  require  the  exertion  of  the  powers  indispensable  to  the  attsinment
of  the  ends  of  their  creation*  Nor  is  a  casual  conflict  with  the  rights  of
particular  individuals  any  reason  to  be  urged  against  the  exercise  of
such  powers.  The  wretch  beneath  the  gallows  may  repine  at  the  fate,
which  awaits  him ;  and  yet  it  is  no  less  certain,  that  the  laws,  under  which
he  suffers,  were  made  for  his  security.  The  unreasonable  murmurs  of
individuals  against  the  restraints  of  society  have  a  direct  tendency  to
produce  that  worst  of  all  despotisms,  which  makes  every  individual  the
tyrant  over  his  neighbour's  rights.

**  That  *  the  safety  of  the  people  is  the  supreme  law,'  not  only  com-
ports with,  but  is  indispensable  to,  the  exercise  of  those  powers  in  their
public  functionaries,  without  which  that  safety  cannot  be  guarded.  Oa
this  principle  it  i^  that  courts  of  justice  are  universally  acknowledged
to  be  vested,  by  their  very  creation,  with  power  to  impose  silence,
respect,  and  decorum,  in  their  presence,  and  submission  to  their  lawful
mandates,  and,  as  a  corollary  to  this  proposition,  to  preserve  themselves
and  their  officers  from  the  approach  of  insults  or  pollution.

^  It  is  true,  that  the  courts  of  justice  in  the  United  States  are  vested,
by  express  statute  provision,  with  power  to  fine  ai>d  imprison  for  con-
tempts ;  but  it  does  not  follow,  from  this  circumstance,  that  they  would
not  have  exercised  that  power  without  the  aid  of  the  statute,  or  not,  in
cases,  if  such  should  occur,  to  which  such  statute  provision  may  not
extend.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  legislative  assertion  of  this  right,  as
incidental  to  a  grant  of  judicial  power,  and  can  only  be  considered

1  By  a  vote  of  78  yeas  against  17  nays.  •

*  1  Tack.  Black.  Comm.  App.  200  to  20Ss  note ;  Jeffenon'a  Manual,

sa


Digitized  by


Google


312  CONSTITUTIOir  OP  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  HI.

lenge  given  to  a  member,  which  was  held  a  breach  of
privilege;*  and  m  May,  1832,  m  the  case  of  Samuel
Houston,  for  an  assault  upon  a  member  for  words  spoken

eiUier  as  an  instance  of  abundant  caution,  or  a  legislative  declaration,
that  the  power  of  punishing  for  contempts  shall  not  extend  beyond  its
known  and  acknowledged  limits  of  fine  and  imprisonment.

^*  But  it  is  contended,  that  if  this  power  in  the  bouse  of  representa-
tives is  to  be  asserted  on  the  plea  of  necessity,  the  ground  is  too  broad,
and  the  result  too  indefinite  ;  that  the  executive,  and  every  coK>rdinate,
and  even  subordinate,  branch  of  the  government,  may  resort  to  the  same
justification,  and  the  whole  assume  to  themselves,  in  the  exercise  of  this
power,  the  most  tyrannical  licentiousness.

**  This  is  unquestionably  an  evil  to  be  guarded  against,  and  if  the  doc-
trine may  be  pushed  to  that  extent,  it  must  be  a  bad  doctrine,  and  is  justly
denounced.

<*  But  what  is  the  alternative  ?  The  argument  obviously  leads  to  the
total  annihilation  of  the  power  of  the  house  of  repsesentatives  to  guard
itself  from  contempts ;  and  leaves  it  exposed  to  every  indignity  and  in-
terruption, that  rudeness,  caprice,  or  even  conspiracy,  may  meditate
against  it  This  result  is  fraught  with  too  much  absurdity  not  to  bring
into  doubt  the  soundness  of  any  argument,  from  which  it  is  derived.
That  a  deliberate  assembly,  clothed  with  the  majesty  of  the  people,  and
charged  with  the  care  of  all,  that  is  dear  to  them ;  composed  of  the  most
distinguished  citizens,  selected  and  drawn  together  from  every  quarter
of  a  great  nation ;  whose  deliberations  are  required  by  public  opinion  to
be  conducted  under  the  eye  of  the  public,  and  whose  decisions  must  be
clothed  widi  all  that  sanctity,  which  unlimited  confidence  in  their  wis-
dom and  purity  can  inspire ;  that  such  an  assembly  should  not  possess
the  power  to  suppress  rudeness,  or  repel  insult,  is  a  supposition  too  wild
to  be  suggested.  And  accordingly  to  avoid  the  pressure  of  these  con-
siderations, it  has  been  argued,  that  the  right  of  the  respective  houses
to  exclude  from  their  presence,  and  their  absolute  control  within  their
own  walls,  carry  with  them  the  right  to  punish  contempts  committed  in
their  presence  ;  while  the  absolute  legislative  power  given  to  congress
within  this  district,  enables  them  to  provide  by  law  against  all  other  in-
sults, against  which  there  is  any  necessity  for  providing.

**  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  so  far  as  the  issue  of  this  cause  is  impli-
cated, this  argument  yields  all  right  of  the  plaintiff  in  error  to  a  decis-
ion in  (lis  favour ;  for,  non  constat,  from  the  pleadings,  but  that  this  war-
rant issued  for  an  offence  committed  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the'
house.

1  Jefferson's  Manual,  §  3.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XII.] pmiYiLEOSfl  or  ooiieRE8S«  819

in  his.place,  and  afterwards  printed^  reflecting  on
the  character  of  Houston.^  In  the  former  case,  the
house  punished  the  offence  by  imprisonment;  in  the

**  Nor  is  it  immaterial  to  notice,  what  difficulties  the  negation  of  this
right  in  the  house  of  representatives  draws  after  it,  when  it  is  consider-
ed, that  the  concession  of  the  power,  if  exercised  within  their  walls,
relinquishes  the  great  grounds  of  the  argument,  to  wit :  the  want  of  an
express  grant,  and  the  unrestricted  and  undefined  nature  of  the  power
here  set  up.  For  why  should  the  house  be  at  liberty  to  exercise  an
ungraDted,  an  unlimited,  and  undefined  power  within  their  walls,  any
more,  than  without  them  ?  If  the  analogy  with  indlridual  right  and
power  bo  resorted  to,  it  will  reach  no  farther,  than  to  exclusion ;  and  it
requires  no  exuberance  of  imagination  to  exhibit  the  ridiculous  conse-
quences, which  might  result  from  such  a  restriction,  imposed  upon  the
conduct  of  a  deliberative  assembly.

**  Nor  would  their  situation  be  materially  relieved  by  resorting  to  their
legislative  power  within  the  district  That  power  may,  indeed,  be  ap-
plied to  many  purposes,  and  was  intended  by  the  constitution  to  extend
to  many  purposes  indispensable  to  the  security  and  dignity  of  the  gen-
eral government ;  but  there  are  purposes  of  a  more  grave  and  general
character,  than  the  offences,  which  may  be  denominated  contempts,  and
which,  from  their  very  nature,  admit  of  no  precise  definition.  Judicial
gravity  will  not  admit  of  the  illustrations,  which  this  remark  would  ad-
mit of.  Its  correctness  is  easDy  tested  by  pursuing,  in  imagination,  a
legislative  attempt  at  defining  the  cases,  to  which  the  epithet  contempt
might  be  reasonably  applied.

*^  But  although  the  offence  be  held  undefinable,  it  is  justly  contended,
that  the  punishment  need  not  be  indefinite. Nor  is  it  so.

^  We  are  not  now  considering  the  extent,  to  which  the  punishing,
power  of  congress,  by  a  legislative  act,  may  bo  carried.  On  that  sub-
ject, the  bounds  of  their  power  are  to  be  found  in  the  provisions  of  the
constitution.

"  The  present  question  is,  what  Js  the  extent  of  the  punishing  power,
which  the  deliberative  assemblies  of  the  Union  may  assume,  and  exer-
cise on  the  principle  of  self-preservation  ?

"  Analogy,  and  the  nature  of  the  case,  furnish  the  answer  —  *  (Ac  least
possible  power  adequate  to  the  end  proposed ; "  which  is  the  power  of  im-
prisonment. It  may,  at  first  view,  and  from  the  history  of  the  practice
of  our  legislative  bodies,  be  thought  to  extend  to  other  inflictions.  But
every  other  will  be  found  to  be  mere  commutation  for  confinement ;
since  commitment  alone  is  the  alternative,  where  the  individual  proves

1  See  the  Speeches  of  Mr.  Doddridge  and  Mr.  Burges  on  this  occasion.

VOL.  II.  40


Digitized  by


Google


314 CONSTITUTIOir  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

latter,  by  a  reprimand  by  the  speaker.  So  in  1800,  in
the  case  of  William  Duane,  for  a  printed  libel  against  the
senate,  the  party  was  held  guilty  of  a  contempt^  and

contumacious.  And  even  to  the  duration  of  imprisonment  a  period  is
imposed  by  the  nature  of  things ;  since  the  existence  of  the  power>  that
imprisons,  is  indispensable  to  its  continuance ;  and  although  the  legisla-
tive power  continues  perpetual,  the  legislative  body  ceases  to  exist  on
the  moment  of  its  adjournment  or  periodical  dissolution.  It  follows,
that  imprisonment  must  terminate  with  that  adjournment.

"  This  view  of  the  subject  necessarily  sets  bounds  to  the  exercise  of
a  caprice,  which  has  sometimes  disgraced  deliberative  assemblies,  when
■  under  the  influence  of  strong  passions  or  wicked  leaders,  but  the  in-
stances of  which  have  long  sinre  remained  on  record  only«  as  historical
facts,  not  as  precedents  for  imitation.  In  the  present  fixed  and  settled
state  of  English  institutions,  there  is  no  more  danger  of  their  being
revived,  probably,  than  in  our  own.

'*  But  the  American  legislative  bodies  have  never  possessed,  or  pre-
tended to,  the  omnipotence,  which  constitutes  the  leading  feature  in  the
legislative  assembly  of  Great  Britain,  and  which  may  have  led  occasion-
ally to  the  exercise  of  caprice,  under  the  specious  appearance  of  merited
resentment

"  If  it  be  inquired,  what  security  is  there,  that  with  an  officer  avowing
himself  devoted  to  their  will,  the  house  of  representatives  will  confine  its
punishing  power  to  the  limits  of  imprisonment,  and  not  push  it  to  the
infliction  of  corporeal  punishment,  or  even  death,  and  exercise  it  in  cases
aflTecting  the  liberty  of  speech  and  of  the  press  ?  The  reply  is  ta  be
found  in  the  consideration,  that  the  constitution  was  formed  in  and  for
an  fdvancad  state  of  society,  and  rests  at  every  point  on  received  opin-
ions and  fixed  ideas.  It  is  not  a  new  creation,  but  a  combination  of  ex-
isting materials,  whose  properties  and  attributes  were  familiarly  under-
stood, and  had  been  determined  by  reiterated  experiments.  It  is  not,
therefore,  reasoning  upon  things,  as  they  are,  to  suppose,  that  any  de-
liberative asembly,  constituted  under  it,  would  ever  assert  any  other
rights  and  powers,  than  those,  which  had  been  established  by  long  prac-
tice, and  conceded  by  public  opinion.  Melancholy,  also,  would  be  that
state  of  distrust,  which  rests  not  a  hope  upon  a  moral  influence.  The
most  absolute  tyranny  could  not  subsist,  where  men  could  not  be  trusted
with  pow6r,  because  they  might  abuse  it,  much  less  a  government,
which  has  no  other  basis,  than  the  sound  morals,  moderation,  and  good
sense  of  those,  who  compose  it.  Unreasonable  jealousies  not  only  blight
the  pleasures,  but  dissolve  the  very  texture  of  society.

"  But  it  is  argued,  that  the  inference,  if  any,  arising  under  the  consti-
tution, is  against  the  exercise  of  the  powers  here  asserted  by  the  hoase


Digitized  by


Google


OB.  XII.]  PRIYILEOES  OF  COKORESS.  315

punished  by  imprisonment'  Nor  is  there  any  thing
peculiar  in  the  claim  under  the  constitution  of  the
United  States. The  same  power  has  been  claimed,  and

of  representatives ;  that  the  express  grant  of  power  to  punish  their  mem-
bers respectively,  and  to  expel  them,  by  the  application  of  a  familiar
maxim,  raises  an  implication  against  the  power  to  punish  any  other,  than
their  own  members.

^  This  argument  proves  too  much ;  for  its  direct  application  would
lead  to  the  annihilation  of  almost  every  power  of  congress.  To  enforce
its  laws  upon  any  subject,  without  the  sanction  of  punishment,  is  obvi-
ously impossible.  Yet  there  is  an  express  grant  of  power  to  punish  in
one  class  of  cases  and  one  only ;  and  all  the  punishing  power  exercised
by  congress  in  any  cases,  except  those,  which  relate  to  piracy  and  of-
fences against  the  laws  of  nations,  is  derived  from  implication.  Nor
did  the  idea  ever  occur  to  any  one,  that  the  express  grant  in  one  class
of  cases  repelled  the  assumption  of  the  punishing  power  in  any  other.

*^  The  truth  is,  that  the  exercise  of  the  powers  given  over  their  own
members  was  of  such  a  delicate  nature,  that  a  constitutional  provision
became  necessary  to  assert,  or  communicate  it  Constituted,  as  that
body  is,  of  the  delegates  of  confederated  states,  some  such  provision
was  necessary  to  guard  against  their  mutual  jealousy,  since  every  pro-
ceeding against  a  representative  would  indirectly  affect  the  honour  or
interests  of  the  state,  which  sent  him.

**  In  reply  to  the  suggestion,  that,  on  this  same  foundation  of  necessi-
ty, might  be  raised  a  superstructure  of  implied  powers  in  the  executive,
and  every  other  department,  and  even  ministerial  officer  of  the  govern-
ment, it  would  be  sufficient  to  observe,  thai  neither  analogy  nor  prece-
dent, would  support  the  assertion  of  such  powers  in  any  other,  than  a  legis-
lative or  judicial  body.  Even  corruption  any  where  else  would  not  con-
taminate the  source  of  political  life.  In  the  retirement  of  the  cabinet^
it  is  not  expected,  that  the  executive  can  be  approached  by  indignity  or
insult ;  nor  can  it  ever  be  necessary  to  the  executive,  or  any  other  de-
partment, to  hold  a  public  deliberative  i^^mbly.  These  are  not  argu-
ments ;  they  are  visions,  which  mar  the  enjoyment  of  actual  blessings, '
with  the  attack  or  feint  of  the  harpies  of  imagination.

<<  As  to  the  minor  points  made  in  this  case,  it  is  only  necessary  to  ob-
serve, that  there  is  nothing  on  tlie  face  of  this  record,  from  which  it
can  appear,  on  what  evidence  this  warrant  was  issued.  And  we  are  not
to  presume,  that  the  house  of  representatives  would  have  issued  it  with-
out duly  esUblishing  the  fact  charged  on  the  individual. And,  as  to

1  Joum.  of  Senate,  37th  March,  1800 ;  Jefferson's  Manual,  §  a  See
also  Bwrddt  v,  MboUj  14  East,  1.


Digitized  by


Google


316 coNSTiTUTioir  or  the  u»  states, [book  ni.

exercised  repeatedly,  under  the  state  goyeraments,
independent  of  any  special  constitutional  provision,
upon  the  broad  ground  stated,  by  Mr.  Chief  Justice
Shippen,  that  the  members  of  the  legislature  are  legal-
ly, and  inherently  possessed  of  all  such  privileges,  as
are  necessary  to  enable  them,  vnth  freedom  and  safety,
to  execute  the  great  trust  reposed  in  them  by  the
body  of  the  people,  who  elected  them.*

^  846.  The  povv^er  to  pimish  for  contempts,  thus  as-
serted both  m  England  and  America,  is  confined  to
punishment  during  the  session  of  the  legislative  body,
and  cannot  be  extended  beyond  it'  It  seems,  that
the  power  of  congress  to  punish  cannot,  in  its  utmost
extent,  proceed  beyond  imprisonment;  and  then  it
terminates  with  the  adjournment,  or  dissolution  of  that
body.*  Whether  a  fine  may  not  be  imposed,  has  been
recendy^  made  a  question  in  a  case  of contempt

the  distance,  to  which  the  process  might  reach,  it  is  very  clear,  that
there  exists  no  reiison  for  confining  its  operation  to  the  limits  of  the
District  of  Columbia.  After  passing  those  limits,  we  know  no  bounds,
that  can  be  prescribed  to  its  range,  but  those  of  the  United  States.  And
why  should  it  be  restricted  to  other  boundaries  ?  Such  are  the  limits  of
the  legislating  powers  of  that  body  ;  and  the  inhabitant  of  Louisiana  or
Maine  may  as  probably  charge  them  with  bribery  and  corruption,  or  at-
tempt, by  letter,  to  induce  the  commission  of  either,  as  the  inhabitant  of
any  other  section  of  the  Union.  If  the  inconvenience  be  urged,  the
reply  is  obvious:  there  is  no  difficulty  in  observing  that  respectful  de-
portment, which  will  render  all  apprehension  chimerical.^

See  also  Rex  v.  Brass  Crosby,  3  Wilson  R.  188. —  In  the  convention
a  proposition  was  made  and  referred  to  the  select  committee  appointed  to
draft  the  constitution  giving  authority  to  punish  for  contempts,  and  enu-
merating them.  The  committee  made  no  report  on  the  subject  Journ.
of  Convention,  20th  Aug.  263,  264.

1  Botton  V.  Martin,  1  Dall.  R.  296.  See  also  House  of  Delegates  in
1784,  the  case  of  John  Warden,  1  Elliot's  Debates,  69  ;  C(iffin  v.  C<iffin,
4  Mass.  R.  1,34,35.

«  Dunn  V.  Anderson,  6  Wheht  R.  204, 230, 231.

3  Dwm  V.  Andermm,  6  Wheat  R.  204,  230,  231 ;  1  Kenf  a  Comm.
Lectll,p.22L  4  in  1831.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XII.] PRinusaES  or  coitgiucss.  817

before  the  house  of  lords ;  upon  which  occasion  Lord
Chancellor  Brougham  expressed  himself  in  the  nega-
tive, and  the  other  law  lords,  Eldon  and  Tenterden^
m  the  affirmative ;  but  the  point  was  not  then  solemn-
ly decided.^  It  had,  however,  been  previously  affirmed
by  the  house  of  lords  in  the  case  of  Rex  .y.  Flowery
(8  T.  R.  31 4,)  m  case  of  a  libel  upon  one  of  the  Bishops.
Lord  Kenyon  then  said,  that  in  ascertaining  and  punish-
ing for  a  contempt  of  its  privileges,  the  house  acted  in
a  judicial  capacity.*

^  847.  The  sixth  section  of  the  first  article  contains
an  enumeration  of  the  rights,  privileges,  and  disabilities
of  the  members  of  each  house  m  their  personal  and  in-
dividual characters,  as  contradistinguished  from  the
rights,  privileges,  and  disabilities  of  the  body,  of  which
they  are  members.  It  may  here,  again,  be  remarked,
that  these  rights  and  privileges  are,  m  truth,  the  rights
and  privileges  of  their  constituents,  and  for  their  benefit
and  security,  rather  than  the  rights  and  privileges  of
the  member  for  his  own  benefit  and  security .*  In  like
manner,  the  dbabilities  imposed  are  founded  upon  the
same  comprehensive  policy ;  to  guard  the  powers  of  the
representative  from  abuse,  and  to  secure  a  wise,  im-
partial, and  uncorrupt  administration  of  his  duties.

i  See  a  learned  article  on  this  subject  in  the  English  Law  Magazine
for  Joly,  1831,  p.  1,  ^.  Parliamentary  Debates,  1831.

9  In  Yates  v.  Lansing,  (9  Johns.  R.  417,)  Mr.  Justice  PiaU  said,  that
^  the  right  of  punishing  for  contempts  by  summary  conviction  is  inhe-
rent in  all  courts  of  justice  and  legislative  assemblies,  and  is  essential  to
their  protection  and  existence.  It  is  a  branch  of  the  common  law  adopt-
ed and  sanctioned  by  our  state  constitution.  The  decision  involved
in  this  power  is  in  a  great  measure  arbitrary  and  unde6nable ;  and  yet
the  experience  of  ages  has  demonstrated,  that  it  is  perfectly  compatible
with  civil  liberty,  and  auxiliary  to  the  purest  ends  of  justice."

<  Com.  Dig.  Farlwmentf  D.  17.


Digitized  by


Google


318  CONSTITUTIOir  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

§  848.  The  first  clause  is  as  follows :  ^^The  senators
"and  representatives  shall  receive  a  compensation  for
"  their  services,  to  be  ascertained  by  law,  and  paid  out
"  of  the  treasury  of  the  United  States.  They  shall,  in
•*  all  cases,  except  treason,  felony,  and  breach  of  the
"peace,  bei  privileged  from  arrest  during  their  attend-
"ance'at  the  session  of  their  respective  houses,  and  in
"  going  to,  and  returning  from,  the  same.  And  for  any
"speech  or  debate  in  either  house  they  shall  not  be
"questioned  in  any  other  place.''

§  849.  In  respect  to  compensation,  there  is,  at  pres-
ent, a  marked  distinction  between  the  members  of  the
British  parliament,  and  the  members  of  congress  ;  the
former  not  being,  at  present,  entitled  to  any  pay.
Formerly,  indeed,  the  members  of  the  house  of  com-
mons were  entitled  to  receive  wages  from  their  constit-
uents ;  but  the  last  known  case  is  that  of  Andrew
Marvell,  who  was  a  member  from  Hull,  in  the  first  par-
liament after  the  restoration  of  Charles  the  Second
Four  shillings  sterling  ^  day  used  to  be  allowed  for
a  knight  of  the  shire  ;  and  two  shillings  a  day  for  a
member  of  a  city  or  borough;  and  this  rate  was  estab-
lished in  the  reign  of  Edward  the  Third.  And  we  are
told,  that  two  shillings  a  day,  the  allowance  to  a  bur-
gess, was  so  considerable  a  sum,  m  these  ancient  times,
that  there  are  many  instances,  where  boroughs  petidon-
ed  to  be  excused  from  sending  members  to  parliament,
representing,  that  they  were  engaged  in  buildmg
bridges  or  other  public  works,  and,  therefore,  unable
to  bear  so  extraordinary  an  expense.*  It  is  believed,
that  the  practice  m  America  during  its  colonial  state
was,  if  not  universally,  at  least  generally,  to  allow  a

1  1  Black.  Comm.  174,  and  Cbristian'a  note,  34 ;  Id.  Prynne  on  4  loft
39  ;  Com.  Dig.  ParUameni^  D.  16.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  Xn.]  PRIYILEGXS  OF  COIfOIUESS.  319

compensation  to  be  paid  to  members  ;  and  the  prac-
tice is  believed  to  be  absolutely  universal,  under  the
state  constitutions.  The  members  are  not,  however,
always  paid  out  of  the  public  treasury  ;  but  the  prac-
tice still  exists,  constitutionally,  or  by  usage,  in  some
of  the  states,  to  charge  the  amount  of  the  compensa-
tion fixed  by  the  legislature  upon  the  constituents,  and
levy  it  in  the  state  tax.  That  has  certainly  been  the
general  course  in  the  state  of  Massachusetts ;  and  it  was
probably  adopted  from  the  ancient  practice  in  England.
^  850.  Whether  it  is,  on  the  whole,  best  to  allow  to
members  of  legislative  bodies  a  compensation  for  their
services,  or  whether  their  services  should  be  considered
merely  honorary,  is  a  question  admitting  of  much  argu-
ment on  each  side;  and  it  has  accordingly  found  strenu-
ous advocates,  and  opponents,  not  only  m  speculation,
but  in  practice.  It  has  been  already  seen,  that  in  Eng-
land none  is  now  allowed,  or  claimed  ;  and  there  can
be  little  doubt,  thsatt  public  opinion  is  altogether  in  fa-
vour of  their  present  course.  On  the  other  hand,  in
America  an  opposite  opinion  prevails  among  those,
whose  influence  is  most  impressive  with  the  people  on
such  subjects.  It  is  not  surprising,  that  under  such
circumstances,  there  should  have  been  a  considerable
diversity  of  opinion  manifested  in  the  convention  itself.
The  proposition  to  aUow  compensation  out  of  the  pub-
lic treasury,  to  members  of  the  house  of  representa-
tives, was  originally  carried  by  a  vote  of  eight  states
against  three ;  *  and  to  the  senators  by  a  vote  of  seven
states  agamst  three,  one  being  divided.*  At  a  subse-
quent period,  a  motion  to  strike  out  the  payment  out  of
the  public  treasury  was  lost  by  a  vote  of  four  states  in

1  Journal  of  Ck>nyentioii9  ^7^  116,117.  >  Id.  lia

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


820  CONSTITUTION  OF  THS  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III«

the  affirmaiive,  and  five  in  the  negative,  two  being  di«
vided ;  ^  and  the  whole  proposition,  as  to  representa-
tives, was  (as  amended)  lost  by  a  vote  of  five  states
for  it,  and  five  agamst  it,  one  being  divided*  And  as
to  senators,  a  motion  wa3  made,  that  they  should  be
paid  by  their  respective  states,  which  was  lost,  five
states  voting  for  it,  and  six  agamst  it ;  and  then  the
proposition  to  pay  them  oat  of  the  public  treasury  was
lost  by  a  similar  vote.'  At  a  subsequent  period  a  pro-
position was  reported,  that  the  compensation  of  the
members  of  both  houses  should  be  made  by  the  state,
in  which  they  were  chosen ;  ^  and  ultimately  the  pres-
ent plan  was  agreed  to  by  a  vote  of  nine  states  against
two.^  Such  a  fluctuation  of  opinion  exhibits  in  a  strong
light  the  embarrassing  considerations,  which  surround-
ed the  subject*

^851.  The  principal  reasons  in  favour  of  a  compen-
sation may  be  presumed  to  have  been  the  following*
In  the  first  place,  the  advantage,  it  secured,  of  command-
mg  the  first  talents  of  the  nation  in  the  public  coundl%
by  removing  a  virtual  disqualification,  that  of  poverty,
fit)m  that  large  class  of  men,  who,  though  favoured  by
nature,  might  not  be  favoured  by  fortune.  It  could
hardly  be  expected,  that  such  men  would  make  the
necessary  sacrifices  m  order  to  gratify  their  ambition
for  a  public  station  ;  and  if  they  did,  there  was  a  cor-
responding danger,  that  they  might  be  compelled  by
their  necessities,  or  tempted  by  their  wants,  to  jdeld
up  their  independence,  and  perhaps  their  integrity,  to
the  allurements  of  the  corrupt,  or  the  opulent'^ In  the

1  Journ.  of  Convention,  142.  a  Id.  144.  3  Id.  150,  151.

<  Id.  219,  §10.  5  Id.  251.

6  See  Yates's  Minutes,  4  Elliot's  Deb.  92  to  99.

7  See  2  Elliot's  Debates,  279,  280  ;  Yates's  Minutes,  4  Elliot's  Deb.
92  to  99.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XII.]  PRIYILEOXS  OF  CONGRESS.  321

next  place,  it  would,  in  a  prop(»tionate  degree,  gratify
the  popular  feeling  by  enlarging  the  circle  of  candi-
dates, from  which  members  might  be  chosen,  and  bring-
ing the  office  within  the  reach  of  persons  in  the  middle
ranks  of  society,  although  they  might  not  possess  shin*
ing  talents  ;  a  course  best  suited  to  the  equality  found,
and  promulgated  m  a  republic.  In  the  next  place,  it
would  'make  a  seat  in  the  national  councils,  as  attrac-
tive, and  perhaps  more  so,  than  in  those  of  the  state,  by
the  superior  emoluments  of  office.  And  in  the  last
place,  it  would  be  in  conformity  to  a  long  and  well
settled  practice,  which  embodied  public  sentiment,  and
had  been  sanctioned  by  pubhc  approbation.*

§  852.  On  the  other  hand,  it  might  be,  and  it  was,
probably,  urged  against  it,  that  the  practice  of  allowing
compensation  was  calculated  to  make  the  office  rather
more  a  matter  of  bargain  and  speculation,  than  of  high
political  ambition.  It  would  operate,  as  an  inducement
to  vulgar  and  grovelmg  demagogues,  of  little  talent,
and  narrow  means,  to  defeat  the  claims  of  higher  can-
didates, than  themselves ;  and  with  a  view  to  the  com-
pensation alone  to  engage  in  all  sorts  of  corrupt  intrigues
to  procure  their  own  election.  It  would  thus  degrade
these  high  trusts  from  being  deemed  the  reward  of
distinguished  merit,  and  strictly  honorary,  to  a  mere
traffic  for  political  office,  which  would  first  corrupt  the
people  at  the  polls,  and  then  subject  their  liberties  to
be  bartered  by  their  venal  candidate.  Men  of  talents
in  this  way  would  be  compelled  to  degradation,  in  or-
der to  acquire  office,  or  would  be  excluded  by  more
unworthy,  or  more  cunning  candidates,  who  would  feel,
that  the  labourer  was  worthy  of  his  hire. There  is  no

1  See  Rawle  on  the  Ck>Dttitation,  ch.  18,  p.  181.
VOL.  II.  4Z

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


322  CONSTITUTION  OF  THS  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

danger,  that  the  want  of  compensation  would  deter
men  of  suitable  talents  and  virtues,  even  in  the  humbler
walks  of  life,  fipom  becoming  members ;  since  it  could
scarcely  be  presumed,  that  the  public  gratitude  would
not,  by  other  means,  aid  them  in  their  private  business,
and  increase  their  just  patronage.  And  if,  in  a  few
cases,  it  should  be  otherwise,  it  should  not  be  forgotten,
that  one  of  the  most  wholesome  lessons  to  be  taught
in  republics  was,  that  men  should  learn  suitable  econ-
omy and  prudence  in  theu*  private  affairs  ;  and  that
profusion  and  poverty  were,  with  a  few  splendid  ex-
ceptions, equally  unsafe  to  be  entrusted  with  the  public
rights  and  interests,  since,  if  they  did  not  betray,  they
would  hardly  be  presumed  willing  to  protect  them.
The  practice  of  England  abundantly  showed,  that  com-
pensation was  not  necessary  to  bring  into  public  life
the  best  talents  and  virtues  of  the  nation.  In  looking
over  her  list  of  distinguished  statesmen,  of  equal
purity  and  patriotism,  it  would  be  found,  that  compara-
tively few  had  possessed  opulence  ;  and  many  had
struggled  through  life  with  the  painful  pressure  of  nar-
row resources,  the  res  augusUe  dond}

^  863.  It  does  not  become  the  commentator  to  say,
whether  experience  has  as  yet  given  more  weight  to
the  former,  than  to  the  latter  reasons.  Certain  it  is,
that  the  convention,  in  adopting  the  rule  of  allowing  a
compensation,  had  principaDy  in  view  the  importance
of  securing  the  highest  dignity  and  independence  in  the
discharge  of  legislative  functions,  and  the  justice,  as
well  as  duty  of  a  free  people,  possessing  adequate
means,  to  indemnify  those,  who  were  employed  in
then-  service,  against  aU  the  sacrifices  incident  to  their

^  See  Yates's  Minutes,  4  Elliot's  Debates,  92  to  99.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  xil] privilcoes  of  congress.  323

station.  It  has  been  justly  observed,  that  the  principle
of  compensation  to  those,  who  render  services  to  the
public,  runs  through  the  whole  constitution.^

§  864.  If  it  be  proper  to  allow  a  compensation  for
services  to  the  members  of  congress,  there  seems  the
utmost  propriety  in  its  being  paid  out  of  the  public
treasury  of  the  United  States.  The  labour  is  for  the
benefit  of  the  nation,  and  it  should  properly  be  remu-
nerated by  the  nation.  Besides ;  if  the  compensation
were  to  be  allowed  by  the  states,  or  by  the  constituents  #
c^  the  members,  if  left  to  their  discretion,  it  might  keep
the  latter  in  a  state  of  slavish  dependence,  and  might
introduce  great  inequalities  in  the  allowance.  And  if
it  were  to  be  ascertained  by  congress,  and  paid  by  the
constituents,  there  would  always  be  danger,  that  the
rule  would  be  fixed  to  suit  those,  who  were  the  least  en-
Ughtened,  and  the  most  parsimonious,  rather  than  those,
who  acted  upon  a  high  sense  of  the  dignity  and  the
duties  of  the  station.  Fortunately,  it  is  left  for  the  de-
cbion  of  congress.  The  compensation  is  "  to  be  ascer-
tsdned  by  law  ;'*  and  never  addresses  itself  to  the  pride,
or  the  parsimony,  the  local  prejudices,  or  local  habits  of
any  part  of  the  Union.  It  is  fixed  with  a  Jiberal  view
to  the  national  duties,  and  is  paid  fi*om  the  national  purse.
If  the  compensation  had  been  left,  to  be  fixed  by  the
state  legislature,  the  general  government  would  have
become  dependent  upon  the  governments  of  the  states ;
and  the  latter  could  almost,  at  their  pleasure,  have  dis-
solved it*  Serious  evils  were  felt  fi^m  this  source  under
the  confederation,  by  which  each  state  was  to  maintain
its  own  delegates  m  congress  ;'  for  it  was  found,  that  the

1  Rawle  on  the  ConstitutioD,  ch.  18,  p.  179.

•  3  Elliot's  Debates,  379.

>  Articles  of  Confederation,  arc.  5.


Digitized  by


Google


324 coNSTiTimoir  or  ths  v.  states,  [book  hi.

states  too  often  were  operated  upon  by  local  consid-
erations, as  contradistinguished  from  general  and  na-
tional interests.  *

§  855.  The  only  practical  question,  which  seems  to
have  been  farther  open  upon  this  head,  is,  whether  the
compensation  should  have  been  ascertained  by  the  con-
stitution itself,  or  left,  (as  it  now  is,)  to  be  ascertained
from  time  to  time  by  congress.  If  fixed  by  the  consti-
tution, it  might,  from  the  change  of  the  value  of  money,
^and  the  mpdes  of  life,  have  become  too  low,  and  utterly
inadequate.  Or  it  might  have  become  too  high  in  con-
sequence of  serious  changes  in  the  prosperity  of  the
nation.*  It  is  wisest,  therefore,  to  have  it  left,  where  it  is,
to  be  decided  by  congress  from  time  to  time,  according
to  their  own  sense  of  justice,  and  a  large  view  of  the
national  resources.  There  is  no  danger,  that  it  will
ever  become  excessive,  without  excitmg  general  dis-
content, and  then  it  will  soon  be  changed  from  the  re-
action of  public  opmion.  The  danger  rather  is,  that
public  opinion  will  become  too  sensitive  upon  this  sub-
ject ;  and  refuse  to  allow  any  addition  to  what  may  be
at  the  time  a  very  moderate  allowance.  In  the  actual
practice  of  the  government,  this  subject  has  rarely  been
stirred  without  producing  violent  excitements  at  the
elections.  This  alone  is  sufficient  to  establish  the  safe-
ty of  the  actual  exercise  of  the  power  by  the  bodies,
with  which  it  is  lodged,  both  in  the  state  and  national
legislatures.'  It  is  proper,  however,  to  add,  that  the
omission  to  provide  some  constitutional  mode  of  fixing
the  pay  of  members  of  congress,  without  leaving  the
subject  to  their  discretion,  formed  in  some  minds  a
strong  objection  to  the  constitution.*

1  2  Elliot's  Debates,  279 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  70, 71.

•  2  BUiot's  Debates,  279, 280, 281, 283. 3 1  EUiot's  Debates,  76^  71.

4  See  Gov.  Randolph's  Letter ;  3  Amer.  Mas.  62,  70.


Digitized  by


Google


cm.  XUJ]  PEITILEQM  OF  OOK6RB8S.  325

^  866.  The  next  part  of  the  clause  regards  the  priy-
ilege  of  the  members  from  arrest,  except  for  crimes,
during  their  attendance  at  the  sessions  of  congress,  and
their  going  to,  and  returning  from  them.  This  privilege
is  conceded  by  law  to  the  humblest  suitor  and  witness
in  a  court  of  justice ;  and  it  would  be  strange,  indeed,
if  it  were  denied  to  the  highest  functionaries  of  the  state
in  the  discharge  of  their  public  duties.  It  belongs  to
congress  in  common  with  all  other  legislative  bodies,
which  exist,  or  have  existed  in  America,  since  its  first  set-v
tiement,  under  every  variety  of  government ;  and  it  has
immemorially  constituted  a  privilege  of  both  houses  of
the  British  parliament^  It  seems  absolutely  indispensa-
ble for  the  just  exercise  of  the  legislative  power  in
every  nation,  purporting  to  possess  a  free  constitution
of  government ;  and  it  cannot  be  surrendered  without
endangering  the  public  liberties,  as  well  as  the  private
independence  of  the  members.*

§  867.  This  privilege  from  arrest,  privileges  them  of
course  against  all  process,  the  disobedience  to  which  is
punishable  by  attachment  of  the  person,  such  as  a  sub^
pcsna  ad  respondendum,  aut  testificanduroy  or  a  summons
to  serve  on  a  jury ;  and  (as  has  been  justly  observed)
with  reason,  because  a  member  has  superiour  duties  to
perform  in  another  place.  When  a  representative  is
withdrawn  from  his  seat  by  a  summons,  the  people,
whom  he  represents,  lose  their  voice  in  debate  and  vote,
as  they  do  in  his  voluntary  absence.  When  a  senator
is  withdrawn  by  summons,  his  state  loses  half  its  voice
in  debate  and  vote,  as  it  does  in  his  voluntary  absence.
The  enormous  disparity  of  the  evil  admits  of  no  com-

1  1  Black.  Comm.  164,  165;  Com.  Dig.  Parliament,  D.  17;  Jeffereon'i
Manual,  § .%  PriviUgt ;  Bmyon  v.  Eodyn,  Sir  O.  Bridg.  R.  334

9  1  Kent  Comm.Lect  11,  p.  231;  BoUon  y.  MaHin,  1  DalL  R.996;
Cqfiny.  Cqffin^  4  Mass.  R.  1.


Digitized  by


Google


326  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

parison.*  The  privilege,  indeed,  is  deemed  not  mere-
ly the  privilege  of  the  member,  or  his  constituents,  but
the  privilege  of  the  house  also.  And  every  man  must
at  his  peril  take  notice,  who  are  the  members  of  the
house  returned  of  record.*

§  868.  The  privilege  of  the  peers  of  the  British  par-
liament to  be  free  from  arrest,  in  civil  cases,  is  for  ever
sacred  and  inviolable.  For  other  purposes,  (as  for
common  process,)  it  seems,  that  their  privilege  did  not
extend,  but  from  the  teste  of  the  summons  to  parlia-
ment, and  for  twenty  days  before  and  after  the  session.
But  that  period  has  now,  as  to  all  common  process
but  arrest,  been  taken  away  by  statute.'  The  privUege
of  the  members  of  the  house  of  commons  from  arrest
b  for  forty  days  after  every  prorogation,  and  for  forty
days  before  the  next  appointed  meeting,  which  in
effect  is  as  long,*  as  the  pariiament  lasts,  it  seldom
being  prorogued  for  more  than  four  score  days,  at  a
time.^  In  case  of  a  xlissolution  of  parliament,  it  does
not  appear,  that  the  privilege  is  confined  to  any  precise
time ;  the  rule  being,  that  the  party  is  entitled  to  it  for
a  convenient  time,  redeundo.  ^

§  859.  The  privilege  of  members  of  parliament  for-
merly extended  also  to  their  servants  and  goods,  so
that  they  could  not  be  arrested.  But  so  far,  as  it  went  to
obstruct  the  ordinary  course  of  justice  in  the  British
courts,  it  has  since  been  restrained.® In  the  mem-

l  JeffersoD's  Manual,  §  3.  ^  Id.  §  a

3  Com.  Dig.  Parliament,  D.  17;  1  Black.  Comm.  165, 166.

4  1  Black.  Comm.  165 ;  Com.  Dig.  Parliament,  D.  17.

5  Holiday  V.  Pitt,  2  Str.  R.  985 ;  S.  C.  Cas.  Temp.  Hard.  28 ;  1  Black.
Comm.  165 ;  Christian's  note,  21 ;  Barnard  v.  Mordaunly  1  Kenyon  R-
125.

6  Com.  Dig.  PaHiamea^D.  17;  1  Black.  Comm.  165;  Jefferson's
Manual,  §  3.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XII.]  PRIVILEGES  OF  COJXGKESB.  327

bcrs  of  congress,  the  privilege  is  strictly  personal,  and
does  not  extend  to  their  servants  or  property.  It  is
also,  in  all  cases  confined  to  a  reasonable  time,  eumfo,
marandOf  et  redeundoj  mstead  of  being  limited  by  a  pre-
cise number  of  days.  It  was  probably  from  a  survey
of  the  abuses  of  privilege,  which  for  a  long-time  defeat^
ed  in  England  the  purposes  of  justice,  that  the  consti-
tution has  thus  marked  its  boundary  with  a  sedulous
caution.^

§  860.  The  eflfect  of  this  privilege  is,  that  the  arrest
of  the  member  is  unlawful,  and  a  trespass  ab  initio,  for
which  he  may  madntsdn  an  action,  or  proceed  against
the  aggressor  by  way  of  indictment  He  may  also  be
discharged  by  motion  to  a  court  of  justice,  or  upon  a
writ  of  habeas  corpus  ;*  and  the  arrest  may  also  be  pun-
ished, as  a  fcontempt  of  the  house.'

§  861.  In  respect  to  the  time  of  going  and  returning,
the  law  is  not  so  strict  in  point  of  time,  as  to  require
the  party  to  set  out  immediately  on  his  return ;  but
allows  him  time  to  settle  his  private  affairs,  and  to  pre-
pare for  his  journey.  Nor  does  it  nicely  scan  his  road^
nor  is  his  protection  forfeited,  by  a  littie  deviation  from
that,  which  is  most  direct ;  for  it  is  supposed,  that  some
superior  convenience  or  necessity  directed  it.*  The
privilege  from  arrest  takes  place  by  force  of  the  elec-
tion, and  before  the  member  has  taken  his  seat,  or  is
sworn.*

§  862.  The  exception  to  the  privilege  is,  that  it  shall
not  extend  to  "  treason,  felony,  or  breach  of  the  peace.'*

1  Jefferson's  Manual,  §  3.

«  Id.  §  3 ;  2  Str.  990  ;  'i  Wilson's  R.  151 ;  Cas.  Temp.  Hard.  28.

3  1  Black.  Coram.  164, 165, 166 ; Com.  Dig.  Parliameni,  D.  17 ;  Jef-
ferson's Manual,  §  3.

4  Jefferson's  Manual,  §  3;  2  Str.  R.  986, 987.

^  Jefferson's  Manual,  §  3 ;  but  see  Com.  Dig.  PariiamerUy  D.  17.


Digitized  by


Google


328 CONSTITUTION  OP  TH£  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  HI.

These  words  are  the  same  as  those,  in  which  the  excep-
tion to  the  privilege  of  parliament  is  usuaUy  expressed
at  the  common  law,  and  was  doubtless  borrowed  from
that  source.^  Now^  as  all  crimes  are  offences  against
the  peace,  the  phrase  "breach  of  the  peace"  would
seem  to  extend  to  all  indictable  offences,  as  well
those,  which  are,  in  fact,  attended  with  force  and
iddence,  as  those,  which  are  only  constructive  breaches
of  the  peace  of  the  government,  inasmuch  as  they  vio-
tete  its  good  order.*  And  so  in  truth  it  was  decided
in  parliament,  in  the  case  of  a  seditious  Ubel,  published
by  a  member,  (Mr.  Wilkes,)  against  the  opinion  of  Lord
Camden  and  the  other  judges  of  the  Court  of  Common
Pleas ;'  and,  as  it  will  probably  now  be  thought,  since
the  party  spirit  of  those  times  has  subsided,  with  entire
good  sense,  and  in  furtherance  of  public  justice.  *  It
would  be  monstrous,  that  any  member  should  protect
himself  from  arrest,  or  punishment  for  a  libel,  often  a
crime  of  the  deepest  malignity  and  mischief,  while  he
would  be  liable  to  arrest,  for  the  pettiest  assault,  or  the
most  insignificant  breach  of  the  peace.

^  863.  The  next  great  and  vital  privilege  is  the  free-
dom of  speech  and  debate,  without  which  all  other
privileges  would  be  comparatively  unimportant,  or  inef-
fectual^ This  privilege  also  is  derived  from  the  prac-
tice of  the  British  parliament,  and  was  in  full  exercise
in  our  colonial  legislatures,  and  now  belongs  to  the  leg-
islature of  every  state  in  the  Union,  as  matter  of  consti-
tutional right.  In  the  British  parliament  it  is  a  claim  of
immemorial  right,  and  is  now  farther  fortified  by  an  act

1  4  Inst  25;*  1  Black.  Comm.  165;  Com.  Dig.  Parliament^  D.  17.
s  1  Black.  Comm.  166.

3  JUx  V.  Wilkei,  3  Wilson's  R.  151.

4  See  1  Black.  Comm.  166, 1Q7.
ft  See  9  WilMo'b  Law  Lect  156.


Digitized  by


Google


€H.  XII.]  PRITILEGES  OF  CONGRESS.  329

of  parliament ;  and  it  is  always  particularly  demanded
of  the  king  in  person  by  the  speaker  of  die  house  of
commons,  at  the  opening  of.  every  new  parliament^
But  this  privilege  is  strictly  confined  to  things  done  in
the  course  of  parliamentary  proceedings,  and  does  not
cover  things  done  beyond  the  place  and  limits  of  duty.*
Therefore,  although  a  speech  delivered  in  the  house  of
commons  is  privileged,  and  the  member  cannot  be
questioned  respecting  it  elsewhere ;  yet,  if  he  publishes
his  speech,  and  it  contains  libellous  matter,  he  is  liable
to  an  action  and  prosecution  therefor,  as  in  common
cases  of  libel^  And  the  same  principles  seem  applica-
ble to  the  privilege  of  debate  and  speech  in  congress.
No  man  ought  to  have  a  right  to  defame  others  under
colour  of  a  performance  of  the  duties  of  his  office.  And
if  he  does  so  in  the  actual  discharge  of  his  duties  in
congress,  that  furnishes  no  reason,  why  he  should  be
enabled  through  the  medium  of  the  press  to  destroy
the  reputation,  and  invade  the  repose  of  other  citizens.
It  is  neither  within  the  scope  of  his  duty,  nor  in  further-
ance of  public  rights,  or  public  policy.  Every  citizen
has  as  good  a  right  to  be  projected  by  the  laws  from
malignant  scandal,  and  false  charges,  and  defamatory
imputations,  as  a  member  of  congress  has  to  utter  them
in  his  seaL  If  it  were  otherwise,  a  man's  character
might  be  taken  away  without  the  possibility  of  redress;
either  by  the  malice,  or  indiscretion,  or  overweaning
self-conceit  of  a  member  of  congress.*  It  is  proper,
however,  to  apprise  the  learned  reader,  that  it  has
been  recently  denied  in  congress  by  very  distinguished
lawyers,  that  the  privilege  of  speech  and  debate  in  con-

1  1  Black.  Comm.  164,  la^.  ^  Jefferson's  Manual,  §  a

3  The  King  v.  Creevy,  1  Maule  &  Selw.  27.3.

4  See  the  reasoning  in  Cqffin  v.  Cqffin,  4  Mass.  R.  1.

VOL.  II.  42


Digitized  by


Google


330 CONSTITUTION  OF  THK  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

gress  does  not  extend  to  publication  df  his  speech. And
they  ground  themselves  upon  an  important  distinction
arising  from  the  actual  differences  between  English  and
American  legislation. In  the  former,  the  publication  of
the  debates  is  not  strictly  lawful,  except  by  license  of  the
house. In  the  latter,  it  is  a  common  right,  exercised
and  supported  by  the  direct  encouragement  of  the  body.
This  reasoning  deserves  a  very  attentive  examination.^
^  864.  The  next  clause  regards  the  disqualifications
of  members  of  congress ;  and  is  as  follows :  "  No  sen-
**ator  or  representative  shall,  during  the  time,  for  which
"he  was  elected,  be  appointed  to  any  civil  oflSce  under
•*  the  authority  of  the  United  States,  which  shall  have
"  been  created,  or  the  emoluments  whereof  shall  have
•*  been  increased,  during  such  time. And  no  person,
**  holding  any  office  under  the  United  States,  shall  be
"  a  member  of  either  house  of  congress  during  his  con-
"tinuance  in  oflSce.** This  clause  does  not  appear  to
have  met  with  any  opposition  in  the  convention,  as  to
the  propriety  of  some  provision  on  the  subject,  the
principal  question  being,  as  to  the  best  mode  of  expres-
smg  the  disqualifications.' It  has  been  deemed  by  one
commentator  an  admirable  provision  against  venality,
though  not  perhaps  sufficiently  guarded  to  prevent
evasion.* And  it  has  been  elaborately  vindicated  by
another  with  uncommon  earnestness.^ The  reasons
for  excluding  persons  from  offices,  who  have  been  con-
cerned in  creating  them,  or  increasing  their  emoluments,

1  Mr.  Doddridge's  Speech  in  the  case  of  Hoaston,  in  May,  1832;  Mr.
Burg^es's  Speech,  n>id.
9  Joarn.  of  Convention,  314,  319,  330,  .'V32,  323.

3  1  Tack.  Black.  Comm.  App.  198,  214,  215, 375^

4  Rawle  on  the  Const  ch.  19,  p.  184,  dLC. ;  1  Wilson's  Law  Lect  446
to  449.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XII.]  PRIVILEGES  OF  COITOIUCSS.  331

are  to  take  away,  as  far  as  possible,  any  improper  bias  in
the  vote  of  the  representative,  and  to  secure  to  the  con-
stituents some  solemn  pledge  of  his  disinterestedness.
The  actual  provision,  however,  does  not  go  to  the  ex-
tent of  the  principle ;  for  his  appointment  is  restricted
only  "during  the  time,  for  which  he  was  elected;**
thus  leaving  in  full  force  every  influence  upon  his  mind,
if  the  period  of  his  election  is  short,  or  the  duration  of
it  is  approaching  its  natural  termination.  It  has  some-
times been  matter  of  regret,  that  the  disqualification  had
not  been  made  co-extensive  with  the  supposed  mischief;
and  thus  have  for  ever  excluded  members  from  the  pos-
session of  offices  created,  or  rendered  more  lucrative
by  themselves.^  Perhaps  there  is  quite  as  much  wis-
dom in  leaving  the  provision,  where  it  now  is.

^  865.  It  is  not  easy,  by  any  constitutional  or  legis-
lative enactments,  to  shut  out  all,  or  even  many  of  the
avenues  of  undue  or  corrupt  mfluence  upon  the  human
mind.  The  great  securities  for  society  —  those,  on
which  it  must  for  ever  rest  in  a  free  government  —  are
responsibility  to  the  people  through  elections,  and  per-
sonal character,  and  purity  of  principle.  Where  these
are  wantmg,  there  never  can  be  any  solid  confidence,
or  any  deep  sense  of  duty.  Where  these  exist,  they
become  a  sufficient  guaranty  against  all  sinister  influ-
ences, as  well  as  all  gross  offences.  It  has.  been  re-
marked with  equal  profoundness  and  sagacity,  that,  as
there  is  a  degree  of  depravity  in  mankmd,  which  re-
quires a  certain  degree  of  circumspection  and  distrust;
so  there  are  other  qualities  m  human  nature,  which
justify  a  certain  portion  of  esteem  and  confidence.
Republican  government  presupposes  the  existence  of

1  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  cli.  19.  See  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comro.  App.
375.


Digitized  by


Google


332  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  111.

these  qualities  in  a  higher  form,  than  any  other.^ It
might  well  be  deemed  harsh  to  disqualify  an  individual
from  any  oflSce,  clearly  required  by  the  exigencies  of
the  country,  simply  because  he  had  done  his  duty.*
And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  disqualification  might  ope-
rate upon  many  persons,  who  might  find  their  way  into
the  national  councils,  as  a  strong  inducement  to  post-
pone the  creation  of  necessary  offices,  lest  they  should
become  victims  of  their  high  discharge  of  duty. The
chances  of  receiving  an  appointment  to  a  new  office  are
not  so  many,  or  so  enticing,  as  to  bewilder  many  minds ;
and' if  they  are,  the  aberrations  from  duty  are  so  easily
traced,  that  they  rarely,  or  never  escape  the  public
reproaches. And  if  influence  is  to  be  exerted  by  the
executive  for  improper  purposes,  it  will  be  quite  as  easy,
and  in  its  operation  less  seen,  and  less  suspected,  to
give  the  stipulated  patronage  in  another  forn^  either  of
office,  or  of  profitable  employment,  already  existmg.
And  even  a  general  disqualification  might  be  evaded  by
suffering  the  like  patronage  silently  to  fall  into  the  hands
of  a  confidential  friend,  or  a  favourite  chUd  or  relative.
A  dishonourable  traffic  m  votes,  if  it  should  ever  be-
come the  engine  of  party  or  of  power  in  our  country,
would  never  be  restrained  by  the  slight  network  of
any  constitutional  provisions  of  this  sort It  vi/ould
seek,  and  it  would  find  its  due  rewards  in  the  general
patronage  of  the  government,  or  m  the  possession  of
the  offices  conferred  by  the  people,  which  would  bring
emolument,  as  well  as  influence,  and  secure  power  by
gratifymg  favourites. The  history  of  our  state  govern-
ments (to  go  no  farther)  will  scarcely  be  thought  by
any  ingenuous  mind  to  afford  any  proofs,  that  the  ab-

i  The  Federalist,  Na  55.  <  2  ElUot's  Debates,  279.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  XII.]  PRIVILEGES  OF  CONGRESS.  333

sence  of  such  a  disqualification  has  rendered  state
legislation  less  pure,  or  less  intelligent ;  or,  that  the  ex-
istence of  such  a  disqualification  would  have  retarded
one  rash  measure,  or  introduced  one  salutary  scruple
into  the  elements  of  popular  or  party  strife.  History,
which  teaches  us  by  examples,  establishes  the  truth
beyond  all  reasonable  question,  that  genuine  patriotism
is  too  lofty  in  its  honour,  and  too  enlightened  m  its  ob-
ject, to  need  such  checks ;  and  that  weakness  and  vice,
the  turbulence  of  faction,  and  the  meanness  of  avarice,
are  easily  bought,  notwithstandmg  all  the  efforts  to
fetter,  or  ensnare  them.

^  866.  The  other  part  of  the  clause,  which  disquali-
fies persons  holding  any  office  under  the  United  States
fi'om  being  members  of  either  house  during  their  con-
tinuance in  office,  has  been  still  more  universally  ap-
plauded; and  has  been  vindicated  upon  the  highest
grounds  of  public  policy.  It  is  doubtless  founded  m  a
deference  to  state  jealousy,  and  a  sincere  desire  to  ob-
viate the  fears,  real  or  imaginary,  that  the  general  gov-
ernment would  obtam  an  undue  preference  over  the
state  governments.*  It  has  also  the  strong  recommen-
dation, that  it  prevents  any  undue  influence  from  office,
either  upon  the  party  himself,  or  those,  with  whom  he
is  associated  in  legislative  deliberations.  The  universal
exclusion  of  all  persons  holdmg  office  is  (it  must  be
admitted)  attended  with  some  inconveniences.  The
heads  of  the  departments  are,  in  fact,  thus  precluded
from  proposing,  or  vindicating  their  own  measures  in
the  face  of  the  nation  in  the  course  of  debate ;  and  are
compelled  to  submit  them  to  other  men,  who  are  either
imperfectiy  acquainted  with  the  measures,  or  are  indif-

1  See  Rawle  on  the  ConstitutioD,  ch.  19 ;  The  Federalist,  No.  56.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


334  COirSTJTUTION  of  the  17.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

ferent  to  their  success  or  Mure.  Thus,  that  open  and
public  responsibility  for  measures,  which  properly  be-
longs to  the  executiye  in  all  governments,  and  espe-
cially in  a  republican  government,  as  its  greatest  secu-
rity and  strength,  is  completely  done  away,  The  ex-
ecutive is  compelled  to  resort  to  secret  and  unseen  in-
fluence, to  private  interviews,  and  private  arrangements,
to  accomplish  its  own  impropriate  purposes ;  instead  of
proposing  and  sustainmg  its  own  duties  and  measures
by  a  bold  and  manly  appeal  to  the  nation  in  the  face  of
its  representatives.  One  consequence  of  this  state  of
things  is,  that  there  never  can  be  traced  home  to  the
executive  any  responsibility  for  the  measures,  which
are  planned,  and  carried  at  its  suggestion.  Another
consequence  will  be,  (if  it  has  not  yet  been,)  that  mea-
sures will  be  adopted,  or  defeated  by  private  intrigues,
political  combinations,  irresponsible  recommendations,
and  all  the  blandishments  of  office,  and  all  the  deaden-
ing weight  of  silent  patronage.  The  executive  will
never  be  compelled  to  avow,  or  to  support  any  opinions.
His  ministers  may  conceal,  or  evade  any  expression  of
thdr  opinions.  He  will  seem  to  follow,  when  m  fact
he  directs  the  opinions  of  congress.  He  will  assume
the  air  of  a  dependent  instrument,  ready  to  adopt  the
acts  of  the  legislature,  when  in  fact  his  spuit  and  his
wishes  pervade  the  whole  system  of  legislation.  If
corruption  ever  eats  its  way  silently  into  the  vitals  of
this  republic,  it  will  be,  because  the  people  are  unable
to  bring  responsibility  home  to  the  executive  through
hb  chosen  ministers.  They  will  be  betrayed,  when
their  suspicbns  are  most  lulled  by  the  executive,  under
the  disguise  of  an  obedience  to  the  will  of  congress.
If  it  would  not  have  been  safe  to  trust  the  heads  of  de-
partments, as  representatives,  to  the  choice  of  the  peo-


Digitized  by


Google


€H.  XII.]  PRIVILEOSS  OF  COKGRS88.  836

pie,  as  their  constituents,  it  would  have  been  at  least
some  gdn  to  have  allowed  them  a  seat,  like  territorial
delegates,  in  the  house  of  representatives,  where  they
might  freely  debate  without  a  title  to  vote.  In  such  an
event,  their  influence,  whatever  it  would  be,  would  be
seen,  and  felt,  and  understood,  and  on  that  account
would  have  involved  little  danger,  and  more  searchmg
jealousy  and  opposition ;  whereas,  it  is  now  secret  and
silent,  and  from  that  very  cause  may  become  over-
whelming.

§  867.  One  other  reason  in  favour  of  such  a  right  is,
that  it  would  compel  the  executive  to  make  appoint-
ments  for  the  high  departments  of  government,  not
from  personal  or  party  favourites,  but  from  statesmen
of  high  public  character,  talents,  experience,  and  ele-
vated services ;  from  statesmen,  who  had  earned  public
favour,  and  could  command  public  confidence.  At
present,  gross  mcapacity  may  be  concealed  under  oflS-
cial  forms,  and  ignorance  silently  escape  by  shifting  the
labours  upon  more  intelligent  subordinates  m  oflSce.
The  nation  would  be,  on  the  other  plan,  better  served ;
and  the  executive  sustained  by  more  masculine  elo-
quence, as  well  as  more  liberal  learning.

^  868.  In  the  British  parliament  no  restrictions  of
the  former  sort  exist,  and  few  of  the  latter,  except  such
as  have  been  created  by  statute.*  It  is  true,  that  an
acceptance  of  any  office  under  the  crown  is  a  vacadon
of  a  seat  in  parliament  This  is  wise ;  and  secures  the
people  from  being  betrayed  by  those,  who  hold  office,
and  whom  they  do  not  choose  to  trust.  But  generally,
they  are  re-eligible ;  and  are  entitled,  if  the  people  so
choose,  again  to  hold  a  seat  in  the  house  of  commons,


1  Seo  1  Black.  Comm.  175, 176.


Digitized  by


Google


336 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

notwithstanding  their  official  character.^  The  conse-
quence is,  that  the  ministers  of  the  crown  assume  an
open  public  responsibility ;  and  if  the  representation  of
,  the  people  in  the  house  of  commons  were,  als  it  is  under
the  national  government,  founded  upon  a  uniform  rule,
by  which  the  people  might  obtain  their  full  share  of  the
government,  it  would  be  impossible  for  the  ministry  to
exercise  a  controlling  influence,  or  escape  (as  in  Amer-
ica they  may)  a  direct  palpable  responsibility.  There
can  be  no  danger,  that  a  free  people  will  not  be  suffi-
ciently watchful  over  their  rulers,  and  their  acts,  and
opinions,  when  they  are  known  and  avowed ;  or,  that
they  will  not  find  representatives  in  congress  ready  to
oppose  improper  measures,  or  sound  the  alarm  upon
jarbitrary  encroachments.  The  real  danger  is,  when
the  mfluence  of  the  rulers  is  at  work  in  secret,  and  as-
sumes no  definite  shape ;  when  it  guides  with  a  silent
and  irresistible  sway,  and  yet  covers  itself  under  the
forms  of  ^£^il|r  opinion,  or  independent  legislation ;
when  it  dl^^othing,  and  yet  accomplishes  every  thing.
^  869.  Such  is  the  reasoning,  by  which  many  en-
lightened statesmen  have  not  only  been  led  to  doubt,
but  even  to  deny  the  value  of  this  constitutional  dis-
qualification. And  even  the  most  strenuous  advocates
of  it  are  compelled  so  far  to  admit  its  force,  as  to  con-
cede, that  the  measures  of  the  executive  government,
so  far  as  they  fall  withm  the  immediate  department  of
a  particular  officer,  might  be  more  directly  and  fully
explained  on  the  floor  of  the  house.'  Still,  however,
the  reasoning  from  the  Bridsh  practice  has  not  been
deemed  satisfactory  by  the  public ;  and  the  guard  in-

1  1  Black.  Comm.  175, 176,  Christian's  note,  S9.
3  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  19.  p.  187.


Digitized  by


Google


€H.  XII.}  PRIYILEOBS  OF  CONGRESS.  337

terposed  by  the  constitution  has  been  received  with
general  approbation,  and  has  been  thought  to  have
worked  well  during  our  experience  under  the  national
government^  Indeed,  the  strongly  marked  parties  in
the  British  parliament,  and  their  consequent  dissensions
have  been  ascribed  to  the  non-existence  of  any  such
restraints;  and  the  progress  of  the  influence  of  the
crown,  and  the  supposed  corruptions  of  legislation,  have
been  by  some  writers  traced  back  to  the  same  original
blemish,*  Whether  these  inferences  are  borne  out  by
historical  facts,  is  a  matter,  upon  which  different  judg-
ments may  arrive  at  different  conclusions ;  and  a  work^
like  the  present,  is  not  the  proper  place  to  discuss
them.

1  Mr.  Rawle's  remarks  in  his  Treatise  od  Constitutional  Law,(ch.  19,)
are  as  full  on  this  point,  as  can  probably  be  found.  See  also  The  Fed-
eralist, No.  55 ;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comro.  App.  198, 214,  215 ;  2  £Uiot'8
Debates,  278, 279, 280, 281, 282 ;  1  Wilson's  Law  Lect  446  to  44a

»  1  WUson'B  Law  Lect  446  to  449.


VOL.  II.  43


Djgitized  by


Google


838  CONSTITUTIOH  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

CHAPTER  XHL

MODE  OF  PASSING  LAWS. PRESIDENT'S  NEGATIYE.

§  870.  The  seventh  section  of  the  first  article  treats
of  two  important  subjects,  the  right  of  originating  reve-
nue bills,  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  president's
negative  upon  the  passing  of  laws.

§871.  The  first  clause  declares  — "All  bills  for
^raising  revenue  shall  originate  in  the  house  of  repre-
^  sentatives ;  but  the  senate  may  propose,  or  concur
**  with  amendments,  as  on  other  bills/'  This  provision,
so  far  as  it  regards  the  right  to  originate  what  are  tech-
nically called  "  money  bills,"  is,  beyond  all  question,
borrowed  from  the  British  house  of  commons,  of  which
it  is  the  ancient  and  indisputable  privilege  and  right,
that  all  grants  of  subsidies  and  parUamehtary  aids  shall
begin  in  their  house,  and  are  first  bestowed  by  them,
although  their  grants  are  not  effectual  to  all  intents  and
purposes,  until  they  have  the  assent  of  the  other  two
branches  of  the  legislature.*  The  general  reason  given
for  this  privilege  of  the  house  of  commons  is,  that  the
supplies  are  raised  upon  the  body  of  the  people ;  and
therefore  it  is  proper,  that  they  alone  should  have  the
right  of  taxing  themselves.  And  Mr.  Justice  Black-
stone  has  very  correctly  remarked,  that  this  reason
would  be  unanswerable,  if  the  commons  taxed  none
but  themselves.  But  it  is  notorious,  that  a  very  large
share  of  property  is  in  possession  of  the  lords ;  that  this
property  is  equally  taxed,  as  the  property  of  the  com-


1  1  Black.  Comm.  169.


Digiti


zed.by  Google


OH.  XIII.]  MODS  OF  PASSING  LAWS.  339

mons ;  and  therefore  the  commons,  not  being  the  sde
persons  taxed,  this  cannot  be  the  reason  of  their  having
the  sole  right  of  raising  and  modelling  the  supply.  The
true  reason  seems  to  be  this.  The  lords  being  a  per-
manent hereditary  body,  created  at  pleasure  by  the
king,  are  supposed  more  liable  to  be  influenced  by  the
crown,  and  when  once  influenced,  more  likely  to  con-
tinue so,  than  the  commons,  who  are  a  temporary  elec-
tive body,  freely  nominated  by  the  people.  It  would,
therefore,  be  extremely  dangerous  to  give  the  lords  any
power  of  framing  new  taxes  for  the  subject  It  is  suffi-
cient, that  they  have  a  power  of  rejecting,  if  they  think
the  commons  too  lavish  or  unprovident  in  their  grants.^
^  872.  This  seems  a  very  just  account  of  the  matter,
widi  reference  to  the  spirit  of  the  British  constituticm ;
though  a  difierent  explanation  has  been  deduced  from
a  historical  review  of  the  power.  It  has  been  asserted
to  have  arisen  from  the  instructions  from  time  to  time
given  by  the  constituents  of  the  commons,  (whether
county,  city,  or  borough,)  as  to  the  rates  and  assess-
ments, which  they  were  respectively  willing  to  bear
and  assent  to ;  and  from  the  aggregate  it  was  easy  for
the  commons  to  ascertam  the  whole  amount,  which  the
commonalty  of  the  whole  kingdom  were  willing  to
grant  to  the  king.'  Be  this  as  it  may,  so  jealous  are
the  commons  of  this  valuable  privilege,  that  herein  they
will  not  suffer  the  other  house  to  exert  any  power,  but
that  of  rejecting.  They  will  not  permit  the  least  altera-
tion or  amendment  to  be  made  by  the  lords  to  the
mode  of  taxing  the  people  by  a  money  bill ;  and  under

1  1  Black.  Comm.  169 ;  De  Lolme  on  Constitution,  ch.  4, 8,  p.  66,  S4,
85,  and  note.

9  3  Wilson's  Law  Lect  161, 162, 163,  citing  MiDar  on  Constitation,
398. Bat  see  1  WUson's  Law  Lect  444, 445.


Digitized  by


Google


340 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  lU.

«

this  appellation  are  included  all  bills,  by  which  money  I
is  directed  to  be  raised  upon  the  subject  for  any  pur-
pose, or  in  any  shape  whatsoever,  either  for  the  exi-
gencies of  the  government,  and  collected  from  the  king-
dom in  general,  as  the  land  tax,  or  for  private  benefit,
and  collected  in  any  particular  district,  as  turnpikes,
parish  rates,  and  the  like.*  It  is  obvious,  that  this
power  might  be  capable  of  great  abuse,  if  other  bills
were  tacked  to  such  money  bills ;  and  accordingly  it
was  found,  that  money  biUs  were  sometimes  tackell
to  favourite  measures  of  the  commons,  with  a  view  to
ensure  their  passage  by  the  lords.  This  extraordinary
use,  or  rather  perversion  of  the  power,  would,  if  suffer-
ed to  grow  into  a  common  practice,  have  completely
destroyed  the  equilibrium  of  the  British  constitution,
arid  subjected  both  the  lords  and  the  kmg  to  the  power
of  the  commons.  Resistance  was  made  from  time  to
time  to  this  unconstitutional  encroachment;  and  at
length  the  lords,  with  a  view  to  give  permanent  effect
to  their  own  rights,  have  made  it  a  standing  order  to
reject  upon  sight  all  bills,  that  are  tacked  to  money
bills.*  Thus,  the  privilege  is  mamtamed  on  one  side,
and  guarded  against  undue  abuse  on  the  other.

^  873.  It  will  be  at  once  perceived,  that  the  same
reasons  do  not  exist  in  the  same  extent,  for  the  same
exclusive  right  in  our  house  of  representatives  in  re-
gard to  money  bills,  as  exist  for  such  right  m  the  Brit-
ish house  of  commons.  It  may  be  fit,  that  it  should
possess  the  exclusive  right  to  originate  money  bills ;
since  it  may  be  presumed  to  possess  more  ample  means
of  local  information,  and  it  more  directly  represents  the
opmions,  feelings,  and  wishes  of  the  people ;  and,  being


X  1  Black.  Comm.  170,  and  Christian's  Note,  (26.)
9  De  Lolme  oo  Constitution,  ch.  17,  p.  381,  ^&L


Digitized  by


Google


CM.  XIIU]  MODE  OF  PASSIlfG  LAWS.  34L

directly  dependent  upon  them  for  support,  it  will  be
more  watchful  and  cautious  in  the  imposition  of  taxes,
than  a  body,  which  emanates  exclusively  from  the
states  in  their  sovereign  political  capacity.^  But,  as
the  senators  are  in  a  just  sense  equally  representatives
of  the  people,  and  do  not  hold  their  offices  by  a  per-
manent or  hereditary  title,  but  periodically  return  to  the
common  mass  of  citizens ;  *  and  above  all,  as  direct
taxes  are,  and  must  be,  apportioned  among  the  states
according  to  their  federal  population ;  and  as  all  the
states  have  a  distinct  local  interest,  both  as  to  the
amount  and  nature  of  all  taxes  of  every  sort,  which  are
to  be  levied,  there  seems  a  peculiar  fitness  in  giving  to
the  senate  a  power  to  alter  and  amend,  as  well  as  to
concur  with,  or  reject  all  money  bills.  The  due  influ-
ence of  all  the  states  is  thus  preserved;  for 'otherwise
it  might  happen,  from  the  overwhelmmg  representation
of  soma  of  the  large  states,  that  taxes  might  be  levied,
which  would  bear  with  peculiar  severity  upon  the  in-
terests, either  agricultural,  commercial,  or  manufactur-
ing, of  others  being  the  minor  states ;  and  thus  the
equilibrium  intended  by  the  constitution,  as  well  of
power,  as  of  interest,  and  influence,  might  be  practi-
cally subverted.

§  874.  There  would  also  be  no  small  inconvenience
in  excluding  the  senate  from  the  exercise  of  this  power
of  amendment  and  alteration ;  smoe  if  any,  the  slightest
modification  were  required  in  such  a  bill  to  make  it
either  palatable  or  just,  the  senate  would  be  compelled
to  reject  it,  although  an  amendment  of  a  single  line

^  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  163,  164;  Rawle  on  Constitution,  ch.  6;
4  Elliot's  Debates,  141.

9  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  215 ;  3  Wilson's  Law  Lect.  169,
164;  Rawle  on  Constitution,  ch.  6;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  141.


Digitised  by


Google


342 coNSTiTUTioir  of  the  u.  states, [book  m.

might  make  it  entirely  acceptable  to  both  houses.^
Such  a  practical  obstruction  to  the  legislation  of  a  free
government  would  far  outweigh  any  supposed  theoreti-
cal advantages  from  the  possession  or  exercise  of  an
exclusive  power  by  the  house  of  representatives.  In-
finite perplexities,  ^md  misunderstandings,  and  delays
would  clog  the  most  wholesome  legislation.  Even  the
annual  appropriation  bills  might  be  in  danger  of  a  mis-
carriage on  these  accounts ;  and  the  most  painful  dis-
sensions might  be  introduced.

§  875.  Indeed,  of  so  litUe  importance  has  the  exclu-
sive possession  of  such  a  power  been  thought  in  the
state  governments,  that  some  of  the  state  constitutions
make  no  difference,  as  to  the  power  of  each  branch
of  the  legislature  to  originate  money  bills.  Most  of
them  contain  a  provision  similar  to  that  m  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United  States ;  and  in  those  states,  where
the  exclusive  power  formerly  existed,  as,  for  instance,
in  Yfrgmia  and  South-Carolina,  it  was  a  constant  source
of  difficulties  and  contentions.'  In  the  revised  consti-
tution of  South-Carolina,  (in  1790,)  the  provision  was
altered,  so  as  to  conform  to  the  clause  in  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United  States.

^  876.  The  clause  seems  to  have  met  vnth  no  seri-
ous opposition  m  any  of  the  state  conventions ;  and  in-
deed could  scarcely  be  expected  to  meet  with  any  op-
position, except  in  Virginia;  smce  the  other  states
were  well  satisfied  with  the  principle  adopted  in  their
own  state  constitutions ;  and  in  Vii^mia  the  clause  cre-
ated but  little  debate.'

§  877.  What  bills  are  properiy  "bills  for  raismg  rev-
enue,'* in  the  sense  of  the  constitution,  has  been  matter

1  2  Elliot'8  Debates,  283, 284.  s  id.  3  id.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


OH.  XIII.] president's  kxoatiye.  343

of  some  discussion.  A  learned  commentator  supposes^
that  every  bill,  which  indirectly  or  consequentially  may
raise  reyenue,  is,  within  the  sense  of  the  constitution,  a
revenue  bilL  He  therefore  thinks,  that  the  bills  for
establishing  the  post-office,  and  the  mmt,  and  regulat-
ing the  value  of  foreign  coin,  belong  to  this  class,  and
ought  not  to  have  originated  (as  in  fact  they  did)  in  the
senate.^  But  the  practical  construction  of  the  constitu*
tion  has  been  agamst  his  opinion.  And,  indeed,  the
hbtory  of  the  origin  of  the  power,  already  suggested,
abundantly  proves,  that  it  has  been  confined  to  bills  to
levy*taxes  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  words,  and  has  not
been  understood  to  extend  to  bills  for  other  purposes,
which  may  incidentally  create  revenue.*  No  one  sup-
poses, that  a  bill  to  sell  any  of  the  public  lands,  or  to
sell  public  stock,  is  a  bill  to  raise  revenue,  in  the  sense
of  the  constitution.  Much  less  would  a  bill  be  so
deemed,  which  merely  regulated  the  value  of  foreign  or
domestic  ccHns,  or  authorized  a  discharge  of  insolvent
debtors  upon  assignments  of  their  estates  to  the  United
States,  giving  a  priority  of  payment  to  the  United
States  in  cases  of  insolvency,  although  all  of  them  might
incfdentally  bring  revenue  into  the  treasury.

^  878.  The  next  clause  respects  the  power  of  the
president  to  approve,  and  negative  laws.  In  the  con-
vention there  does  not  seem  to  have  been  much  diver-
sity of  opmion  on  the  subject  of  the  propriety  of  giving
to  the  president  a  negative  on  the  laws.  The  principsd
points  of  discussion  seem  to  have  been,  whether  the
negative  should  be  absolute,  or  qualified ;  and  if  the
latter,  by  what  number  of  each  house  the  bill  should  be
subsequendy  passed,  in  order  to  become  a  law ;  and

1  Tocl^er'fl  Black.  Comm.  App.  261,  and  note,
s  See  2  Elliot's  Debates,  283, 284.


Digitized  by


Google


344 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

whether  the  negative  should  in  either  case  be  exclu-
sively vested  in  the  president  alone,  or  in  him  jointiy  with
some  other  department  of  the  government  The  pro-
position of  a  qualified  negative  seems  to  have  obtained
general,  but  not  universal  support,  having  been  carried
by  the  vote  of  eight  states  against  two.^  This  being
settled,  the  question,  as  to  the  number,  was  at  first
unanimously  carried  in  the  affirmative  in  favour  of  two
thh'ds  of  each  house;  at  a  subsequent  period  it  was
altered  to  three  fourths  by  a  vote  of  six  states  against
four,  one  being  divided ;  and  it  was  ultimately  restored
to  the  two  thirds,  without  any  apparent  struggle.^*  An
effort  was  also  made  to  unite  the  supreme  national  ju-
diciary with  the  executive  in  revising  the  laws,  and
exercising  the  negative.  But  it  was  constantly  resisted,
being  at  first  overruled  by  a  vote  of  four  states  against
three,  two  being  divided,  and  finally  rejected  by  the
vote  of  eight  states  against  three.'

§  879.  Two  points  may  properly  arise  upon  this
subject.  First,  the  propriety  of  vestmg  the  power  in
the  president ;  and  secondly,  the  extent  of  the  legisla-
tive check,  to  prevent  an  undue  exercise  of  it.  The
former  also  admits  of  a  double  aspect,  viz.  whether  the
negative  should  be  absolute,  or  should  be  qualified.
An  absolute  negative  on  the  legislature  appears,  at
first,  to  be  the  natural  defence,  with  which  the  execu-
tive magistrate  should  be  armed.  But  in  a  fi^e  gov-
ernment, it  seems  not  altogether  safe,  nor  of  itself  a
sufficient  defence.  On  ordinary  occasions,  it  may  not
be  exerted  with  the  requisite  iSinnness ;  and  on  extra-
ordinary occasions,  it  may  be  perfidiously  abused. It

1  Journal  of  the  Convention,  97.

9  Journal  of  the  Convention,  195, 253, 254,  355.

3  Journal  of  the  Convention,  69,  96, 195,  25a


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIII.]  PR£SlD£in''s  KEGATIYB.  d46

is  true,  that  the  defect  of  such  a^  absolute  negative  has
a  tendency  to  weaken  the  executive  department  But
this  may  be  obviated,  or  at  least  counterpoised,  by
other  arrangements  in  the  government ;  such  as  a  quali-
fied connexion  with  the  senate  in  making  treaties  and
appointments,  by  which  the  latter,  being  a  stronger  de-
partment, may  be  led  to  support  the  constitutional  rights
of  the  former,  without  bemg  too  much  detached  from
its  own  legislative  functions.^  And  the  patronage  of
the  executive  has  also  some  tendency  to  create  a  coun-
teracting influence  in  aid  of  his  independence.  It  is
true,  that  in  England  an  absolute  negative  is  vested  in
the  king,  as  a  branch  of  the  legislative  power  ;  and  he
possesses  the  absolute  power  of  rejecting,  rather  than
of  resolving.  And  this  is  thought  by  Mr.  Justice  Black-
stone  and  others,  to  be  a  most  important,  and  indeed
mdispensable  part  of  the  royal  prerogative,  to  guard
against  the  usurpations  of  the  legislative  authority.*
Yet  in  pomt  of  fact  this  negative  of  the  kmg  has  not
been  once  exercised  since  the  year  1692;'  a  fact,
which  can  only  be  accounted  for  upon  one  of  two  sup-
positions, either  that  the  influence  of  the  crown  has
prevented  the  passage  of  objectionable  measures,  or  that
the  exercise  of  the  prerogative  has  become  so  odious,
that  it  has  not  been  deemed  safe  to  exercise  it,  except
upon  the  most  pressing  emergencies.^  Probably  both
*

1  The  Federalist,  No.  51.  ^  I  Black.  Comm.  154.

3  De  Lolme  on  Constitution,  ch.  17,  p.  390,  391  ;  1  Kent's  ComnL
Lectl],i>.  226.

4  1  WUson's  Law  Lect  448, 449  ;  The  Federalist,  No.  73  ;  Id.  No.  69 ;
1  Kent's  Corora.  Lect  1 1,  p.  226.—  Mr.  Burke,  in  his  letter  to  the  sher-
iffs ofBristol,*  has  treated  this  subject  with  his  usual  masterly  power.
**  The  king's  negative  to  bills,"  says  he,  '<  is  one  of  the  most  undisputed  of
the  royal  prerogatives ;  and  it  extends  to  all  cases  whatsoever. I  am


♦In  1777.

VOL.  II.  44


Digitized  by


Google


346 CONSTITUTION  Or  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  in.

motives  have  alternately  prevailed  in  regard  toi  bills,
which  were  disagreeable  to  the  crown ;  ^  though,  for
the  last  half  century,  the  latter  has  had  the  most  uni*
form  and  decisive  operation.  As  the  house  of  com-
mons becomes  more  fmd  more  the  representative  of  the
popular  opinion,  the  crown  will  have  less  and  less  in-
ducement to  hazard  its  own  uifluence  by  a  rejection  of
any  favourite  measure  of  the  people.  It  will  be  more
likely  to  take  the  lead,  and  thus  guide  and  moderate,
instead  pf  resisting  the  commons.  And,  practically
speaking,  it  is  quite  problematical,  whether  a  qualified
negative  may  not  hereafter  in  England  become  a  more
efficient  protection  of  the  crown,  than  an  absolute  nega*
tive,  which  makes  no  appeal  to  the  other  legislative
bodies,  and  consequently  compels  the  crown  to  bear
the  exclusive  odium  of  a  rejection.*  Be  this  a&  it  may,
the  example  of  England  furnishes,  on  this  pomt,  no
sufficient  authority  for  America.  The  whole  structure
of  our  government  is  so  entirely  different,  and  the
elements,  of  which  it  is  composed,  are  so  dissimilar
from  that  of  England,  that  no  argument  can  be  drawn
firom  the  practice  of  the  latter,  to  assist  us  m  a  just
arrangement  of  the  executive  authority.

^  880.  It  has  been  observed  by  Mr.  Chancellor
Kent,  with  pithy  elegance,  that  the  peremptory  veto  of
the  Roman  Tribunes,  who  were  placed  at  the  door  of
the  Roman  senate,  would  not  be  reconcileable  with  the

fkt  from  certain,  that  if  several  laws,  which  I  know,  bad  fallen  under
the  stroke  of  that  sceptre,  that  the  public  would  have  had  a  very  heavy
loss.  But  it  is  not  the  propriety  of  the  exercise,  which  is  in  question.
The  exercise  itself  is  wisely  forborne.  Its  repose  may  be  the  preser-
vation of  its  existence  ;  and  its  exiiitehce  may  be  the  means  of  saving
the  constiution  itself,  on  an  occasion  worthy  of  bringing  it  forth."

1 1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  "iSS,  356 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  11,  p.  996.

9  See  Uie  reasoning  in  The  Federalist,  No.  73 ;  Id.  No.  51 ;  1  WiL
son's  Law  Lect  448»  449.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIII.]  PRXflPEJfT't  NEOATIYS.  847

spirit,  of  deliberation  and  independence,  which  dis-
tinguishes the  councils  of  modern  times.  The  French
constitution  of  1701,  a  laboured  and  costly  fabric,  on
which  the  philosophers  and  statesmen  of  France  ex-
hausted all  their  ingenuity,  and  which  was  prostrated
in  the  dust  in  the  course  of  one  year  from  its  existence^
gave  to  the  king  a  negative  upon  the  acts  of  the  legis-
lature, with  some  feeble  limitations.  Every  bill  was
to  be  presented  to  the  king,  who  might  refuse  his  as-
sent ;  but  if  the  two  following  legislatures  should  suc-
cessively present  the  same  bill  in  the  same  temtis,  it
was  then  to  become  a  law.  The  constitutional  negative^
given  to  the  president  of  the  United  States,  appears  to
be  more  wisely  digested,  than  any  of  the  examples,
which  have  been  mentioned.^

^881.  The  reasons,  why  the  president  should  pos-
sess a  qualified  negative,  if  they  are  not  quite  obvious,
are,  at  least,  when  fairiy  expounded,  entirely  ^sadsfac-
tory.  In  the  first  place,  there  is  a  natural  tendency  in
the  legislative  department  to  mtrude  upon  the  rights,
and  to  absorb  the  powers  of  the  other  departments  of
government.^  A  mere  parchment  delineation  of  the
boundaries  of  each  is  whoQy  insufficient  for  the  pro-
tection of  the  weaker  branch,  as  the  executive  unques-
tionably is;  and  hence  there  arises  a  constitutional
necessity  of  arming  it  with  powers  for  its  own  defence*
If  the  executive^did  not  possess  this  qualified  negative,
he  would  gradually  be  stripped  of  all  his  authority,  and
become,  what  it  is  well  known  the  governors  of  some
states  are,  a  mere  pageant  and  shadow  of  magistracy.'

1  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  11,  p.  226, 227.

s  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  11,  p.  225, 230;  The  Federalist,  Na  73;  Id.
No.  51.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  51,  73 ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  225, 329 ;
1  WilM>n's  Law  Lect  448,  449  ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  11,  p,  225, 226.


Digitized  by


Google


348 CONSTITUTION  or  the  U.  STAT£S.  [book  III.

,  §  882.  In  the  next  place,  the  power  is  important,  as
an  additional  security  against  the  enactment  of  rash,
immature,  and  improper  laws.  It  establishes  a  saluta-
ry check  upon  the  legislative  body,  calculated  to  pre-
serve the  community  against  the  effects  of  faction,
precipitancy,  unconstitutional  legislation,  and  tempora-
ry excitements,  as  well  as  political  hostility.^  It  may,
indeed,  be  said,  that  a  single  man,  even  though  he  be
president,  cannot  be  presumed  to  possess  more  wis-
dom, or  virtue,  or  experience,  than  what  belongs  to  a
number  of  men.  But  this  furnishes  no  answer  to  the
reasoning.  The  question  is  not,  how  much  wisdom,  or
virtue,  or  experience,  is  possessed  by  either  branch  of
the  government,  (though  the  executive  magistrate  may
well  be  presumed  to  be  eminently  distinguished  in  all
these  respects,  and  therefore  the  choice  of  the  people ;)
but  whether  the  legislature  may  not  be  misled  by  a
love  of  power,  a  spirit  of  faction,  a  political  impulse,  or
a  persuasive  influence,  local  or  sectional,  which,  at  the
same  time,  may  not,  from  the  difference  in  the  election
and  dujdes  of  the  executive,  reach  him  at  all,  or  not
reach  him  in  the  same  degree.  He  will  always  have
a  primary  inducement  to  defend  his  own  powers ;  the
legislature  may  well  be  presumed  to  have  no  desire  to
favour  them.  He  will  have  an  opportunity  soberly  to
examine  the  acts  and  resolutions  passed  by  the  legisla-
ture, not  having  partaken  of  the  feehngs  or  combma-
tions,  which  have  procured  their  passage,  and  thus
correct,  what  shall  sometimes  be  wrong  from  haste  and
inadvertence,  as  well  as  design.^  His  view  of  them,
if  not  more  vnse,  or  more  elevated,  will,  at  least,  be

1  The  Federalist,  No.  73 ;  1  Wilson's  Law  Lect  448,  449,  45a
9  The  Federalist,  No.  7a


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIII.] presisdbnt's  negatiys.  349

I

independent,  and  under  an  entirely  different  responsi-
bility to  the  nation,  from  what  belongs  to  them.  He  is
the  representative  of  the  whole  nation  in  the  aggregate ;
they  are  the  representatives  only  of  distinct  parts ;  and
sometimes  of  litde  more  than  sectional  or  local  interests.
^  883.  Nor  is  there  any  solid  objection  to  this  quali-
fied power.^  If  it  should  be  objected,  that  it  may
sometimes  prevent  the  passage  of  good  laws,  as  well  as
of  bad  laws,  the  objection  is  entitied  to  but  Utde  weight.
In  the  first  place,  it  can  never  be  effectually  exercised,
if  two  thirds  of  both  houses  are  in  favour  of  the  law ;  and
if  they  are  not,  it  is  not  so  easily  demonstrable,  that
the  law  is  either  wise  or  salutary.  The  presumption
would  rather  be  the  other  way  ;  or,  at  least,  that  the
utility  of  it  was  not  unquestionable,  or  it  would  receive
the  requisite  support.  In  the  next  place,  the  great  evil
of  all  free  governments  is  a  tendency  to  over-legislation,
and  the  mischief  of  inconstancy  and  mutability  in  the
laws  forms  a  great  blemish  in  the  character  and  genius
of  all  free  governments.*  The  injury,  which  may  pos-
sibly arise  from  the  postponement  of  a  salutary  law,
is  far  less,  than  from  the  passage  of  a  mischievous  one,
or  fit)m  a  redundant  and  vacillating  legislation.'  In
the  next  place,  there  is  no  practical  danger,  that  this
power  would  be  much,  if  any,  abused  by  the  president.
The  superior  weight  and  influence  of  the  legislative
body  in  a  free  government,  and  the  hazard  to  the
weight  and  mfluence  of  the  executive  in  a  trial  of
strength,  afibrd  a  satisfactory  security,  that  the  power
will  generally  be  employed  with  great  caution  ;  and
that  there  will  be  more  often  room  for  a  charge  of

1  1  Tack.  Black.  Comm.  225, 324 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  11,  p.  225, 22&
«  The  Federalist,  No.  73.  3  w.


Digitized  by


Google


850 CONST^UTION  OF  THE  V.  STATCS. [bOOK  III.

timidity,  than  of  rashness  in  its  exercise.^  It  has  been
ak*eady  seen,  that  the  British  king,  with  all  his  sove-
reign attributes,  has  rarely  mterposed  this  high  prerog*
ative,  and  that  more  'than  a  century  has  elapsed  smce
its  actual  application.  If  from  the  offensive  nature  of
the  power  a  royal  hereditary  executive  thus  indulges
serious  scruples  in  its  actual  exercise,  surely  a  repub*
lican  president,  chosen  for  four  years,  may  be  presumed
to  be  still  more  unwilling  to  exert  it.^

^  884.  The  truth  is,  as  has  been  already  hinted,  that
the  real  danger  is,  that  the  executive  will  use  the  pow*
er  too  rarely.  He  will  do  it  only  on  extraordinary  oc-
casions, when  a  just  regard  to  the  public  safety,  or  pub-
lic interests,  or  a  constitutional  obligation,  or  a  necessity
of  maintaining  the  appropriate  rights  and  prerogatives
of  his  oflSce  compels  him  to  the  step ; '  and  then  it
will  be  a  solemn  appeal  to  the  people  themselves  from
their  own  representatives.  Even  within  these  narrow
limits  the  power  is  highly  valuable  ;  and  it  will  silendy
operate  as  a  preventive  check,  by  discouraging  attempts
to  overawe,  or  to  control  the  executive.  Indeed,  one
of  the  greatest  benefits  of  such  a  power  is,  that  its  in-
fluence is  felt,  not  so  much  in  its  actual  exercise,  as  in
its  silent  and  secret  energy  as  a  prevendve.  It  checks
the  intention  to  usurp,  before  it  has  ripened  into  an
act.

^  885.  It  has  this  additional  recommendation,  as  a
qualified  negative,  that  it  does  not,  like  an  absolute
negative,  present  a  categorical  and  harsh  resistance  to
the  legislative  will,  which  is  so  apt  to  engender  strife,
and  nourish  hostility.  It  assumes  the  character  of  a
mere  appeal  to  the  legislature  itself  and  asks  a  revision

1  The  Federalist,  No.  7a  >  Id.  s  id.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIII.]  PBSSIDENT'8  keoatiyb.  361

of  its  own  judgment^  It  is  in  the  nature,  then,  merely
of  a  rehearing,  or  a  reconsideration,  and  involves  noth-
ing to  provoke  rescntme^^t,  or  rouse  pride.  A  president,
who  might  hesitate  to  defeat  a  law  by  an  absolute  veto,
might  feel  little  scruple  to  return  it  for  reconsideration
upon  reasons  and  arguments  suggested  on  the  return.
If  these  were  satisfactory  to  the  legislature,  he  would
have  the  cheering  support  of  a  respectable  portion  of
the  body  in  justification  of  his  conduct  If,  on  the  other
hand,  they  should  not  be  satisfactory,  the  concurrence
of  two  thirds  would  secure  the  ultimate  passage  of  the
law,  without  exposing  him  to  undue  censure  or  reproach.
Even  in  such  cases  his  opposition  would  not  be  with-
out some  benefit.  His  observations  would  be  cal-
culated to  excite  public  attention  and  discussion,  to  lay
bare  the  grounds,  and  policy,  and  constitutionality  of
measures ;  *  and  to  create  a  continued  watchfulness,  as
to  the  practical  effects  of  thie  laws  thus  passed,  so  as
that  it  might  be  ascertained  by  experience,  whether  his
sagacity  and  judgment  were  safer,  than  that  of  the  legis-
lature.^ Nothing  but  a  gross  abuse  of  the  power  upon
frivolous,  or  party  pretences,  to  secure  a  petty  triumph,
or  to  defeat  a  wholesome  restraint,  would  bring  it  into
contempt,  or  odium  ;  and  then,  it  would  soon  be  follow-
ed by  that  remedial  justice  from  the  people,  in  the  ex-
ercise of  the  right  of  election,  which,  first  or  last,  will
be  found  to  follow  with  reproof,  or  cheer  with  applause,
the  acts  of  their  rulers,  when  passion  and  prejudice
have  removed  the  temporary  bandages,  wUch  have
blinded  their  judgment.  I^ooking  back  upon  the  history
of  the  government  for  the  last  forty  years,  it  will  be

1  The  Federalist,  No.  7a

s  Rawle  on  CoDstitution,  ch.  6,  p.  61, 62.

3  1  WilBon'8  Lect  449, 450;  The  Federalkt,  No.  7a


Digitized  by


Google


362 coNSTiTUTioir  of  the  u.  states, [book  iu.

found,  that  the  president's  negative  has  been  rarely
exerted ;  and  whenever  it  has  been,  no  instance  (it  is
believed)  has  occurred,  in  which  the  act  has  been  con-
curred in  by  two  thirds  of  both  houses.  If  the  public
opinion  has  not,  in  all  cases,  susta'med  this  exercise  of
the  veto,  it  may  be  affirmed,  that  it  has  rarely  been
found  that  the  disapprobation  has  been  violent,  or
unqualified.

§  886.  The  proposition  to  unite  the  Supreme  Court
with  the  executive  in  the  revision  and  quaUfied  rejec-
tion of  laws,  failed,  as  has  been  seen,  in  the  convention.^
Two  reasons  seem  to  have  led  to  this  result,  and  proba-
bly were  felt  by  the  people  also,  as  of  decisive  weight
The  one  was,  that  the  judges,  who  are  the  interpreters
of  the  law,  might  receive  an  improper  bias  from  having
given  a  previous  opinion  in  their  revisory  capacity.
The  other  was,  that  the  judges,  by  being  often  associat-
ed with  the  executive,  might  be  induced  to  embark  too
far  in  the  political  views  of  that  magistrate ;  and  thus  a
dangerous  combination  might,  by  degress,  be  cemented
between  the  executive  and  judiciary  departments.  It
is  impossible  to  keep  the  judges  too  distmct  from  any
other  avocation,  than  that  of  expounding  the  laws  ;  and  it
is  peculiarly  dangerous  to  place  them  in  a  situation  to  be
either  corrupted,  or  influenced  by  the  executive.^  To
these  may  be  added  another,  which  may  almost  be  deem-
ed a  corollary  from  them,  that  it  would  have  a  tendency
to  take  from  the  judges  that  public  confidence  in  their
impartiality,  independence,  and  integrity,  which  seem
indispensable  to  the  due  administration  of  public  justice.
Whatever  has  a  tendency  to  create  suspicion,  or  pro-
voke jealousy,  is  mischievous  to  the  judicial  department

X  Journal  of  ConventioD,  195, 253.
9  The  Federalift,  No.  73.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIII.] president's  negative.  368

Judges  should  not  only  be  pure,  but  be  believed  to  be
so.  The  moral  influence  of  their  judgments  is  weak-
ened, if  not  destroyed,  whenever  there  is  a  general,
even  though  it  be  an  unfounded  distrust,  that  they  are
guided  by  other  motives  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties
than  the  law  and  the  testimony.  A  free  people  have
no  security  for  their  liberties,  when  an  appeal  to  the
judicial  department  becomes  either  illusory,  or  ques-
tionable.^

^  887.  The  other  point  of  inquiry  is,  as  to  the  extent
of  the  legislative  check  upon  the  negative  of  the  execu-
tive. It  has  been  seen,  that  it  was  originally  proposed,
that  a  concurrence  of  two  thirds  of  each  house  shoqld
be  required ;  that  this  was  subsequently  altered  to  three
fourths ;  and  was  finally  brought  back  again  to  the  origin-
al number.^  One  reason  against  the  three  fourths  seems
to  have  been,  that  it  would  aflford  little  security  for  any
effectual  exercise  of  the  power.  The  larger  the  num-
ber required  to  overrule  the  executive  negative,  the
more  easy  it  would  be  for  him  to  exert  a  silent  and
secret  influence  to  detach  the  requisite  number  in  order
to  carry  his  object  Another  reason  was,  that  even,
supposing  no  such  influence  to  be  exerted,  still,  in  a
great  variety  of  cases  of  a  political  nature,  and  especially
such,  as  touched  local  or  sectional  interests,  the  pride
or  the  power  of  states,  it  would  be  easy  to  defeat  the
most  salutary  measures,  if  a  combination  of  a  few  states

*  It  is  a  remarkable  circurostaDce  in  the  history  of  Mr.  Jefferson's
opinions,  that  he  was  decidedly  in  favour  of  associating  the  judiciary
with  the  executive  in  the  exercise  of  the  negative  on  laws,  or  of  invest-
ing it  separately  with  a  similar  power.*  At  a  subsequent  period  his
opinion  respecting  the  value  and  importance  seems  to  have  undergone
extraordinary  changes.

»  Journal  of  Uie  Convention,  p.  230,253, 254,  256.

*  9  JeflSsnon's  Corrmp.  S74 }  3  Pitk.  SB3.

VOL.  II.  45


Digitized  by


Google


854  CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  UI.

could  produce  such  a  result.  And  the  executive  hnn-
self  might,  from  his  local  attachments  or  sectional  feel-
ings, partake  of  this  common  bias.  In  addition  to  this,
the  departure  from  the  general  rule,  of  the  right  of  a
majority  to  govern,  ought  not  to  be  allowed  but  upon
the  most  urgent  occasions ;  and  an  expression  of  opinion
by  two  thirds  of  both  houses  in  favour  of  a  measure
certainly  afforded  all  the  just  securities,  which  any  wise,
or  prudent  people  ought  to  demand  in  the  ordinary
course  of  legislation ;  for  all  laws  thus  passed  might,  at
any  time,  be  repealed  at  the  mere  will  of  the  majority.
It  was  also  no  small  recommendation  of  the  lesser  num-
ber, that  it  offered  fewer  inducements  to  improper  com-
binations, either  of  the  great  states,  or  the  small  states,
to  accomplish  particular  objects.  There  could  be  but
one  of  two  rules  adopted  m  all  governments,  either,
that  the  majority  should  govern,  or  the  minority  should
govern.  The  president  might  be  chosen  by  a  bare
majority  of  electoral  votes,  and  this  majority  might  be
by  the  combination  of  a  few  large  states,  and  by  a  mi-
nority of  the  whole  people.  Under  such  circumstances,
if  a  vote  of  three  fourths  were  required  to  pass  a  law,
the  voice  of  two  thirds  of  the  states  and  two  thirds  of
the  people  might  be  permanently  disregarded  during  a
whole  administration.  The  case  put  may  seem  strong ;
btrt  it  is  not  stronger,  than  the  supposition,  that  two  thirds
of  both  houses  would  be  found  ready  to  betray  the  solid
interests  of  their  constituents  by  the  passage  of  injuri-
ous or  unconstitutional  laws.  The  provision,  therefore,
as  it  stands,  affords  all  reasQnable  security ;  and  pressed
farther,  it  would  endanger  the  very  objects,  for  which  it
is  introduced  into  the  constitution.

^  888.  But  the  president  might  effectually  defeat  the
wholesome  restraint,  thus  intended,  upon  his  qualified


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIII.] president's  hegative.  366

negative,  if  he  might  silently  decline  to  act  after  a  biH
was  presented  to  him  for  approval  or  rejection.  The
constitution,  therefore,  has  wisely  provided,  that "  if  any
**bill  shall  not  be  returned  by  the  president  within  ten
^  days  (Sundays  excepted)  after  it  shall  have  been  pre-
^  sented  to  him,  it  shall  be  a  law,  in  like  manner,  as  if
**  he  had  signed  it''  ^  But  if  this  clause  stood  alone,
congress  might,  in  like  manner,  defeat  the  due  exer*
cise  of  his  qualified  negative  by  a  termination  of  the
session,  which  would  render  it  impossible  fw  the  presi^
dent  to  return  the  bill  It  is  therefore  added,  ^unless
"  the  congress,  by  their  adjournment,  prevent  its  retun^
^  in  which  case  it  shall  not  be  a  law."

§  889.  The  remaming  clause  merely  applies  to
orderSy  resohitianSj  and  votes,  to  which  the  concurrence
of  both  houses  may  be  necessary ;  and  as  to  these,  with
a  single  exception,  the  same  rule  is  applied,  as  is  by  the
preceding  clause  appUed  to  bills.  If  this  provision  had
not  been  made,  congress,  by  adopting  the  form  of  an
order  or  resolution,  instead  of  a  bill,  might  have  efiec-
tually  defeated  the  president's  qualified  negative  in  all
the  most  important  portions  of  legislation.^

§  890.  It  has  been  remarked  by  De  Lohne,  that  m
most  of  the  ancient  fi*ee  states,  the  share  of  the  pec^
in  the  business  of  legislation  was  to  approve  or  reject
the  propositions,  which  were  made  to  them,  and  to  give
the  final  sanction  to  the  laws.  The  functions  of  those
persons,  or  m  general,  those  bodies,  who  were  entrusted
with  the  executive  power,  was  to  prepare  and  frame


1  The  orijpnal  proposition  in  the  convention  was,  that  the  bill  should
he  returned  by  the  president  in  seven  days.  It  was  subsequently  altered
to  ten  days  by  a  vote  of  nine  states  against  two.*

9  Journal  of  Convention,  p.  230, 255.


*  Joaroal  of  Convention,  9B0, 9&4,  SB.


Digitized  by


Google


356  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

the  laws,  and  then  to  propose  them  to  the  people.  In
a  word,  they  possessed  that  branch  of  the.  legislative
power,  which  may  be  called  the  initiativey  that  is,  the
prerogative  of  putting  that  power  into  action.  In  the
first  times  of  the  Roman  republic,  this  initiative  power
was  constantly  exercised  by  the  Roman  senate.  Laws
were  m?ide  p(^[mlijussu,  ex  authoritate  sencUi ;  and,  even
m  elections,  the  candidates  were  subject  to  the  previous
approbation  of  the  senate/  In  modern  times,  in  the
republics  of  Venice,  Berne,  and  Geneva,  the  same
power  is,  in  fact,  exercised  by  a  select  assembly,  before
it  can  be  acted  upon  by  the  larger  assembly  of  the  citi-
zens, or  their  representatives.*  He  has  added,  that  this
power  is  very  useful,  and  perhaps  even  necessary,  in
states  of  a  republican  form,  for  giving  a  permanence  to
the  laws,  as  well  as  for  preventing  political  disorders
and  struggles  for  power.  At  the  same  time,  he  is  com-
pelled to  admit,  that  this  expedient  is  attended  with
inconveniences  of  little  less  magnitude,  than  the  evils  it
is  meant  to  remedy.*  The  inconveniences  are  certainly
great,  but  there  are  evils  of  a  deeper  character  belong-
ing to  such  a  system.  The  natural,  nay,  necessary
tendency  of  it  is,  ultimately  to  concentrate  all  power  in
the  initiative  body,  and  to  leave  to  the  approving  body
but  the  shadow  of  authority.  It  is  in  fact,  though  not  •
in  form,  an  oligarchy.  And,  so  far  from  its  being  useful
in  a  republic,  it  is  the  surest  means  of  sapping  all  its
best  institutions,  and  overthrowing  the  public  liberties,
by  corruptmg  the  very  fountains  of  legislation.  De
Lolme  praises  it  as  a  peculiar  excellence  of  the  British
monarchy.  America,  no  less,  vindicates  it,  as  a  funda-
mental principle  in  all  her  republican  constitutions.

1  De  Lolme,  Bug.  Const  B.  2,  ch.  4,  p.  234,  and  note.  9  Id.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CBU  XII.]  PROCEEDINGS  OF  C0KORE8S.  367

^891.  We  have  thus  passed  through  all  the  clauses
of  the  constitution  respecting  the  structure  and  organi-
zation of  the  legislative  department,  and  the  rights,
powers,  and  privileges  of  the  component  branches  sev-
erally, as  well  as  in  the  aggregate.  The  natural  order
of  the  constitution  next  leads  us  to  the  consideration  of
the  POWERS,  which  are  vested,  by  the  constitution,  in
the  legislative  department  Before,  however,  entering
upon  this  large  and  important  inquiry,  it  may  be  useful
to  state,  in  a  summary  manner,  the  ordinary  course  of
proceedings  at  each  new  session  of  congress,  and  the
mode,  in  which  laws  are  usually  passed,  according  to
the  settled  usages  in  congress,  under  the  rules  and
orders  of  the  two  houses.  In  substance,  it  does  not
differ  from  the  manner  of  conducting  the  like  business
in  the  British  parliament.^

^  892.  On  the  day  appomted  for  the  assembling  of  a
new  congress,  the  members  of  each  house  meet  in  their
separate  apartments.  The  house  of  representatives
then  proceed  to  the  choice  of  a  speaker  and  clerk,  and
any  one  member  is  authorized  then  to  administer  the
oath  of  office  to  the  speaker,  who  then  administers  the
like  oath  to  the  other  members,  and  to  the  clerk.  The
like  oath  is  administered  by  any  member  of  the  senate,
to  the  president  of  the  senate,  who  then  administers  a
like  oath  to  all  the  members,  and  the  secretary  of  the
senate ;  and  this  proceeding  is  had,  when,  and  as  often
as  a  new  president  of  the  senate,  or  member,  or  secre-
tary, is  chosen.^  As  soon  as  these  preliminaries  are
gone  through,  and  a  quorum  of  each  house  is  present,
notice  is  given  thereof  to  the  president,  who  signifies

1  1  Tuck.  Black.  Coram.  App.' 229, note;  1  Black. Coram.  181 ;  Jeffer-
son's Manual,  j)<w«m ;  2  Wilson's  Law  Lect  171  to  i76,
a  Actofl789,ch.  1.


Digitized  by


Google


358 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

his  intention  to  address  them.  This  was  formeriy  done
by  way  of  speech ;  but  is  now  done  by  a  written
message,  transmitted  to  each  house,  containing  a  gen-
eral exposition  of  the  affairs  of  the  nation,  and  a  recom-
mendation of  such  measures,  as  the  president  may  deem
fit  for  the  consideration  of  congress.  When  the  habit
was  for  the  president  to  make  a  speech,  it  was  in  the
presence  of  both  houses,  and  a  written  answer  was
prepared  by  each  house,  which,  when  accepted,  waa
presented  by  a  committee.  At  present,  no  answer
whatsoever  is  given  to  the  contents  of  the  message.
And  this  change  of  proceeding  has  been  thought,  by
many  statesmen,  to  be  a  change  for  the  worse,  since  the
answer  of  each  house  enabled  each  party  in  the  legis-
lature to  express  its  own  views,  as  to  the  matters  in  the
speech,  and  to  propose,  by  way  of  amendment  to  the
answer,  whatever  was  deemed  more  correct  and  more
expressive  of  public  sentiment,  than  was  contained  in
either.  The  consequence  was,  that  the  whole  policy
and  conduct  of  the  administration  came  undef  solemn
review ;  and  it  was  animadverted  on,  or  defended,  with
equal  zeal  and  independence,  according  to  the  different
views  of  the  speakers  in  the  debate ;  and  the  final  vote
showed  the  exact  state  of  public  opinion  on  all  leading
measures.  By  the  present  practice  of  messages,  this
facile  and  concentrated  opportunity  of  attack  or  defence
is  completely  taken  away ;  and  the  attack  or  defence^  of
the  administration  is  perpetually  renewed  at  distant
intervals,  as  an  incidental  topic  in  all  other  discussions^
to  which  it  often  bears  very  slight,  and  perhaps  no  rela-
tion. The  result  is,  that  a  great  deal  of  time  is  lost  in
collateral  debates,  and  that  the  administration  is  driven
to  defend  itself  in  detaU,  on  every  leading  motion,  or
measure  of  the  session.^

1  Under  President  Washington  and  President  John  Adams,  the  prac-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  XIII.] PROCE£I>Iir0S  OF  COITGRESS.  369

^893.  A  bill  may  be  introduced  by  motion  of  a
member,  and  leave  of  the  house ;  or  it  may  be  intro-
duced by  order  of  the  house,  on  the  report  of  a  corb-
mittee ;  or  it  may  be  reported  by  a  committee.  In
cases  of  a  general  nature,  one  day's  notice  is  given  of  a
motion  to  bring  in  a  bilL  The  bill,  however  introduc-
ed, is  drawn  out  on  paper,  with  a  multitude  of  blanks
or  void  spaces,  where  any  thing  occurs,  that  is  dubious^
or  necessary  to  be  settled  by  the  house ;  such,  espe-
cially, as  dates  of  times,  sums  of  money,  amount  of  pen-
alties, and  limitations  of  numbers.  It  is  then  read  a
j&rst  time  for  information ;  and  if  any  opposition  is  made
to  it,  the  question  is  then  put,  whether  it  shall  be  re-
jected. If  no  opposition  is  made,  or  if  the  quesdon  to
reject  is  negatived,  the  bill  goes  to  a  second  reading
without  a  question,  and  it  is  accordingly  read  a  second
time  at  some  convenient  distance  of  time.  Every  bill
must  receive  three  readings  in  the  house  previous  to  its
passage;  and  these  readings  are  on  different  days,
unless  upon  a  special  order  of  the  house  to  the  con-
trary. Upon  the  second  reading  of  a  bill,  the  speaker
states  it,  as  ready  for  commitment,  or  engrossment.  If
committed,  it  is  committed  either  to  a  select,  or  a  stand*
ing  committee,  or  to  a  committee  of  the  whole  house.
If  to  the  latter,  the  house  determme  on  what  day.  If
the  bill  is  ordered  to  be  engrossed,  (that  is,  copied  out
in  a  fair,  large,  round  hand,)  the  house  then  appoint  the
day,  when  it  shall  be  read  the  tlurd  time.  Most  of  the
important  bills  are  committed  to  a  committee  of  the
whole  house ;  and  every  motion  or  proposition  for  a  tax
(ff  charge  upon  the  people,  and  for  a  variation  in  the  sum

tioe  wad,  to  deliver  speecheB.  President  Jefferson  discontinued  this
coarse,  and  substituted  messages ;  and  this  practice  has  been  since  in-
variably followed.


Digitized  by


Google


360 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES.  [bOOK  HI.

or  quantum  of  a  tax  or  duty,  and  for  an  appropriation  of
money,  is  required  first  to  be  discussed  in  a  committee
of  the  whole  house.  The  great  object  of  referring  any
matter  to  a  committee  of  the  whole  house  is,  to  allow
a  greater  freedom  of  discussion,  and  more  times  of
speaking,  than  is  generally  allowed  by  the  rules  of  the
house.  It  seems,  too,  that  the  yeas  and  nays  are  not
required  to  be  taken  upon  votes  in  committee,  as  they
may  be  in  votes  in  the  house.

^  894.  On  going  into  a  committee  of  the  whole  house,
the  speaker  leaves  the  chair,  and  a  chairman  is  ap-
pointed by  the  speaker  to  preside  in  committee.  Amend-
ments and  other  proceedings  are  had  in  committee
much  in  the  same  way,  as  occur  in  the  regular  course
of  the  business  of  the  house.  Select  and  standing  com-
mittees regulate  their  own  times  and  modes  of  proceed-
ing according  to  their  own  discretion  and  pleasure,
unless  otherwise  ordered  by  the  house.  They  make
their  reports  in  the  same  way  from  time  to  time  to  the
house,  and  secure  the  directions  of  the  latter.  When
a  bill  is  committed  to  a  committee,  it  is  read  in  sections ;
paragraph  after  {)aragraph  is  debated ;  blanks  are  filled
up ;  and  alterations  and  amendments,  both  in  form  and
substance,  are  proposed,  and  often  made.

^  895.  After  the  committee  have  gone  through  with
the  whole  bill,  they  report  it,  with  all  the  alterations
and  amendments  made  m  it,  to  the  house.  It  is  then,
or  at  some  suitable  time  afterwards,  considered  by  the
latter,  and  the  question  separately  put  upon  every  alter-
ation, amendment,  and  clause.  After  commitment  and
report  to  the  house,  and  at  any  time  before  its  passage,
any  bill  may  be  recommitted  at  the  pleasure  of  the
house.  When  a  bill,  either  upon  a  report  of  a  commit-
tee, or  after  full  discussion  and  amendment  in  the  house.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIII.]  MODE  OF  PASSIITQ  LAWS.  361

Stands  for  the  next  stage  of  its  progress,  the  question
dien  is,  whether  it  shall  be  engrossed  and  read  a  third
time.  And  this  is  the  proper  time  commonly  chosen
by  those,  who  are  fundamentally  opposed  to  it,  to  make
their  attack  upon  it,  it  now  being  as  perfect,  as  its  friends
can  shape  it,  and  as  little  exceptionable,  as  its  enemies
have « been  able  to  make  it  Attempts  are,  indeed^
sometimes  made  at  previous  stages  to  defeat  it,  but
they  are  usually  disjointed  eflTorts ;  because  many  per-
sons, who  do  not  expect  to  be  in  favour  of  the  bill  ulti-
mately, are  willing  to  let  it  go  on  to  its  most  perfect
state,  to  take  tune  to  examine  it  for  themselves,  and  to
hear  what  can  be  said  in  its  favour.

§  896.  The  two  last  stages  of  the  bill,  viz.  on  the
questions,  whether  it  shall  have  a  third  reading,  and
whether  it  shall  pass,  are  the  strong  pomts  of  resistance,
and  defence.  The  first  is  usually  the  most  interesting
contest,  because  the  subject  is  more  new  and  engaging,
and  the  trial  of  strength  has  not  been  made ;  so  that
the  struggle  for  victory  is  yet  wholly  doubtful,  and  the
ardour  of  debate  is  proportionally  warm  and  earnest
If  the  bill  is  ordered  to  be  engrossed  for  a  third  readmg,
it  is,  when  engrossed,  put  upon  its  final  passage.
Amendments  are  sometimes  made  to  it  at  this  stage,
though  reluctantly ;  and  any  new  clause,  thus  added,  is
called  a  rider.  If  the  vote  is,  that  the  bill  shall  pass,
the  tide  is  then  setded,  though  a  tide  is  always  reported
with  the  bill ;  and  that  being  agreed  to,  the  day  of  its
passage  is  noted  at  the  foot  of  it  by  the  clerk.  It  is
then  signed  by  the  speaker,  and  transmitted  to  the
other  house  for  concurrence  therein.

§  897.  The  bill,  when  thus  transmitted  to  the  other
house,  goes  through  similar  forms.  It  is  either  reject-
ed, committed,  or  concurred  in,  with,  or  without  amend-

VOL.  II.  46


Digitized  by


Google


363 CONSTITUTION  OF  THIS  U.  STATES, [BOOK  UU

ments. If  a  bill  is  amended  by  the  house,  to  which  it
it  transmitted,  it  is  then  returned  to  the  other  house,  in
which  it  originated,  for  their  assent  to  the  amendment
If  the  amendment  is  agreed  to,  the  fact  is  made  known
to  the  other  house. If  not  agreed  to,  the  disagreement
is  in  like  manner  notified. And  the  like  course  is
adc^ted,  where  the  amendment  is  agreed  to  with  an
amendment In  either  of,  these  cases,  the  house  pro-
posing the  amendment  may  recede  from  it ;  or  may
adc^t  it  with  the  amendment  proposed  by  the  other
house. If  neither  is  done,  the  house  then  vote  to  in-
sist on  the  amendment,  or  to  adhere  to  it. A  vote  to
insist  keeps  the  question  still  open. But  a  vote  to
adhere  requires  the  other  house  either  to  insist^  or  to
recede ;  for  if,  on  their  part,  there  is  a  vote  to  adhere^
the  bill  usually  falls  without  farther  effort But,  upon
a  disagreement  between  the  two  houses,  a  conference
by  a  committee  of  each  is  usuaUy  asked ;  and  in  this
manner  the  matters  in  controversy  are  generally  ad-
justed by  adoptmg  the  course  recommended  by  the
ccMnmittees,  or  one  of  them. When  a  bill  has  passed
both  houses,  the  house  last  acting  on  it  makes  knovm
its  passage  to  the  other,  and  it  is  detivered  to  the  joint
committee  of  enrolment,  who  see,  that  it  is  truly  en-
rolled in  parchment,  and  being  signed  by  the  speaks
of  the  house,  and  the  president  of  the  senate,  it  is  then
senc  to  the  president  for  his  signature. If  he  approves
it,  he  signs  it;  and  it  is  then  deposited  among  the  rolls  in
the  office  of  the  department  of  state. If  he  disaf^roves
of  it,  he  returns  it  to  the  house,  in  which  it  originated,
with  his  objections. Here  they  are  entered  at  large  on
the  journal,  and  afterwards  the  house  proceed  to  a  con-
sideration of  them.^

i  ThisBiiiiniiary  is  abstracted  from  1  niack.Coinm.  ISl,  183 ;  1  Tucker's
Black.  ComnL  App.299,330,  note ;  1  Kent  Comm.  Lect  11,  p.  383,  834 ',


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIII.]  MODE  or  PASSIJf  O  LAW9.  S63

^  898.  This  review  of  the  forms  and  modes  of  pro-
ceeding in  the  passbg  of  laws  cannot  M  to  impress
upon  every  mind  the  cautious  steps,  by  which  legisla-
tion is  guarded,  and  the  solicitude  to  conduct  busmess
without  precipitancy,  rashness,  or  irregularity.  Fre-
quent opportunities  are  aflForded  to  each  house  to  re-
view their  own  proceedings ;  to  amend  their  own  errors ;
to  correct  their  own  inadvertencies ;  to  recover  fix)m
the  results  of  any  passionate  excitement ;  and  to  re-
consider the  votes,  to  which  persuasive  eloquence,  or
party  spirit  has  occasionally  misled  their  judgments.
Under  such  circumstances,  if  legislation  be  unwise,  or
loose,  or  inaccurate,  it  belongs  to  the  infirmity  of  hu-
man nature  in  general,  or  to  that  personal  carelessness
and  indifference,  which  is  sometimes  the  foible  of
genius,  as  well  as  the  accompaniment  of  ignorance  and
prejudice.

^  899.  The  structure  and  organization  of  the  several
branches,  composing  the  legislature,  have  also  (unless
my  judgment  has  misled  me)  been  shown  by  the  past
review  to  be  admirably  adapted  to  preserve  a  whole-
some and  upright  exercise  of  their  powers.  All  the
checks,  which  human  ingenuity  has  been  able  to  devise,
(at  least,  all  which,  with  reference  to  our  habits,  institu-
tions, and  local  interests,  seemed  practicable,  or  desh*a-
ble,)  to  give  perfect  operation  to  the  Machinery  of  gov-
ernment ;  to  adjust  all  its  movements ;  to  prevent  its
eccentricities ;  and  to  balance  its  forces ;  —  all  these
have  been  introduced,  with  singular  skill,  ingenuity,  and
wisdom,  into  the  structure  of  the  constitution.

^  900.  Yet,  after  all,  the  fabric  may  fall ;  for  the

dWilsoD'a  Law  Lect  171-,  17^,  173;  Rawle  on  CoostitOtton,  ch.  6;
p.  60,  &c. ;  and  especially  from  the  iltles  of  both  booses,  and  Jefferson's
Manual,  (editioii  at  Washington,  1828.)


Digitized  by


Google


J64 coNSTiTUTioir  or  the  u.  states,  [book  lu.

work  of  man  is  perishable,  and  must  for  ever  have  in-
herent elements  of  decay.  Nay,  it  must  perish,  if
there  be  not  that  vital  spirit  in  the  people,  which  alone
can  nourish,  sustain,  and  direct  aU  its  movements.  It
is  in  vain,  that  statesmen  shall  form  plans  of  govern-
ment, in  which  the  beauty  and  harmony  of  a  republic
shall  be  embodied  m  visible  order,  shall  be  built  up  on
solid  substructions,  and  adorned  by  every  useful  orna-
ment, if  the  inhabitants  suffer  the  silent  power  of  time
to  dilapidate  its  walls,  or  crumble  its  massy  supporters
into  dust ;  if  the  assaults  from  without  are  never  resist-
ed, and  the  rottenness  and  mming  from  within  are  never
guarded  against  Who  can  preserve  the  rights  and
liberties  of  the  people,  when  they  shall  be  abandoned
by  themselves  1  Who  shall  keep  watch  in  the  temple,
when  the  watchmen  sleep  at  their  posts?  Who  shall
call  upon  the  people  to  redeem  their  possessions,  and
revive  the  republic,  when  their  own  hands  have  delibe-
rately and  comiptiy  surrendered  them  to  the  oppressor,
and  have  built  the  prisons,  or  dug  the  graves  of  their
own  friends  1  Aristotle,  in  ancient  times,  upon  a  large
survey  of  the  republics  of  former  days,  and  of  the  facile
manner,  in  which  they  had  been  made  the  instruments
of  their  own  destruction,  felt' himself  compelled  to  the
melancholy  reflection,  which  has  been  painfully  repeated
by  one  of  the  greatest  statesmen  of  modem  times,  that
a  democracy  has  many  striking  points  of  resemblance
with  a  tyranny.  "The  ethical  character,**  says  he,  "is
the  same;  both  exercise  despotism  over  the  better
class  of  citizens ;  and  the  decrees  are  in  the  one,  what
ordinances  and  arrets  are  in  the  other.  The  dema-
goguCy  too,  and  the  court  favourite  are  not  unfreguenihf
the  same  identical  men,  and  ahcays  bear  a  close  analogy.
And  these  have  the  principal  power,  each  in  tKeir  re-


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XIII.]  MODS  or  PAS8IKO  LAWS.  365

spective  governments,  favourites  with  the  absolute  mon-
arch, and  demagogues  with  a  people,  such  as  I  have
described.^  *

§  901.  This  dark  picture,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  will
never  be  applicable  to  the  republic  of  America.  And
yet  it  affords  a  warning,  which,  like  all  the  lessons  of
past  experience,  we  are  not  permitted  to  disregard.
America,  free,  happy,  and  enlightened,  as  she  is,  must
rest  the  preservation  of  her  rights  and  liberties  upon
the  virtue,  independence,  justice,  and  sagacity  of  the
people.  If  either  fail,  the  republic  is  gone.  Its  shad-
ow may  remam  with  all  the  pomp,  and  circumstance,
and  trickery  of  government,  but  its  vital  power  will
have  departed.  In  America,  the  demagogue  may  arise,
as  well  as  elsewhere.  He  is  the  natural,  though  spuri-
ous growth  of  republics ;  and  like  the  courtier  he  may,
by  his  blandishments,  delude  the  ears,  and  blind  Che
eyes  of  the  people  to  their  own  destruction.  If  ever
the  day  shall  arrive,  in  which  the  best  talents  and  the
best  virtues  shall  be  driven  from  office  by  intrigue  or
corruption,  by  the  ostracism  of  the  press,  or  the  still
more  unrelenting  persecution  of  party,  le^slation  will
cease  to  be  nationsJ.  It  will  be  wise  by  accident,  and
bad  by  system.

1  Burke  od  the  French  Revolution,  note ;  Aristotle  Polit.  B.  4,  ch.  4.
See  Montesquieu^s  Spirit  of  Laws,  B.  8,  jm«nm.


Digitized  by


Google


"366 coir8TiTxrTK>ir  or  thb  u.  states,  [book  on
CHAPTER  XIV.

POWERS  OF  COKORESS.

^  902L  We  have  now  arrived,  in  the  course  of  our
inquiries,  at  the  eighth  section  of  the  first  article  of  the
constitution,  which  contains  an  enumeration  of  the  prin-
cipal powers  of  legislation  confided  to  congress.  A
consideration  of  this  most  important  subject  will  detain
our  attention  for  a  considerable  time ;  as  well,  because
of  the  variety  of  topics,  which  it  embraces,  as  (tf  the
controversies,  and  discussions,  to  which  it  has  given  rise.
It  has  been,  in  the  past  time,  it  is  in  the  present  time,
and  it  will  probably  in  all  future^  time,  continue  to  be
the  debateable  ground  of  the  constitution,  signalized,  at
once,  by  the  victories,  and  die  defeats  of  the  same  par-
ties. Here,  die  advocates  of  state  rights,  and  the
friends  of  the  Union  vrill  meet  in  hostile  array.  And
here,  those,  who  have  lost  power,  will  maintain  long
and  arduous  struggles  to  regain  the  public  confidence^
and  those,  who  have  secured  power,  will  dispute  every
position,  which  may  be  assumed  £»*  attack,  either  of
their  policy,  or  their  principles.  Nor  ought  it  at  all
to  surprise  us,  if  that,  which  has  been  true  in  the  political
history  of  other  nations,  shall  be  true  in  regard  to  our
own ;  that  the  opposing  parties  shall  occasionally  be
found  to  mamtain  the  same  system,  when  in  power,
which  they  have  obstinately  resisted,  when  out  of  pow-
er. Without  supposing  any  insincerity  or  departure
fit>m  principle  in  such  cases,  it  will  be  easily  imagined,
that  a  very  different  course  of  reasoning  will  force  itself
on  the  minds  of  those,  who  are  responsible  for  the
measures  of  government,  from  that,  which  the  ardour


Digitized  by


Google


I
CH.  XIV.]  POWSES  OF  CONGRESS.  Sd7

of  opposition,  and  the  jealousy  of  rivals,  might  well  foster
in  those,  who  may  desire  to  defeat,  what  they  have  no
interest  to  approve.

^  903.  The  first  clause  of  the  eighth  section  is  in  the
following  words :  *^  The  congress  shall  have  power  to
^lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  to
^pay  the  debts  and  provide  for  the  common  defence,
^  and  general  welfare  of  the  United  States ;  but  aH
^^  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  shall  be  uniform  through-
^  out  the  United  States.'*

^  904.  Before  proceeding  to  consider  the  nature  and
extent  of  the  power  conferred  by  this  clause,  and  the
reasons,  on  which  it  is  founded,  it  seems  necessary  to
settle  the  grammatical  construction  of  the  clause,  and  to
ascertain  its  true  reading.  Do  the  words,  ^to  lay  and
collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,''  constitute  a
distinct,  substantial  power;  and  the  words,  "to  pay  debts
"  and  provide  for  the  common  defence,  and  general  wel-
"f  are  of  the  United  States,"  constitute  another  distinct
and  substantial  power  1  Or  are  the  latter  words  connect
ed  with  the  former,  so  as  to  constitute  a  quaUfication  upon
them  1  This  has  been  a  topic  of  political  controversy ;
and  has  furnished  abundant  materials  for  popular
declamation  and  alarm.  If  the  former  be  the  true  in*-
terpretation,  then  it  is  obvious,  that  under  colour  of
the  generality  of  the  words  to  "  provide  for  the  com-
mon defence  and  general  welfare,"  the  government  of
the  United  States  is,  in  reality,  a  government  of  gener-
al and  unlimited  powers,  notwithstanding  the  subse-
quent enumeradon  of  specific  powers ;  if  the  latter  be
the  true  construction,  then  the  power  of  taxation  only
b  given  by  the  clause,  and  it  is  limited  to'  objects  of  a
national  character,  "  for  the  common  defence  and  the
"  general  welfare."


Digitized  by


Google


368 COKSTITUTIOK  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  in.

§  905.  The  former  opinion  has  been  maintained  by
some  minds  of  great  ingenuity,  and  liberality  of  views.^
The  latter  has  been  the  generally  received  sense  of  the
nation,  and  seems  supported  by  reasoning  at  once  solid
and  impregnable.  The  reading,  therefore,  which  will
be  maintained  in  these  commentaries,  is  that,  which
makes  the  latter  words  a  qualification  of  the  former;
and  this  will  be  best  illustrated  by  supplying  the  words,
which  are  necessarily  to  be  understood  in  this  inter-
pretation. They  will  then  stand  thus :  "  The  congress
"  shall  have  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  im-
^  posts,  and  excises,  in  order  to  pay  the  debts,  and  to
**  provide  for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare
**  of  the  United  States ; "  that  is,  for  the  purpose  of  pay-
ing the  public  debts,  and  providing  for  the  common
defence  and  general  welfare  of  the  United  States. In


-  1  See  2  Elliot's  Debates,  927, 328.  See  Dane's  App.  §  41,  p.  48 ;  see
else  1  Elliot's  Debates,  93 ;  Id.  293 ;  Id.  300 ;  2  Wilson's  Uw  Lect,  178,
180,  181 ;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  224 ;  2  U.  S.  Law  Journal,  April,  1826,
p.  251,  264,  270  to  282.  This  last  work  contains,  in  p.  770  d  seq.  9l
▼ery  elaborate  exposition  of  the  doctrine. — Mr.  Jefferson  has,  upon  more
than  one  occasion,  insisted,  that  this  was  the  federal  doctrine,  that  is,  the
doctrine  maintained  by  the  federalists,  as  a  party ;  and  that  the  other
doctrine  was  that  of  the  republicans,  as  a  party.*  The  assertion  is  incor-
rect ;for  the  latter  opinion  was  constantly  maintained  by  some  of  the  most
ctrenuous  federalists  at  the  time  of  the  adoption  of  tlie  constitution,  and
has  since  been  maintained  by  many  of  them.f  It  is  remarkable,  that  Mr.
George  Mason,  one  of  the  most  decided  opponents  of  the  constitution  in
the  Virginia  convention,  held  the  opinion,  that  the  clause,  to  provide  for
the  common  defence  and  general  welfare,  was  a  substantive  power.
He  added,  **  That  congress  should  have  power  to  provide  for  the  gener-
al welfare  of  the  Union,  I  grant  But  I  wish  a  clause  in  the  constitu-
tion in  respect  to  all  powers,  which  are  not  granted,  that  they  are  retain-
ed by  the  states ;  otherwise  the  power  of  providing  for  the  general
welfare  may  be  perverted  to  its  destruction."  t

•  4  ieffenon  Corratp.  306.

t  fiBUiot't  Oebatei,  170, 183, 106;  9filliot*i DebatM, 908;  9 Amer.  Musewn, 494 ;  9  Amer.
MuMum.  338.
t  9  ElUot'i  Debates,  397, 398.


Digitized  by


Google


CH. XIV.] POWERS  or  CONGRESS — TAXES. , S69

this  sense,  congress  has  not  an  unlhnited  power  of  taxa-
tion ;  but  it  is  limited  to  specific  objects, —  the  payment
of  the  public  4ebts,  and  providing  for  the  common  de-
fence and  general  welfare,  A  tax,  therefore,  laid  by
congress  for  neither  of  these  objects,  would  be  uncon-
stitutional, as  an  excess  of  its  legislative  authority*  In
what  manner  this  is  to  be  ascertained,  or  decided,  will
be  considered  hereafter.  At  present,  the  interpretation
of  the  words  only  is  before  us ;  and  the  reasoning,  by
which  that  already  suggested  has  been  vindicated,  will
now  be  reviewed.

§  906.  The  constitution  was,  from  its  very  origin,  -
contemplated  to  be  the  frame  of  a  national  government,
of  special  and  enumerated  powers,  and  not  of  general
and  unlimited  powers.  This  is  apparent,  as  will  be
presently  seen,  from  the  history  of  the  proceedings  oi
the  convention,  which  framed  it ;  and  it  has  formed  the
admitted  basis  of  all  legislative  and  judicial  reasoning
upon  it,  ever  since  it  was  put  into  operation,  by  all,  who
have  been  its  open  friends  and  advocates,  as  well  as
by  all,  who  have  been  its  enemies  and  opponents.  If
the  clause,  "  to  pay  the  debts  and  provide  for  the  com-
^mon  defence  and  general  welfare  of  the  United
"  States,*'  is  construed  to  be  an  mdependent  and.  sub-
stantive grant  of  power,  it  not  only  renders  wholly  unim-
portant and  unnecessary  the  subsequent  enumeration
of  specific  powers ;  but  it  plainly  extends  far  beyond
them,  and  creates  a  general  authority  in  congress  to
pass  all  laws,  which  they  may  deem  for  the  common
defence  or  general  welfare.^  Under  such  circum-
stances, the  constitution  would  practically  create  an
unlimited  national  government. The  enumerated  pow-

1  President  Monroe's  Message,  4th  May,  1822,  p.  33,  Sa

vot..  II.  47

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


370 COXSTITUTIOX  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

ers  would  tend  to  embarrassment  and  confusion ;  since
they  would  only  give  rise  to  doubts,  as  to  the  true  ex-
tent of  the  general  power,  or  of  the  enumerated  pow-
ers.

§  907.  One  of  the  most  common  maxims  of  interpre-
tation is,  (as  has  been  already  stated,)  that,  as  an
exception  strengthens  the  force  of  a  law  in  cases  not
excepted,  so  enumeration  weakens  it  in  cases  not  enu-
merated. But,  how  could  it  be  applied  with  success
to  the  interpretation  of  the  constitution  of  the  United
States,  if  the  enumerated  powers  were  neither  excep-
tions from,  n6r  additions  to,  the  geneial  power  to  pro-
vide for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare  1  To
give  the  enumeration  of  the  specific  powers  any  sensi-
ble place  or  operation  in  the  constitution,  it  is  indispen-
sable to  construe  them,  as  not  wholly  and  necessarily
embraced  in  the  general  power.  The  common  princi-
ples of  interpretation  would  seem  to  instruct  us,  that
the  different  parts  of  the  same  instrument  ought  to  be
so  expounded,  as  to  give  meaning  to  every  part,  which
will  bear  it.  Shall  one  part  of  the  same  sentence  be
excluded  altogether  from  a  share  in  the  meaning ;  and
shall  the  more  doubtful  and  indefinite  terms  be  retained
m  their  full  extent,  and  the  clear  and  precise  expres-
sions be  denied  any  signification  1  For  what  purpose
could  the  enumeration  of  particular  powers  be  inserted,
if  these  and  all  others  were  meant  to  be  included  in  the
preceding  general  power  ?  Nothing  is  more  natural  or
common,  than  first  to  use  a  general  phrase,  and  then
to  qualify  it  by  a  recital  of  particulars.  But  the  idea  of
an  enumeration  of  particulars,  which  neither  explain,  nor
qualify  the  general  meaning,  and  can  have  no  other
effect,  than  to  confound  and  mislead,  is  an  absurdity,
which  no  one  ought  to  charge  on  the  enlightened  au-


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV,]  • POWERS  OF  CONGRESS TAXES.  S71

thors  of  the  constitution.*  It  would  be  to  charge  them
either  with  premeditated  folly,  or  premeditated  fraud.

§  908,  On  the  other  hand,  construing  this  clause  in
connexion  with,  and  as  a  part  of  the  preceding  clause,
giving  the  power  to  lay  taxes,  it  becomes  sensible  and
operative.  It  becomes  a  qualification  of  that  clause,
and  limits  the  taxing  power  to  objects  for  the  conmion
defence  or  general  welfare.  It  then  contains  no  grant
of  any  power  whatsoever ;  but  it  is  a  mere  expression
of  the  ends  and  purposes  to  be  eflfected  by  the  preced-
ing power  of  taxation.'

§  909.  An  attempt  has  been  sometimes  made  to
treat  this  clause,  as  distinct  and  independent,  and  yet
as  having  no  real  significancy  per  se,  but  (if  it  may  be
so  said)  as  a  mere  prelude  to  the  succeeding  enume-
rated powers.  It  is  not  improbable,  that  this  mode  of
explanation  has  been  suggested  by  the  fact,  that  in  the
revised  draft  of  the  constitution  in  the  convention  the
clause  was  separated  from  the  preceding  exacdy  in  the
same  manner,  as  every  succeeding  clause  was,  viz.  by
a  semicolon,  and  a  break  in  the  paragraph ;  and  that  it
now  stands,  in  some  copies,  and  it  is  said,  that  it  stands
in  the  official  copy,  with  a  semicolon  interposed.'  But
this  circumstance  will  be  found  of  very  little  weight,
when  the  origin  of  the  clause,  and  its  progress  to  its

1  The  Federalist,  No.  41.

3  See  Debates  on  the  Judiciary  iu  1802,  p.  332;  Dane's  App.  $  41 ;
President  Monroe's  Message  on  Internal  Improvements,  4th  May,  1822,
p.  32,33;  1  Tuck.  Black.  App.  231.

3  Journ.  of  Convention,  p.  356 ;  Id.  494  ;  2  United  States  Law  Journal,
p.  264,  April,  1826,  New- York.  —  In  the  Federalist,  No.  41,  the  circum-
stance, that  it  is  separated  from  the' succeeding  clauses  by  a  semicolon  is
noticed.  The  printed  Journal  of  the  Convention  gives  the  revised  draft
from  Mr.  Brearly's  copy,  as  above  stated.  See  Journal  of  Convention,
p.  351,356.  See  President  Monroe's  Message  on  Internal  Improve-
menti,  4Ui  May,  1822,  p.  16, 32,  &.c.


Digiti


zedb^Google


372 C0K8TITUTI0N  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  III.

present  state  are  traced  in  the  proceedings  of  the  con-
vention. It  will  then  appear,  that  it  was  first  intro-
duced as  an  appendage  to  the  power  to  lay  taxes.*  But
there  is  a  fundamental  objection  to  the  interpretation
thus  attempted  to  be  maintained,  which  is,  that  it  robs
the  clause  of  all  efficacy  and  meaning.  No  person  has
a  right  to  assume,  that  any  part  of  the  constitution  is
useless,  or  is  without  a  meaning ;  and  o  fortiori  no  per-
son h^  a  right  to  rob  any  part  of  a  meaning,  natural
and  appropriate  to  the  language  in  the  connexion,  in
which  it  stands.*  Now,  the  words  have  such  a  natural
and  appropriate  meaning,  as  a  qualification  of  the  pre-
ceding clause  to  lay  taxes.  Why,  then,  should  such  a
meaning  be  rejected?

^910.  It  is  no  sufficient  answer  to  say,  that  the
clause  ought  to  be  regarded,  merely  as  containing
•*  general  terms,  explained  and  limited,  by  the  subjoin-
ed specifications,  and  therefore  requiring  no  critical  at-
tention, or  studied  precaution  ;"^  because  it  is  assuming
the  very  point  in  controversy,  to  assert,  that  the  clause
is  connected  with  any  subsequent  specifications.  It  is
not  said,  to  **  provide  for  the  common  defence,  and  ge-
neral welfare,  in  manner  follomngj  mz.^^  which  would
be  the  natural  expression,  to  indicate  such  an  intention.
But  it  stands  entirely  disconnected  fi'om  every  subse-
quent clause,  both  in  sense  and  punctuation ;  and  is  no
more  a  part  of  them,  than  they  are  of  the  power  to
lay  taxes.  Besides;  what  suitable  application,  in
such  a  sense,  would  there  be  of  the  last  clause  in  the
enimieration,  viz.,  the  clause  "  to  make  all  laws,  neces-
sary and  proper  for  carrying  into  execution  the  fore-

1  Journ.  of  Convention,  p.  323,  324,326.

8  President  Monroe's  Message,  4  May,  ISS'J,  p.  32,  33.

3  Pretident  Madison's  Letter  to  Mr.  Stevenson,  27  Nov.  1830.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS OF CONGRESS — TAXES.  373

going  powers,  &c.  ?  "  Surely,  this  clause  is  as  applica-
ble to  the  power  to  lay  taxes,  as  to  any  other ;  and  no
one  would  dream  of  its  being  a  mere  specification,  un-
der the  power  to  provide  for  the  common  defence,  and
general  welfare.

^911.  It  h^  been  said  in  support  of  this  construction,
that  in  the  articles  of  confederation  (art  8)  it  is  provided,
that  "  all  charges  of  war,  and  all  other  expenses,  that
"  shall  be  incurred  for  the  common  defence,  or  general
"  welfare,  and  allowed  by  the  United  States  in  con-
egress  assembled,  shall  be  defrayed  out  of  a  commqu
"  treasury,  &c ;"  and  that  "  the  similarity  in  the  use  of
**  these  same  phrases  in  these  two  great  federal  char-
"  ters  may  well  be  considered,  as  rendering  their  mean-
"ing  less  liable  to  misconstruction;  because  it  will
"  scarcely  be  said,  that  in  the  former  they  were  ever
"  understood  to  be  either  a  general  grant  or  power,  or
"  to  authorize  the  requisition  or  application  of  money
"by  the  old  congress  to  the  common  defence  and  [or]*
"general  welfare,  except  in  the  cases  afterwards  enu-
"  merated,  which  explained  and  limited  their  meaning ;
"  and  if  such  was  the  limited  meaning  attached  to  these
"phrases  in  the  very  instrument  revised  and  remodelled
"  by  the  present  constitution,  it  can  never  be  supposed,
"  that  when  copied  into  this  constitution,  a  different
"meaning  ought  to  be  attached  to  them."*  Without
stopping  to  consider,  whether  the  constitution  can
in  any  just  and  critical  sense  be  deemed  a  revision
and  remodelling  of  the  confederation,*  if  the  argu-
ment here stated  be  of  any  value,  it  plainly  estab-

1  «« Or"  is  the  word  in  the  article.

3  Virginia  Report  and  Resolutions  of  7  January,  1800. See  also  the
Federalist,  No.  41.
3  See  the  Federalist.  No.  40.


Digitized  by


Google


374 COlfSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

lishes,  that  the  words  ought  to  be  construed,  as  a
qualification  or  limitation  of  the  power  to  lay  taxes.
By  the  confederation,  all  expenses  incurred  for  the
common  defence,  or  general  welfare,  are  to  be  defrayed
out  of  a  common  treasury,  to  be  supplied  by  requisi-
tions upon  the  states.  Instead  of  requisitions,  the  con-
stitution gives  the  right  to  the  national  government
directly  to  lay  taxes.  So,  that  the  only  difference  in
this  view  between  the  two  clauses  is,  as  to  the
mode  of  obtaining  the  money,  not  as  to  the  objects  or
purposes,  to  which  it  is  to  be  applied.  If  then  the
constitution  were  to  be  construed  according  to  the  true
bearing  of  this  argument,  it  would  read  thus :  con-
gress shall  have  power  to  lay  taxes  for  "  all  charges  of
"  war,  and  all  other  expenses,  that  shall  be  incurred  for
**  the  common  defence  or  general  welfare.'*  This  plain-
ly makes  it  a  qualification  of  the  taxing  power ;  and
not  an  independent  provision,  or  a  general  index  to  the
succeeding  specifications  of  power.  There  is  not,  how-
ever, any  solid  ground,  upon  which  it  can  be  for  a  mo-
ment maintained,  that  the  language  of  the  constitution  is
to  be  enlarged,  or  restricted  by  the  language  of  the  con-
federation. That  would  be  to  make  it  speak,  what  its
words  do  not  import,  and  its  objects  do  not  justify.  It
would  be  to  append  it,  as  a  codicil,  to  an  instrument,
which  it  was  designed  wholly  to  supercede  and  va-
cate.

^912.  But  the  argument  in  its  other  branch  rests
on  an  assumed  basis,  which  is  not  admitted.  It  sup-
poses, that  in  the  confederation  no  expenses,  not  strictly
incurred  under  some  of  the  subsequent  specified  pow-
ers given  to  the  continental  congress,  could  be  properly
payable  out  of  the  common  treasury.  Now,  that  is  a
proposition  to  be  proved ;  and  is  not  to  be  taken  for


Digitized  by


Google


CH. XIV.] POWERS OF COlfokESS  —  TAXES.  376

granted.  The  confederation  was  not  finally  ratified,  so
as  to  become  a  bindmg  instrument  on  any  of  the  states,
until  IfTarch,  1781.  Until  that  period  there  could  be
no  practice  or  construction  under  it;  and  it  is  not
shown,  that  subsequently  there  was*  any  exposition  to
the  effect  now  insisted  on.  Indeed,  after  the  peace  of
1783,  if  there  had  been  any  such  exposition,  and  it  had.
been  unfavourable  to  the  broad  exercise  of  the  power,
it  would  have  been  entided  to  less  weight,  than  usually
belongs  to  the  proceedings  of  public  bodies  in  the  ad-
minis  traiion  of  their  powers ;  since  the  decline  and  fall
of  the  confederation  was  so  obvious,  that  it  was  of  little
use  to  exert  them.  The  states  notoriously  disregarded
the  rights  and  prerogatives  admitted  to  belong  to  the
confederacy ;  and  even  the  requisitions  of  congress,  for
objects  most  unquestionably  within  their  constitutional
authority,  were  openly  denied,  or  silently  evaded.
Under  such  circumstances,  congress  would  have  little
inclination  to  look  closely  to  their  powers ;  since,  wheth-
er great  or  small,  large  or  narrow,  they  were  of  litUe
practical  value,  and  of  no  practical  cogency.

^913.  But  it  does  so  happen,  that  in  point  of  fact,  no
such  unfavourable  or  restrictive  interpretation  or  prac-
tice was  ever  adopted  by  the  continental  congress.  On
the  contrary,  they  construed  their  power  on  the  subject
of  requisitions  and  taxation,  exactly  asit  is  now  contend-  -
ed  for,  as  a  power  to  make  requisitions  on  the  states  for
all  expenses,  which  they  might  deem  proper  to  incur  for
the  common  defence  and  general  welfare  ;  and  to  ap-
propriate all  monies  in  the  treasury  to  the  like  purposes.
This  is  admitted  to  be  of  such  notoriety,  as  to  require
no  proof.^ Surely,  the  practice  of  that  body  in  ques-

1  Mr.  Madison  himself,  in  his  Letter  to  Mr.  Stevenson,  Nov.  27, 1830,

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


876  CONSTITUTION  or  the  U.  states, [book  III.

tions  of  this  nature  must  be  of  far  higher  value,  than
the  mere  private  interpretation  of  any  persons  in  the
present  times,  however  respectable.  But  the  practice
was  conformable  to  the  constitutional  authority  of  con-
gress under  the  confederation.  The  ninth  article  ex-
pressly delegates  to  congress  the  power  "  to  ascertain
"  the  necessary  sums  to,  be  raised  for  the  service  of
"the  United  States,  and  to  appropriate  and  apply
"  the  same  for  defraying  the  public  expenses ; ''  and
then  provides,  that  congress  shall  not  "  ascertain  the


admits  the  force  of  these  remarks  in  their  full  extent  His  lan-
guage is,  "  If  the  practice  of  the  revolutionary  congress  he  pleaded
in  opposition  to  this  view  of  the  case  "  (i.  e.  his  view,  that  the  words  have
no  distinct  meaning?,)  "  the  plea  i's  met  by  the  notoriety,  that,  on  several
accounts,  the  practice  of  that  body  is  not  the  expositor  of  the  articles  of
the  confederation.  These  articles  were  not  in  force,  until  they  were
finally  ratified  by  Maryland,  in  1781.  Prior  to  that  event,  the  power  of
congress  was  measured  by  the  exigencies  of  the  war ;  and  derived  its
sanction  from  the  acquiescence  of  the  states.  Afler  that  event,  habit,
and  a  continued  expediency, amounting  often  to  a  real,  or  an  apparent  ne-
cessity, prolonged  the  exercise  of  an  undefined  authority,  which  was
the  more  readily  overlooked,  as  the  members  of  that  body  held  their
seats  during  pleasure  ;  as  its  acts,  particularly  after  the  failure  of  the
bills  of  credit,  depended  for  their  efficacy  on  the  will  of  the  states,  and
as  its  general  impotency  became  manifest  Examples  of  dtparlwrt
from  the  prescribed  nUe  are  too  well  knoum  to  require  proof  J"  So  that
it  is  admitted,  that  the  practice,  under  the  confederation,  was  notoriously
such,  as  allowed  appropriations  by  congress  for  any  objects,  which  they
deemed  for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare.  And  yet  we
are  now  called  upon  to  take  a  new  and  modern  gloss  of  that  instrument,
directly  at  variance  with  that  practice.  See  also  Mr.  Wilson's  pamphlet,
on  the  constitutionality  of  the  bank  of  North  America,  in  1785.  The
reason,  why  he  does  not  allude  to  the  terms  "  common  defence  and  gen-
eral welfare,"  in  that  ar^ment,  probably  was,  that  there  was  no  ques-
tion respecting  appropriations  of  money  involved  in  that  discussion.
He  strenuously  contends,  that  congress  bad  a  eight  to  charter  the  bank  ;
and  he  alludes  to  the  fifth  article,  which,  for  the  convenient  manage-
ment of  the  general  inttresls  of  the  United  States,  provides  for  the  ap-
pointment of  delegates  from  the  states.  He  deduces  the  power,  from
its  being  essentially  nationaly  and  vitally  important  to  the  government.
3  Wilson's  l4iw  Lect  387.


Digitized  by


Google


CH. XIV,] POWERS  or CONGRESS TAXES.  377

"sums  and  expenses  necessary  for  the  defence  and
"  welfare  of  the  United  States,  or  any  of  them,  &c.
"  unless  nine  states  assent  to  the  same/' So  that  here
we  have,  in  the  eighth  article,  a  declaration,  that  "  all
"  charges  of  war  and  all  other  expenses,  that  shall  be
"  incurred  for  the  common  defence  or  general  welfare,
"  &c.  shall  be  defrayed  out  of  a  common  treasury ;  '*
and  in  the  ninth  article,  an  express  power  to  ascertain
the  necessary  sums  of  money  to  be  raised  for  the  pub-
lic semce ;  and  then,  that  the  necessary  sums  for  the
defence  and  welfare  of  the  United  States,  (and  not  of
the  United  States  alone,  for  the  words  are  added,)  or
of  any  of  themy  shall  be  ascertained  by  the  assent  of
nine  states. Clearly  therefore,  upon  the  plain  language
of  the articles, the words "common  defence  and
general  welfare,''  in  one,  and  "  defence  and  welfare,"  in
another,  and  "  public  service,"  in  another,  were  not  idle
words,  but  were  descriptive  of  the  very  intent  and  ob-
jects of  the  power ;  and  not  confined  even  to  the  defence
and  welfare  of  all  the  states,  but  extending  to  the  wel-
fare and  defence  of  any  of  them} The  power  then  is,
in  this  view,  even  larger,  than  that  conferred  by  the  con-
stitution.

^914.  But  there  is  no  ground  whatsoever,  which
authorizes  any  resort  to  the  confederation,  to  interpret
the  power  of  taxation,  which  is  conferred  on  congress
by  the  constitution.  The  clause  has  no  reference
whatsoever  to  the  confederation;  nor  indeed  to  any
other  clause  of  the  constitution.  It  is,  on  its  face,  a
distinct,  substantive,  and  independent  power.  Who,
then,  is  at  liberty  to  say,  that  it  is  to  be  limited  by  other
clauses,  rather  than  they  to  be  enlarged  by  it ;  smce

1  2  Elliot's  Deb.  195.

VOL.  II.  48


Digitized  by


Google


378 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

there  is  no  avowed  connexion,  or  reference  from  the
one  to  the  others'?  Interpretation  would  here  desert
its  proper  oflSce,  that,  which  requires,  that  "  every  part
^  of  the  expression  ought,  if  possible,  to  be  allowed
^some  meanmg,  and  be  made  to  conspire  to  some
"common  end."  *

§  915.  It  has  been  farther  said,  in  support  of  the
construction  now  under  consideration,  that  "  whether
the  phrases  in  question  are  construed  to  authorize
every  measure  relating  to  the  common  defence  and
general  welfare,  as  contended  by  some ;  or  every  mea-
sure only,  in  which  there  might  be  an  application  of
money,  as  suggested  by  the  caution  of  others ;  the
efifect  must  substantially  be  the.  same,  in  destroying  the
import  and  force  of  the  particular  enumeration  of  pow-
ers, which  follow  these  general  phrases  in  the  consti-
tution. For  it  is  evident,  that  theie  is  not  a  smgle  pow-
er whatsoever,  which  may  not  have  some  reference  to
the  common  defence,  or  the  general  welfare ;  nor  a  pow-
er of  any  magnitude,  which,  in  its  exercise,  does  not  in-
volve, or  admit  an  application  of  money. The  govern-
ment, therefore,  which  possesses  power  m  either  one,
or  the  other  of  these  extents,  is  a  government  without
Umitations,  formed  by  a  particular  enumeration  of  pow-
ers ;  and  consequendy  the  meaning  and  effect  of  this
particular  enumeration  is  destroyed  by  the  exposition
given  to  these  general  phrases." The  conclusion  de-

I  The  Federalist,  No.  40.  —  In  the  first  draft,  of  Dr.  Franklin,  in
1775,  the  claase  was  as  follows  :  '*  All  charges  of  wars,  and  all  other
general  expenses,  to  be  incurred  for  the  common  welfare,  shall  be  de-
^yed,''  &c.— In  Mr.  Dickinson's  drafl,  in  July,  1776,  the  words  were,
**  All  charges  of  wars,  and  all  other  expenses,  that  shall  be  incurred  for
the  common  defence,  or  general  welfare,"  &c ;  and  these  words  were
subsequently  retained.  1  Secret  Jour,  of  Congress,  (printed  in  1821,)
p.  285, 294, 307, 323  to  325,  354.


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


OH.  XIV.] POWERS OF COKGRSSS  — TAXES.  379

duced  from  these  premises  is,  that  under  the  confedera-
tion, and  the  constitution,  "congress  is  authorized  to
provide  money  for  the  common  defence  and  general
welfare.  In  both  is  subjomed  to  this  authority  an  enu-
meration of  the  cases,  to  which  their  powers  shall  ex-
tend. Money  cannot  be  applied  to  the  general  welfare
otherwise,  than  by  an  application  of  it  to  some  particu-
lar measiu*e,  conducive  to  the  general  welfare.  When-
ever, therefore,  money  has  been  raised  by  the  general
authority,  and  is  to  be  applied  to  a  particular  measure,
a  question  arises,  whether  the  particular  measure  be
within  the  enumerated  authorities  vested  in  the  con-
gress. If  it  be,  the  money  requisite  for  it  may  be  ap-
plied to  it ;  if  it  be  not,  no  such  application  can  be
made.  This  fair  and  obvious  interpretation  coin-
cides with,  and  is  enforced  by  the  clause  in  the  consd-
tudon,  which  declares,  that  no  money  shall  be  drawn
from  the  treasury  but  in  consequence  of  appropriations
by  law.  An  appropriation  of  money  to  the  general
welfare  would  be  deemed  rather  a  mockery,  than  an
observance  of  this  constitutional  injunction."  *

^916.  Stripped  of  the  ingenious  texture,  by  which
this  argument  is  disguised,  it  is  neither  more  nor  less,
than  an  attempt  to  obliterate  from  the  constitution  the
whole  clause,  "  to  pay  the  debts,  and  provide  for  the
"  common  defence  and  general  welfare  of  the  United
"  States,"  as  entirely  senseless,  or  inexpressive^  of  any
intention  whatsoever.*  Strike  them  out,  and  the  con-
stitution is  exactly  what  the  argument  contends  for.  It
is,  therefore,  an  argument,  that  the  words  ought  not  to

1  Virginia  Resolutions,  of  8th  January,  1800.  The  same  reasoning^
is  in  President  Madison's  Veto  message,  of  3d  of  March,  1817.  4  El-
Uot's  Deh.  280, 281.

«4  EUiot'sDeb.236.


Digitized  by


Google


380 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

be  in  the  constitution ;  because  if  they  are,  and  have
any  meaning,  they  enlarge  it  beyond  the  scope  of  cer-
tain other  enumerated  powers,  and  this  is  both  mis-
chievous and  dangerous.  Being  in  the  constitution,  they
are  to  be  deemed,  vox  et  preterea  nihilj  an  empty
sound  and  vain  phraseology,  a  finger-board  pointing  to
other  powers,  but  having  no  use  whatsoever,  since  these
powers  are  sufficiently  apparent  without.  *  Now,  it  is
not  too  much  to  say,  that  in  a  constitution  of  govern-
ment, fi^amed  and  adopted  by  the  people,  it  is  a  most
unjustifiable  latitude  of  interpretation  to  deny  effect  to
any  clause,  if  it  is  sensible  in  the  language,  in  which
it  is  expressed,  and  in  the  place,  in  which  it  stands.  If
words  are  inserted,  we  are  bound  to  presume,  that  they
have  some  definite  object,  and  intent ;  and  to  reason
them  out  of  the  constitution  upon  arguments  ah  inconve^
nientij  (which  to  one  mind  may  appear  wholly  unfound-
ed, and  to  another  wholly  satisfactory,)  is  to  make  a
new  constitution,  not  to  construe  the  old  one.  It  is  to
do  the  very  thing,  which  is  so  often  complained  of,  to
make  a  constitution  to  suit  our  oWn  notions  and  wishes,
and  not  to  administer,  or  construe  that,  which  the  people
have  given  to  the  country.

^917.  But  what  is  the  argument,  when  it  is  thor-
oughly sifted  ?  It  reasons  upon  a  supposed  dilemma,
upon  which  it  suspends  the  advocates  of  the  two  con-
trasted opinions.  If  the  power  to  provide  for  the  com-
mon defence  and  general  welfare  is  an  independent

^  In  a  Debate  of  7Ui  of  Febnaiy,  1792.  (4  Elliot's  Deb.  236.)  Mr.
Madison  puts  them,  (manifestly  as  his  own  construction,)  "  as  a  sort  of
caption,  or  general  description  of  the  specified  powers,  and  as  having  no
further  moaning,  and  giving  no  further  powers,  than  what  is  found  in
that  specification."  See  also,  Mr.  Madison's  Veto  message,  on  the
Bank  Bonus  Bill,  3d  March,  1817. 4  Elliot's  Deb.  280, 281.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV,] POWERS OF CONGRESS  —  TAXES.  381

power,  then  it  is  said,  that  the  government  is  unlimited,
and  the  subsequent  enumeration  of  powers  is  unnecessa-
ry and  useless.  If  it  is  a  mere  appendage  or  qualifica-
tion of  the  power  to  lay  taxes,  still  it  involves  a  power
of  general  appropriation  of  the  monies  so  raised,  which
indirectly  produces  the  same  result.*  Now,  the  former
position  may  be  safely  admitted  to  be  true  by  those,
who  do  not  deem  it  an  independent  power ;  but  the
latter  position  is  not  a  just  conclusion  from  the  premises,
which  it  states,  that  it  is  a  qualified  power.  It  is  not  a
logical,  or  a  practical  sequence  from  the  premises ;  it  is
a  non  sequitur.

^918.  A  dilemma,  of  a  very  difierent  sort,  might  be
fairly  put  to  those,  who  contend  for  the  doctrine,  that
the  words  are  not  a  qualification  of  the  power  to  lay
taxes,  and,  indeed,  have  no  meaning,  or  use  per  se. The
words  are  found  in  the  clause  respecting  taxation,  and
as  a  part  of  that  clause. If  the  power  to  tax  extends
shnply  to  the  payment  of  the  debts  of  the United
States,  then  congress  has  no  power  to  lay  any  taxes
for  any  other  purpose. K  so,  then  congress  could  not
appropriate  the  money  raised  to  any  other  purposes ;
since  the  restriction  is  to  taxes  for  payment  of  thie  debts
of  the  United  States,  that  is,  of  the  debts  then  existing.
This  would  be  almost  absurd. If,  on  the  other  hand,
congress  have  a  right  to  lay  taxes,  and  appropriate  the
money  to  any  other  objects,  it  must  be,  because  the
words,  "  to  provide  for  the  common  defence  and  gene-
"  ral  welfare,*'  authorize  it,  by  enlarging  the  power  to
those  objects ;  for  there  are  no  other  words,  which  be-
long to  the  clause. All  the  other  powers  are  in  distinct
clauses,  and  do  noi  touch  taxation. No  advocate  for

1  4  EUiot's  Deb.  280, 281.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


882 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

the  doctrine  of  a  restrictive  power  will  contend,  that
the  power  to  lay  taxes  to  pay  debts,  authorizes  the
payment  of  all  debts,  which  the  United  States  may
choose  to  incur,  whether  for  national  or  constitutional
objects,  or  not.  The  words,  "  to  pay  debts,  ^  are  there-
fore, either  antecedent  debts,  or  debts  to  be  incurred
"  for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare,'*  which
will  justify  congress  in  mcurring  any  debts  for  such
purposes.  But  the  language  is  not  confined  to  the
payment  of  debts  for  the  common  defence  and  general
welfare.  It  is  not  **  to  pay  the  debts  ^  merely ;  but
**  to  provide  far  the  common  defence  and  general  wel-
fere.**  That  is,  congress  may  lay  taxes  to  provide
means  for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare.
So  that  there  is  a  difficulty  in  rejecting  one  part  of  the
qualifymg  dause,  without  rejecting  the  whole,  or  en-
lai^ng  the  words  for  some  purposes,  and  restricting
them  for  others.

^919.  A  power  to  lay  taxes  for  any  purposes  what-
soever is  a  general  power ;  a  power  to  lay  taxes  for
certain  specified  purposes  is  a  limited  power.  A  power
to  lay  taxes  for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare
of  the  United  States  is  not  in  common  sense  a  general
power.  It  is  limited  to  those  objects.  It  cannot
constitutionally  transcend  them.  If  the  defence  pro-
posed by  a  tax  be  not  the  common  defence  of  the
United  States,  if  the  welfare  be  not  general,  but  spe-
cial, or  local,  as  contradistmguished  fi-om  national,  it  is
not  within  the  scope  of  the  constitution.  If  the  tax  be
not  proposed  for  the  common  defence,  or  general  wel-
fare, but  for  other  objects,  wholly  extraneous,  (as  for
instance,  for  propagating  Mahometanism  among  the
Turks,  pr  givmg  aids  and  subsidies  to  a  foreign  nation,
to  build  palaces  for  its  kings,  or  erect  monuments  to  its


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS — TAXES.  383

heroes,)  it  would  be  wholly  mdefi?nsible  upon  consti-
tutional principles.  The  power,  then,  is,  under  such  cir-
cumstances, necessarily  a  qualified  power.  If  it  is  so,
how  then  does  it  aflfect,  or  in  the  slightest  degree  trench
upon  the  other  enumerated  powers?  No  one  will  pre-
tend, that  the  power  to  lay  taxes  would,  in  general,  have
superseded,  or  rendered  unnecessary  all  the  other
enumerated  powers.  It  would  neither  enlarge,  nor
qualify  them.  A  power  to  tax  does  not  include  them.
Nor  would  they,  (as  unhappily  the  confederation  too
clearly  demonstrated,)^  necessarily  include  a  power  to
tax.  Each  has  its  appropriate  office  and  objects ;  each
may  exist  without  necessarily  interfering  with,  or  anni-
hilating the  other.  No  one  will  pretend,  that  the  power
to  lay  a  tax  necessarily  includes  the  power  to  declare
war,  to  pass  naturalization  and  bankrupt  laws,  to  coin
money,  to  establish  post-offices,  or  to  define  piracies
and  felonies  on  the  high  seas.  Nor  would  either  of
these  be  deemed  necessarily  to  include  the  power  to
tax.  It  might  be'  convenient;  but  it  would  not  be
absolutely  indispensable.

^  920.  The  whole  of  the  elaborate  reasoning  upon
the  propriety  of  granting  the  power  of  taxation,  pressed
with  so  much  ability  and  earnestness,  both  in  and  out
of  the  convention,'  as  vital  to  the  operations  of  the  na-
tional government,  wouId>have  been  useless,  and  almost
absurd,  if  the  power  was  included  in  the  subsequentiy
enumerated  powers.  If  the  power  of  taxing  was  to  be
granted,  why  should  it  not  be  qualified  according  to  the
intention  of  the  framers  of  the  constitution  ?  But  then,
it  is  said,  if  congress  may  lay  taxes  for  the  common
defence  and  general  welfare,  the  money  may  be  appro-

1  See  the  Federalist,  No.  21, 22,  30 ;  1  ElUot's  Deb.  318.
s  See  the  FederaHst,  No.  30  to  37.


Digitized  by


Google


384  CONSTITUTION  OF  THfi  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

priated  for  those  purposes,  although  not  within  the  scope
of  the  other  enumerated  powers.  Certainly  it  may  be
so  appropriated ;  for  if  congress  is  authorized  to  lay
taxes  for  such  purposes,  it  would  be  strange,  if,  when
raised,  the  money  could  not  be  applied  to  them.  That
would  be  to  give  a  power  for  a  certain  end,  and  then
deny  the  end  intended  by  the  power.  It  is  added,
"  that  there  is  not  a  single  power  whatsoever,  which
may  not  have  some  reference  to  the  common  defence
or  general  welfare ;  nor  a  power  of  any  magnitude,
which,  in  its  exercise,  does  not  involve,  or  admit  an  ap-
plication of  money."  If  by  the  former  language  is
meant,  that  there  is  not  any  power  belonging,  or  inci-
dent to  any  government,  which  has  not  some  reference
to  the  common  defence  or  general  welfare,  the  proposi-
tion may  be  peremptorily  denied.  Many  governments
possess  powers,  which  have  no  application  to  either  of
these  objects  in  a  just  sense ;  and  some  possess  pow-
ers repugnant  to  both.  If  it  is  meant,  that  there  is  no
power  belonging,  or  incident  to  a  good  government,  and
especially  to  a  republican  government,  which  may  not
have  some  reference  to  those  objects,  that  proposition
may,  or  may  not  be  true ;  but  it  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  present  inquiry.  The  only  question  is,  whether  af
mere  power  to  lay  taxes,  and  appropriate  money  for  the
common  defence  and  general  welfare,  does  include  all
the  other  powers  of  government ;  or  even  does  include
the  other  enumerated  powers  (limited  as  they  are)  of
the  national  government.  No  person  can  answer  in
the  affirmative  to  either  part  of  the  inquiry,  who  has
fully  considered  the  subject.  The  power  of  taxation  is
but  one  of  a  multitude  of  powers  belonging  to  govern-
ments ;  to  the  state  governments,  as  well  as  the  nation-
al government. Would  a  power  to  tax  authorize  a


Digitized  by


Google


CH.XiyJ POWERS  OF  CONGRESS — TAXES.  385

state  government  to  regulate  the  descent  and  distribu-
tion of  estates ;  to  prescribe  the  form  of  conveyances  ;
to  establish  courts  of  justice  for  general  purposes ;  to
legislate  respecting  personal  rights,  or  the  general
dominbn  of  property  ;  or  to  punish  all  offences  against
society  ?  Would  it  confide  to  congress  the  power  to
grant  patent  rights  for  invention ;  to  provide  for  coun-
terfeiting the  public  securities  and  coin ;  to  constitute
judicial  tribunals  with  the  powers  confided  by  the  third
article  of  the  constitution ;  to  declare  war,  and  raise
armies  and  navies,  and  make  regulations  for  their  gov-
ernment ;  to  exercise  exclusive  legislation  in  the  terri-
tories of  the  United  States,  or  in  other  ceded  places ;
or  to  make  all  laws  necessary  and  proper  to  carry  into
effect  all  the  powers  given  by  the  constitution?  The
constitution  itself  upon  its  face  refutes  any  such  notion.
It  gives  the  power  to  tax,  as  a  substantive  power ;  and
gives  others,  as  equally  substantive  and  independent

§  921.  That  the  same  means  may  sometimes,  or
pfjten,  he  resorted  to,  to  carry  into  effect  the  different
powers,  furnishes  no  objection ;  for  that  is  common  to
aU  governments.  That  an  appropriation  of  money  toay
be  the  usual,  or  best  mode  of  carrying  into  effect  some
of  these  powers,  furnishes  no  objection ;  for  it  b  one  of
the  purposes,  for  which,  the  argument  itself  admits,  that
the  power  of  taxation  is  given.  That  it  is  indispensable
fcM*  the  due  exercise  of  all  the  powers,  may  admit  of
sooQie  doubt  The  only  real  question  is,  whether  even
admittmg  the  power  to  lay  taxes  is  appropriate  for
some  of  the  purposes  of  other  enumerated  powers,  (for
no  one  will  contend,  that  it  will,  of  itself,  reacl^  or  pro-
vide for  them  all,)  it  is  limited  to  such  appropriations,  as
grow  out  of  the  exercise  of  those  powers.  In  other
wordfi^  whether  it  is  an  mcident  to  those  powers,  or  a
VOL.  II.  49

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


886 OONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  8TATB8. [bOOK  m*

substantiye  power  in  other  cases,  which  may  concern
the  comqaon  defence  and  the  general  welfare.  If  there
are  no  other  cases,  which  concern  the  common  defence
and  general  welfare,  except  those  within  the  scope  of
the  other  enumerated  powers,  the  discussion  is  merely
nominal  and  frivolous.  If  there  are  such  cases,  who  is
at  liberty  to  say,  that,  bemg  for  the  common  defence
and  general  welfare,  the  constitution  did  not  intend  to
embrace  themi  The  preamble  of  the  constitution  de-
clares one  of  the  objects  to  be,  to  provide  for  the  com-
mon defence,  and  to  promote  the  general  welfare ;  and
if  the  power  to  lay  taxes  is  in  express  terms  given  to
provide  for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare,
what  ground  can  there  be  to  construe  the  power,  short
of  the  object  1  To  say,  that  it  shall  be  merely  auxiliary
to  other  enumerated  powers,  and  not  co-extensive  with
its  own  terms,  and  its  avowed  objects?  One  of  the
best  established  rules  of  interpretation,  one,  which  com-
mon sense  and  reason  forbid  us  to  overlook,  is,  that
when  the  object  of  a  power  is  clearly  defined  by  its
terms,  or  avowed  m  the  context,  it  ought  to  be  con-
strued, so  as  to  obtain  the  object,  and  not  to  defeat  it
The  circumstance,  that  so  construed  the  power  may
be  abused,  is  no  answer.  All  powers  may  be  abused ;
but  are  they  then  to  be  abridged  by  those,  who  are  to
administer  them,  or  denied  to  have  any  operation  ?  If
the  people  frame  a  constitution,  the  rulers  are  to  obey
it  Neither  rulers,  nor  any  other  functionaries,  much
less  any  private  persons,  have  a  right  to  cripple  it,  be-
cause it  is  according  to  their  own  views  inconvenient,
or  dangerous,  unwise  or  impolitic,  of  narrow  limits,  or
of  wide  influence.

§  922.  Besides  ;  the  argument  itself  admits,  that
^congress  is  authorized  to  provide  money  for  the


Digitized  by


Google


en.  xin.] powsRS  of  congress  —  taxes* 887

"  commoD  defence  and  general  welfare.**  It  is  not  pre-
tended, that,  when  the  tax  is  laid,  the  specific  objects^
for  which  it  is  laid,  are  to  be  specified,  or  that  it  is  to
be  solely  applied  to  those  objects.  That  would  be  to
insert  a  limitation,  no  where  stated  in  the  text  But  it
is  said,  that  it  must  be  applied  to  the  general  welfare ;
and  that  can  only  be  by  an  application  of  it  to  some
particular  measure,  conducive  to  the  general  welfare.
This  is  admitted.  But  then,  it  is  added,  that  this  par-
ticular measure  must  be  within  the  enumerated  author-
ities Tested  in  congress,  (that  is,  within  some  of  the
powers  not  embraced  in  the  first  clause,)  otherwise  the
application  is  not  authorized.^  Why  not,  since  it  is  for
the  general  welfare?  No  reason  is  assigned, except,  that
not  being  withm  the  scope  of  those  enumerated  pow-
ers, it  is  not  given  by  the  constitution.  Now,  the  pre-
mises may  be  true ;  but  the  conclusion  does  not  Mow,
unless  the  words  common  defence  and  general  voelfare
are  limited  to  the  specifications  included  in  those  pow-
ers. So,  that  after  all,  we  are  led  back  to  the  same
reasoning,  which  construes  the  words,  as  having  no  mean-
ing per  sCf  but  as  dependent  upon,  and  an  exponent
ol^  the  enumerated  powers.  Now,  this  conclusion
is  not  justified  by  the  natural  connexion  or  collocation
of  the  words ;  and  it  strips  them  of  all  reasonable  force
and  efficacy.  And  yet  we  are  told,  that  "  this  fisdr  and
obvious  interpretation  coincides  with,  and  is  enforced
by,  the  clause  of  i]^e  constitution,  which  provides,  that
no  money  shall  be  drawn  fix)m  the  treasury,  but  in
consequence  of  appropriations  by  law ; "  as  if  the  clause
did  not  equally  apply,  as  a  restraint  upon  drawing
money,  whichever  construction  is  adopted. Suppose

1  See  also  4  Elliot's  Debates,  280, 281.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


988  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  HI*

congress  to  possess  the  most  unlimited  power  to  ap-
propriate money  for  the  general  welfare ;  would  it  not
be  still  true,  that  it  could  not  be  drawn  from  the  tr^-
sury,  until  an  appropriation  was  made  by  some  law
passed  by  congress  1  This  last  clause  is  a  limitation^
tiot  upon  the  powers  of  congress,  but  upon  the  acts  of
the  executiye,  and  other  public  officers,  in  regard  to
the  public  monies  in  the  treasury.  .

^  923.  The  argument  in  favour  of  the  construction,
which  treats  the  clause,  as  a  qualification  of  the  power
to  lay  taxes,  has,  perhaps,  never  been  presented  in  a
more  concise  or  forcible  shape,  than  in  an  official  opin-
ion, deliberately  given  by  one  of  our  most  distinguished
statesmen.^  "  To  lav  taxes  to  provide  for  the  general
welfare  of  the  United  States,  is,^  says  he, "  to  lay  taxes
for  the  purpose^  of  providing  for  the  general  welfiare.
For  the  laying  of  taxes  is  the  power^  and  the  general
welfare  the  purpose^  for  which  the  power  is  to  be  ex-
ercised. Congress  are  not  to  lay  taxes  ad  libitum^  for
any  purpose  they  please  ;  but  only  to  pay  the  debts,
or  provide  for  the  welfare  of  the  Union.  In  like  man-
ner they  are  not  to  do  any  thing  they  please,  to  pro-
vide for  the  general  welfare ;  but  only  to  lay  taxes  for
that  purpose.  To  consider  the  latter  phrase,  not  as
describing  the  pxupose  of  the  first,  but  as  giving  a  dis-
tinct and  independent  power  to  do  any  act  they  please,
which  might  be  for  the  good  of  the  Union,  would  ren-
der all  the  preceding  and  subsequent  enumerations  of
power  completely  useless.  It  would  reduce  the  whole
instrument  to  a  single  phrase,  that  of  instituting  a  con-
gress with  power  to  do  whatever  would  be  for  the
good  of  the  United  States ;  and,  as  they  would  be  the
sole  judges  of  the  good  or  evil,  it  would  also  be  a  pow-

1  Mr.  Jefferson.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


OH.  xin.] powxms  of  ooiroREfS'-^  taxes. S8d

er  to  do  whatever  eril  they  pleased.  It  is  an  estab-
lished rule  of  GODstniction^  where  a  phrase  wiU  bear
either  of  two  meanings,  to  give  that,  which  will  allow
some  meaning  to  the  oiher  parts  of  the  instrument,  and
not  that,  which  will  render  all  the  others  useless.
Certainly,  no  such  universal  power  was  meant  to  be
^ven  them.  It  was  intended  to  lace  them  up  strictly
within  the  enumerated  powers,  and  those,  without
whkh,  as  means,  those  powers  could  not  be  carried
into  effect.^  *

^  924.  The  same  opmion  has  been  maintained  at
different  and  distant  times  by  many  eminent  states-
men.* It  was  avowed,  and  apparently  acquiesed  in,
in  the  state  conventions^  called  to  ratify  the  constitu-
tion ;'  and  it  has  been,  on  various  occasions,  adopted

1  Jefferson's  Opinion  on  the  Bank  of  the  United  States,  15th  Febru-
ary, 1791 ;  4  Jefferson's  Correspondence,  524,  525.  — This  opinion  was
deliberately  reasserted  by  Mr.  Jefferson  on  other  occasions.  There
may,  perhaps,  also  be  found  traces  of  an  opinion  still  more  restrictive  in
his  later  writings ;  but  they  are  very  obscore  and  unsatisfactory.  Bee  4
Jefferson's  Correspondence,  306,  416,  457 ;  Message  of  President  Jef-
ferson, 2d  December,  1806  ;  5  Wait's  State  Papers,  453,  458,  459.

8  It  was  maintained  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  in  his  Treasury  Report  on  Man*
ufactures,  (5th  Dec.  1791,)  and  in  his  argument  on  the  constitutionality
of  a  National  Bank,  23d  Feb.  1791,  p.  147, 148 ;  by  Mr.  Gerry  in  tbe  de-
bate on  the  National  Bank  in  Feb.  1791,(4  Elliot's  Debates,  226;)  by
Mr.  Ellswortli  in  a  speech  in  1788,(3  American  Museum,  338?)  and  by
President  Monroe,  in  his  Message  of  the  4th  of  May,  J822,  (p.  33  to  38,)
in  an  elaborate  argument,  which  well  deserves  to  be  studied.  He  con-
tends, that  the  power  to  lay  taxes  is  confined  to  purposes  for  the  com-
mon defence  and  general  welfare.  And  that  the  power  of  appropriation
of  the  monies  is  co-extensive,  that  is,  that  it  may  be  applied  to  any  pur-
poses of  the  common  defence  or  general  welfare.  Mr.  Adams,  in  his
iiCtter  to  Mr.  Speaker  Stevenson,  1 1th  of  July,  1832,  published  since  the
preparation  of  these  Commentaries,  has  given  a  masterly  exposition  of
the  clause,  to  which  it  may  be  important  hereafter  again  to  recur.

3  2  Elliot's  Debates,  170, 183, 195, 328,  344 ;  3  EUiot's  Debates,  262 ;
2  American  Museum,  434;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  311 5  Id.  81, 82;  3  Elliot's
Debates,  263, 290 ;  2  American  Museum,  644.


Digitized  by


Google


390 ooirsnTUTioN  of  thx  u.  states,  [book  ni.

•

by  congress,^  and  may  fairly  be  deemed,  that  which  the
deliberate  sense  of  a  majority  of  the  nation  has  at  all
times  supported.  This,  too,  seems  to  be  the  construc-
tion maintained  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United
States.  In  the  case  of  CHbbons  r.  OgdeUj*  Mr.  Chief
Justice  Marshall,  in  delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court,
said,  ^  Congress  is  authorized  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,
&c  to  pay  the  debts,  and  provide  for  the  common
defence  and  general  welfare  of  the  United  States^
This  does  not  interfere  with  the  power  of  the  states  to
tax  for  the  support  of  their  own  governments ;  nor  is  the
exercise  of  that  power  by  the  states  an  exercise  of
any  portion  of  the  power,  that  b  granted  to  the  United
States.  In  imposing  taxes  for  state  purposes,  they  are
not  doing,  what  congress  is  empowered  to  do.  Con-
gress is  not  empowered  to  tax  for  those  purposes,
which  are  within  the  exclusive  province  of  the  states.
When,  then,  each  government  is  exercising  the  power
of  taxation,  neither  b  exercbing  the  power  of  the
other."  Under  such  circumstances,  it  b  not,  peiiiaps,
too  much  to  contend,  that  it  b  the  truest,  the  safest,
and  the  most  authoritative  construction  of  the  consti-
tution.'

§  925.  The  view  thus  taken  of  this  clause  of  the
constitution  will  receive  some  confirmation,  (if  it  should
be  thought  by  any  person  necessary,)  by  an  histori-
cal examination  of  the  proceedings  of  the  convention.

I  See  cases  referred  to  in  President  Monroe's  Message,  4th  of  May,
1822 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  p.  250,  251 ;  4  Elliot's  Deb.  226, 24:3, 244, 279
to  282 ;  Id.  29],  292 ;  2  United  States  Law  Journal,  April,  182G,  p.  263
to  280;  Webster's  Speeches,  389  to  401, 411, 412,  426.

s  9  Wheat  R.  1, 199.

3  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  p.  251 ;  Sergeant  on  Const  Law,  ch.  28,  p.
311  tp  315  ;  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  9,  p.  104  }  2  United  States
Law  Journal,  April,  1826,  p.  351  to  282.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  UII.] POWERS  OF  OOirORESS  — TAXES.  391

The  first  resolution  adopted  by  the  convention  on  this
subject  of  the  powers  of  the  general  government,  was
^  that  the  national  legislature  ought  to  be  empowered  to
enjoy  the  legislative  rights  vested  in  congress  by  the
confederation,  and  moreover  to  legislate  in  all  cases,  to
which  the  separate  states  are  mcompetent,  or  in  which
the  harmony  of  the  United  States  may  be  interrupted
by  the  exercbe  of  individual  legislation."  ^  At  a  subse-
quent period,  the  latter  clause  was  altered,  so  as  to
read  thus:  ''And,  moreover,  to  legislate  in  all  cases
/en*  the  general  interests  of  the  Union,  and  also  in  those,
to  which  the  states  are  separately  incompetent,  or  in
which  the  harmony  of  the  United  States  may  be  inter-
rupted by  the  exercise  of  individual  legislation.'^ '
Wlien  the  first  draft  of  the  constitution  was  prepared,  in
pursuance  of  the  resolutions  of  the  convention,  the
clause  respecting  taxation  (bemg  the  first  section  of
the  seventh  article)  stood  thus :  "  The  legislature  of
the  United  States  shall  have  the  power  to  lay  and  col-
lect taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,"  without  any
qualification  or  limitation  whatsoever.

^  926.  Afterwards  a  motion  was  made  to  refer  cer-
tain propositions,  and  among  others  a  proposition  to
secure  the  payment  of  the  public  debt,  and  to  appro-
priate funds  exclusively  for  that  purpose,  and  to  secure
the  public  creditors  fi^om  a  violation  of  the  public  faith,
when  pledged  by  the  authority  of  the  legislature,  to  a
select  committee,  (of  five,)  which  was  accordingly
done.'  Another  committee  (of  eleven)  was  appointed
at  the  same  time,  to  consider  the  necessity  and  expe-
diency of  the  debts  of  the  several  states  being  assumed

1  Jourii.  of  CoiiTention,68,  86,  87, 135, 136.
s  Journ.  of  CoDventioD,  181, 182, 208.
'  Joanu  of  Convention,  261.


Digitized  by


Google


902  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

by  the  Uidted  States.^  The  lattek*  committee  reported,
that  ^  the  legislature  of  the  United  States  shall  have
power  to  fulfil  the  engagements,  which  have  been  en-
tered into  by  congress,  and  to  discharge,  as  well  the
debts  of  the  United  States,  as  the  debts  incurred  by
the  several  states  during  the  late  war,  kr  the  common
defence  and  general  welfare.^  This  propositlcm  (it
may  be  presumed)  has  no  reference  whatsoever  to  die
clause  in  the  draft  of  the  constitution  to  lay  taxes.
The  former  committee  (of  five)  at  a  later  day  reported,
that  there  'should  be  added  to  the  first  section  of  the
seventh  article  (the  clause  to  lay  taxes)  the  following
words,  ^  for  payment  of  the  debts  and  the  necessary
expenses  of  the  United  States,  provided,  that  no  law
for  raisiag  any  branch  of  revenue,  except  what  may
be  specially  appropriated  for  the  payment  of  interest
on  debts  or  loans,  shall  continue  in  force  for  more  than
•^  years.^  *  It  was  then  moved  to  amend  the  first
clause  of  die  report  of  the  other  committee,  (on  state
debts,)  so  as  to  read  as  follows  :  ^The  legislature  sbsiBi
fulfil  the  engagements  and  discharge  the  debts  of  tlie
United  States,**  which  (after  an  ineffectual  attempt  to
amend  by  bilking  out  the  words,  ^^  discharge  the  debts,^
and  inserting  the  words,  ^  liquidate  the  claims,")  pass-
ed unanimously  in  the  affirmative.'  So,  that  the  pro-
vision in  the  report,  to  assume  the  state  dd>ts,  was
struck  out  On  a  subsequent  day,  it  was  moved  to
amend  the  first  section  of  the  seventh  article,  so  as  to
read :  ^  The  legislature  shaU  fiilfil  the  engagements,
and  discharge  the  dd^ts  of  the  United  States,  and  shall
have  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,

1  Joam.  of  Convention,  261.  9  Id.  377.

'  Journ.  of  Convention,  379, 380.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIII.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS — TAXES.  393

BXid  excises,"  which  passed  in  the  aflSrmative ;  *  thus
incorporating  the  amendment  already  stated  with  the
clause  respecting  taxes  in  the  draft  of  the  constitution.
On  a  subsequent  day  the  following  clause  was  propos-
ed and  agreed  to:  "All  debts  contracted,  and  engage-
"  ments  entered  into  by  or  under  the  authority  of  con-
"gress,  shall  be  as  valid  against  the  United  States,
**  under  this  constitution,  as  imder  the  confederation.'*
On  the  same  day,  and  after  the  adoption  of  this  amend-
ment, it  was  proposed  to  add  to  the  first  clause  of  the
first  section  of  the  seventh  article,  (to  lay  taxes,  &c.,)
the  following  words  :  "  for  the  payment  of  said  debts,
'^and  for  the  defi^ying  the  expenses,  that  shall  be  in-
**curred  for  the  common  defence,  and  general  welfare,*'
which  passed  in  the  negative  by  the  vote  of  ten  states
against  one.*  So,  that  the  whole  clause  stood  without
any  fiirther  amendment,  giving  the  power  of  taxation  in
the  same  unlimited  terms,  as  it  was  reported  in  the
original  draft  of  the  constitution.  This  unlimited  extent
of  the  power  of  taxation  seems  to  have  been  unsatisfac-
tory;  and  at  a  later  day  another  committee  reported,  that
the  clause  respecting  taxation  should  read  as  follows  :
"  The  legislature  shall  have  power  to  lay  and  collect
^  taxes,  duties,  hnposts,  and  excises,  to  pay  the  debts,
"and  provide  for  the  common  defence,  and  general
"  welfare  of  the  United  States ; ''  and  this  passed  in*
the  aflirmative  without  any  division.'  And  in  the  final
draft  the  whole  clause  now  stands  thus :  "  The  con-
"  gress,  &c.  shall  have  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,
"  duties,  imposts,  and  excises  ;  to  pay  the  debts  and
"  provide  for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare
"  of  the  United  States.''  ^ From  this  historical  survey,

1  Journ.  of  Convention,  284.  3  id.  291.

3  Journ.  of  Convention,  323, 324, 326.  ^  Id.  351, 35a

VOL.  II.  50


Digitized  by


Google


394  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U-  STATES. [bOOK  UK

it  is  apparent,  that  it  was  first  brought  forward  in  con-
nexion with  the  power  to  lay  taxes ;  that  it  was  orig-
inally adopted,  as  a  qualification  or  limitation  of  the  ob-
jects of  that  power ;  and  that  it  ^as  not  discussed,  as
an  independent  power,  or  as  a  general  phrase  point-
ing to,  or  connected. with,  the  subsequent  enumerated
powers.  There  was  another  amendment  proposed,
which  would  have  created  a  general  power  to  this
effect ;  but  it  was  never  adopted,  and  seems  silently  to
have  been  abandoned.^

§  927.  Besides  ;  it  is  impracticable  in  grammatical
propriety  to  separate  the  different  parts  of  the  latter
clause.  The  words  are,  "  to  pay  the  debts,  and  pro-
"  vide  for  the  common  defence,''  &c.  "  To  pay  the
"  debt§"  cannot  be  construed,  as  an  independent  power;
for  it  is  connected  with  the  other  by  the  copulative
"  and.'*  The  payment  of  the  antecedent  debts  of  the
United  States  was  already  provided  for  by  a  distinct
article  ;  *  and  the  power  to  pay  future  debts  must  ne-
cessarily be  implied  to  the  extent,  to  which  they  could
constitutionally  be  contracted ;  and  would  fall  within
the  purview  of  the  enumerated  power  to  pass  all  laws
necessary  and  proper  to  carry  the  powers  given  by  the
constitution  into  effect  If,  then,  these  words  were  and
ought  to  be  read,  as  a  part  of  the  preceding  power  to  lay
taxes,  and  in  connexion  with  it,  (as  this  historical  review
establishes  beyond  any  reasonable  controversy,)  they
draw  the  other  words,  "  and  provide  for  the  common
"  defence,"  &c.  with  them  into  the  same  connexion.
On  the  other  hand,  if  this  connexion  be  once  admitted,
it  wotild  be  almost  absurd  to  contend,  that  "  to  pay
**  the  debts  "  of  the  United  States  was  a  general  phrase,

1  Journ.  of  Convention,  277,

9  Journ.  of  Convention,  291. See  also  the  Constitution,  art  6.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIII.] POWERS  OP  CONGRESS TAXES.  396

which  pointed  to  the  subsequent  enumerated  powers,
and  was  qualified  by  them  ;  and  yet,  as  a  part  of  the
very  clause,  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  disregard  it  The
truth  is,  (as  the  historical  review  also  proves,)  that  after
it  had  been  decided,  that  a  positive  power  to  pay  the
public  debts  should  be  inserted  in  the  constitution,  and
a  desire  had  been  evinced  to  introduce  some  restric-
tion upon  the  power  to  lay  taxes,  in  order  to  allay
jealousies  and  suppress  alarms,  it  was  (keeping  both
objects  in  view)  deemed  best  to  append  the  power  to
pay  the  public  debts  to  the  power  to  lay  taxes  ;  and
then  to  add  other  terms,  broad  enough  to  embrace  all
the  other  purposes  contemplated  by  the  constitution.
Among  these  none  were  more  appropriate,  than  the
words, "  common  defence  and  general  welfare,'*  found  in
the  articles  of  confederation,  and  subsequently  with
marked  emphasis  introduced  into  the  preamble  of  the
constitution.  To  this  course  no  opposition  was  made,  be-
cause it  satisfied  those,  who  wished  to  provide  positively
for  the  public  debts,  and  those,  who  wished  to  have  the
power  of  taxation  co-extensive  with  all  constitutional
objects  and  powers-  In  other  words,  it  conformed  to
the  spirit  of  that  resolution  of  the  convention,  which
authorized  congress  "  to  legislate,  in  all  cases,  for  the
"  general  interests  of  the  Union."  ^

1  Journal  of  Convention,  181, 182,  208. —  The  letter  of  Mr.  Madison
to  Mr.  Stevenson  of  27th  November,  1880,  contains  an  historical  ex-
amination of  the  origin  and  progress  of  this  clause  substantially  the
same,  as  that  given  above.  AHer  perusing  it,  I  perceive  no  reason  to
change  the  foregoing  reasoning.  In  one  respect,  Mr.  Madison  seems
to  labour  under  a  mistake,  viz.  in  supposing,  that  the  proposition  of  the
25th  of  August,  to  add  to  the  power  to  lay  taxes,  as  previously  amended
on  the  23d  of  August,  the  words,  *'  for  the  payment  of  the  debts  and  for
defraying  the  expenses,  thtft  shall  be  incurred  for  the  common  defence
and  general  welfare,"  was  rejected  on  account  of  the  generality  of  the


Digitized  by


Google


396  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  IIU

^  928.  Having  thus  disposed  of  the  question,  what  is
the  true  interpretation  of  the  clause,  as  it  stands  in  the
text  of  the  constitution,  and  ascertained,  that  the  power

phraseology.  The  known  opinions  of  some  of  the  states,  which  voted
in  the  negative  (Connecticut  alone  voted  in  the  afiEirmative)  shows,  that
it  could  not  have  heon  rejected  on  this  account  It  is  most  probable,
that  it  was  rejected,  because  it  contained  a  restriction  upon  the  power
to  tax ;  for  this  power  appears  at  first  to  have  passed  without  opposition
in  its  general  form.*  It  may  be  acceptable  to  the  general  reader  to
have  the  remarks  of  this  venerable  statesman  in  his  own  words,  and
therefore  they  are  here  inserted.  After  giving  an  historical  review  of
the  origin  and  progress  of  the  whole  clause,  he  says,

**  A  special  provision  in  this  mode  could  not  have  been  necessary  for  the
debts  of  the  new  congress  ;  for  a  power  to  provide  money,  and  a  power
to  perform  certain  acts,  of  which  money  is  the  ordinary  and  appropriate
means,  must,  of  course,  carry  with  them,  a  power  to  pay  the  expense  of
performing  the  acts.  Nor  was  any  special  provision  for  debts  j^oposed,
till  the  case  of  the  revolutionary  debts  was  brought  into  view  ;  and  it  ia
a  fair  presumption,  from  the  course  of  the  varied  propositions,  which
have  been  noticed,  that  but  for  the  old  debts,  and  their  association  with
the  terms, '  common  defence  and  general  wel&re,'  the  clause  would
have  remained,  as  reported  in  the  first  draft  of  a  constitution,  expressing
generally  '  a  power  in  congress  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,
and  excises ; '  without  any  addition  of  the  phrase  '  to  provide  for  the
common  defence  and  general  welfare.'  With  this  addition,  indeed,  the
language  of  the  clause  being  in  conformity  with  that  of  the  clause  in  the
articles  of  confederation,  it  would  be  qualified,  as  in  those  articles,  by
the  specification  of  powers  subjoined  to  it  But  there  is  sufficient  rea-
son to  suppose,  that  the  terms  in  question  would  not  have  been  intro*
duced,  but  for  the  introduction  of  the  old  debts,  with  which  they  happened
to  stand  in  a  familiar,  though  inoperative,  relation.  Thus  introduced,  how-
ever, they  pass  undisturbed  through  the  subsequent  stages  of  the  consti-
tution.

'*If  it  be  asked,  why  the  terms  ^common  defence  and  general  wel-
fare,' if  not  meant  to  convey  the  comprehensive  power,  which,  taken
literally,  they  express,  were  not  qualified  and  explained  by  some  refer-
ence to  the  particular  power  subjoined,  the  answer  is  at  hand,  that
although  it  might  easily  have  been  done,  and  experience  shows  it  might
be  well,  if  it  bad  been  done,  yet  the  omission  is  accounted  for  by  an  in-
attention to  the  phraseology,  occasioned,  doubUess,  by  identity  with  the
harmless  character  attached  to  it  in  the  instrument,  from  which  it  was
borrowed.

"  But  may  it  not  be  asked  with  infinitely  more  propriety,  and  without
the  possibility  of  a  satisfactory  answer,  why,  if  the  terms  were  meant  to

*  Jourcal  ofConTention,  p.  920, 357, 384,  391.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XIII.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS TAXES.  397

of  taxation,  though  general,  as  to  the  subjects,  to  which
it  may  be  applied,  is  yet  restrictive,  as  to  the  purposes,
for  which  it  may  be  exercised ;  it  next  becomes  matter

embrace,  not  only  all  the  powers  particularly  expressed,  but  the  indefi-
nite power,  which  has  been  claimed  under  them,  the  intention  was  not
so  declared ;  why,  on  that  supposition,  so  much  critical  labour  was  em-
ployed in  enumerating  the  particular  powers,  and  in  defining  and  limit-
ing their  extent  ?

^  The  variations  and  vicissitudes  in  the  modification  of -the  clause,  in
which  the  terms  *  common  defence  and  general  welfare '  appear,  are
remarkable  ;  and  to  be  no  otherwise  explained,  than  by  differences  of
opinion,  concerning  the  necessity  or  the  form  of  a  constitutional  provis-
ion for  the  debts  of  the  revolution  ;  some  of  the  members,  apprehend-
ing improper  claims  for  losses  by  depreciated  bills  of  credit;  others,  an
evasion  of  proper  claims,  if  not  positively  brought  within  the  authorized
functions  of  the  new  government;  and  others  again,  considering  the
past  debts  of  the  United  States,  as  sufficiently  secured  by  the  principle,
that  no  change  in  the  government  could  change  the  obligations  of  the
nation.  Besides  the  indications  in  the  Journal,  the  history  of  the  period
sanctions  this  explanation.

^  But,  it  is  to  be  emphatically  remarked,  that  in  the  multitude  of  mo-
tions, propositions,  and  amendments,  there  is  not  a  single  one  having
reference  to  the  terms  '  common  defence  and  general  welfare,'  unless
we  were  so  to  understand  the  proposition  containing  them,  made  on
August  25th,  which  was  disagreed  to  by  all  the  states,  except  one.

^  The  obvious  conclusion,  to  which  we  are  brought,  is,  that  these
terms,  copied  from  the  articles  of  confederation,  were  regarded  in  the
new,  as  in  the  old  instrument,  merely  as  general  terms,  explained  and
limited  by  the  subjoined  specifications,  and  therefore  requiring  no  criti-
cal attention  or  studied  precaution.

"  If  the  practice  of  the  revolutionary  congress  be  pleaded  in  opposi-
tion to  this  view  of  the  case,  the  plea  is  met  by  the  notoriety,  that  on
several  accounts,  the  practice  of  that  body  is  not  the  expositor  of  the
'  articles  of  confederation.'  These  articles  were  not  in  force,  tUI  they
were  finally  ratified  by  Maryland  in  1781.  Prior  to  that  event,  the  pow-
er of  congress  was  measured  by  the  exigencies  of  the  war,  and  derived
its  sanction  from  the  acquiescence  of  the  states.  Afler  that  event,  hab-
it, and  a  continued  expediency,  amounting  often  to  a  real  or  apparent
necessity,  prolonged  the  exercise  of  an  undefined  authority,  which  was
the  more  readily  overlooked,  as  the  members  of  the  body  held  their
seats  during  pleasure,  as  its  acts,  particularly  afler  the  failure  of  the
bills  of  credit,  depended  for  their  efficacy  on  the  will  of  the  states  ;  and
as  its  general  impotency  became  manifest  Examples  of  departure
from  the  prescribed  rule  are  too  well  known  to  require  proof. The


Digitized  by


Google


398 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U/  STATES. [bOOK  HI.

of  inquiry,  what  were  the  reasons,  for  which  this  power
was  given,  and  what  were  the  objections,  to  which  it
was  deemed  liable.

case  of  the  old  bank  of  North  America  might  be  cited,  as  a  memorable
one.  The  incorporating  ordinance  grew  out  of  the  inferred  necessity
of  such  an  institution  to  carry  on  the  war,  by  aiding  the  finances,  which
were  starving  under  the  neglect  or  inability  of  the  states  to  furnish  their
assessed  quotas.  Congress  was  at  the  time  so  much  aware  of  the  defi-
cient authority,  that  they  recommended  it  to  the  state  legislatures  to
pass  laws  giving  due  effect  to  the  ordinance,  which  was  donQ  by  Peno-
sylvania  and  several  other  states.

"  Mr.  Wilson,  justly  distinguished  for  his  intellectual  powers,  being
deeply  impressed  with  the  importance  of  a  bank  at  such  a  crisis,  pub-
lished a  small  pamphlet,  entitled  *  Considerations  on  the  Bank  of  North
America,^  in  which  he  endeavoured  to  derive  the  power  from  the  nature
of  the  Union,  in  which  the  colonies  were  declared  and  became  indepen-
dent states;  and  also  from  the  tenour  of  the  ♦articles  of  confederation '
themselves.  But  what  is  particularly  worthy  of  notice  is,  that  with  all
his  anxious  search  in  those  articles  for  such  a  power,  he  never  glanced
at  the  terms, '  common  defence  and  general  welfare,'  as  a  source  of  it
He  rather  chose  to  rest  the  claim  on  a  recital  in  the  text,  ♦  that  for  the
more  convenient  management  of  the  general  interests  of  the  United
States,  delegates  shall  be  annually  appointed  to  meet  in  congress,'  which
he  said  implied,  that  the  United  States  had  general  rights,  general  pow-
ers, and  general  obligations,  not  derived  from  any  particular  state,  nor
from  all  the  particular  states,  taken  separately,  but  ♦  resulting  from  the
union  of  the  whole  ;'  these  general  powers,  not  being  controlled  by  the
article  declaring,  that  each  state  retained  all  powers  not  granted  by  the
articles,  because  ♦  the  individual  states  never  possessed,  and  could  not
retain,  a  general  power  over  the  others.'

"^  The  authority  and  argument  here  resorted  to,  if  proving  the  ingenu-
ity and  patriotic  anxiety  of  the  author,  on  one  band,  show  suficiently  on
the  other,  that  the  terms,  ♦  common  defence  and  general  welfare,'  could
not,  according  to  the  known  acceptation  of  them,  avail  his  object

^  That  the  terms  in  question  were  not  suspected  in  the  convention,
which  formed  the  constitution,  of  any  such  meaning,  as  hos  been  con-
structively applied  to  them,  may  be  pronounced  with  entire  confidence.
For  it  exceeds  the  possibility  of  belief,  that  the  known  advocates  in  the
convention  for  a  jealous  grant,  and  cautious  definition  of  federal  powers,
should  have  silently  permitted  the  introduction  of  words  or  phrases,  in  a
sense  rendering  fruitless  the  restrictions  and  definitions  elaborated  by
them.

"  Consider,  for  a  moment,  the  immeasurable  difference  between  the
constitution,  limited  in  its  powers  to  the  enumerated  objects ;  and  ex-


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIII.] POWERS  OP  CONGRESS TAXES.  399

§  929.  That  the  power  of  taxation  should  be,  to
some  extent,  vested  in  the  national  government,  was
admitted  by  all  persons,  who  sincerely  desired  to  escape

panded,  as  it  would  be  by  the  import  claimed  for  tbe  phraseology  in
questfoD.  The  difference  is  equivalent  to  two  constitutions,  of  charac-
ters essentially  contrasted  with  each  other ;  the  one  possessing  powers
•confined  to  certain  specified  cases ;  the  other  extended  to  all  ^casos
whatsoever.  For  what  is  the  case,  that  would  not  be  embraced  by  a
general  power  to  raise  money ;  a  power  to  provide  for  the  general  wel-
fare ;  and  a  power  to  pass  all  laws  necessary  and  proper  to  carry  these
powers  into  execution  ;  all  such  provisions  and  laws  superseding  at  the
same  time,  all  local  laws  and  constitutions  at  variance  with  them  ?  Can
less  be  said,  with  the  evidence  before  us,  furnished  by  the  Journal  of
the  Convention  itself,  than  that  it  is  impossible,  that  such  a  constitution,
as  the  latter,  would  have  been  recommended  to  tbe  states  by  all  the
members  of  that  body,  whose  names  were  subscribed  to  the  instrument?

^  Passing  from  this  view  of  the  sense,  iu  which  the  terms, '  common
defence  and  general  welfare,'  were  used  by  the  framers  of  the  constitu-
tion, let  us  look  for  that,  in  which  they  roust  have  been  understood  by
the  conventions,  or  rather  by  the  people,  who,  through  their  conventions,
accepted  and  ratified  it  And  here  the  evidence  is,  if  possible,  stiD
more  irresistible,  that  the  terms  could  have  been  regarded,  as  giving  a
scope  to  federal  legislation,  infinitely  more  objectionable,  than  any  of
the  specified  powers,  which  produced  such  strenuous  opposition,  and
calls  for  amendments,  which  might  be  safeguards  against  the  dangers
apprehended  from  them.

"  Without  recurring  to  the  published  debates  of  those  conventions,
which,  as  far  as  they  can  be  relied  on  for  accuracy,  would,  it  is  believed,
not  impair  the  evidence  furnished  by  their  recorded  proceedings,  it  wiU
suffice  to  consult  the  lists  of  amendments  proposed  by  such  of  the  con-
ventions, as  considered  the  powers  granted  to  the  government,  too  ex-
tensive, or  not  safely  defined.

^  Besides  the  restrictive  and  explanatory  amendments  to  the  text  of
the  constitution,  it  may  be  observed,  that  a  long  list  was  premised  under
the  name,  and  in  the  nature  of  'Declaration  of  Rights ;'  all  of  them  in-
dicating a  jealousy  of  tbe  federal  powers,  and  an  anxiety  to  multiply
securities  against  a  constructive  enlargement  of  them.  But  ths  appeal
is  more  panicularly  made  to  the  number  and  nature  of  the  amendments,
proposed  to  be  made  specific  and  integral  parts  of  the  constitutional
text

"  No  less  than  seven  states,  it  appears,  concurred  in  adding  to  their
ratifications  a  series  of  amendments,  which  they  deemed  requisite.  Of
these  amendments,  nine  were  proposed  by  the  convention  of  Massachu-
setts ;  five  by  that  of  South-Carolina ;  twelve  by  that  of  New-Hamp-


Digitized  by


Google


400 CONSTITUTlOir  OP  THE  U,  STATES. [bOOK  III.

from  the  imbecilities,  as  well  as  the  inequalities  of  the
confederation.^  Without  such  a  power,  it  would  not
be  possible  to  provide  for  the  support  of  the  national

shire  ;  twenty  by  that  of  Virginia ;  thirty-three  by  that  of  New^ork ;
twenty-six  by  that  of  North-Carolina ;  and  twenty-one  by  that  of  Rhode-
Island.

'*  Here  are  a  majority  of  the  states,  proposing  amendments,  in  one  in-
stance diirty-three  by  a  single  state  ;  all  of  them  intended  to  circum-
scribe the  power  grante<l  to  the  general  government,  by  explanations,
restrictions,  or  prohibitions,  without  including  a  single  proposition  from
a  single  state  referring  to  the  terms,  'common  defence  and  general  wel-
fare;' which,  if  understood  to  convey  the  asserted  power,  could  not
have  failed  to  be  the  power  most  strenuously  aimed  at,  because  evi-
dently more  alarming  in  its  range,  than  all  the  powers  objected  to,  put
together.  And  that  the  terms  should  have  passed  altogether  unnoticed
by  the  many  eyes,  which  saw  danger  in  terms  and  phrases  employed  in
some  of  the  most  minute  and  limited  of  the  enumerated  powers,  must  be
regarded  as  a  demonstration,  that  it  was  taken  for  granted,  that  the
terms  were  harmless,  because  explained  and  limited,  as  in  the  *  articles
of  confederation,'  by  the  enumerated  powers,  which  followed  them.

^  A  like  demonstration,  that  these  terms  were  not  understood  in  any
sense,  that  could  invest  congress  with  powers  not  otherwise  bestowed
by  the  constitutional  charter,  may  be  found  in  what  passed  in  the  first
session  of  congress,  when  the  subject  of  amendments  was  taken  up,  with
the  conciliatory  view  of  freeing  the  constitution  from  objections,  which
had  been  made  to  the  extent  of  its  powers,  or  to  the  unguarded  terms
employed  in  describing  them.  Not  only  were  the  terms, '  common  de-
fence and  general  welfare,'  unnoticed  in  the  long  list  of  amendments
bfought  forward  in  the  outset ;  but  the  Journals  of  Congress  show,  that
in  the  progress  of  the  discussions,  not  a  single  proposition  was  made  in
either  branch  of  the  legislature,  which  referred  to  the  phrase,  as  admits
ting  a  constructive  enlargement  of  the  granted  powers,  and  requiring  an
amendment  guarding  against  it.  Such  a  forbearance  and  silence  on
such  an  occasion,  and  among  so  many  members,  who  belonged  to  the
part  of  the  nation,  which  called  for  explanatory  and  restrictive  amend-
ments, and  who  had  been  elected,  as  known  advocates  for  them,  cannot
be  ac(  ounted  for,  without  supposing,  th&t  the  terms, '  common  defence
and  general  welfare,'  were  not,  at  that  time,  deemed  susceptible  of  any
such  construction,  as  has  since  been  applied  to  them.

**  It  may  be  thought,  perhaps,  due  to  the  subject,  to  advert  to  a  letter
of  October  5th,  1787,  to  Samuel  Adams,  and  another  of  October  Kith,  of

i  See  The  Federalist,  No.  21,  90.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  XIII.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS — TAXES.  401

forces  by  land  or  sea,  or  the  national  civil  list,  or  the
ordinary  charges  and  expenses  of  government  For
these  purposes  at  least,  there  must  J)e  a  constant  and
regular  supply  of  revenue.^  If  there  should  be  a  defi-
ciency, one  of  two  evils  must  inevitably  ensue ;  either
the  people  must  be  subjected  to  continual  arbitrary
plunder;  or  the  government  must  sink  into  a  fatal  atro-
phy,*  The  former  is  the  fate  of  Turkey  under  its
sovereigns :  the  latter  was  the  fate  of  America  under
the  confederation.'

^  930.  If, .  then,  there  is  to  be  a  real,  effective  na-
tional government,  there  must  be  a  power  of  taxation
co-extensive  with  its  powers,  wants,  and  duties.  The
only  inquiry  properly  remaining  is,  whether  the  resour-
ces of  taxation  should  be  specified  and  limited ;  or,
whether  the  power  in  this  respect  should  be  general,
leaving  a  full  choice  to  the  national  legislature.  The  op-
ponents of  the  constitution  strenuously  contended,  that

the  same  year,  to  the  governor  of  Virginia,  from  R.  H.  Lee,  in  both  of
which  it  is  seen,  that  the  t^rms  had  attracted  his  notice,  and  were  ap-
prehended by  him  '  to  submit  to  congress  every  object  of  human  legisla-
tion.' But  it  is  particularly  worthy  of  remark,  that  although  a  member
of  the  senate  of  the  United  States,  when  amendments  to  the  constitution
were  before  that  house,  and  sundry  additions  and  alterations  were  there
made  to  the  list  sent  from  the  other,  no  notice  was  taken  of  those  terms,
as  pregnant  with  danger.  It  must  be  inferred,  that  the  opinion  formed
by  the  distinguished  member,  at  the  first  view  of  the  constitution,  and
before  it  had  been  fully  discussed  and  elucidated,  had  been  changed
into  a  conviction,  that  the  terms  did  not  fairly  admit  the  construction  he
had  originally  put  on  them ;  and  therefore  needed  no  explanatory  pre-
caution against  it"

Against  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Madison,  there  are  the  opinions  of  men  of
great  eminence,  and  well  entitled  to  the  confidence  of  their  country ;
and  among  these  may  be  enumerated  Presidents  Washington,  Jefferson,
and  Monroe,  and  Mr.  Hamilton.  The  opinion  of  the  latter  upon  this
very  point  wlU  be  given  hereafter  in  his  own  words.

1  1  Tucker's  Bkck.  Comm,  App.  235  etseq, ;  Id.  244, 245.

a  The  Federalist,  No.  30.  3  Id.

VOL.  II.  51


Digitized  by


Google


402  CONSTITUTION  OF  THS  V.  8TAT£$. [bOOK  III.

the  power  should  be  restricted ;  its  friends,  as  strenu-
ously contended,  that  it  was  indispensable  for  the  pub-
lic safety,  that  it  sl|ould  be  general

§  93L  The  general  reasonmg,  by  which  an  unlimited
power  was  sustamed,  was  to  the  following  effects
Every  government  ought  to  contain  within  itself  every
power  requisite  to  the  full  accomplishment  of  the  objects
committed  to  its  care,  and  the  complete  execution  of
the  trusts,  for  which  it  is  responsible,  free  from  every
other  control,  but  a  regard  to  the  public  good,  and  to  the
secusrity  of  the  people.  In  other  words,  every  power
ought  to  be  proportionate  to  its  object  The  duties  oi
superintending  the  national  defence,  and  of  securing  the
public  peace  against  foreign  or  domestic  violence,  in-
volve a  provision  for  casualties  and  dangers,  to  which
no  possible  limits  can  be  assigned ;  and  therefore  the
power  of  making  that  provision  ought  to  know  no  othef
bounds,  than  the  exigencies  of  the  nation,  and  the  re-
sources of  the  community.  Revenue  is  the  essential
engine,  by  which  the  means  of  answering  the  national
exigencies  must  be  procured;  and  therefore  the  power
of  procuring  it  must  necessarily  be  comprehended  in
that  of  providing  for  those  exigencies.  Theory,  as
well  as  practice,  the  past  experience  of  other  nations,
as  well  as  our  own  sad  experience  under  the  confede-
ration, conspire  to  prove,  that  the  power  of  procuring
revenue  is  unavailing,  and  a  mere  mockery,  when  ex-
ercised over  states  in  their  collective  capacities.  If,
therefore,  the  federal  government  was  to  be  of  any
efficiency,  and  a  bond  of  union,  it  ought  to  be  invested
with  an  unqualified  power  of  taxation  for  all  national
purposes.^ In  the  history  of  mankind  it  has  ordinarily

1  The  Federalist,  No.  31 ;  Id.  No.  30 ;  Id.  No.  21.

*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  XIII.] POWERS  OF  COlfORESS  —  TAXES.  403

been  found,  that  in  the  usual  progress  of  thmgs  the
necessities  of  a  nation  in  every  stage  of  its  existence
are  at  least  equal  to  its  resources.*  But,  if  a  more  fa-
vourable state  of  things  should  exist  in  our  own  gov-
ernment, still  we  must  expect  reverses,  and  ought  to
provide  against  them.  It  is  impossible  to  foresee  all
the  various  changes  in  the  posture,  relations,  and  power
of  different  nations,  which  might  affect  the  prosperity
and  safety  of  our  own.  We  may  have  formidable  for-
eign enemies.  We  may  have  internal  commotions.
We  may  suffer  from  physical,  as  well  as  moral  calami-
ties; from  plagues,  famine,  and  earthquakes;  from
political  convulsions,  and  rivalries;  from  the  gradual
decline  of  particular  sources  of  industry;  and  from
the  necessity  of  changing  our  own  habits  and  pur-
suits, in  consequence  of  foreign  improvements  and  com-
petitions, and  the  variable  nature  of  human  wants  and
desires.  A  source  of  revenue  adequate  in  one  age,
may  wholly  or  partially  fail  in  another.  Commerce,  or
manufactures,  or  agricuhure  may  thrive  under  a  tax  in
one  age,  which  would  destroy  them  in  another.  The
power  of  taxation,  therefore,  to  be  useful,  must  not
only  be  adequate  to  all  the  exigencies  of  the  nation,  but
it  must  be  capable  of  reaching  from  time  to  time  all  the
most  productive  sources.  It  has  been  observed  with
no  less  truth,  than  point,  that  ^^  in  political  arithmetic
two  and  two  do  not  always  make  four.'*  *  Constitutions*
of  government  are  not  to  be  framed  upon  a  calculation
of  existing  exigencies  ;  but  upon  a  combination  of  these
with  the  probable  exigencies  of  ages,  according  to  the
natural  and  tried  course  of  human  affairs.  There  ought
to  be  a  capacity  to  provide  for  future  contingencies,  as
they  may  happen ; .  and  as  these  are  (as  has  been

1  The  Federalist,  No.  30.  <  The  Federalist,  No.  31.

■ Digitized  by  VJpOQlC


404 coirsTiTUTioir  of  the  v.  states,  [book  in.

already  suggested)  illimitable  in  their  nature,  so  it  is
impossible  safely  to  limit  that  capacity.*

§  932.  In  answer  to  this  reasomng  it  was  objected,
that  •^it  is  not  true,  because  the  exigencies  of  the
Union  may  not  be  susceptible  of  Umitation,  that  its
power  of  taxation  ought  to  be  unconfined.  Revenue
b  as  requisite  to  the  purposes  of  the  local  administra-
tions, as  to  those  of  the  Union ;  and  the  former  are  at
least  of  equal  importance  with  the  latter  to  the  happi-
ness of  the  people.  It  is,  therefore,  as  necessary,  that
the  state  governments  should  be  able  to  command  the
means  of  supplying  their  wants,  as  that  the  national
government  should  possess  the  like  faculty  in  respect
to  the  wants  of  the  Union.  But  an  indefinite  power  in
the  latter  might,  and  probably  would  in  time,  deprive
the  former  of  the  means  of  providing  for  their  own
necessities ;  and  would  subject  them  entirely  to  the
mercy  of  the  national  legislature.  As  the  laws  of  the
Union  are  to  become  the  supreme  law  of  the  land ;  and
as  it  is  to  have  power  to  pass  all  laws,  that  may  be
necessary,  for  carrying  into  execution  the  authorities,
with  which  it  is  proposed  to  vest  the  national  govern-
ment, it  might  at  any  time  abolish  the  taxes  imposed  for
state  objects  upon  the  pretence  of  an  mterference  with
its  own.  It  might  allege  a  necessity  of  domg  this  in
order  to  give  efficacy  to  the  national  revenue ;  and  thus
'all  the  resources  of  taxation  might  by  degrees  become
the  subjects  of  federal  monopoly,  to  the  entire  exclu-
sion and  destruction  of  the  state  governments."  * The

1  The  Federalist,  No.  34 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  77  to  89;  Id.  303  to
308 ;  Id,  309, 31 1  to  316,  321  to  329 ;  Id.  337 ;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  95, 96,
118 ;  Id.  198  to  204 ;  3  ElUot's  Debates,  261, 262, 290 ;  3  Amer.  Museom,
334, 338 ;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  234,  235,  236.
,  a  The  Federalist,  No.  31 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  77,  78  to  89 ;  Id.  91,
105, 112 ;  Id.  293, 294  to  296 ;  Id.  301, 309, 303 ;  R  329  to  333 ;  2  EUi-


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Xni.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS  —  TAXES.  405

difficulties  arising  from  this  collision  between  the  state
and  national  governments  might  be  easily  avoided  by  a
separation  an*d  distinction,  as  to  the  subjects  of  taxation,
or  by  other  methods,  which  might  be  easily  devised.
Thus,  for  instance,  the  general  government  might  be  en-
trusted with  the  power  of  external  taxation,  such  as  lay-
ing duties  and  imposts  on  goods  imported ;  and  the  states
remam  exclusively  in  pibssession  of  the  power  of  inter-
nal taxation.  Or  power  might  be  given  to  the  general
government  to  lay  taxes  exclusively  upon  certain  spe-
cified subjects ;  or  to  lay  taxes,  if  requisitions  on  the
states  were  not  complied  with ;  *  or,  if  the  specified
subjects  failed  to  proditce  an  adequate  revenue,  resort
might  be  had  to  requisitions,  or  even  to  direct  taxes,  to
supply  the  deficiency.*

§  933.  In  regard  to  these  objections  it  was  urged,
that  it  was  impossible  to  rely  (as  the  history  of  the
government  under  the  confederation  abundantly  proved)
upon  requisitions  upon  the  states.'  Direct  taxes  were
exceedingly  unequal,  and  difficult  to  adjust ;  ^  and  could

ot's  Debates,  52,  Si,  208 ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  77  to  91 ;  1  Tuck.  Black.
Comm.  App.  240 ;  2  Amer.  Museum,  543,  544.

1  3  Amer.  Museum,  423 ;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  52, 53, 200,  206.

s  See  The  Federalist,  No.  30;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  294;  1  Tucker's
Black.  Comm.  App.  234,  235 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  294,  295 ;  2  Elliot's
Debates,  52,  53,  111,  112 ;  Id.  200, 206,  208.  —  It  was  moved  in  the  con-
vention, that  whenever  revenue  was  required  to  be  raised  by  direct  tax-
ation, it  should  be  apportioned  among  Uie  states,  and  then  requisitions
made  upon  the  states  to  pay  the  amount ;  and  in  default  only  of  their
'  compliance,  congress  should  be  authorized  to  pass  acts  directing  the
mode  of  collectiug  it.  But  this  proposition  was  rejected  by  a  vote  of
seven  states  against  one,  one  state  being  divided.*

3  The  Federalist,  No.  30 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  303,  304 ;  Id.  325^
326, 327;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  198, 199,  204.

4  The  Federalist,  No.  21 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  81,  82 ;  2  Elliot's  De-
bates, 105 ;  Id.  199,  204,  236 ;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  234, 235^
236;  3DaU.ii.l71,178.  >

*  Journal  of  the  Convmtioo,  p.  974.


Digitized  by


Google


406 coNSTiTtmoir  of  the  u.  states,  [book  hi.

not  safely  be  relied  on,  as  an  adequate  or  satisfactory
source  of  revenue,  except  as  a  final  resort,  when  others
more  eligible  failed.  The  distinction  between  external
and  internal  taxation  was  indeed  capable  of  being  re-
duced to  practice.  But  in  many  emergencies  it  might
leave  the  national  government  without  any  adequate
resources,  and  compel  it  to  a  course  of  taxation  ruinous
to  our  trade  and  industry,  and  the  solid  interests  of  the
^  country.  No  one  of  due  reflection  can  contend,  that
commercial  imports  are,  or  could  be,  equal  to  all  future
exigencies  of  the  Union ;  and  indeed  ordinarily  they
may  not  be  found  equal  to  them.^  Suppose  they  are
equal  to  the  ordinary  expenses  of  the  Union ;  yet,  if
war  should  come,  the  civil  list  must  be  entirely  over-
looked, or  the  military  left  without  any  adequate  supply.*
ttow  is  it  possible,  that  a  government  half  supplied  and
half  necessitous  can  fulfil  the  purposes  of  its  institution,
or  can  provide  for  the  security,  advance  the  prosperity,
or  support  the  reputation  of  the  commonwealth  1  How
can  it  ever  possess  either  energy  or  stability,  dignity  or
credit,  confidence  at  home,  or  respectability  abroad  ?
How  can  its  admmistration  be  any  thing  else,  than  a
succession  of  expedients,  temporary,  impotent,  and
disgraceful?  How  will  it  be  able  to  avoid  a  frequent
sacrifice  of  its  engagements  to  immediate  necessity  ?
How  can  it  undertake,  or  execute  any  liberal  or  en-
larged plans  of  public  good  ?  • Who  would  lend  to  a


1  The  Federalist,  No.  41. See  1  Elliot's  Debates,  303  to  306.

•  The  Federalist,  No.  30,  34.— "  A  government,"  (said  one  of  our
most  distinguished  statesmen,  Mr.  Ellsworth,  of  Connecticut,  speaking
on  this  very  subject,)  ^  which  can  command  but  half  its  resources,  is
like  a  man  wilh  but  one  arm  to  defend  himself."  Speech  in  Connecti-
cut Convention,  7th  January,  1788 ;  3  Amer.  Museum,  338.

>  The  Federalist,  No.  30.


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  XIII.] POWERS  OP  CONGRESS TAXES.  407

government,  incapable  of  pledging  any  permanent  re-
sources to  redeem  its  debts  1  It  would  be  the  com-
mon case  of  needy  individuals,  who  must  borrow  upon
onerous  conditions  and  usury,  because  they  cannot
promise  a  punctilious  discharge  of  their  engagements,*
It  ^  ould,  therefore,  not  only  not  be  wise,  but  be  the
extreme  of  folly  to  stop  short  of  adequate  resources  for
all  emergencies,  and  to  leave  the  government  entrusted
with  the  care  of  the  national  defence  in  a  state  of  total,
or  partial  incapacity  to  provide  for  the  protection  of  the
community  against  future  invasions  of  the  public  peace
by  foreign  war,  or  domestic  convulsions.  Jf,  indeed,
we  are  to  try  the  novel,  not  to  say  absurd  experiment
in  politics,  of  tying  up  the  hands  of  government  from
protective  and  offensive  war,  founded  upon  reasons  of
state,  we  ought  certainly  to  be  able  to  compel  foreign  .
nations  to  abstain  from  all  measures,  which  shall  in-
jure, or  cripple  us.*  We  must  be  able  to  repress  their
ambition,  and  disarm  their  enmity ;  to  conquer  their
prejudices,  and  destroy  their  rivalries  and  jealousies.
Who  is  so  visionary,  as  to  dream  of  such  a  moral  influ-
ence in  a  republic  over  the  whole  world?  It  should
never  be  forgotten,  that  the  chief  sources  of  expense  in
every  government  have  ever  arisen  from  wars  and  re-
bellions, from  foreign  ambition  and  enmity,  or  from  do-
mestic insurrections  and  factions.  And  it  may  well  be
presumed,  that  what  has  been  m  the  past,  will  continue
to  be  in  the  future.

^  934.  Besides ;  it  is  manifest,  that  however  ade-
quate commercial  imposts  might  be  for  the  ordinary
expenditures  of  peace,  the  operations  of  war  might,
and  indeed  ordinarily  would,  if  our  adversary  possess-

*  The  PcderaliBt,  No.  30.  ^  The  Federalist,  Na  34.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


408 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  III.

ed  a  large  naval  force,  greatly  endanger,  if  it  did  not
wholly  cut  off  our  supplies  from  this  source.  *  And  if
this  were  the  sole  reliance  of  the  national  government,
a  naval  warfare  upon  our  commerce  would,  on  this  very
account,  be  at  once  the  most  successful,  and  the  most
irresistible  means  of  subduing  us,  or  compelling  us  to
sue  for  peace.  What  could  Great  Britain,  or  France
do  m  a  naval  war,  if  they  were  compelled  to  rely  on
commerce  alone,  as  a  resource  for  taxation  to  raise
armies,  or  maintain  navies  1  What  could  America  do,
in  a  contest  with  a  rival  power,  whose  navy  possessed
a  superiority,  sufficient  to  blockade  all  her  principal
ports?*  And,  independent  of  any  such  exigencies,
the  history  of  the  world  shows,  that  nothing  is  more
fluctuating  and  capricious  than  trade.  The  proudest
commercial  nations  in  one  age  have  sunk  down  to  com-
parative insignificance  m  another.  Look  at  Venice,
and  Genoa,  and  the  Hanse  Towns,  and  Holland,  and
Portugal,  and  Spain !  What  is  their  present,  commer-
cial importance ;  compared  with  its  glory,  and  success,
m  past  times?  Could  either  of  them  now  safely  rely
on  imposts,  as  an  exclusive  source  of  revenue  1

§  935.  There  is  another,  very  important  view  of  this

1  3  Elliot's  Debates,  290.

9  In  the  recent  war,  of  1812-1813,  between  Great  Britain,  and  the
United  States,  we  had  abundant  proofs  of  the  correctness,  of  this  rea-
soning. Notwithstanding  the  duties  upon  importations  were  doMed;
from  the  naval  superiority  of  our  enemy,  our  government,  were  com-
pelled to  resort  to  direct,  and  internal  taxes,  to  land  taxes  and  excises ;
and  even  with  all  these  advantages,  it  is  notorious,  that  the  credit  of  the
government  sunk  exceedingly  low,  during  the  contest;  and  the  public
securities  were  bought  and  sold,  under  the  very  eyes  of  the  administra-
tion, at  a  discount  of  nearly  fifty  per  cent,  from  their  nominal  amount
Nay,  at  one  time,  it  was  impracticable  to  borrow  any  money  upon  the
government  credit  This  event  (let  it  be  remembered,)  took  place,  af-
ter twenty  years,  of  unexampled  prosperity  of  the  country.  It  is  a  sad,
but  solemn  admonition.


Digitized  by


Google


on.  xiv.] POWERS  or  coiraRssfl — taxes. 409

subject.  If  the  power  of  taxation  of  the  general  govem-
ment  were  confined  to  duties  on  imports,  it  is  evident,
that  it  might  be  compelled,  for  want  of  other  adequate
resources,  to  extend  these  duties  to  an  injurious  excess.
Trade  might  become*  embarrassed,  and  perhaps  oppress-
ed, so  as  to  dimmish  the  receipts,  while  the  duty  was
increased;  smuggling,  always  facile,  and  always  de-
moralizing in  a  republic  of  a  widely  extended  sea-
coast,  would  be  most  mischievously  encouraged.^  The
first  effect  would  be,  that  commerce  would  thus  gradu-
ally change  its  channels ;  and  if  other  interests  should
be  (as,  indeed,  they  might  be  to  some  extent)  aided
by  such  exorbitant  duties ;  the  ultimate  result  would
be  a  great  diminution  of  the  revenue,  and  the  ruin  of
a  great  branch  of  industry.  It  never  can  be  either
politic  or  just,  wise  or  patriotic,  to  found  a  government
upon  principles,  which  in  its  ordinary,  or  even  extraor-
dinary operations,  must  naturally,  if  not  necessarily,
lead  to  such  a  result.  This  would  be,  to  create  a  gov-
ernment, not  for  the  happiness,  or  prosperity  of  the
whole  people;  but  for  oppressions,  and  mequalities,
arising  from  scanty  means,  and  inadequate  powers.

§  936.  In  regard  to  the  other  part  of  the  objection,*
founded  on  the  dangers  to  the  state  governments  fit)m
this  general  power  of  taxation,  it  is  wholly  vrithout
any  solid  foundation.  It  assumes,  that  the  national
government  will  have  an  interest  to  oppress  or  des-
tiroy  the  state  governments ;  a  supposition,  wholly  in-
admissible in  principle,  and  unsupported  by ;  fact
There  is  quitp  as  much  reason  to  presume,  that  there
will  be  a  disposition  m  the  state  governments  to  en-
croach on  that  of  the  union.* In  truth,  no  reasoning,

1  The  Federalist,  No.  35.  >  The  Federalist,  No.  dL

VOL.  II.  52


Digitized  by


Google


410 COKSTITUTIOir  OF  THE  V.  STATS8. [bOOK  IU.

founded  exclusively  on  either  ground,  is  safe,  or  satis-
factory. There  ought  to  be  power  in  each  govern-
ment to  maintain  itself,  and  execute  its  own  powers ;
but  it  does  not  necessarily  follow,  that  either  would
become  dangerous  to  the  other.  The  objection,  in-
deed, is  rather  aimed  at  the  structure,  and  organiza-
tion of  the  government,  than  at  its  powers ;  since  it  is
impossible,  if  the  structure  and  organization  be  rea-
sonably skilful,  that  any  usurpation  or  oppression  can
take  place.^

^  937.  But  waiving  this  consideration,  it  will  at  once
be  seen,  that  the  state  governments  have  complete
means  of  self-protection,  as  with  the  sole  exception  of
duties  on  imports  and  exports,  (which  the  constitution
has  taken  from  the  states,  unless  it  is  exercised  by  the
consent  of  congress,)  the  power  of  taxation  remains
iix  the  states  concurrent  and  co-e;ctensive  with  that
of  congress.  The  slightest  attention  to  the  subject
will  demonstrate  this  beyond  all  controversy.  The
language  of  the  constitution  does  not,  in  terms,  make
it  an  exclusive  power  in  congress ;  the  existence  of  a
concurrent  power  is  not  incompatible  with  the  exercise
of  it  by  congress ;  and  the  states  are  not  expressly
prohibited  from  us'mg  it  by  the  constitution.  Under
such  circumstances,  the  argument  is  irresistible,  that  a
concurrent  power  remains  in  the  states,  as  a  part  of
their  originsd  and  unsurrendered  sovereignty.*

1  The  Pedewliet,  No.  31,  32.

9  The  FeOeralist,  No.  3*2.  See  Gihb<ms  v.  C^den,  9  Wheat  R.  1,
199  to  202.  1  Kent»8  Coram.  Lect  18,  p.  3t)3, 367,  368, 369. —This  sub-
ject has  been  already  considered  in  these  Commentaries,  in  the  rules  of
interpretation  of  the  constitution  ;  and  a  very  important  illustratim,  in
tfie  Federalist,  No.  32,  on  this  very  point  of  Uzation,  was  cited  there.  It
seems,  therefore,  wholly  unnecessary  to  repeat  the  reasoning.  See  also
4  Wheaton's  ,R.  193, 316 ;  5  Wheaton's  R.  22,  24, 28, 45,  49  ;  9  Whea-
ton's  R.  199, 210,  238 ,- 12  Whemton's  R.  448.


Digitized  by


Google


CH« XIT.] POWERS OF COKGRESS — TAXES.  411

§  938.  The  remarks  of  the  Federalist,  on  this  point,
are  very  full  and  cogent.  "There  is,  plainly,^  says
that  work,  "no  expression,  in  the  granting  clause,
which  makes  that  power  exclusive  m  the  Union.
There  is  no  independent  clause,  or  sentencfe,  which
prohibits  the  states  from  exercising  it.  So  far  is  this
from  being  the  case,  that  a  plain  and  conclusive  argu-
ment to  the  contrary  is  deducible  from  the  restraint
laid  upon  the  states,  in  relation  to  duties  on  imports
and  exports.  This  restriction  implies  an  admission,
that,  if  it  were  not  inserted,  the  states  would  possess
the  power  it  excludes ;  and  it  implies  a  further  admis*
sion,  that  as  to  all  other  taxes  the  authority  of  the
states  remains  undiminished.  In  any  other  view,  it
would  be  both  unnecessary  and  dangerous.  It  would
be  unnecessary,  because,  if  the  grant  to  the  Union  rf
the  power  of  laying  such  duties  implied  the  exclusion
of  the  states,  or  even  their  subordination  in  this  par-
ticular, there  would  be  no  need  of  such  a  restriction.
It  would  be  dangerous,  because  the  introduction  of  it
leads  directly  to  the  conclusion,  which  has  been  men-
tioned, and  which,  if  the  reasoning  of  the  objectors  be
just,  could  not  have  been  intended ;  I  mean,  that  the
states  in  all  cases,  to  which  the  restriction  did  not  ap-
ply, would  have  a  concurrent  power  of  taxation  with
the  Union.  The  restriction  in  question  amounts  to
what  lawyers  call  a  negative  pregnant ;  that  is,  a  ne-
gation of  one  thing,  and  an  affirmance  of  another;  a
negation  of  the  authority  of  the  states  to  impose  taxes
on  imports  and  exports ;  and  an  affirmance  of  their  au-
thority to  impose  them  on  other  articles.*' — "  As  to  a
supposition  of  repugnancy  between  the  power  of  taxa-
tion in  the  states,  and  in  the  Union ;  it  cannot  be  sup-
ported in  that  sense,  which  would  be  requisite  to  wcx^


Digitized  by


Google


412 CONSTITUTIOir  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

an  exclusion  of  the  states.  It  is  indeed  possible,  Aat
a  tax  might  be  laid  on  a  particular  article  by  a  state,
which  might  render  it  inexpedient,  that  a  fiirther  tax
should  be  laid  on  the  same  article  by  the  Union.  But
it  would  not  imply  a  constitutional  inability  to  impose  a
further  tax.  The  quantity  of  the  imposition,  the  ex-
pediency of  an  increase,  on  either  side,  would  be  mu-
tually questions  of  prudence ;  but  there  would  be  in-
volved no  direct  contradiction  of  power.  The  particu-
lar policy  of  the  national  and  state  system  of  finance
mi^t,  now  and  then,  not  exactly  coincide,  and  might
require  reciprocal  forbearance.  It  is  not,  however,  a
mere  possibility  of  inconvenience,  in  the  exercise  oS
powers ;  but  an  immediate  constitutional  repugnancy,
that  can,  by  implication,  alienate  and  extinguish  a  pre-
existing right  of  sovereignty.'**

§  939.  It  is  true,  that  the  laws  of  the  Union  are  to
be  supreme.'  But,  without  this,  they  would  amount  to
nothing.  It  may  be  admitted,  that  a  law,  laying  a  tax
for  the  use  of  the  United  States,  would  be  supreme  in
its  nature,  and  legally  uncontrollable.  Tet  a  law,  ab-
rogating a  state  tax,  or  preventing  its  collection,  would
be  as  clearly  unconstitutional ;  and,  therefore,  not  the
supreme  law.  As  far  as  an  improper  accumulation  of
taxes  on  the  same  thing  might  tend  to  render  the  col-
lection difficult,  or  precarious,  it  would  be  a  mutual  in-
convenience, not  arising  from  superiority,  or  defect  of
power  on  either  side,  but  from  an  injudicious  exercise
of  it«

1  The  Federalist,  No.  32,  S6.  See  dso  3  American  Museum,  338,
841;  I  EUiot'sDeb.  307,306;  Id. 31 5, 3 16;  id.  3*21  to:m;  2  Elliot's  Deb.
196  to  204 ;  M'CuUock  Y.SlaU  of  Maryland,  4  Wheat  R.  316, 4:33  to  436;
9  Wheaton's  R.  199,200,201  ;  12  Wheaton's  R.  448.— Whether  a
state  can  tax  an  instrument,  created  by  the  national  government,  to  ac-
.  complisb  national  objects,  will  be  hereafter  considered.

9  The  Federalist,  No.  33, 36  ;  1  Elliot's  Deb.  307, 308  ;  Id,  321, 322.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XIV.] POWERS or CONORS8S — TAXES.  413

^  940,  The  states,  with  this  concurrent  power,  will
be  entirely  safe,  and  have  ample  resources  to  meet  all
their  wants,  whatever  they  may  be,  although  few  public
expenses,  comparatively  speaking,  vvill  fall  to  their  lot
to  provide  for.  They  wUl  be  chiefly  of  a  domestic  cha-
racter, and  affecting  internal  polity ;  whereas,  the  re-
sources of  the  Union  will  cover  the  vast  expenditures,
occasioned  by  foreign  intercourse,  wars,  and  other
charges  necessary  for  the  safety  and  prosperity  of  the
Union.  The  mere  civil  list  of  any  country  is  always
small ;  the  expenses  of  armies,  and  navies,  and  foreign
relations  unavoidably  great.  There  is  no  sound  reason,
why  the  states  should  possess  any  exclusive  power
over  sources  of  revenue,  not  reqmred  by  their  wants.
But  there  is  the  most  urgent  propriety  in  conceding  to
the  Union  all,  which  may  be  commensurate  by  their
wants.  Any  attempt  to  discriminate  between  the
sources  of  revenue  would  leave  too  much,  or  too  little
to  the  states.  If  the  exclusive  power  of  extenial
taxation  were  given  to  the  Union,  and  of  external  taxa-
tion to  the  states,  it  would,  at  a  rough  calculation,  prob-
ably give  to  the  states  a  conmiand  of  two  thirds  of  the
resources  of  the  community,  to  defray  from  a  tenth  to
a  twentieth  of  its  expenses ;  and  to  the  Union,  one  third
of  the  resources  of.  the  community,  to  defray  from  nine
tenths  to  nineteen  twentieths  of  its  expenses.  Such
an  unequal  distribution  is  wholly  indefensible.  And  it
may  be  added,  that  the  resources  of  the  Union  would,
or  might  be  diminished  exactly  in  proportion  to  the  m-
crease  of  demands  upon  its  treasury ;  for  (as  has
been  abeady  seen)  war,  which  brings  the  great  expen-
ditures, narrows,  or  at  least  may  narrow  the  resources  of
taxation  from  duties  on  imports  to  a  very  alarming  de-
gree. If  we  enter  any  other  line  of  discrunination,  it


Digitized  by


Google


414 coirsTiTimoN  or  the  u.  states, [book  ni.

wUl  be  equally  difficult  to  adjust  the  proper  proporticms ;
for  the  inquiry  itself,  in  respect  to  the  future  wants, ^  as
well  of  the  states,  as  of  the  Union,  and  their  relative
proportion,  must  involve  elements,  for  ever  changing,
and  incapable  of  any  precise  ascertainment  Too
much,  or  too  little  would  for  ever  be  found  to  belong  to
the  states ;  and  the  states,  as  well  as  the  Union,  might
be  endangered  by  the  very  precautions  to  guard  against
abuses  of  power.^  Any  separation  of  the  subjects  of
revenue,  which  could  have  been  fallen  upon,  would
have  amounted  to  a  sacrifice  of  the  interests  of  the
Union  to  the  power  of  the  individual  states ;  or  of  a
surrender  of  important  functions  by  the  latter,  which
would  have  removed  them  to  a  mean  provincial  servi-
tude, and  dependence.*

§  941.  Other  objections  of  a  specious  character
were  urged  against  confiding  to  congress  a  general
power  of  taxation.  Among  these,  none  were  insisted
on  with  more  frequency,  and  earnestness,  than  the  in-
capacity of  congress  to  judge  of  the  proper  subjects
of  taxation,  considering  the  diversified  interests,  and
pursuits  of  the  states,  and  the  impracticability  of  re-
presenting in  that  body  all  their  interests  and  pursuits.'
The  principal  pressure  of  this  argument  has  been  al-
ready examined,  in  the  survey  already  taken  ot  the

i  The  Federalist,  No.  34;  J  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  934,235,
236.

I  s  The  Federalist  calculated,  that  tlie  highest  prohahle  sum,  required
for  the  ordinary  permanent  expenses  of  any  state  government,  would
not  exceed  a  million  of  dollars.  But  that  of  the  Union,  it  was  supposed,
could  not  be  susceptible  of  any  exact  measure.  The  Federalist,  No.
34.

3  The  Federalist,  No.a5,  36  ;  1  Elliot's  Deb.  297  to  300 ;  Id.  309  to
3ia  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  237,  238 ;  2  Elliot's  Deb.  98;  Id.
185, 186  to  188  ;  Id.  201, 20^,  203  ;  Id.  232, 236 ;  3  £lliot'«  Debatei,
77  to  91.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIT.] P0WBR8  OF  COKGRESS-^^TAXEI.  415

structure  and  oi^nization  of  the  senate,  and  house  of
Representatives*  In  truth,  if  it  has  any  real  force,  or
efficacy,  it  is  an  argument  against  any  national  gov-
ernment, having  any  efficient  national  powers ;  and  it
is  not  necessary  to  repeat  the  reasoning,  on  which  the
expediency,  or  necessity  of  such  a  government  has  been
endeavoured  to  be  demonstrated.  And,  in  respect  to  the
particular  subject  of  taxation,  there  is  quite  as  much  rea-
son to  suppose,  that  there  will  be  an  adequate  assemblage
of  experience,  knowledge,  skill,  and  wisdom,  in  congress,
and  as  adequate  means  of  ascertaining  the  proper  bearing
of  all  taxes,  whether  direct,  or  indirect,  whether  affect-
ing-agriculture, commerce,  or  manufactures,  as  to  dis-
charge any  other  functbns  delegated  to  congress.  To
suppose  otherwise,  is  to  suppose  the  Union  unpractica-
bie,  or  mischievous.^

^  942.  Other  objections  were  raised  on  the  ground
of  the  multiplied  means  of  influence  in  the  njaiional
government,  growing  out  of  the  appointments  to  office,
necessary  in  the  collection  of  the  revenues ;  the  host
of  officers,  which  would  swarm  over  the  land,  like
locusts,  to  devour  its  substance  ;,and  the  terrific  op-
pressions, resulting  from  double  taxes,  and  harsh,  and
arbitrary  regulations.*  These  objections  were  an-
swered, as  well  might  be  supposed,  by  appeals  to  com-
mon sense,  and  common  experience;  and  they  are  the
less  necessary  now  to  be  refuted,  since  in  the  actual
practice  of  the  government  they  have  been  proved  to
be  visionary,  and  Macious,  the  dreams  of  speculative
statesmen,  indulging  their  love  of  mgenious  paradoxes,

1  The  Federalist,  No.  35,  36,  41,  45  ;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.
244,  245.

3  The  Federalist,  No  36  ;  2  Elliot's  Debates  52, 53,  70;  Id.  206  ;  3
Elliot's  Debates,  282, 263 ;  2  Amesican  Musetun,  543.


Digitized  by


Google


416 coirsTiTUTioir  of  the  v.  states, [book  ni.

or  the  suggestions  of  fear,  stimulated  by  discontent,  or
carried  away  by  phantoms  of  the  imagination.^

§  943.  But  another  extraordinary  objection,  which
shows,  how  easily  men  may  persuade  themselves  of  the
truth  of  almost  any  proposition,  which,  temporary  inter-
ests or  excitements  induce  them  to  believe,  was  urged
from  the  North ;  and  it  was,  that  the  impost  would  be  a
partial  tax  ;  and  that  the  southern  states  will  pay  but  little
in  comparison  with  the  northern.  It  was  refuted  by
unanswerable  reasoning ;'  and  would  hardly  deserve
mention,  if  the  opposite  doctrine  had  not  been  recently
revived  and  propagated  with  abundant  zeal  at  the  South,
that  duties  on  importations  fallivith  the  most  calamitous
inequality  on  the  southern  states.  Nay,  it  has  been
seriously  urged,  that  a  single  southern  state  is  burthen-
ed  with  the  payment  of  more  than  half  of  thfe  whole
duties  levied  on  foreign  goods  throughout  the  Union.

§  944.  Again ;  it  was  objected,  that  there  was  no
certainty,  that  any  duties  would  be  laid  on  importations ;
for  the  southern  states  might  object  to  all  imposts  of
this  nature,  as  they  have  no  manufactures  of  their  own,
and  consume  more  foreign  goods,  than  the  northern
states ;  and,  therefore,  direct  taxes  would  be  the  com-
mon resort  to  s»upply  revenue.'  To  which  no  other
answer  need  be  given,  than,  that  the  rule  of  apportion-
ment, as  well  as  the  inequalities  of  such  taxes,  would»
undoubtedly,  produce  a  strong  disinclination  in  the  na-
tion, and  especially  in  the  southern  states,  to  resort
to  them,  unless  under  extraordinary  circumstances.*

f 1  The  Federalist,  No.  156  ;  3  American  Mu8eym,338,  341  ;  1  Elliot's
Deb.  81, 293,  204,  300  to  302  ;  Id.  337,  338  ;  2  Elliot's  Deb.  98  ;  Id.
198  to  204.
9  See  Mr.  Ellsworth's  Speech,  3  Aroeiican  Museum,  338, 340.

3  1  Elliot's  Debates,  90, 91.

4  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  234  to  238 ;  TBe  Federalist,  No.  13.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  00NORE8S — TAXES.  417

An  objection,  of  a  directly  opposite  character,  was
also  taken  ;  viz.  that  the  power  of  laying  direct  taxes
was  not  proper  to  be  granted  to  the  national  govern-
ment, because  it  was  unnecessary,  impracticable,  unsafe,
and  accumulative  of  expense.^  This  objection  also  was
shown  to  be  imfounded;  and,  indeed,  under  certain
exigencies,  which  have  been  ah*eady  alluded  to^  the  na-
tional government  might  for  want  of  it  be  utterly  pros-
trated.*

^  945.  Other  objections  were  urged,  which  it  seems
unnecessary  to  enumerate,  as  they  were  either  tempo-
rary in  their  nature,  o|*  were  mere  auxiliaries  to  those
ah^ady  mentioned.  The  experience  of  the  national
government  has  hitherto  shown  the  entire  safety,  prac">
ticability,  and  even  necessity  of  its  possessmg  the
general  power  of  taxation.  The  states  have  exercised
a  concurrent  power  without  obstruction  or  inconve^
nience,  and  enjoy  revenues  adequate  to  all  their  wants;
more  adequate,  indeed,  than  they  could  possibly  pos-
sess, if  the  Union  were  abolished,  or  the  national
government  were  not  vested  with  a  general  power  of
taxation,  which  enables  it  to  provide  for  all  objects  of
common  defence  and  general  wel£sa*e.  The  triumph  of
the  friends  of  the  constitution,  in  securing  this  great
fundamental  source  of  all.  real  effective  national  sove-
reignty, was  most  signal ;  and  it  is  the  noblest  monu«
ment  of  their  wisdom,  patriotism,  and  independence.
Popular  feelmgs,  and  popular  prejudices,  and  local
interests,  and  the  pride  of  state  authority,  and  the  jeal-

31, 36 ;  1  Elliot's  Debates,  61, 63 ;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  105 ;  3  Elliot's  De-
bates, 77  to  91 ;  8  Jouni.  of  Continent.  Congress,  16th  Dec.  1783,  p.  203*

1  3  Elliot's  Debates,  197  to  304 ;  Id.  308,  333, 335 ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,
77,91.

9  Ibid.

VOL.  II.  63


Digitized  by


Google


418  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STA^Si* [BOOK  HI.

ousy  of  state  sovereignty,  were  all  against  thenu Yet
they  were  not  dismayed ; and  by  steadfast  appeals  to
reason,  to  the  calm  sense  of  the  people,  and  to  the
lessons  of  history,  they  subdued  (^position,  and.  won
ccmfidence. Without  the  possession  of  this  power,  the
constitution  would  have  long  since,  like  the  confedera-
tion, have  dwindled  down  to  an  empty  pageant It
would  have  become  an  unreal  mockery,  deluding  our
hopes,  and  exciting  our  fears. It  would  have  flitted
before  us  for  a  moment  with  a  pale  and  ineffectual  light,
and  then  have  departed  for  ever  to  the  land  of  shad-
ows. There  is  so  much  candour  and  force  in  the
remarks  of  the  learned  American  commentator  cm
Blackstone^  on  this  subject,  that  they  deserve  to  be
cited  in  this  place.* **  A  candid  review  of  this  part  of
the  federal  constitution  cannot  fail  to  excite  our  just
applause  of  the  principles,  upon  which  it  is  founded.
All  the  arguments  against  it  appear  to  have  been  drawn
torn  the  mexpediency  of  establishing  such  a  form  of
government,  rather  than  from  any  defect  in  this  part  of
the  system,  admitting,  that  a  general  government  was
necessary  to  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  the  states
individually. This  great  primary  question  being  once
decided  in  the  affirmative,  it  might  be  difficult  to  prove,
that  any  part  of  the  powers  granted  to  congress  in  this
clause  ought  to  have  been  altogether  withheld : yet
being  granted,  rather  as  an  ultimate  provision  in  any
possible  case  of  emergency,  than  as  a  means  of  ordi-
nary revenue,  it  is  to  be  wished,  that  the  exercise  rf
powers,  either  oppressive  m  then*  operation,  or  mcon-
sistent  with  the  genius  of  the  people,  or  irreconcilable
to  their  prejudices,  might  be  reserved  for  cogent  occa-
sions, which  might  justify  the  temporary  recourse  to  a

1  J  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  346.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  C0N6IUB88 — TAXES.  419

lesser  evil,  as  the  means  of  avoiding  one  more  perma-
nent, and  of  greater  magnitude.''

§  946.  The  language  of  the  constitution  is,  ^  Congress
^  shall  have  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  im-*
^  posts,  and  excises,''  &c.  ^  But  all  duties^  imposts^  and
*^  excises  shall  be  uniform  throughout  the  United  States.*^
A  distinction  is  here  taken  between  taxes,  and  duties,
imposts,  and  excises ;  and,  indeed,  there  are  other
parts  of  the  constitution  respecting  the  taxing  power,
(as  will  presently  be  more  fully  seen,)  such  as  the  regu-
lations respecting  direct  taxes,  the  prohibition  of  taxes
or  duties  on  exports  by  the  United  States,  and  the
prohibition  of  imposts  or  duties  by  the  states  on  im-
ports or  exports,  which  require  an  attention  to  this  dis-
tinction.

§  94.7  In  a  general  sense,  all  contributions  imposed
by  the  government  upon  individuals  for  the  service  of
the  state,  are  called  taxes,  by  whatever  name  they  may
be  known,  whether  by  the  name  of  tribute,  tythe,
talliage,  impost,  duty,  gabel,  custom,  subsidy,  aid,  supply,
excise,  or  other  name.^  In  this  sense,  they  are  usually
divided  mto  two  great  classes,  those,  which  are  dh-ect,
and  those,  which  are  indirect  Under  the  former  de-
nomination are  included  taxes  on  land,  or  real  property,
and  under  the  latter,  taxes  on  articles  of  consumption.'
The  constitution,  by  giving  the  power  to  lay  and  collect
taxes  in  general  terms,  doubtless  meant  to  include  all
sorts  of  taxes,  whether  direct  or  indirect*  But,  it  may
be  asked,  if  such  was  the  intention,  why  were  the  sub-

^  See  2  Staart's  Polit  Econ.  485 ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  232  ;
1  Black.  Comm.  308 ;  3  Dall.  R.  171 ;  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  B.  3,
cb.  3,  B.  5,  cb.  2,  P.  1,  P.  2,  art  4. '

9  The  Federalist,  No.  21,  36;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  233, 238, 239 ;
Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  B.  5,  cb.  2,  Pt  2,  art  1  and  2,  and  App.

3  Lov^^ibmrox^hy.  Bfoi^e, 5  Wheat  R.  317,  318,  319.


Digitized  by


Google


420  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  UU

sequent  words,  dutiesy  imposts  and  excises^  added  in
the  clause  ?  Two  reasons  may  be  suggested ;  the  first,
that  it  was  dcme  to  avoid  all  possibility  of  doubt  in  the
Gcmstniction  of  the  clause,  since,  in  common  parlance,
the  word  taxes  is  sometimes  applied  in  contradistinction
to  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  and,  in  the  delegation  of
so  Tital  a  power,  it  was  desirable  to  avdd  all  possible
misconception  of  this  sort ;  and,  accordingly,  we  find,
m  the  very  first  draft  of  the  constitution,  these  explana-
tory words  are  added.^  Another  reason  was,  that  the
constitution  prescribed  different  rules  of  laying  taxes  in
different  cases,  and,  therefore,  it  was  indispensable  to
make  a  discrimination  between  the  classes,  to  which
each  rule  was  meant  to  apply/

§  948.  The  second  section  of  the  first  article,  which
has  been  already  commented  on  for  another  purpose,
declares,  that  ^^  direct  taxes  shall  be  apportioned  among
^  the  several  states,  which  may  be  included  within  this
**  Union,  according  to  their  respective  numbers."  The
fourth  clai^e  of  the  ninth  section  of  the  same  article
(which  would  regularly  be  commented  on  in  a  fiiture
page)  declares,  that  "  no  capitation,  or  other  du-ect  tax,
^  shall  be  laid,  unless  in  proportion  to  the  census  ot
^enumeration  herein  before  directed  to  be  taken.*'
And  the  clause  now  under  consideration,  that  ^^  all  du-
^  duties,  imposts,  and  excises  shall  be  uniform  through-
**  out  the  United  States.*'  Here,  then,  two  rules  are
prescribed,  the  rule  of  apportionment  (as  it  is  called)
for  direct  taxes,  and  the  rule  of  uniformity  for  duiies^
impostSy  and  excises.  If  there  are  any  other  kinds  of
taxes,  not  embraced  in  one  or  the  other  of  these  two
classes,  (and  it  is  certainly  diflScult  to  give  fiill  effect  to

1  Journal  of  Convention,  2:20.

9  IfyWm  V.  UniUd  SlaUs,  3  Dall.  171, 174.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Xiy.] POWERS  OF  COKGRESS — TAXEl^.  421

the  wwds  of  the  coastitution  without  supposing  them
to  exist,)  it  would  seem,  that  congress  is  left  at  full
liberty  to  levy  the  same  by  either  rule,  or  by  a  mixture
of  both  rules,  or  perhaps  by  any  other  rule,  not  incon-
sistent with  the  general  purposes  of  the  constitution.^
It  is  evident,  that  ^duties,  imposts,  and  excises^  are
indirect  taxes  in  the  sense  of  the  constitution.  But  the
difficulty  still  remains,  to  ascertain^  what  taxes  are  com-
prehended under  this  description ;  and  what  under  the
description  of  direct  taxes.  It  has  been  remarked  by
Adam  Smith,  that  the  private  revenue  of  individuals
arises  ultimately  from  three  diflferent  sources,  rent,
profit,  and  wages ;  and,  that  every  public  tax  must  be
finally  paid  fix)m  some  one,  or  all  of  these  differeiit
sorts  of  revenue.'  He  treats  all  taxes  upon  land,  or
the  produce  of  land,  or  upon  houses,  or  parts,  or  ap-
pendages thereof  (such  as  hearth  taxes  and  window
taxes,)  under  the  head  of  taxes  upon  rent ;  all  taxes
upon  stock,  and  money  at  interest,  upon  other  personal
property  yielding  an  income,  and  upon  particular  em-
ployments, or  branches  of  trade  and  business,  under
the  head  of  taxes  on  profits ;  and  taxes  upon  salaries
under  the  head  of  wages.  He  treats  capitation  taxes
and  taxes  on  consumable  articles,  as  mixed  taxes,  falling
upon  all  or  any  of  the  different  species  of  revenue.'  ,  A
fiill  consideration  of  these  different  classifiations  of
taxes  belongs  more  properly  to  a  treatise  upon  political
economy,  than  upon  constitutional  law.
,  ^  949.  The  word  "  duties ''  has  not,  perhaps,  in  all
cases  a  very  exact  signification,  or  rather  it  is  used
sometimes  in  a  larger,  aud  sometimes  in  a  narrower

' 1  Ht^Um  V.  United  Stales,  3  Dall.  R.  171.
«  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  B.  5.  ch.  2,  P.  2.
^  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  B.  5,  cb.  2,  P.  3,  art  1, 3, 3, 4.


Digitized  by


Google


422 coirsTiTirriON  or  the  v.  states, [book  iir.

sense.  In  its  large  sense,  it  is  rery  nearly  an  eqoiva*
lent  to  taxes,  embracing  all  impositions  or  charges  levied
on  persons  Or  things.^  In  its  more  restrained  sense,  it
is  often  used  as  equivalent  to  "  customs,'*  which  appel-
lation is  usually  applied  to  those  taxes>  which  are  paya-
ble upon  goods  and  merchandise  imported,  or  exported^
and  was  probably  given  on  account  of  the  usual  and
constant  demand  of  them  for  the  use  of  kings,  states,  and
governments.'  In  this  sense,  it  is  nearly  synonymous
with  ^  imposts^''  which  is  sometimes  used  m  the  large
sense  of  taxes,  or  duties,  or  impositioi\s,  and  sometimes
in  the  more  restradned  sense  of  a  duty  on  imported
goods  and  merchandise.'  Perhaps  it  is  not  unreasona-
ble to  presume,  that  this  narrower  sense  might  be  in
the  minds  of  the  framers  of  the  constitution,  when  this
clause  was  adopted,  since,  in  another  clause,  it  is  sub-
sequently provided,  that  "No  tax  or  duty  shall  be  laid
•*on  articles  exported  from  any  state  ;*'  and,  that  "  No
^  state  shall,  without  the  consent  of  congress,  lay
'^any  imposts  or  duties  on  imports  or  exports^  except
^  what  may  be  absolutely  necessary  for  executing  its
•*  inspection  laws.'*  *  There  is  another  provision,  that
"No  state  shall,  vnthout  the  consent  of  congress,
"lay  any  duty  of  tonnage  j^  &c. ;  from  which,  pertiaps,
it  may  be  gathered,  that  a  tonnage  duty,  (by  which  is
to  be  understood,  not  the  ancient  custom  in  England,
so  called,  on  wines  imported,^  but  a  duty  cki  the  ton-

1  See  The  Federalist,  No.  36.

s  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  B.  4,  ch.  1,  P.  3,  B.  5,  ch.  9,  art  4 ;
Hale  on  Coatomst  Uarg.  Tracts,  p.  115,  &c.;  1  Black.  Ck»im.  813^  314,
315, 316 ;  Com.  Dig.  Prerogative,  D.  43  to  D.  49.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  30 ;  3  Elliot's  Debates,  289.

4  Mr.  Madison  is  of  opinion,  that  the  terms,  tmposts,  and  duties,  in  these
clauses,  are  used  as  synonymous.  There  is  much  force  in  bis  sugges-
tions. Mr.  Ma'lison's  Letter  to  Mr.  Cabell,  18th  Sept  1828.

5  1  Black.  Comm.  315;  Hale  on  Customs,  Harg.  Law  Tracts,  p.  3»
ch.7,ch.  14,  ch.  15.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CR.  XIV.] POWBRS  OF  CONOItESS"— TAXES.  423

nage  of  ships  arid  vessels,)  was  not  deemed  an  impostj
strictly,  but  a  duty*  However,  it  must  be  admitted,
that  little  certainty  can  be  arrived  at  from  such  slight
changes  of  phraseology,  where  the  words  are  suscepti-
ble of  various  interpretations,  and  of  more  or  less  expan-
sion. The  most,  that  can  be  done,  is,  to  offer  a  probable
conjecture  from  the  apparent  use  of  words  in  a  con-
nexion, where  it  is  desirable  not  to  deem  any  one
superfluous,  or  synonymous  with  the  others.  A  learned
commentator  has  supposed,  that  the  words,  'Muties
and  imposts,''  in  the  constitution,  were  probably
intended- to  comprehend  every  species  of  tax  or  contri-
bution, not  included  under  the  ordinary  terms,  ^^  taxes
and  excises.***  Another  learned  judge  has  said,*
^what  is  the  natural  and  common,  or  technical  and
appropriate,  meaning  of  the  words,  duty  and  excise^  it
is  not  easy  to  ascertain.  They  present  no  clear  or
precise  idea  to  the  mind.  Different  persons  will  annex
different  significations  to  the  terms."  On  the  same
occasion,  another  learned  judge  said,  '<  The  term,  diUy^
is  the  most  comprehensive,  next  to  the  generical  term,
tax;  and  practically  in  Great  Britain,  (whence  we  take
our  general  ideas  of  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  excises,
customs,  &c.)  embraces  taxes  on  stamps,  tolls  for  pas-
sage, &c.  and  is  not  confined  to  taxes  on  importations
only."*

^  940.  ^  Excises  "  are  generally  deemed  to  be  of  an
opposite  nature  to  "imposts,"  in  the  restrictive  sense  of
the  latter  term;  and  are  defined  to  be  an  inland  imposi-
tion, paid  sometimes  upon  the  consumption  of  the  com-


1  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  24a

»  Mr.  Justice  Patterson  in  HyUon  v.  U.  Stales,  3  Dall.  Rrl7I,  177.

8  Mr.  Justice  Chase,  Ibid.  174. See  The  Federalist,  No.  36.


Digitized  by


Google


424 coNSTiTirrroN  of  the  u.  states, [book  in.

modity,  or  frequently  upcm  the  retail  sale,  which  is  the
last  stage  before  the  consumption.^

§  951.  But  the  more  important  inquiry  is,  what  are
direct  taxes  in  the  sense  of  the  constitution,  since  they
are  required  to  be  laid  by  the  rule  of  apportionment,
and  all  indirect  taxes,  whether  they  fall  under  the  head
of  ^  duties,  imposts,  or  excises,"  or  under  any  other
description,  may  be  laid  by  the  rule  of  uniformity.  It  is
dear,  that  citation  taxes,'  or,  as  they  are  more  com-
monly called,  poll  taxes,  that  is,  taxes  upon  the  poUs^
heads,  or  persons,  of  the  contributors,  are  direct  taxes,
for  the  constitution  has  expressly  enumerated  them,  as
such.  *^No  capitation,  or  other  direct  tax,  shall  be
laid,"  &c.  is  the  language  of  that  instrument.

^  952.  Taxes  on  lands,  houses,  and  other  permanent
real  estate,  or  on  parts  or  appurtenances  thereof^  have
always  been  deemed  of  the  same  character,  that  is,  di-
rect taxes.'  It  has  been  seriously  doubted,  i^  m  the
sense  of  the  constitution,  any  taxes  are  direct  taxes,
except  those  on  polls  or  on  lands*  Mr.  Justice  Chase,
in  Hyttan  v.  UnUed  StateB,  (3  DalL  R.  171,)  said,  "I
am  inclined  to  think,  that  the  du'ect  taxes,  contemplated
by  the  constitution,  are  only  two,  viz.  a  capitation  or  poll
tax  simply,  without  regard  to  property,  profession,  or
other  circumstancie,  and  a  tax  on  land.  I  doubt,  wheth-
er a  tax  by  a  general  assessment  of  personal  property
within  the  United  States  is  included  within  the  term.


I  1  BlaoL  Comro.  318;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  341;  Smith't
Wealth  of  Nations,  B.  5,  ch.  2,  art  4 ;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  209 ;  3  Elliot's
Debates,  289,  290.

<  Bee  2  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  B.  5,  ch.  2,  art  4  ;  The  Federal-
ist, No.  36 ;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  209.

3  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  232,  233 ;  Hylton  v.  United  l^aies,  3
Dall.  R.  171 :  The  Federalist,  No.  21 ;  Loughborough  v.  Blake^  5  Wheat
R.  317  to  325.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS TAXES.  425

direct  tax."  Mr.  Justice  Patterson,  in  the  same  case,
said,  "  It  is  not  necessary  to  determine,  whether  a  tax
on  the  produce  of  land  be  a  direct  or  an  indirect  tax.
Perhaps  the  immediate  product  of  land,  in  its  original
and  crude  state,  ought  to  be  considered,  as  a  part  of  the
land  itself.  .When  the  produce  is  converted  into  a
manufacture,  it  assumes  a  new  shape,  &c.  Whether
*  direct  taxes,'  in  the  sense  of  the  constitution,  compre-
hend any  other  tax,  than  a  capitation  tax,  or  a  tax  on
land,  is  a  questionable  point,  &c.  I  never  entertained
a  doubt,  that  the  principal,  I  will  not  say  the  only,  ob-
jects, that  the  framers  of  the  constitution  contemplated,
as  falling  within  the  rule  of  apportionment,  were  a  capi-
tation tax  and  a  tax  on  land."  And  he  proceeded  to
state,  thatthe  rule  of  apportionment,  both  as  regards  rep-
resentatives, and  as  regards  direct  taxes,  was  adopted
to  guard  the  Southern  states  against  undue  impositions
and  oppressions  in  the  taxing  of  slaves.  Mr.  Justice  Ire-
dell, in  the  same  case,  said,  "  Perhaps  a  direct  tax,  in  the
sense  of  the  constitution,  can  mean  nothing  but  a  tax
on  something  inseparably  annexed  to  the  soil ;  some-
thing capable  of  apportionment  under  all  such  circum-
stances. A  land  or  poll  tax  may  be  considered  of  this
description.  The  latter  is  to  be  considered  so,  particu-
larly imder  the  present  constitution,  on  account  of  the
slaves  in  the  Southern  states,  who  give  a  ratio  in  the
representation  in  the  proportion  of  three  to  five;
Either  of  these  is  capable  of  an  apportionment.  In
regard  to  other  articles,  there  may  possibly  be  consid-
erable doubt."  The  reasoning  of  the  Federalist  seems
to  lead  to  the  same  result.^

^  953.  In  the  year  1794,  congress  passed  an  act,*
laying  duties  upon  carriages  for  the  conveyance  of  per-/


»  the  Federalist,  No.  31,  36.  «  Act  of  1794,  ch.  45.

VOL.  II.  54


Digitized  by


Google


426  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III*

sons,  which  were  kept  by  or  for  any  person,  for  his
own  use,  or  to  be  let  out  to  hire,  or  for  the  conveying
of  passengers,  to  wit,  for  every  coach  the  yearly  sum  of
ten  dollars,  &c.  &c. ;  and  made  the  levy  uniform
throughout  the  United  States.  The  constituticMiality  of
the  act  was  contested,  in  the  case  before  stated,*  upon
the  ground,  that  it  was  a  direct  tax,  and  so  ought  to  be
apportioned  among  the  states  according  to  their  num«
bers.  After  solemn  argument,  the  Supreme  Court
decided,  that  it  was  not  a  direct  tax  within  the  meaning
of  the  constitution.  The  grounds  of  this  decision,  as
stated  in  the  various  opinions  of  the  judges,  were ;  first,
the  doubt,  whether  any  taxes  were  direct  in  the  sense
of  the  constitution,  but  capitation  and  land  taxes,  as  has
been  already  suggested;  secondly,  that  in  cases  of
doubt,  the  rule  of  apportionment  ought  not  to  be  fa-
voured, because  it  was  matter  of  compromise,  and  in
itself  radically  indefensible  and  wrong;  thirdly,  the
monstrous  inequality  and  injustice  of  the  carriage  tax,
if  laid  by  the  rule  of  apportionment,  which  would  show,
that  no  tax  of  this  sort  could  have  been  contemplated
by  the  convention,  as  within  the  rule  of  apportionment ;
fourthly,  that  the  terms  of  the  constitution  were  satisfied
by  confining  the  clause,  respecting  direct  taxes,  to  capi-
tation and  land  taxes ;  fifthly,  that,  accurately  speaking,
all  taxes  on  expenses  or  consumption  are  indirect  taxes,
and  a  tax  on  carriages  is  of  this  kind ;  and,  sixthly,
(what  is  probably  of  most  cogency  and  force,  and  df
itself  decisive,)  that  no  tax  could  be  a  direct  one  in  the
sense  of  the  constitution,  which  was  not  capable  of  ap-
portionment according  to  the  rule  laid  down  in  the  con-
stitution. Thus,  suppose  ten  dollars  were  contemplated
as  a  tax  on  each  coach  or  post-chaise  in  the  United

1  8  Dalla8*o  Reports,  171.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


CH.  XIV.] I»0W£R8  OF  CONGRESS TAXES.  427

States,  and  die  number  of  such  carriages  in  the  United
States  were  one  hundred  and  five,  and  the  num-
ber of  representatives  in  congress  the  same.  This
would  produce  ten  hundred  and  fifty  dollars.  The
share  of  Virginia  would  be  ^'-  parts,  or  ^190 ;  the
share  of  Connecticut  would  be  y|-o  parts*  or  $7(k
Suppose,  then,  in  Virginia,  there  are  fifty  carriages,  the
sum  of  $190  must  be  collected  fi*om  the  owners  of  these
carriages,  and  apportioned  among  them,  which  would
make  each  owner  pay  $3*80.  And  suppose,  in  Con-
necticut, there  are  but  two  carriages,  the  share  of  that
state  ($70)  must  be  paid  by  the  owners  of  those  two-
carriages,  viz.  $35  each.  Yet  congress,  in  such  a  case,
intend  to  lay  a  tax  of  but  ten  dollars  on  each  coach.  And
if,  in  any  state,  there  should  be  no  coach  or  post-chaise
owned,  then,  there  could  be  no  apportionment  at  alL
The  absurdity,  therefore,  of  such  a  mode  of  taxation
demonstrates,  that  such  a  tax  cannot  be  a  direct  tax
in  the  sense  of  the  constitution.  It  is  no  answer  to  this
reasoning,  that  congress,  having  determined  to  raise
such  a  sum  of  money,  as  such  a  tax  on  carriages  would
produce,  might  apportion  the  sum  due  by  the  rule  of
apportionment,  and  then  order  it  to  be  collected  on
different  articles,  selected  in  each  state.  That  would  be,
not  to  lay  and  collect  a  tax  on  carriages,  but  on  the
articles,  which  were  made  contributory  to  the  payment
Thus,  the  tax  might  be  called  a  tax  on  carriages,  and
levied  on  horses.  And  the  same  objection  would  lie
to  an  apportionment  of  the  sum,  and  then  a  general
assessment  of  it  by  congress  upon  all  articles.^

I  S  Dallas's  Reports,  171 ; Rawle  oq  Const  ch.  9;  4  Elliot's  Deb.
5242  ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  1%  p.  239,  240 ; 1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm!

App.3d4.


Digitized  by


Google


428 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  IT.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

§  954.  Having  endeavoured  to  point  out  the  leadmg
distinctions  between  direct  and  indirect  taxes,  and  that
duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  in  the  sense  of  the  consti-
tution, belong  to  the  latter  class,  the  order  of  the  sub-
ject would  naturally  lead  us  to  the  inquiry,  why  direct
taxes  are  required  to  be  governed  by  the  rule  of  appor-
tionment ;  and  why  "duties,  imposts,  and  excises"  are
required  to  be  uniform  throughout  the  United  States.
The  answer  to  the  former  will  be  given,  when  we  come
to  the  farther  examination  of  certain  prohibitory  and
restrictive  clauses  of  the  constitution  on  the  subject  of
taxation. The  answer  to  the  latter  may  be  given  in  a
few  words. It  was  to  cut  off  all  undue  preferences  of
one  state  over  another  in  the  regulation  of  subjects
affecting  their  common  interests. Unless  duties,  im-
posts, and  excises  were  uniform,  the  grossest  and  most
oppressive  inequalities,  vitally  affecting  the  pursuits  and
employments  of  the  people  of  different  states,  might
exist The  agriculture,  commerce,  or  manufactures  of
one  state  might  be  built  up  on  the  ruins  of  those  of
another ;  and  a  combination  of  a  few  states  in  congress
might  secure  a  monopoly  of  certain  branches  of  trade
and  business  to  themselves,  to  the  injury,  if  not  to  the
destruction,  of  their  less  favoured  neighbours. The  con-
stitution throughout  all  its  provisions  is  an  instrument  of
checks,  and  restraints,  as  well  as  of  powers. It  does  not
rely  on  confidence  in  the  general  government  to  pre-
serve the  interests  of  all  the  states. It  is  founded  in  a
wholesome  and  strenuous  jealousy,  which,  foreseeing  the
possibility  of  mischief,  guards  with  solicitude  against  any
exercise  of  power,  which  may  endanger  the  states,  as
far  as  it  is  practicable. If  this  provision,  as  to  uni-
formity of  duties,  had  been  omitted,  although  the  power
might  never  have  been  abused  to  the  injury  of  the


• Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF CONGRESS  —  TAXES.  429

feebler  states  of  the  Union,  (a  presumption,  which  his-
tory does  not  justify  us  in  deeming  quite  safe  or  certain;)
yet  it  would,  of  itself,  have  been  sufficient  to  demolish,
in  a  practical  sense,  the  value  of  most  of  the  other
restrictive  clauses  in  the  constitution.  New  York  and
Pennsylvania  might,  by  an  easy  combination  with  the
Southern  states,  have  destroyed  the  whole  navigation
of  New  England.  A  combination  of  a  different  char-
acter, between  the  New  England  and  the  Western
states,  might  have  borne  down  the  agriculture  of  the
South ;  and  a  combination  of  a  yet  different  character
might  have  struck  at  the  vital  interests  of  manufactures.
So  that  the  general  propriety  of  this  clause  is  established
by  its  intrinsic  political  wisdom,  as  well  as  by  its  ten-
dency to  quiet  alarms,  and  suppress  discontents.^

§  956.  Two  practical  questions  of  great  importance
have  arisen  upon  the  construction  of  this  clause,  either
standing  alone,  or  in  connexion  with  other  clauses,  and
incidental  powers,  given  by  the  constitution.  One  is,
whether  the  government  has  a  right  to  lay  taxes  for  any
other  purpose,  than  to  raise  revenue,  however  much
that  purpose  may  be  for  the  common  defence.  Or  gen-
eral welfare.  The  other  is,  whether  the  money,  when
raised,  can  be  appropriated  to  any  other  purposes,  than
such,  as  are  pointed  out  in  the  other  enumerated  pow-
ers of  congress.  The  former  involves  the  question,
whether  congress  can  lay  taxes  to  protect  and  encour-
age domestic  manufactures ;  the  latter,  whether  con-
gress can  appropriate  money  to  internal  improvements.
Each  of  these  questions  has  given  rise  to  much  animat-
ed controversy ;  each  has  been  affirmed  and  denied,
with  great  pertinacity,  zeal,  and  eloquent  reasoning ;

1  See  4  EUiot's  Deb.  235,  236.

t


Digitized  by


Google


430  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

each  has  become  promment  in  the  struggles  of  party ;
and  defeat  in  each  has  not  hitherto  silenced  opposition,
or  given  absolute  security  to  victory.  The  contest  is
often  renewed  ;  and  the  attack  and  defence  maintained
with  equal  ardour.  In  discussing  this  subject,  we  are
treading  upon  the  ashes  of  yet  unextinguished  fires,  —
incedimus  per  ignes  suppositos  cineri  doloso; — and  while
the  nature  of  these  Commentaries  requires,  that  the
doctrine  should  be  freely  examined,  as  maintained  on
either  side,  the  result  will  be  left  to  the  learned  reader,
without  a  desire  to  influence  his  judgment,  or  dogmati-
cally to  announce  that  belonging  to  the  commentator.

§  956.  First,  then,  as  to  the  question,  whether  con-
gress can  lay  taxes,  except  for  the  purposes  of  revenue.
This  subject  has  been  already  touched,  in  considering
what  is  the  true  reading,  and  interpretation  of  the  clause,
conferring  the  power  to  lay  taxes.  If  the  reading  and
interpretation,  there  insisted  on,  be  correct^  it  furnishes
additional  means  to  resolve  the  question,  now  under
consideration.

§  &57.  The  argument  against  the  constitutional  au-
thority is  understood  to  be  miintained  on  the  fdlowing
grounds,  which,  though  applied  to  the  protection  of
manufactures,  are  equally  applicable  to  all  other  cases,
where  revenue  is  not  the  object  The  general  govern-
ment is  one  of  specific  powers,  and  it  can  rightfully
exercise  only  the  powers  expressly  granted,  and  those,
which  may  be  **  necessary  and  proper  '*  to  carry  them
into  effect ;  all  others  being  reserved  expressly  to  the
states,  or  to  the  people.  It  results  necessarily,  that
those,  who  claim  to  exercise  a  power  under  the  consti-
tution, are  bound  to  show,  that  it  is  expressly  granted,  or
that  it  is  "necessary  and  proper,''  as  a  means  to  execute
some  of  the  granted  powers.  No  such  proof  has  been
offered  in  regs^d  to  the  protection  of  manufactures.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIT.] POWERS  OF  C0NQR£8S TAXES*  431

^  958.  It  is  true,  that  the  eighth  section  of  the  first
article  of  the  constitution  authorizes  congress  to  lay
and  coUect  an  impost  duty  ;  but  it  is  granted,  as  a  tax
power,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  revenue ;  a  ^ower,  in  its
nature,  essentially  different  from  that  of  imposing  pro-
tective, or  prohibitory  duties.  The  two  are  incompati-
ble ;  for  the  prohibitory  system  must  end  in  destroying
the  revenue  from  imports.  It  has  been  said,  that  the
system  is  a  violation  of  the  spirit,  and  not  of  the  letter
of  the  constitution.  The  distinction  is  not  material.  The
constitution  may  be  as  grossly  violated  by  acting  against
its  meaning,  as  against  its  letter.  The  constitution
grants  to  congress  the  power  of  imposing  a  duty  on
imports  for  revenue,  which  power  is  abused  by  being
converted  into  an  instrument  for  rearing  up  the  indus-
try of  one  section  of  the  country  on  the  ruins  of  another.
The  violation,  then,  consists  in  using  a  power,  granted
for  one  object,  to  advance  another,  and  that  by  a  sacri-
fice of  the  original  object.  It  is  in  a  word  a  violation
of  perversion^  the  most  dangerous  of  all,  because  the  most
insidious  and  difficult  to  resist.  Such  is  the  reasoning
emanating  from  high  legislative  authority.^  On  another
interesting  occasion,  the  argument  has  been  put  in  the
following  shape.  It  is  admitted,  that  congress  has
power  to  lay  and  collect  such  duties,  as  they  may  deem
necessary  for  the  purposes  of  revenue,  and  mthin  these
Umits  so  to  arrange  those  duties,  as  incidentally ,  and  to
that  extent  to  give  protection  to  the  manufacturer.  But
the  right  is  denied  to  convert,  what  is  here  denominated

1  See  the  exposition  and  protest,  reported  by  a  committee  of  the
house  of  representatives,  of  South  Carolina,  on  19th  of  December,  1829,
and  adopted  ;  the  draft  of  which  has  been  attributed  to  Mr;  Vice  Presi-
dent Calhoun.  I  have  followed,  as  nearly  as  practicable,  the  very  words
of  the  report


Digitized  by


Google


432  CONSTITimON  of  the  it.  states, [book  III.

the  incidental,  into  the  principal  power;  and  transcend-
ing the  limits  of  revenue,  to  impose  an  additional  duty
substantially  and  exclusively  for  the  purpose  of  aflTording
that  protecflon.  Congress  may  countervail  the  regula-
tions of  a  foreign  power,  which  may  be  hostile  to  our
commerce ;  but  their  authority  is  denied  permanently
to  prohibit  all  importation,  for  the  purpose  of  securing
the  home  maricet  exclusively  to  the  domestic  manufac-
turer ;  thereby  destroying  the  commerce  they  were
entrusted  to  regulate,  and  fostering  an  interest,  with
which  they  have  no  constitutional  power  to  interfere.
To  do  so,  therefore;  is  a  palpable  abuse  of  the  taxing
power,  which  was  conferred  for  the  purpose  of  revenue ;
and  if  it  is  referred  to  the  authority  to  regulate  com-
merce, it  is  as  obvious  a  perversion  of  that  power,  since
it  may  be  extended  to  an  utter  annihilation  of  the  objects,
which  it  was  intended  to  protect^

^  969.  In  furtherance  of  this  reasoning,  it  has  been
admitted,  that  under  the  power  to  regulate  commerce,
congress  is  not  limited  to  the  imposition  of  duties  upon
imports  for  the  sole  purpose  of  revenue.  It  may  im-
pose retaliatory  duties  on  foreign  powers ;  but  these
retaliatory  duties  must  be  imposed  for  the  regulation  of
commerce,  not  for  the  encouragement  of  manufactures.
The  power  to  regulate  manufactures,  not  having  been
confided  to  congress,  they  have  no  more  right  to  act
upon  it,  than  they  have  to  interfere  with  the  systems
of  education,  the  poor  laws,  or  the  road  laws,  of  the
states. Congress  is  empowered  to  lay  taxes  for  rev-

1  This  is  extracteil  from  the  address  of  the  Free  Trade  Convention,  at
Philadelphia,  in  Oct  ia31,  p.  33, 34,  attributed  to  the  pen  of  Mr.  Attorney
General  Berrien.  Mr.  Senator  Hayne,  in  his  Speech,  9  January,  1832^
says,  that  be  does  not  know,  where  the  constitutional  objections  to  the
tariff  system  are  better  summed  up^  than  in  this  address,  (p.  31, 32.)


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIY.] POWfiltS  OF  CONGRESS — TAXES.  433

enue,  it  U  true ;  hut  there  is  no  power  to  encourage^
protect^  or  meddle  with  manufactures.^

§  960.  It  is  unnecessary  to  consider  the  argument
at  present,  so  fietr  as  it  bears  upon  the  constitutional
authority  of  congress  to  protect  or  encourage  manufac-
tures ;  because  that  subject  will  more  properly  come
under  review,  in  all  its  bearings,  under  another  head,
viz.  the  power  to  regulate  commerce,  to  which  it  is
nearly  allied,  and  from  which  it  is  more  usually  derived.
Stripping  the  argument,  therefore,  of  this  adventitious
circumstance,  it  resolves  itself  into  this  statement  The
power  to  lay  taxes  is  a  power  exclusively  given  to  raise
revenue,  and  it  can  constitutionally  be  applied  to  no
other  purposes.  The  application  for  other  purposes  is
an  abuse  of  the  power ;  and,  in  fact,  however  it  may  be
in  form  disguised,  it  is  a  premeditated  usurpation  of
authority.  Whenever  money  or  revenue  is  wanted  for
constitutional  purposes,  the  power  to  lay  taxes  may  be
applied  to  obtain  it.  When  money  or  revenue  is  not
so  wanted,  it  is  not  a  proper  means  for  any  constitu-
tional end.

^961.  The  argument  m  favour  of  the  constitutional
authority  is  grounded  upon  the  terms  and  the  intent  of
the  constitution.  It  seeks  for  the  true  meaning  and
objects  of  the  power  accordmg  to  the  obvious  sense  of
the  language,  and  the  nature  of  the  government  pro-
posed to  be  established  by  that  instrument.  It  relies
upon  no  strained  construction  of  words;;  but  demands
a  fair  and  reasonable  interpretation  of  the  clause,  with-
out any  restrictions  not  naturally  implied  in  it,  or  in  the
context  It  will  not  do  to  assume,  that  the  clause  was
intended  solely  for  the  purposes  of  raismg  revenue ;  and

1  CoL  Drayton's  Oration,  at  Charleston,  4th  of  July,  1831,  p.  13, 14.

VOL.  II.  65


Digitized  by


Google


434  CONSTITUTCON  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

then  argue,  that  being  so,  the  power  cannot  be  consti-
tutionally applied  to  any  o±er  purposes.  The  very
point  in  controversy  is,  whe±er  it  is  restricted  to  pur-
poses of  revenue.  That  must  be  proved ;  and  cannot
be  assumed,  as  the  basis  of  reasoning.

§  962.  The  language  of  the  constitution  is,  ^  Congress
^  shall  have  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  im-
**  posts,  and  excises."  If  the  clause  had  stopped  here,
and  remained  in  this  absolute  form,  (as  it  was  in  fact,
when  reported  in  the  first  draft  in  the  convention,)  there
could  not  have  been  the  slightest  doubt  on  the  subject.
The  absolute  power  to  lay  taxes  includes  the  power  in
every  form,  in  which  it  may  be  used,  and  for  every  pur-
pose, to  which  the  legislature  may  choose'  to  apply  it
This  results  from  the  very  nature  of  such  an  unrestrict-
ed power.  A  fortiori  it  might  be  applied  by  congress
to  purposes,  for  which  nations  have  been  accustomed
to  apply  to  it  Now,  nothing  is  more  clear,  firom  the
history  of  commercial  nations,  than  the  fact,  that  the
taxing  power  is  often,  very  often,  applied  for  other  pur-
poses, than  revenue.  It  is  often  applied,  as  a  r^ulation
of  commerce.  It  is  often  applied,  as  a  virtual  prohibi-
tion upon  the  importation  of  particular  articles,  for  the
encouragement  and  protection  of  domestic  products,
and  industry ;  for  the  support  of  agriculture,  commerce,
and  manufactures  ;^  for  retaliation  upon  foreign  monq>-
olies  and  injurious  restrictions  ;*  for  mere  purposes  of
state  policy,  and  domestic  economy;  sometimes  to
banish  a  noxious  article  of  consumption ;  sometimes,  as
a  bounty  upon  an  mfant  manufacture,  or  agricultural

1  Hamilton's  Report  on  Manufactures,  in  1791.

9  See  Mr.  Jefferson's  Report  on  Commercial  Restrictions,  in  1793 ;
5  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  ch.  7,  p.  483  to  487 ;  1  Wait's  State
Piipers,  432, 434.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Xir.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS — TAXES.  436

product ;  sometimes,  as  a  temporary  restraint  of  trade;
sometimes,  as  a  suppression  of  particular  employments;
sometimes,  as  a  prerogative  power  to  destroy  competi-
tion, and  secure  a  monopoly  to  the  government  I^

§  963.  I^  then,  the  power  to  lay  taxes,  bemg  general,
may  embrace,  and  in  the  practice  of  nations  does  em-
brace, all  these  objects,  either  separately,  or  in  combi-
nation, upon  what  foundation  does  the  argument  rest,
which  assumes  one  object  only,  to  the  exclusion  of  all
the  resti  which  insists,  m  eflFect,  that  because  revenue
may  be  one  object,  therefore  it  is  the  sole  object  of  the
power?  which  assumes  its  own  construction  to  be  cor-
rect, because  it  suits  its  own  theory,  and  denies  the
same  right  to  others,  entertaining  a  different  theory  ?
If  the  power  is  general  in  its  terms,  is  it  not  an  abuse
of  all  fair  reasoning  to  insist,  :that  it  is  particular?  to
desert  the  import  of  the  language,  and  to  substitute  other
and  different  language  ?  Is  this  allowable  in  regard  to
any  instrument  ?  Is  it  allowable  in  an  especial  manner,
as  to  constitutions  of  government,  grovnng  out  of  the
rights,  duties,  and  exigencies  of  nations,  and  looking  to
an  mfinite  variety  of  circumstances,  which  may  require
very  different  applications  of  a  given  power  ?

^  964.  In  the  next  place,  then,  is  the  power  to  lay
taxes,  given  by  the  constitution,  a  general  power ;  or
is  it  a  limited  power  ?  If  a  limited  power,  to  what  ob-
jects is  it  limited  by  the  terms  of  the  constitution  ?

§  965.  Upon  this  subject,  (as  has  been  already  stat-
ed,) three  different  opinions,  appear  to  have  been  held
by  statesmen  of  no  common  sagacity  and  ability.  The
first  is,  that  the  power  is  unlimited ;  and  that  the  subse-
quent clause,  **  to  pay  the  debts,  and  provide  for  the
**  common  defence  and  general  welfare,'*  is  a  substan-

1  See  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  B.  5,  ch.  2,  ajt.  4.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


436 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  HI.

tive,  independent  power.  In  the  yiew  of  those,  ^o
maintain  this  opinion,  the  power,  being  general,  cannot
with  any  consistency  be  restrained  to  purposes  of
revenue.

§  966.  The  next  is,  that  the  power  is  restrained  by
the  subsequent  clause,  so  that  it  is  a  power  to  lay  taxes
in  order  to  pay  debts,  and  to  provide  for  the  common
defence  and  general  welfare.  Is  raising  revenue  the
only  proper  mode  to  provide  for  the  common  defence
and  general  welfare  1  May  not  the  general  welfare,  in
the  judgment  of  congress,  be,  4n  given  circumstances,
as  well  provided  for,  nay  better  provided  for,  by  prohibi-
tory duties,  or  by  encouragements  to  domestic  industry
of  all  sorts  ?  If  a  tax  of  one  sort,  as  on  tonnage,  or  for-
eign vessels,  will  aid  commerce,  and  a  tax  on  foreign
raw  materials  will  aid  agriculture,  and  a  tax  on  imported
febrics  will  aid  domestic  manufactures,  and  so  promote
the  general  welfare ;  may  they  not  be  all  constitutionally
united  by  congress  in  a  law  for  this  purpose  1  If  con-
gress can  unite  them  all,  may  they  not  sustam  them  sev-
eraUy  in  separate  laws  ?  Is  a  tax  to  aid  manufactures^
or  agriculture,  or  commerce,  necessarily,  or  even  natur-
ally, against  the  general  welfare,  or  the  common  defence?
TVlio  is  to  decide  upon  such  a  point?  Ccmgress,  to  whom
the  authority  is  given  to  exercise  the  power?  Or  any
other  body,  state  or  national,  which  may  choose  to
assume  it  ?

^  967.  Besides ;  if  a  particular  act  of  ccmgress,  not
for  revenue,  should  be  deemed  an  excess  of  the  pow-
ers ;  does  it  follow,  that  all  other  acts  are  so?  If  the
common  defence  or  general  welfare  can  be  promoted
by  laymg  taxes  in  any  other  manner,  than  for  revenue,
who  is  at  liberty  to  say,  that  congress  cannot  constitu-
tionally exercise  the  power  for  such  a  purpose  ? No


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  KIT.] P0WBR8  OF  COITGWCM  —  TAXE8*  437

one  has  a  right  to  say,  that  the  common  defence  and
general  welfare  can  never  be  promoted  by  lading  taxes,
except  for  revenue.  No  one  has  ever  yet  been  bold
enough  to  assert  such  a  proposition.  Different  men
have  entertamed  opposite  opinions  on  subjects  of  this
nature.  It  is  a  matter  of  theory  and  speculation,  of
political  economy,  and  national  policy,  and  not  a  matter  of
power.  It  may  be  wise  or  unwise  to  lay  taxes,  except
for  revenue ;  but  the  wisdom  or  inexpediency  of  a
measure  is  no  test  of  its  constitutionality.  Those,  there*
fore,  who  hold  the  opinion  above  stated,  must  unavoid-
ably maintain,  that  the  power  to  lay  taxes  b  not  con*
fined  to  revenue ;  but  extends  to  all  cases,  where  it  is
proper  to  be  used  for  the  common  defence  and  gen-
eral welfare.^  One  of  the  most  effectual  means  of  de-
fence agmnst  the  injurious  regulations  and  pdicy  of
foreign  nations,  and  which  is  most  commonly  resorted
to,  b  to  apply  the  power  of  taxation  to  the  products
and  manufactures  of  foreign  nations  by  way  of  retalia-
tion ;  and,  short  of  war,  this  is  found  to  be  practically
that,  which  is  felt  most  extensively,  and  produces  the
most  immediate  redress.  How,  then,  can  it  be  imag-
ined for  a  moment,  that  this  was  not  contemplated  by
the  framers  of  the  constitution,  as  a  means  to  provide
for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare  ?

^  968.  The  tlurd  opinion  is,  (as  has  been  already
stated,)  that  the  power  is  restricted  to  such  specific
objects,  as  are  contained  in  the  other  enumerated  pow-
ers. Now,  if  revenue  be  not  the  sole  and  exchmce
means  of  carrying  into  effect  all  these  enumerated
powers,  the  advocates  of  this  doctrine  must  maintain
vrith  those  of  the  second  opinion,  that  the  power  is  not

^  See  Hamilton's  Report  on  Manufactures,  in  1791 ;  1  Hamilton's
Works,  (edit  1810,)  230 ;  U  ElUot's  Debates,  34^.


Digitized  by


Google


438 COKSTITUTIOW  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

limited  to  purposes  of  revenue.  No  man  will  pretend
to  say,  that  all  those  enumerated  powers  have  no  other
objects,  or  means  to  effectuate  them,  than  revenue.
Revenue  may  be  one  mode ;  but  it  is  not  the  sole
mode.  Take  the  power  "  to  regulate  commerce.**
Is  it  not  clear  from  the  whole  history  of  nations,  that
laying  taxes  is  one  of  the  most  usual  modes  of  regulat-
ing commerce  1  Is  it  not,  in  many  cases,  the  best
means  of  preventing  foreign  monopolies,  and  mischiev-
ous commercial  restrictions  1  In  such  cases,  then,  the
power  to  lay  taxes  is  confessedly  not  for  revenue.
If  so,  is  not  the  argument  irresistible,  that  it  is  not  lim-
ited to  purposes  of  revenue  ?  Take  another  power,  the
power  to  coin  money  and  regulate  its  value,  and  that  of
foreign  coin ;  might  not  a  tax  be  laid  on  certain  foreign
coin  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  this  into  effect  by  sup-
pressing the  circulation  of  such  coin,  or  regulating  its
value  ?  Take  the  power  to  promote  the  progress  of
science  and  useful  arts;  might  not  a  tax  be  Isdd  on
foreigners,  and  foreign  inventions,  in  aid  of  this  power,
so  as  to  suppress  foreign  competition,  or  encourage
domestic  science  and  arts  ?  Take  another  power,  vital
in  the  estimation  of  many  statesmen  to  the  security  of
a  republic, — the  power  to  provide  for  organizing,  arm-
ing, and  disciplining  the  militia ;  may  not  a  tax  be  laid
on  foreign  arms,  to  encouiage  the  domestic  manufac-
ture of  arms,  so  as  to  enhance  our  security,  and  give
uniformity  to  our  organization  and  discipline  ?  Take
the  power  to  declare  war,  and  its  auxiliary  powers ;
may  not  congress,  for  the  very  object  of  providmg  for
the  effectual  exercise  of  these  powers,  and  securing  a
permanent  domestic  manufacture  and  supply  of  pow-
der, equipments,  and  other  warlike  apparatus,  impose
a  prohibitory  duty  upon  foreign  articles  of  the  same


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIY.] POWERS  OF  COKGRESS  -^  TAXES.  43i^

nature?  If  congress  may,  in  any,  or  all  of  these  cases,
lay  taxes ;  ±en  as  revenue  constitutes,  upon  the  very
basis  of  the  reasoning,  no  object  of  the  taxes,  is  it  not
clear,  that  the  enumerated  powers  require  the  power
to  lay  taxes  to  be  more  extensiv^ely  construed,  than  .for
purposes  of  revenue  ?  It  would  be  no  answer  to  say,
that  the  power  of  taxation,  though  m  its  nature  only  a
power  to  raise  revenue,  may  be  resorted  to,  as  an  im-
plied power  to  carry  into  effect  these  enumerated  pow-
ers in  any  effectual  manner.  That  would  be  to  contend,
that  an  express  power  to  lay  taxes  is  not  co-extensive
with  an  implied  power  to  lay  taxes ;  that  when  the  ex-
press power  is  given,  it  means  a  power  to  raise  rev-
enue only ;  but  when  it  is  implied,  it  no  longer  has  any
regard  to  Ais  object.  .How,  then,  is  a  case  to  be  dealt
with,  of  a  mixed  nature,  where  revenue  is  mixed  up
with  other  objects  in  the  framing  of  the  law  ?

^  969.  If,  then,  the  power  to  lay  taxes  were  ad-
mitted to  be  restricted  to  cases  within  the  enumerated
powers ;  still  the  advocates  of  that  doctrine  are  com-
pelled to  admit,  that  the  power  must  be  construed,  as
not  confined  to  revenue,  but  as  extending  to  all  other
objects  withm  the  scope  of  those  powers.  Where  the
power  is  expressly  given,  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  say,
that  it  is  to  be  implied.  Being  given,  it  may  certainly
be  resorted  to,  as  a  m^ans  to  effectuate  all  the  powers,
to  which  it  is  appropriate  ;  not,  because  it  is  to  be  im-
plied in  the  grant  of  those  powers ;  but  because  it  is
expressly  granted,  as  a  substiantive  power,  and  may  be
used,  of  course,  as  an  auxiliary  to  them.*

§  970.  So  that,  whichever  construction  of  the  power
to  lay  taxes  is  adopted,  the  same  conclusion  is  sustain-

^  See  Mr.  Madison's  Letter  to  Mr.  Cabell,  18th  Sept  1828.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


440 CONSTITUTION  OF  TH£  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

ed,  that  the  power  to  lay  taxes  is  ;iot  by  the  constitu-
tion confined  to  purposes  of  revenue.  In  point  of  fact,
it  has  never  been  limited  to  &uch  purposes  by  con-
gress ;  and  all  the  great  functionaries  of  the  govern-
ment have  constantly  maintained  the  doctrine,  that  it
was  not  constitutionally  so  limited.^

§  971.  Such  is  a  general  summary  of  the  reasoning
on  each  side,  so  far  as  it  refers  to  the  power  of  laying
taxes.  It  will  be  hereafter  resumed  in  examining  the
nature  and  extent  of  the  power  to  regulate  commerce.

^  972.  The  other  question  is,  whether  ccmgress  has
any  power  to  s^propriate  money,  raised  by  taxation  or
otherwise,  for  any  other  purposes,  than  those  pointed
out  in  the  enumerated  powers,  which  follow  the  clause
respecting  taxation.  It  is  said,  ^*  raised  by  taxation  or
otherwise  ;'^  for  there  may  be,  and  in  fact  are,  other
sources  of  revenue,  by  which  money  may,  and  does
come  into  the  treasury  of  the  United  States  otherwise,
than  by  taxation ;  as,  for  instance,  by  fines,  penalties,
and  forfeitures ;  by  sales  of  the  public  lands,  and  inter-
ests and  dividends  on  bank  stocks ;  by  captures  and
prize  in  times  of  war ;  and  by  other  incidental  profits
and  emoluments  growing  out  of  governmental  transac-
tions and  prerogatives.  But,  for  all  the  common  pur-
poses of  argument,  the  question  may  be  treated,  as  one
growing  out  of  levies  by  taxation.

§  973.  The  reasoning,  upon  which  the  opmion,  ad-
verse to  the  authority  of  congress  to  make  appropria-

1  The  present  Commentaries  were  written  before  the  appearance  of
Mr.  John  Q.  Adams's  Letter  to  Mr.  Speaker  Stevenson,  in  1832.
That  Letter  (as  has  been  already  intimated)  contains  a  very  able  and
elaborate  vindication  of  the  power  to  lay  taxes,  as  extending  to  all  pm^
poses  of  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare.  It  is  the  fullest  re-
sponse to  the  Letter  of  Mr.  Madison  to  Mr.  Speaker  Stevenson,  27th
Nov.  1890,  which  has  ever  yet  been  given.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XirJ] POWERS OF CONOREiS  —  TAXES.  441

tions  not  within  the  scope  of  the  enumerated  powers,  is
maintained,  has  been  already,  in  a  great  measure,  stat-
ed in  the  preceding  examination  of  the  grammatical
construction  of  the  clause,  givmg  the  power  to  lay
taxes.^  The  controversy  is  virtually  at  an  end,  if  it
is  once  admitted,  that  the  words,  "  to  provide  for  the
common  defence  and  general  welfare,**  are  a  part  and
qualification  of  the  power  to  lay  taxes ;  for  then,  con-
gress has  certainly  a  right  to  appropriate  money  to  any
purposes,  or  m  any  manner,  conducive  to  those  ends.
The  whole  stress  of  the  argument  is,  therefore,  to
establish,  that  the  words,  "  to  provide  for  the  common
defence  and  general  welfare,**  do  not  form  an  independ-
ent power,  nor  any  qualification  of  the  power  to  lay  taxes.
And  the  argument  is,.that  they  are  "  mere  general  terms,
explained  and  limited  by  the  subjoined  specifications.**
It  is  attempted  to  be  fortified  (as  has  been  already
seen)  by  a  recurrence  to  the  history  of  the  confedera-
tion ;  to  the  successive  reports  and  alterations  of  the
tax  clause  in  the  convention ;  to  the  inconveniencies  of
such  a  large  construction ;  and  to  the  supposed  impos-
sibility, that  a  power  to  make  such  appropriations  for
the  common  defence  and  general  welfare,  should  not
have  been,  at  the  adoption  of  the  constitution,  a  subject
of  great  alarm,  and  jealousy ;  and  as  such,  resisted  in  and
out  of  the  state  conventions.*

1  Se^  Virginia  Resolutions,  7th  Jan.  1800;  Mr.  Madison^s  Letter  to
Mr.  Speaker  Stevenson,  27th  Nov.  1830.  See  also  4  Elliot's  Debatee,
280,  281  ;  2  Elliot's  Debates,  344.

^  The  following  summary,  taken  from  President  Madison's  Veto
Message  on  the  Bank  Bonus  Bill  for  Internal  Improvements,  3d  March,
1817,'''  contains  a  very  clear  statement  of  the  reasoning.  *^To  refer  the
power  in  question,"  (that  is,  of  constructing  roads,  canals,  and  other  in-
ternal improvements,)  **  to  the  clause,  to  provide  for  theconmon  defenee


*  4  Elliof  •  Debates,  980, 961.

VOL.  Ji.  56 .


Digitized  by


Google


442 CONiTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

§  974.  The  argument  in  favour  of  the  power  is  de-
rived, in  the  first  place,  fi-om  the  language  of  the
clause,  conferring  the  power,  (which  it  is  admitted  in
its  literal  terms  covers  it ;  *)  secondly,  fi-om  the  nature
of  the  power,  which  renders  it  in  the  highest  degree
expedient,  if  not  indispensable  for  the  due  operations  of
the  national  government ;  thu-dly,  fi'om  the  early,  con-
stant and  decided  maintenance  of  it  by  the  govern-
ment and  its  functionaries,  as  well  as  by  many  of  our
ablest  statesmen  fit)m  the  very  commencement  of  the
constitution. So,  that  it  has  the  language  and  intent

and  general  welfare,  would,"  says  he,  "  be  contrary  to  the  established
roles  of  interpretation,  as  rendering  the  special  and  careful  enumeration
of  powers,  which  follow  the  clause,  nugatory  and  improper.  Such  a
view  of  the  constitution  would  have  the  effect  of  giving  to  congress  a
general  power  of  legislation,  instead  of  the  defined  and  limited  one,
hitherto  understood  to  belong  to  them ;  the  terms,  *  ttie  common  defence
and  general  welfare,'  embracing  every  object  and  act  within  the  pur-
view of  a  legislative  trust  It  would  have  the  effect  of  subjecting  both
the  constitution  and  laws  of  the  several  states,  in  all  cases  not  specific-
ally exempted,  to  be  superceded  by  the  laws  of  congress ;  it  being  ex-
pressly declared,  that  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  and  the
laws  made  in  pursuance  thereof,  shall  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  and
the  judges  of  every  state  shall  be  bound  thereby,  any  thing  in  the  con-
stitution or  laws  of  any  state  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.  Such  a
view  of  the  constitution,  finally,  would  have  the  effect  of  excluding  Ae
judicial  authority  of  the  United  States  from  its  participation  in  guarding
the  boundary  hetioeen  the  legislative  powers  of  the  general  and  state  goV'
emments ;  inasmuch  as  questions  relating  to  the  general  welfare,  bemg
questions  of  policy  and  expediency,  are  unsusceptible  of  judicial  cogniz-
ance and  decision.  A  restriction  of  the  power  *to  provide  for  the  com-
mon defence  and  general  welfare,*  to  cases,  which  are  to  be  provided
for  by  the  expenditure  of  money,  would  still  leave  within  the  legislative
power  of  congress  all  the  great  and  most  important  measures  of  gov-
ernment, money  being  the  ordinary  and  necessary  means  of  carrying
them  into  execution.''  It  will  be  perceived  at  once,  that  this  is  the  same
reasoning  insisted  on  by  Mr.  Madison  in  the  Virginia  Report  and  Reso-
lutions, of  7th  Jan.  1800 ;  and  in  his  Letter  to  Mr.  Speaker  Stevenson,
of  27th  Nov.  1890  ;  and  by  the  same  genUeman  in  the  Debate  on  the
Cod-fishery  Bill,  in  1793.  4  Elliot's  Debates,  236.
1  Mr.  Madison's  Letter  to  Mr.  Speaker  Stevenson,  27th  Nov.  1890.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS — TA^ES.  443

of  the  text,  and  the  practice  of  the  government  to  sus-
taux  it  against  an  artificial  doctrine,  set  up  on  the  other
side.

§  975.  The  argument  derived  irom  the  words  and
intent  has  been  so  fully  considered  already,  that  it
cannot  need  repetition.  It  is  summed  up  with  great
force  m  the  report  of  the  secretary  of  the  treasury  *  on
manufactures,  in  1791.  "The  national  legislature,*^
says  he,  "has  express  authority  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,
duties,  imposts,  and  excises  ;  to  pay  the  debts  and
provide  for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare,
with  no  other  qualifications,  than  that  all  duties,  im-
posts, and  excises,  shall  be  uniform  throughout  the
United  States ;  that  no  capitation  or  other  direct  tax
shall  be  laid,  unless  in  proportion  to  numbers  ascertain-
ed by  a  census,  or  enumeration  taken  on  the  princ^le
prescribed  in  the  constitution  ;  and  that  no  tax  or
-duty  shall  be  laid  on  articles  exported  fix)m  any  state.
These  three  qualifications  excepted,  the  power  to  raise
money  is  plenary  and  mdefinite.  And  the  objects,  to
which  it  may  be  appropriated,  are  no  less  comprehen-
sive, than  the  payment  of  the  public  debts,  and  the
providing  for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare.
The  terms  'general  welfare  *  were  doubtless  intended
to  signify  more,  than  was  expressed  or  imported  in
those,  which  preceded ;  otherwise  numerous  exigen-
cies, incident  to  the  affairs  of  the  nation,  would  have
been  left  without  a  provision.  The  phrase  is  as  com-
prehensive, as  any,  that  could  have  been  used ;  because
it  was  not  fit,  that  the  constitutional  authority  of  the
Union  to  appropriate  its  revenues  should  have  been
restricted  within  narrower  limits,  than  the  general  wel-

^  Mr.  HamDton.


Digitized  by


Google


444 coNSTiTUTioir  of  the  u*  states* [book  hi.

fere ;  and  because  this  necessarily  embraces  a  vast  vari-
ety of  particulars,  which  are  susceptible  neither  of  spe-
cification, nor  of  definition. It  is,  therefore,  of  necessity
left  to  the  discretion  of  the  national  legislature  to  pro-
nounce upon  the  objects,  which  concern  the  general
wel£aa^  and  for  which,  under  that  description,  an  ap-
propriatbn  of  money  is  requisite  and  proper. And
there  seems  no  room  for  a  doubt,  that  whatever  cojq-
cems  the  general  interests  of  learning,  of  agriculture,
of  manu&ctures,  and  of  commerce,  are  within  the
sphere  of  the  national  councils,  so  far  as  regards  an  ap-
plication  of  money*  The  only  qualification  of  the  gener-
ality of  the  phrase  in  question,  which  seems  to  be  admis-
sible, is  this ;  that  the  object,  to  which  an  appropriation
of  money  is  to  be  made,  must  be  general^  and  not  local ;
its  operation  extending  in  fact,  or  by  possibility,  through-
out the  Union,  and  not  being  confined  to  a  particular
spot. No  objection  ought  to  arise  to  this  construction.
fix>m  a  supposition,  that  it  would  imply  a  power  to  do^
whatever  else  should  appear  to  congress  conducive  to
the  general  welfare. A  power  to  appropriate  money
with  this  latitude,  which  is  granted  in  express  terms,
would  not  carry  a  power  to  do  any  other  thing,  not
authorized  in  the  constitution  either  expressly,  or  by
fair  implication."  *

§  976.  But  the  most  thorough  and  elaborate  view,
which  perhaps  has  ever  been  taken  of  the  subject,  will
be  found  in  the  exposition  of  President  Monroe^  which

^  There  is  no  doubt,  that  President  Washington'  fully  concurred  in
this  opinion,  as  his  repeated  recommendations  to  congress  of  objects  of
Ikis  sort,  especially  of  the  encouragement  of  manufactures,  of  leanung,
of  a  university,  of  new  inventions,  of  agriculture,  of  commerce  and  nav-
igation, of  a  military  academy,  abundantly  prove.  See  5  Marshall's
Life  of  Washington,  ch.  4,  p.  231,  232;  1  Wait's  State  Papers,  15  ;
2  Wait's  SUtc  Papers,  109, 110,  111.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF.  CONGRESS  —  TAXES.  446

accompanied  his  message  respecting  the  bill  for  the
repairs  of  the  Cumberland  Road,  (4th  of  May,  1822.)
The  following  passage  contains,  what  is  most  du*ect  to
the  present  purpose;  and,  though  long,  it  will  amply  re-
ward a  diligent  perusal  After  quotmg  the  clause  of
the  constitution  respecting  the  power  to  lay  taxes,  and
to  provide  for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare,
he  proceeds  to  say,

^977.  "That  the  second  part  of  this  grant  gives  a
right  to  appropriate  the  public  money,  and  nothing
more,  is  evident  from  the  following  considerations:
(1.)  If  the  right  of  appropriation  is  not  given  by  this
clause,  it  b  not  given  at  all,  there  bemg  no  other  grant
in  the  constitution,  which  gives  it  directly,  or  which  has
any  bearing  on  the  subject,  even  by  implication,  except
the  two  following :  first,  the  prohibition,  which  is  con-
tained in  the  eleventh  of  the  enumerated  powers,  not
to  appropriate  money  for  the  support  of  armies  for  a
longer  term  than  two  years ;  and,  secondly,  the  declara-
tion in  the  sixth  member  or  clause  of  the  ninth  section
of  the  first  article,  that  no  money  shall  be  drawn  from
the  treasury,  but  in  consequence  of  appropriations  made
by  law.  (2.)  This  part  of  the  grant  has  none  of  the
characteristics  of  a  distinct  and  original  power.  It  is
manifesdy  incidental  to  the  great  objects  of  the  first
branch  of  the  grant,  which  authorizes  congress  to  lay
and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and  excises ;  a  power
of  vast  extent,  not  granted  by  the  confederation,  the
grant  of  which  formed  or  3  of  the  principal  mducements
to  the  adoption  of  this  constitution.  If  both  parts  c^
the  grant  are  taken  together,  as  they  must  be,  (for  the
one  follows  immediately  after  the  other  in  the  same
sentence,)  it  seems  to  be  impossible  to  give  to  the  latter
any  other  c(Histniction,  than  that  contended  for. Con-


Digitized  by


Google


446 coNSTiTimoN  or  the  u.  states,  [book  hi.

gress  shall  have  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,
imposts,  and  excises.  For  what  purpose  ?  To  pay
the  debts,  and  provide  for  the  common  defence  and
general  welfare  of  the  United  States ;  an  arrangement
and  phraseology,  which  clearly  show,  that  the  latter
part  of  the  clause  was  intended  to  enumerate  the  pur-
poses, to  which  the  money  thus  raised  might  be  appro-
priated. (3.)  If  this  is  not  the  real  object  and  fair  con-
struction of  the  second  part  of  this  grant,  it  follows,
either  that  it  has  no  import  or  operation  whatever,  or
one  of  much  greater  extent,  than  the  first  part  This
presumption  is  evidently  groundless  m  both  mstances ;
in  the  first,  because  no  part  of  the  constitution  can  be
considered  as  useless ;  no  sentence  or  clause  in  it  without
a  meaning.  In  the  second,  because  such  a  construction,
as  would  make  the  second  part  of  the  clause  an  original
grant,  embracing  the  same  objects  with  the  first,  but  with
much  greater  power  than  it,  would  be  in  the  highest
degree  absurd.  The  order  generally  observed  m  grants,
an  order  founded  m  common  sense,  since  it  promotes
a  clear  understanding  of  their  import,  is  to  grant  the
power  mtended  to  be  conveyed  in  the  most  fiill  and
explicit  manner ;  and  then  to  explain  or  qualify  it,  if  ex-
planation or  qualification  should  be  necessary.  This
order  has,  it  is  believed,  been  invariably  observed  m  aD
the  grants  contained  in  the  constitution.  In  the  next
place,  because,  if  the  clause  m  question  is  not  construed
merely  as  an  authority  to  appropriate  the  public  money,
it  must  be  obvious,  that  it  conveys  a  power  of  indefinite
and  unlimited  extent ;  that  there  would  have  been  no
use  for  the  special  powers  to  raise  and  support  armies,
and  a  navy ;  to  regulate  commerce ;  to  csdl  forth  the
militia ;  or  even  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,
and  excises. An  unqualified  power  to  pay  the  debts


Digitized  by


Google


CH. XIV.] POWERS  OP CONGRESS TAXES.  447

and  provide  for  the  common  defence  and  general  wel-
fare, as  the  second  part  of  this  clause  would  be,  if  con-
sidered, as  a  distinct  and  separate  grant,  would  extend
to  every  object,  in  which  the  pubfic  could  be  interested.
A  power  to  provide  for  the  common  defence  would
give  to  congress  the  command  of  the  whole  force,  and
of  all  the  resources  of  the  Union ;  but  a  right  to  provide
for  the  general  welfare  would  go  much  further.  It
would,  in  effect,  break  down  all  the  barriers  between
the  states  and  the  general  government,  and  consolidate
the  whole  under  the  latter.

^  978.  "  The  powers  specifically  granted  to  congress,
are  what  are  called  the  enumerated  powers,  and  are
numbered  in  the  order,  in  which  they  stand ;  among
which,  that  contained  in  the  first  clause  holds  the  first
place  in  point  of  importance.  If  the  power  created  by
the  latter  part  of  the  clause  is  considered  an  original
grant,  unconnected  with,  and  independent  of,  the  first,
as  in  that  case  it  must  be ;  then  the  first  part  is  entirely
done  away,  as  are  all  the  other  grants  in  the  constitu-
tion, being  completely  absorbed  in  the  transcendent
power  granted  in  the  latter  part.  But,  if  the  clause  be
construed  in  the  sense  contended  for,  then  every  part  has
an  important  meaning  and  effect ;  not  a  line,  or  a  word,
in  it  is  superfluous.  A  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,
duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  subjects  to  the  call  of  con-
gress every  branch  of  the  public  revenue,  internal  and
external ;  and  the  addition  to  pay  the  debts  and  pro-
vide for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare,  gives
the  right  of  applymg  the  money  raised,  that  is,  of  ap-
•  propriating  it  to  the  purposes  specified,  according  to  a
^proper  construction  of  the  terms.  Hence  it  follows,
that  it  is  the  first  part  of  the  clause  oriy,  which  gives  a
power,  which  affects  in  any  manner  the  power  remain-


Digitized  by


Google


448  CONSTITUTION  OF  THC  U.  STATES. [bOOK  ID.

ing  to  the  states ;  as  the  power  to  raise  money  from  the
people,  whether  it  be  by  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  or  ex-
cises, though  concurrent  in  the  states,  as  to  taxes  and
excises,  must  necessarily  do.  But  the  use  or  applica-
tion of  the  money,  after  it  is  raised,  is  a  power  alto-
gether of  a  different  character.  It  imposes  no  burthen
on  the  people,  nor  can  it  act  on  them  in  a  sense  to  take
power  from  the  states ;  or  in  any  sense,  in  which  power
can  be  controverted,  or  become  a  question  between  the
two  governments.  The  application  of  money  raised
under  a  lawful  power,  is  a  right  or  grant,  which  may  be
abused.  It  may  be  applied  partially  among  the  states,
or  to  improper  purposes  in  our  fordgn  and  domestic
concerns ;  but  still  it  is  a  power  not  felt  in  the  sense  of
other  powers ;  since  the  only  complaint,  which  any  state
can  make  of  such  partiality  and  abuse  is,  that  some  other
state  or  states  have  obtained  greater  benefit  from  the
application,  than,  by  a  just  rule  of  apportionment,  they
were  entitled  to.  The  right  of  appropriation  is,  thei-e-
fore,  from  its  nature,  secondary  and  incidental  to  the
right  of  raising  money ;  and  it  was  proper  to  place  it  in
the  same  grant,  and  same  clause  with  that  right  By
finding  them  then  in  that  order,  we  see  a  new  proof  of
the  sense,  in  which  the  grant  was  made,  corresponding
with  the  view  herein  taken  of  it.

§  979.  The  last  part  of  this  grant,  which  provides,
that  all  duties,  imposts,  and  excises  shall  be  uniform
throughout  the  United  States,  furnishes  another  strong
proof,  that  it  was  not  intended,  that  the  second  part
should  constitute  a  distinct  grant,  in  the  sense  above
stated,  or  convey  any  other  right,  than  that  of  appropri-
ation. This  provision  operates  exclusively  on  the  power
granted  in  the  first  part  of  the  clause.  It  recites  three
branches  of that  power — duties, imposts,  and  ex-


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWER!  or  COITGRESS  —  TAXES.  449

cises  —  those  only,  on  which  it  could  operate ;  the  rule,
by  which  the  fourth,  that  is,  taxes,  should  be  laid,  being
already  provided  for  in  another  part  of  the  constitution.
The  object  of  this  provision  is,  to  secure  a  just  equality
among  the  states  in  the  exercise  of  that  power  by  con-
gress. By  placing  it  after  both  the  grants,  that  is,  after
that  to  raise,  and  that  to  appropriate  the  public  money,
and  makmg  it  apply  to  the  first  only,  it  shows,  that  it
was  not  mtended,  that  the  power  granted  in  the  second
should  be  paramount  to,  and  destroy  that  granted  m
the  first  It  shows,  also,  that  no  such  formidable
power,  as  that  suggested,  had  been  granted  in  the
second,  or  any  power,  against  the  abuse  of  which  it
was  thought  necessary  specially  to  provide.  Surely,  if
it  was  deemed  proper  to  guard  a  specific  power,  of
limited  extent  and  well  known  import,  against  injustice
and  abuse,  it  would  have  been  much  more  so,  to  have
guarded  against  the  abuse  of  a  power  of  such  vast  ex-
tent, and  so  indefinite,  as  would  have  been  granted,  by
the  second  part  of  the  clause,  if  considered  as  a  distinct
and  original  grant

^  980.  **  With  this  construction  all  the  other  enume-
rated grants,  and  indeed  all  the  grants  of  power  contain-
ed in  the  constitution,  have  their  full  operation  and  effect
They  all  stand  well  together,  fulfilling  the  grfeat  purpo-
ses intended  by  them.  Under  it  we  behold  a  great
scheme  consistent  in  all  its  parts,  a  government  msti-
tuted  for  national  purposes,  vested  with  adequate
powers  for  those  purposes,  commencmg  with  the  most
important  of  all,  that  of  revenue,  and  proceeding,  m
regular  order,  to  the  others,  with  which  it  was  deemed
proper  to  endow  it ;  all  too  drawn  with  the  utmost  cir-
cumspection and  care.  How  much  more  consistent  is
this  construction  with  the  great  objects  of  the  institu-

VOL.  II.  57


Digitized  by


Google


450 coirsTiTUTioN  or  the  v.  8tatx8« [book  ni.

tioQ,  and  with  the  high  character  of  the  enlightened  and
patriotic  citizens,  who  framed  it,  as  well  as  of  those,
who  ratified  it,  than  one,  which  subverts  every  sound
principle  and  rule  of  construcdon,  and  throws  every
thing  into  confusion.

^981.  **I  have  dwelt  thus  long  on  this  part  of  the
subject,  from  an  earnest  desire  to  fix,  in  a  clear  and
satis£su;tory  manner,  the  import  of  the  second  part  of
this  grant,  well  knowing,  fi*om  the  generality  of  the
terms  used,  their  tendency  to  lead  into  error.  I  m-
dulge  a  strong  hope,  that  the  view,  herem  presented,
win  not  be  without  effect,  but  will  tend  to  sansfy  the
unprejudiced  and  impartial,  that  nothing  more  was
granted  by  that  part,  than  a  power  to  appropriate  the
public  money  raised  under  the  other  part.  To  what
extent  that  power  may  be  carried,  will  be  the  next  ob-
ject of  inquiry.

^  982.  ^  It  is  contended,  on  the  one  side,  that,  as  the
national  government  is  a  government  of  limited  powers,
it  has  no  right  to  expend  money,  except  in  the  per-
formance of  acts,  authorized  by  the  other  specific  grants,
according  to  a  strict  construction  of  their  powers ;  that
this  grant,  in  neither  of  its  branches,  gives  to  congress
discretionary  power  of  any  kind ;  but  is  a  mere  instru-
ment in  its  hands,  to  carry  into  effect  the  powers  con-
tamed  in  the,other  grants.  To  this  construction  I  was
inclmed  in  the  more  early  stage  of  our  gpvemment ;
but,  on  further  reflection  and  observation,  my  mind  has
undergone  a  change,  for  reasons,  which  I  will  frankly
unfold.

§  983.  **  The  grant  consists,  as  heretofore  observed,
of  a  two-fold  power;  the  first,  to  raise,  and  ihe  second,
to  appropriate  the  public  money ;  and  the  terms  used
in  both  instances  are  general  and  unqualified. Each


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIY.] POWERS  or  00NGR£S8  —  TAXES.  461

branch  was  obviously  drawn  with  a  view  to  the  other,
and  the  import  of  each  tends  to  illustrate  that  of  the
othen  The  grant  to  raise  money  gives  a  power  over
every  subject,  from  which  revenue  may  be  drawn ;  and
is  made  in  the  same  manner  with  the  grants  to  declare
war;  to  raise  and  support  armies  and  a  navy ;  to  regu-
late commerce;  to  ests^lish  post-offices  and  post  roads;
and  with  all  the  other  specific  grants  to  the  general
government.  In  the  discharge  of  the  powers  contained
in  any  of  these  grants,  there  is  no  other  check,  than
that,  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  great  principles  of  our
system  —  the  responsibUity  of  the  representative  to  his
constituents.  If  war,  for  example,  is  necessary,  and
congress  declare  it  for  good  cause,  their  constituents
will  support  them  in  it.  A  Uke  support  will  be  given
them  for  the  faithful  discharge  of  their  duties  under  any
and  every  other  power,  vested  m  the  United  States.
It  affords  to  the  friends  of  our  free  governments  the
most  heart-felt  consolation  to  know,  and  from  the  best
evidence, — our  own  experience, — that,  in  great  emer-
gencies, the  boldest  measures,  such  as  form  the  strongest
appeals  to  the  virtue  and  patriotism  of  the  people,  are
sure  to  obtain  their  most  decided  approbation.  But
should  the  representative  act  corrupdy,  and  betray  his
trust,  or  otherwise  prove,  that  he  was  unworthy  of  the
confidence  of  his  constituents,  he  would  be  equally  sure
to  lose  it,  and  to  be  removed,  and  otherwise  censured,
according  to  his  deserts.  The  power  to  raise  money
by  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  is  alike  unquali-
fied ;  nor  do  I  see  any  check  on  the  exercise  of  it,
other  than  that,  which  applies  to  the  other  powers  above
recited, — the  responsibility  of  the  representative  to  his
constituents.  Congress  know  the  extent  of  the  public
engagements,  and  the  sums  necessary  to  meet  them ;


Digitized  by


Google


452  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

they  know,  how  much  may  be  derived  fr^m  ear  h  branch
of  revenue  without  pressmg  it  too  far ;  and,  paying  due
regard  to  the  interests  of  the  people,  they  likewise
know,  which  branch  ought  to  be  resorted  to  in  the  first
instance.  From  the  commencement  of  the  govern-
ment, two  branches  of  this  power  (duties  and  imposts)
have  been  in  constant  operation,  the  revenue  from
which  has  supported  the  government  in  its  various
branches,  and  met  its  other  ordinary  engagements.  In
great  emei^encies,  the  other  two  (taxes  and  excises)
have  likewise  been  resorted  to ;  and  neither  was  the
right  nor  the  policy  ever  called  in  question.

§  984  ^  If  we  look  to  the  second  branch  of  this
power,  that,  which  authorizes  the  appropriation  of  the
money  thus  raised,  we  find,  that  it  is  not  less  general
and  unqualified,  than  the  power  to  raise  it  More  com-
prehensive terms,  than  to  *pay  the  debts  and  provide
for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfsEire,'  could  not
have  been  used.  So  mtimately  connected  with,  and
dependent  on  each  other,  are  these  two  branches  of
power,  that  had  either  been  lunited,  the  Umitation  would
have  had  a  like  effect  on  the  other.  Had  the  power  to
rabe  money  been  conditional,  or  restricted  to  special
purposes,  the  appropriation  must  have  corresponded
with  it ;  for  none  but  the  money  raised  could  be  appro-
priated, nor  could  it  be  appropriated  to  other  purposes,
than  those,  which  were  permitted.  On  the  other  hand,
if  the  right  of  appropriation  had  been  restricted  to  cer-
tain purposes,  it  would  be  useless  and  improper  to  raise
more,  than  would  be  adequate  to  those  purposes.  It
may  fairiy  be  inferred,  that  these  restramts  or  checks
have  been  carefully  and  intentionally  avoided.  The
power  in  each  branch  is  alike  broad  and  unqualified ;
and  each  is  drawn  with  peculiar  fitness  to  the  other ;


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIY.] POWERS  or  CONGRESS  —  TAXES.  463

the  latter  requiring  terms  of  great  extent  and  force  to
accommodate  the  former,  which  have  been  adopted ;
and  both  placed  in  the  same  clause  and  sentence.  Can
it  be  presumed,  that  all  these  circumstances  were  so
nicely  adjusted  by  mere  accident  1  Is  it  not  more  just
to  conclude,  that  they  were  the  result  of  due  delibera-
tion and  design  ?  Had  it  been  intended,  that  congress
should  be  restricted  in  the  appropriation  of  the  public
money  to  such  expenditures,  as  were  authorized  by  a
rigid  construction  of  the  other  specific  grants,  how  easy
would  it  have  been  to  have  provided  for  it  by  a  decla-
ration to  that  eflfect  The  omission  of  such  declaration
is,  therefore,  an  additional  proof,  that  it  was  not  intend-
ed, that  the  grant  should  be  so  construed.

^  986.  "  It  was  evidendy  impossible  to  have  sub-
jected this  grant,  in  either  branch,  to  such  restric-
tion, without  exposing  the  government  to  very  serious
embarrassment  How  carry  it  into  effect?  If  the
grant  had  been  made  in  any  degree  dependent  upon
the  states,  the  government  would  have  experienced  the
fate  (^  the  confederation.  Like  it,  it  would  have  with-
ered, and  soon  perished.  Had  the  Supreme  Court
been  authorized,  or  should  any  other  tribunal,  distinct
from  the  government,  be  authorized  to  interpose  its
veto,  and  to  say,  that  more  money  had  been  raised
under  either  branch  of  this  power,  (that  is,  by  taxes,
duties,  imposts,  or  excises,)  than  was  necessary ;  that
such  a  tax  or  duty  \\b3  useless ;  that  the  appropriation
to  this  or  that  purpose  was  unconstitutional ;  the  move-
ment might  have  been  suspended,  and  the  whole  sys-
tem disoi^anized.  It  w^s  impossible  to  have  created
a  power  within  the  government,  or  any  other  power,
distinct  from  congress  and  the  executive,  which  should
control  the  movement  of  the  government  in  this  respect


Digitized  by


Google


454  CONSTITUTIOlf  OF  THB  r.  8TATX8. [BOOK  III.

and  not  destroy  it  Had  it  been  declared  by  a  clause
in  the  constitution,  that  the  expenditures  under  this
grant  should  be  restricted  to  the  construction,  which
D  ight  be  given  of  the  other  grants,  such  restraint,  though
the  most  innocent,  could  not  have  fail^  to  have  had  an
injurious  effect  on  the  vital  principles  of  the  govern-
ment, and  often  on  its  most  important  measures.  Those,
M^ho  might  wish  to  defeat  a  measure  proposed,  might
construe  the  power  relied  cm  in  support  of  it,  in  a  nar-
row and  contracted  manner,  and  in  that  way  fix  a  pre-
cedent inconsistent  with  the  true  import  of  the  grant.
At  other  times,  those,  who  favoured  a  measure,  might
give  to  the  power  relied  on  a  forced  or  strained  con-
struction ;  and,  succeeding  in  the  object,  fix  a  precedent
in  the  opposite  extreme.  Thus  it  is  manifest,  that,  if
the  right  of  appropriation  be  confined  to  that  limit,
measures  may  oftentimes  be  carried,  or  defeated  by
considerations  and  motives,  altogether  independent  oj^
and  unconnected  with,  their  merits,  and  the  several
powers  of  congress  receive  constructions  equally  incon-
sistent with  their  true  import.  No  such  declaration,
however,  has  been  made ;  and  from  the  fair  import  of
the  grant,  and,  indeed,  its  positive  terms,  the  inference,
that  such  was  intended,  seems  to  be  precluded.

§  986.  "Many  considerations  of  great  weight  operate
in  fevour  of  this  construction,  while  I  do  not  perceive
any  serious  objection  to  it  If  it  be  established,  it  fol-
lows, that  the  words,  *  to  provide  for  the  common  de-
fence and  general  welfare,'  have  a  definite,  safe,  and
useful  meanmg.  The  idea  of  their  forming  an  original
grant  with  unlimited  power,  superceding  every  other
grant,  is  abandoned.  They  will  be  considered,  simply,
as  conveying  a  right  of  appropriation ;  a  right  indispen-
sable to  that  of  raising  a  revenue,  and  necessary  to  ex-


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] P0WEK8  or  00NGM:88  —  TAXES.  465

penditures  uoder  every  grant  By  it,  as  already  ob-
served, no  new  power  will  be  taken  from  the  states,
the  money  to  be  appropriated  being  raised  under  a
power  already  granted  to  congress.  By  it,  too,  the
motive  for  giving  a  forced  or  strained  construction  to
any  of  the  other  specific  grants  will,  in  most  instances,
be  diminished,  and,  in  many,  utterly  destroyed.  Thd
importance  of  this  consideration  cannot  be  too  highly
estimated ;  since,  in  addition  to  the  examples  already
given,  it  ought  particularly  to  be  recollected,  that,  to
whatever  extent  any  specific  power  may  be  carried,
the  right  of  jurisdiction  goes  with  it,  pursuing  it  through
all  its  incidents.  The  very  important  agency,  which
this  grant  has  in  carrying  into  efiect  every  other  grant,
is  a  strong  argument  m  favour  of  the  construction  con-
tended for.  All  the  other  grants  are  limited  by  the
nature  of  the  oflSces,  which  they  have  severally  to  per-
form ;  each  conveying  a  power  to  do  a  certain  thing,  and
that  only ;  whereas  this  is  co-extensive  with  the  great
scheme  of  the  government  itself.  It  is  the  lever,  which
raises  and  puts  the  whole  machinery  in  motion,  and
continues  the  movement  Should  either  of  the  other
grants  fail,  ui  consequence  of  any  condition  or  limitation
attached  to  it,  or  misconstruction  of  its  powers,  much
injury  might  follow ;  but  still  it  would  be  the  failure  of
one  branch  of  power,  of  one  item  in  the  system  only.
All  the  others  might  move  on.  But  should  the  right  to
raise  and  appropriate  the  public  money  be  improperly
restricted,  the  whole  system  might  be  sensibly  affected,
if  not  disorganized.  Each  of  the  other  grants  is  limited
by  the  nature  of  the  grant  itself.  This,  by  the  nature
of  the  government  only.  Hence,  it  became  necessary,
that,  like  the  power  to  declare  war,  this  power  should


Digitized  by


Google


,  456 CONSTITUTION  OF  TH£  V.  STATES.  [bOOK  III.

be  commensurate  with  the  great  scheme  of  the  goyem-
ment,  and  with  all  its  purposes.

§  987.  "  If,  then,  the  right  to  raise  and  appropriate
the  public  money  is  not  restricted  to  the  expenditures
under  the  other  specific  grants,  accordmg  to  a  strict
construction  of  their  powers  respectively,  is  there  no
Umitation  to  it?  Have  congress  a  right  to  raise  and
appropriate  the  public  money  to  any,  and  to  every  pur-
pose, accordmg  to  their  will  and  pleasure?  They  cer-
tainly have  not  The  government  of  the  United  States
is  a  limited  government,  instituted  for  great  national
purposes,  and  for  those  only.  Odier  interests  are  com-
mitted to  the  states,  whose  duty  it  is  to  provide  for
them.  Each  government  should  look  to  the  great  and
essential  purposes,  for  which  it  was  instituted,  and  con-
fine itself  to  those  purposes.  A  state  government  will
rarely,  if  ever,  apply  money  to  national  purposes,  with-
out making  it  a  charge  to  the  nation.  The  people  of
the  state  would  not  permit  it.  Nor  will  congress  be
apt  to  apply  money  in  aid  of  the  state  administrations,
for  purposes  strictly  local,  in  which  the  nation  at  large
has  no  interest,  although  the  state  should  desire  it.
The  people  of  the  other  states  would  condemn  it
They  would  declare,  that  congress  had  no  right  to  tax
them  for  such  a  purpose,  and  dismiss,  at  the  next
election,  such  of  their  representatives,  as  had  voted  for
the  measure,  especially  if  it  should  be  severely  felt  I
do  not  think,  that  in  offices  of  this  kind  there  is  much
danger  of  the  two  governments  mistaking  their  inter-
ests, or  their  duties.  I  rather  suspect,  that  they  would
soon  have  a  clear  and  distinct  understanding  of  them,
and  move  on  in  great  harmony."
§  988.  In  regard  to  the  practice  of  the  government,
> it  has  been  entirely  m  conformity  to  the  principles  here


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS OF CONGRESS — TAXES.  457

laid  down.  Appropriations  have  never  been  limited  by
congress  to  cases  falling  within  the  specific  powers  enu-
merated m  the  constitution,  whether  those  powers  be
construed  in  their  broad,  or  their  narrow  sense.  And
in  an  especial  manner  appropriations  have  been  made
to  aid  internal  improvements  of  various  sorts,  in  our
roads,  our  navigation,  our  streams,  and  other  objects  of
a  national  character  and  importance.^  In  spme  cases,
not  silendy,  but  upon  discussion,  congress  has  gone  the
length  of  making  appropriations  to  aid  destitute  foreign-
ers, and  cities  labouring  under  severe  calamities ;  as  in
the  relief  of  the  St.  Domingo  refugees,  m  1794,  and
the  citizens  of  Venezuela,  who  suffered  from  an  earth-
quake m  1812.* An  illustration  equally  forcible,  of  a

1  It  would  be  impracticable  to  enumerate  all  these  various  objects  of
appropriation  in  detail.  Many  of  them  will  be  found  enumerated  in
President  Monroe's  Exposition,  of  4  of  May,  1822.  p.  41  to  45.  The
annual  appropriation  i^cta  speak  a  very  strong  language  on  this  subject
Every  president  of  the  United  States,  except  President  Madison,  seems
to  have  acted  upon  the  same  doctrine.  President  Jefferson  can  hardly
be  deemed  an  exception.  In  his  early  opinion,  already  quoted,  (4  Jeffer-
son's Corresp.  524,)  he  manifestly  maintained  it  In  his  message  to
congress,  (2  Dec.  J  806,*)  he  seems  to  have  denied  it  In  signing  the
bill  for  the  Cumberland  Road,  on  29th  March,  1806,t  he  certainly  gave
it  a  partial  sanction,  as  well  as  upon  other  occasions.  See  Mr.  Monroe's
Exposition,  on  4th  May,  1822,  p.  41.  But  see  4  Jefferson's  Corresp.  457,
where  Mr.  Jefferson  adopts  an  opposite  reasoning.  President  Jackson
has  adopted  it  with  manifest  reluctance ;  but  he  considers  it  as  firmly
established  by  the  practice  of  the  government  See  his  veto  message
on  the  Maysville  Road  bill,  27  May,  1830, 4  Elliot's  Deb.  333  to  335.
The  opinions  maintained  in  congress,  for  and  against  the  same  doctriney
will  be  found  in  4  Elliot's  Deb.  236, 240, 265,  278, 280, 284, 291,  292, 332,
334.  Report  on  Internal  Improvements,  by  Mr.  Hemphill,  in  the  house
of  representatives,  10  Feb.  1831.  See  1  K^nt  Comm.  Lect  12,  p.  250,
251  ;  Sergeant's  Const  Law,  ch.  28,  p.  311  to  314 ;  Rawle  on  the  Const-
ch.  9,  p.  104 ;  2  United  States  Law  Jour.  AprU,  1826,  p.  251, 264  to  282.
9  See  act  of  12  Feb.  1794,  ch.  2 ;  Act  of  8  May,  1812,  ch.  79 ;  4  Elli-
ot's Debates,  240.

*  Wait's  SUto  P^Mn,  457, 458.
t  Act  of  1800,  eh.  19.

VOL.  II.  68


Digitized  by


Google


458 COKSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  lU.

domestic  character,  is  in  the  bounty  given  in  the  cod-
fisheries,  which  was  strenuously  resisted  on  constitu-
tional grounds  in  1792  ;  but  which  still  maintains  its
place  in  the  statute  book  of  the  United  States,  *

§  989,  No  more  need  be  said  upon  this  subject,  in
this  place.  It  will  be  necessarily  resumed  s^ain  in  the
discussion  of  other  clauses  of  the  constitution,  and
especially  of  the  powers  to  regulate  commerce,  to
establish  post-offices  and  post-roads,  and  to  make  in-
ternal improvements.

§  990.  In  order  to  prevent  the  necessity  of  recurring
again  to  the  subject  of  taxation,  it  seems  desirable  to
bring  together,  in  this  connexion,  all  the  remaining  pro-
visions of  the  constitution  on  this  subject,  though  they
are  differently  arranged  in  that  instrument.  The  first
one  is,  "  no  capitation  or  other  direct  tax  shall  be  laid,
"  unless  in  proportion  to  the  census,  or  enumeration,
"herein  before  directed  to  be  taken.'*  This  includes
poll  taxes,  and  land  taxes,  as  has  been  already  re-
marked.

§  991.  The  object  of  this  clause  doubtless  is,  to
secure  the  Southern  states  against  any  undue  propor-
tion of  taxation ;  and,  as  nearly  as  practicable,  to  over-
come the  necessary  inequalities  of  direct  tax.  The
South  has  a  very  large  slave  population ;  and  conse-
quently a  poll  tax,  which  should  be  laid  by  the  rule  of
uniformity,  would  operate  with  peculiar  severity  on
them. It  would  tax  their  property  beyond  its  supposed

1  See  act  of  congress,  of  16  Feb.  1792,  ch.  6 ;  4  Elliot's  Debates,  234
to  238;  Act  of  1813,  ch.  34  See  also  Hamilton's  Report  on  Manufac-
tures, 1791,  article.  Bounties. — The  Speech  of  the  Hon.  Mr.  Grimk*,  in
the  senate  of  South  Carolina,  in  Dec.  1828,  and  of  the  Hon.  Mr.  Hugger,
in  the  house  of  representatives  of  the  same  state,  in  Dec.  1830,  contain
very  elaborate  and  able  expositions  of  the  whole  subject,  and  will  reward
a  diligent  perusal.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRES8 TAXES.  459

relative  value,  and  productiveness  to  white  labour.
Hence,  a  rule  is  adopted,  which,  in  effect,  in  relation  to
poll  taxes,  exempts  two  fifths  of  all  slaves  from  taxa-
tion ;  and  thus  is  supposed  to  equalize  the  burthen
with  the  white  population.*

^  992.  In  respect  to  direct  taxes  on  land,  the  diffi-
culties of  making  a  due  apportionment,  so  as  to  equal-
ize the  burthens  and  expenses  of  the  Union  according
to  the  relative  wealth  and  ability  of  the  states,  was  felt
as  a  most  serious  evil  under  the  confederation.  By
that  instrument,  (it  will  be  recollected,)  the  appor-
tionment was  to  be  among  the  states  according  to  the
value  of  all  land  within  each  state,  granted  or  surveyed
for  any  person,  and  the  buildings  and  improvements
thereon,  to  be  estimated  in  such  mode,  as  congress
should  prescribe.  The  whole  proceedings  to  accom-
plish such  an  estimate  were  so  operose  and  inconven-
ient, that  congress,  in  April,  1783,^  recommended,  as  a
substitute  for  the  article,  an  apportionment,  founded  on
the  basis  of  population,  adding  to  the  whole  number
of  white  and  other  free  citizens  and  inhabitants,  includ-
ing those  bound  to  service  for  a  term  of  years,  three
fifths  of  all  other  persons,  &c.  in  each  state;  which  is
precisely  the  rule  adopted  in  the  constitution.

§  993.  Those,  who  are  accustomed  to  contemplate
the  circumstances,  which  produce  and  constitute  na-
tional wealth,  must  be  satisfied,  that  there  is  no  common
standard,  by  which  the  degrees  of  it  can  be  ascertamed.
Neither  the  value  of  lands,  nor  the  numbers  of  the  people,
which  have  been  successively  proposed,  as  the  rule  of

1  The 'Federalist,  No.  21,  36,  54;  3  Dall.  R.  171, 178;  1  Tucker's
Black.  Comm.App.  236,287;  2  Elliot's  Deb.  208  to  210;  3  Elliot's
Debates,  290;  3  Amer.  Museum,  424 ;  2  Elliot's  Deb.  338.

9  8  Joumal  of  Continental  Congress,  184,  188,  198.


Digitized  by


Qoogle


460 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  D.  STATES.  [bOOK  III.

State  contributions,  has  any  pretension  to  bemg  deemed  a
just  representative  of  that  wealth.  If  we  compare  the
wealth  of  the  Netheriands  with  th^t  of  Russia  or  Ger-
many, or  even  of  France,  and  at  the  same  time  com-
pare the  total  value  of  the  lands,  and  the  aggregate
population  of  the  contracted  territory  of  the  former,  with
the  total  value  of  the  lands,  and  the  aggregate  population
of  the  immense  regions  of  either  of  the  latter  kingdoms,
it  will  be  at  once  discovered,  that  there  is  no  compari-
son between  the  proportions  of  these  two  subjects,  and
that  of  the  relative  wealth  of  those  nations.  If  a  like
parallel  be  run  between  the  American  states,  it  wll
furnish  a  similar  result.*  Let  Virginia  be  contrasted
with  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania  with  Connecticut,
Maryland  with  Virginia,  Rhode-Island  with  Ohio,  and
the  disproportion  will  be  at  once  perceived.  The
wealth  of  neither  will  be  found  to  be,  in  proportion  to
numbers,  or  the  value  of  lands.

^  994.  The  truth  is,  that  the  wealth  of  nations  de-
pends upon  an  infinite  variety  of  causes.  Situation,
soil,  climate ;  the  nature  of  the  productions ;  the  nature
of  the  government ;  the  genius  of  the  citizens ;  the  de-
gree of  information  they  possess ;  the  state  of  conmierce,
of  arts,  and  industry ;  the  manners  and  habits  of  the
people ;  these,  and  many  other  circumstances,  too  com-
plex, minute,  and  adventitious  to  admit  of  a  particular
enumeration,  occasion  differences,  hardly  conceivable,
in  the  relative  opulence  and  riches  of  different  coun-
tries. The  consequence  is,  that  there  c^  be  no  com-
mon measure  of  national  wealth;  and,  of  course,  no  gen-
eral rule,  by  which  the  ability  of  a  state  to  pay  taxes
can  be  determined,* The  estimate,  however  fairly  or

I  The  Tederaliflt,  No.  21.  a  The  Pederalirt,  No.  21.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CH.  XIT.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS  —  TAXES.  461

deliberately  made,  is  open  to  many  errors  and  inequal-
ities, which  become  the  fruitful  source  of  discontents,
controversies,  and  heart-burnings.  These  are  sufficient,
in  themselves,  to  shake  the  foundations  of  any  national
government,  when  no  common  artificial  rule  is  adopted
to  settle  permanently  the  apportionment;  and  every
thing  is  left  open  for  debate,  as  often  as  a  direct  tax  is  to
be  imposed.  Even  in  those  states,  where  direct  taxes  are
constantly  resorted  to,  every  new  valuation  or  appor-
tionment is  found,  practically,  to  be  attended  with  great
inconvenience,  and  excitements.  To  avoid  these  diffi-
culties, the  land  tax  in  England  is  annually  laid  according
to  a  valuation  made  in  the  reign  of  William  the  Third,
(1692,)  and  apportioned  among  the  counties,  according
to  that  valuation.*  The  gross  inequality  of  this  proceed-
ing cannot  be  disguised ;  for  many  of  the  counties,  then
comparatively  poor,  are  now  enormously  increased  in
wealth.  What  is  Yorkshire  or  Lancashire  now,  with
its  dense  manufacturing  population,  compared  with
what  it  then  was  1  Even  when  the  population  of  each
state  is  ascertained,  the  mode,  by  which  the  assessment
shall  be  laid  on  the  lands  in  the  state,  is  a  subject  of  no
small  embarrassment.  It  would  be  gross  injustice  to
tax  each  house  or  acre  to  the  same  amount,  however
diflferent  may  be  its  value,  or  however  different  its
quality,  situation,  or  productiveness.  And  in  estimating
the  absolute  value,  so  much  is  necessarily  matter  of
opinion,  that  different  judgments  may,  and  will  arrive
at  different  results.  And  in  adjusting  the  comparative
values  in  different  counties  or  towns,  new  elements  of  dis-
cord are  unavoidably  introduced.  * In  short*  it  may  be

1  1  Black.  Coram.  312, 3ia

s  See  the  remarks  of  Mr.  Jostice  Patterson,  in  S^Uon  v.  VtUUd  States^
3  DalL  171, 178, 179.


Digitized  by


Google


462 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

affirmed  ^thout  fear  of  contradiction,  that  some  .artifi-
cial rule  of  apportionment  of  a  fixed  nature  is  indispensa-
ble to  the  public  repose ;  and  considering  the  peculiar
situation  of  the  American  states,  and  especially  of  the
slave  and  agricultural  states,  it  is  difficult  to  find  any
rule  of  greater  equality  or  justice,  than  that,  which  the
constitution  has  adopted.  And  it  may  be  added,  (what
was  indeed  foreseen,)  that  direct  taxes  on  land  will
not,  fi-om  causes  sufficiently  apparent,  be  resorted  to,
except  upon  extraordinary  occasions,  to  supply  a  press-
ing want.*  The  history  of  the  government  has  abun-
dantly established  the  correctness  of  the  remark ;  for  in
a  period  of  forty  years  three  direct  taxes  only  have
been  laid  ;  and  those  only  with  reference  to  the  state
and  operations  of  war.

§  995.  The  constitution  having,  m  another  clause,
declared,  that  ^^  Representatives  and  direct  taxes  shall
^  be  apportioned  among  the  several  states  within  this
"Union  according  to  their  respective  numbers,'*
and  congress  having,  in  1815,'  laid  a  direct  tax  on  the
District  of  Columbia,  (according  to  the  rule  of  appor-
tionment,) a  question  was  made,  whether  congress  had
constitutionally  a  right  to  lay  such  a  tax,  the  district
not  being  one  of  the  states ;  and  it  was  unammously
decided  by  the  Supreme  Court,  that  congress  had  such
a  right.  *  It  was  further  held,  that  congress,  in  lay-
mg  a  direct  tax  upon  the  states,  was  not  copstitutionally
bound  to  extend  such  tax  to  the  district,  or  the  territo-
ries of  the  United  States ;  but,  that  it  was  a  matter  for

>  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  234,  235,  and  note;  Id.  236,  237;
3  Dall.  R.  178, 179;  Federalist,  No.  21,  36;  2  Elliot's  Deb.  208  to  2ia

«  Act  of  27  Feb.  1815,  ch.  213.

9  Loughborough  y.  BlakCf  5  Wheaton's  R.  317 ;  Sergeant  on  Const
Law,  ch.  28,  p.  290 ;  1  Kent  Comm.  Lect  12,  p.  241.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS  —  TAXES.  463

their  discretion.  *When,  however,  a  direct  tax  is  to
be  laid  on  the  district  or  the  territories,  it, can  be  laid
only  by  the  rule  of  apportionment.  The  reasoning,  by
which  this  doctrine  is  maintained,  will  be  most  satisfac-
torily seen  by  giving  it  in  the  very  words  used  by  the
court  on  that  occasion.

^  996.  "  The  eighth  section  of  the  first  article  gives
to  congress  *  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,

*  imposts,  and  excises,'  for  the  purposes  thereinafter
mentioned.  This  grant  is  general,  without  limitation  as
to  place.  It,  consequently,  extends  to  all  places,  over
which  the  government  extends.  If  this  could  be  doubt-
ed, the  doubt  is  removed  by  the  subsequent  words,
which  modify  the  grant. These  words  are,  *  but  all

*  duties,  imposts,  and  excises  shall  be  uniform  through-

*  out  the  United  States.'  It  will  not  be  contended,  that
the  modification  pf  the  power  extends  to  places,  to
which  the  power  itself  does  not  extend.  The  power,
then,  to  lay  and  collect  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,
may  be  exercised,  and  must  be  exercised  throughout
the  United  States.  Does  this  term  designate  the
whole,  or  any  particular  portion  of  the  American  em-
pire ?  Certainly  this  question  can  admit  of  but  one
answer.  It  is  the  name  given  to  our  great  republic,
which  is  composed  of  states  and  territories.  The  Dis-
trict of  Columbia,  or  the  territory  west  of  the  Missouri,
is  not  less  within  the  United  States,  than  Maryland  or
Pennsylvania ;  and  it  is  not  less  necessary,  on  the  prin-
ciples of  our  constitution,  that  uniformity  in  the  imposi-
tion of  imposts,  duties,  and  excises  should  be  observed
in  the  one,  than  in  the  other.  Since,  then,  the  power
to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  which  includes  direct  taxes,
is  obviously  co-extensive  with  the  power  to  lay  and
collect  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  and  since  the  latter


Digitized  by


Google


464 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  '  [BOOK  III.

extends  throughout  the  United  Stsrtes,  it  follows,  that
the  power  to  impose  direct  taxes  also  extends  through-
out the  United  States.

§  997.  "  The  extent  of  the  grant  being  ascertamed,
how  far  is  it  abridged  by  any  part  of  the  constitution  1
The  twentieth  section  of  the  first  article  declares,  that

*  representatives  and  direct  taxes  shall  be  apportioned

*  among  the  several  states,  which  may  be  included  within

*  this  Union,  according  to  their  respective  numbers.'

§  998.  **The  object  of  this  regulation  is,  we  think,  to
furnish  a  standard,  by  which  taxes  are  to  be  apportion-
ed, not  to  exempt  from  their  operation  any  part  of  our
country.  Had  the  intention  been  to  exempt  from  taxa-
tion those,  who  are  not  represented  in  congress,  that
intention  would  have  been  expressed  in  direct  terms.
The  power  having  been  expressly  granted,  the  excep-
tion would  have  been  expressly  made.  But  a  limita-
tion can  scarcely  be  ssud  to  be  insinuated.  The  words
used  do  not  mean,  that  direct  taxes  shall  be  imposed
on  states  only,  which  are  represented,  or  shall  be  ap-
portioned to  representatives ;  but  that  direct  taxation,
m  its  application  to  states,  shall  be  apportioned  to  num-
bers. Representation  is  not  made  the  foundation  of
taxation.  If,  under  the  enumeration  of  a  representative
for  every  30,000  souls,  one  state  had  been  found  to
contain  59,000,  and  another  60,000,  the  first  would
have  been  entitled  to  only  one  representative,  and  the
last  to  two.  Their  taxes,  however,  would  not  have
been  as  one  to  two,  but  as  fifty-nine  to  sixty.  This
clause  was  obviously  not  intended  to  create  any  ex-
emption fi-om  taxation,  or  to  make  taxation  dependent
on  representation,  but  to  furnish  a  standard  for  the
apportionment  of  each  on  the  states.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XIV.] P0WEB8  or  OOKORSSS  —  TAXES.  466

^  999.  ^  The  fourth  paragraph  of  the  ninth  section  of
the  same  article,  will  next  be  considered.  It  is  in  these
words :  ^  No  capitation,  or  other  direct  tax,  shall  be
Maid,  unless  in  proportion  to  the  census,  or  enumera-
^  tion  herein  before  directed  to  be  taken.'

§  1000.  ^^  The  census  referred  to  is  in  that  clause  of
the  constitution,  which  has  just  been  considered,  which
makes  numbers  the  standard,  by  which  both  representa*
tives  and  direct  taxes  shall  be  apportioned  among
the  states. The  actual  enumeration  is  to  be  made

*  within  three  years  after  the  first  meeting  of  the  con-

*  gress  of  the  United  States,  and  within  every  subse-

*  quent  term  of  ten  years,  in  such  manner  as  they  shall

*  by  law  direct.'

§  1001.  "As  the  direct  and  declared  object  of  this
census  is,  to  furnish  a  standard,  by  which  ^  representa-
tives, and  direct  taxes,  may  be  apportioned  among  the
several  states,  which  may  be  included  within  this
Union,'  it  will  be  admitted,  that  the  omission  to  extend
it  to  the  district,  or  the  territories,  would  not  render  it
defective.  The  census  referred  to  is  admitted  to  be  a
census  exhibiting  the  numbers  of  the  respective  States.
It  cannot,  however,  be  admitted,  that  the  argumei^t,
which  limits  the  application  of  the  power  of  direct  taxa-
tion to  the  population  contahied  in  this  census,  is  a  just
one.  The  language  of  the  clause  does  not  imply  this
restriction.  It  is  not,  that  *  no  capitation^  or  other  di-
rect tax  shall  be  laid,  unless  on  those  comprehended
vnthin  the  census  herein  before  directed  to  be  taken,'
but  ^unless  in  proportion  to'  that  census.  Now  this  pro-
portion may  be  applied  to  the  district  or  the  territories.
If  an  enumeration  be  taken  of  the  population  in  the  dis-
trict and  the  territories,  on  the  same  principles,  on  which
the  enumeratk)n  of  the  respective  states  is  mad^  then

VOL.  II.  6d


Digitized  by


Google


466 ooirsTmmoN  of  thc  u*  states,  [book  hi.

the  kformatioii  is  acquired,  by  which  a  direct  tax  may
be  imposed  on  the  district  and  territories,  ^in  propor«
tion  to  the  census  or  enumeration'  which  the  constitu-
,tion  directs  to  be  taken.

§  1002.  ^The  standard,  then,  by  which  direct  taxes
must  be  laid,  is  iq)plicable  to  this  district,  and  will  ena-
ble congress  to  apportion  on  it  its  just  and  equal  share
of  the  burthen,  with  the  same  accuracy  as  on  the  re-
spective states.  If  the  tax  be  laid  in  this  proportion,
it  is  withm  the  very  words  of  the  restriction.  It  is  a
tax  in  proportion  to  the  census  or  enumeration  referred
to.

^  1003.  <^  But  the  argument  is  presented  in  another
fwm,  in  which  its  refutation  is  more  difficult  It  b
urged  against  this  construction,  that  it  would  produce
&e  necessity  of  extending  direct  taxation  to  the  district
and  territories,  which  would  not  only  be  inconvenient,
but  contrary  to  the  understandmg  and  practice  of  the
whole  ^vernment.  If  the  power  of  imposing  direct
taxes  be  co-ext^isive  with  the  United  States,  then  it  is
contended,  that  the  restrictive  clause,  if  applicable  to
the  district  and  territories,  requires,  that  the  tax  should
be  extended  to  them ;  since  to  omit  them  would  be  to
vidate  the  rule  of  proportion.

^  1004  "  We  think,  a  satisfactory  answer  to  this
argument  may  be  drawn  from  a  fair  comparative  view
of  the  different  clauses  of  the  constitution,  which  have
been  recited.

^  1005.  ^^  That  the  general  grant  of  power  to  lay  and
collect  taxes,  is  made  in  t^rms,  which  comprehend  the
distiict  and  the  territories,  as  well  as  the  states,  is,  we
think,  incontrovertible.  The  subsequent  clauses  are  in-
tended to  regulate  the  exercise  of  this  power ;  not  to  with-
draw frcHu  it  any  portion  of  the  community. The  words.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIT.] POWERS  or  OONGRKSS— *TAXS8.  467

in  which  those  clauses  are  eicpressed,  import  this  iiitenr
tion.  In  thus  regulating  its  exercise,  a  rule  is  given  in
the  second  section  of  the  first  article  for  its  iq)plicaCion  to
the  respective  states.  That  rule  declares^  how  direct
taxes  upon  the  states  shall  be  imposed.  They  shall  be
apportioned  upon  the  several  states  according  to  their
numbers.  If,  then,  a  durect  tax  be  laid  at  all,  it  must
be  laid  on  every  state,  conformably  to  the  rule  provided
in  the  constitution.  Congress  has  clearly  no  power  to
exempt  any  state  from  its  due  share  of  the  burthen.
But  this  regulation  is  expressly  confined  to  the  states,
and  creates  no  necessity  for  extending  the  tax  to  the
district  or  the  territories.  The  words  of  the  ninth  section
do  not  in  terms  require,  that  the  system  of  direct  taxa*
tion,  when  resorted  fe,  shall  be  extended  to  the  t^ni-
tones,  as  the  words  of  the  second  section  require,  that
it  slmll  be  extended  to  b&  the  states.  They,  thwefbre,
may,  vnthout  violence,  be  imderstood  to  give  a  rule^
when  the  territories  shall  be  taxed,  without  imposing
the  necessity  of  taxing  them.  It  could  scarcely  escape
the  members  of  the  convention,  that  the  expense  of
executing  the  law  in  a  territory  might  exceed  the
amount  of  the  tax.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  the  doubt
created  by  the  words  of  the  ninth  section  relates  to
the  obligation  to  apportion  a  direct  tax  on  the  territo-
ries, as  well  as  the  states,  rather  than  to  the  power  to
do  so.

§  1006.  "If;  then,  the  language  of  the  coBStitution  be
construed  to  comprehend  the  territories  and  District  of
Columbia,  as  well  as  the  states,  that  language  confers
on  congress  the  power  of  taxing  the  district  and  terri-
tories, as  well  as  the  states.  If  the  general  language  of
the  constitution  should  be  confined  to  the  states,  still
the  sixterath  paragraph  of  the  eighth  section  gives  to


Digitized  by


Google


408 CONSTITUTION  07  THE  V.  STATSS.  [bOOK  HI.

congress  the  power  of  exercknng  'exdusive  legisl^tkm
in  all  cases  whatsoever  within  this  district.'

§  1007,  "  On  the  extent  of  these  terms,  accordmg  to
the  common  understanding  of  mankind,  there  can  be
no  difference  of  opinion ;  but  it  is  contended,  that  thej
must  be  limited  by  that  great  principle,  which  was
asserted  in  our. revolution,  that  representation  is  insep-
arable from  taxation.  The  difference  between  requiring
a  continent,  with  an  immense  population,  to  submit  to  be
taxed  by  a  government,  having  no  common  interest  with
it,  separated  from  it  by  a  vast  ocean,  restrained  by  no
principle  of  apportionment,  and  associated  with  it  by  no
common  feelings ;  and  permitting  the  representatives  of
the  American  peq>le,  under  the  restrictions  of  our  con-
stitution, to  tax  a  part  of  the  society,  which  is  either  in
a  state  of  infancy  advancing  to  manhood,  looking  for-
ward to  complete,  equa^ty,  as  soon  as  that  state  of  man-
hood shall  be  attained,  as  is  the  case  with  the  territo-
ries ;  or  which  has  voluntarily  relinquished  the  right  of
representation,  and  has  adopted  the  whole  body  of  con-
gress for  its  legitimate  government,  as  is  the  case  with
the  district ;  is  too  obvious  not  to  present  itself  to  the
minds  of  alL  Although  in  theory  it  might  be  more  con-
genial to  the  spirit  of  our  institutions  to  admit  a  repre-
sentative from  the  district,  it  may  be  doubted,  whether
in  fact,  its  interests  would  be  rendered  thereby  the
more  secure ;  and  certainly  the  constitution  does  not
consider  its  want  of  a  representative  in  congress  as
exempting  it  from  equal  taxation.

^  1008.  "  If  it  were  true,  that,  according  to  the  spirit
of  our  constitution,  the  power  of  taxation  must  be  limit-
ed by  the  right  of  representation,  whence  is  derived  the
right  to  lay  and  cc^ect  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,
within ;this  district? li  the  principles  of  liberty,  and  of


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWSnS  OF  COHOREM TAXS8.  469

our  ccmstitudon,  forbid  the  rabmg  of  re?enue  from  those,
who  are  not  represented,  do  not  these  principles  forbid
the  raising  it  by  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  as  well
as  by  a  direct  taxi  If  the  principles  of  our  revolution
gire  a  rule  applicable  to  this  case,  we  cannot  have  for-
gotten, that  neither  the  stamp  act,  nor  the  duty  on  tea,
were  direct  taxes.  Tet  it  is  admitted,  that  the  consti-
tution not  only  allows,  but  enjobs  the  gotemment  to
extend  the  ordinary  revenue  system  to  this  district

§  1009.  "  If  it  be  said,  that  the  principle  of  uniformity,
established  in  the  constitution,  secures  the  district  from
oppression  in  the  imposition  of  indirect  taxes,  it  is  not
less  true,  that  the  principle  of  apportionment,  also
established  in  the  ccmstitution,  secures  the  district  from
any  oppressive  exercise  of  the  power  to  lay  and  cdlect
direct  taxes.'*

^  1010.  The  next  clause  in  the  constitution  is:  "No
^  tax  or  duty  shall  be  laid  on  xirtides  exported  from
**  any  state.  No  preference  shall  be  given  by  any  reg-
**ulation  of  commerce,  or  revenue,  to  the  ports  of  one
.** state  over  those  of  another;  nor  shall  vessels  bound
*•  to,  or  from  one  state  be  obliged  to  enter,  clear,  or  pay
**  duties  in  another.'*

§  1011.  The  obvious  object  of  these  provisions  is,  to
prevent  any  possibility  of  applymg  the  power  to  lay
taxes,  or  regulate  commerce,  injuriously  to  the  inter-
ests of  any  one  state,  so  as  to  favour  or  aid  another.
If  congress  were  allowed  to  lay  a  duty  on  exports
from  any  one  state  it  might  unreasonably  injure,  or
even  destroy,  the  staple  productions,  or  common  arti-
cles of  that  state.*  The  inequality  of  such  a  tax  would
be  extreme. In  s6me  of  the  states,  the  whole  of  their


1  Rawie  on  the  Conetitutioo,  ch.  10,  p.  115, 116.


Digitized  t)y


Google


470 oovsTiTiprioir  of  the  u.  states,  [book  hi.

means  result  from  agricultural  exports.  In  others,  a
great  portion  is  derived  fix)m  other  sources ;  from  ex-
ternal fisheries  ;  from  freights ;  and  from  the  profits  of
commerce  in  its  largest  extent.  The  burthen  of  such
a  tax  would,  of  course,  be  very  unequally  distributed.
The  power  is,  therefore,  whdly  taken  away  to  inter-
meddle with  the  subject  of  exports.  On  the  other
hand,  preferences  might  bd  given  to  the  ports  of  one
state  by  regulations,  either  of  commerce  or  revenue,
which  might  confer  on  them  local  facilities  or  priv-
ileges in  regard  to  commerce,  or  revenue.  And  such
preferences  might  be  equally  fatal,  if  individually
given  under  the  milder  form  of  requiring  an  entry,
clearance,  or  payment  of  duties  in  the  the  ports  of  any
state,  other  than  the  ports  of  the  state,  to  or  from  which
the  vessel  was  bound.  The  last  clause,  therefore,  does
not  prohibit  congress  fix)m  requiring  an  entry  or  clear-
ance, or  payment  of  duties  at  the  custom-house  on
importations  m  any  port  of  a  state,  to  or  6rom  which
the  vessel  is  bound ;  but  cuts  oflf  the  right  to  require
such  acts  to  be  done  in  other  states,  to  which  the  ves-
sel is  not  bound.^  In  other  words,  it  cuts  off  the  pow-
er to  require,  that  circuity  of  voyage,  which,  under
the  British  colonial  system,  was  employed  tcwinterrupt
the  American  comm^t^e  before  the  revolution.  No
American  vessel  could  then  trade  with  Europe,  unless
thnH^h  a  circuitous  voyage  to  and  from  a  British  port'
^  1012.  The  first  part  of  the  clause  was  reported  in
the  first  draft  of  the  constitution. But  it  did  not  pass

1  Joum.  of  Coavention,  2d3,  294 ;  Sergeant  on  Const  Law,  ch.  28,  p.
346;  UniUdSiates  v.  Brig  mUiam,  2  HalPs  Law  Journal,  d55, 2S9, 260 ;
Rawle  on  the  Const  ch.  10;  p.  116 ;  1  Jefferson's  Corresp.  104  to  106, 112.

a  Reeves  on  Shipping,  28,  36,  47,  49,  52  to  105 ;  Id.  491,  492, 493 ;
Borke*s  Speech  pn  American  Taxation,  in  1774 ;  1  Pitk.  Hist  ch.  3,
p.  91  to  106.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XIV.] POWERS  or  OONQOlEtS  —  TAX£S.  471

without  oppo^tion ;  and  several  attempts  were  made  to
amend  it ;  as  by  inserting  after  the  word  ^*  duty ''  the
words,  **  for  the  purpose  of  revenue,^  and  by  inserting
at  the  end  of  it,  <^  unless  by  consent  of  two  thirds  of
the  legislature ; "  both  of  which  propositions  were  neg-
atived.^ It  then  passed  by  a  vote  of  seven  states  against
four.'  Subsequently,  the  remaining  parts  of  the  clause
were  proposed  by  a  report  of  a  committee,  and  they
appear  to  have  been  adopted  without  objection.'  Upon
the  whole,  the  wisdom  and  soimd  policy  of  this  restric-
tion  cannot  admit  of  reasonable  doubt ;  not  so  much  that
the  powers  of  the  general  government  were  likely  to  be
abused,  as  that  Uie  constitutional  prohibition  would
allay  jealousies,  and  ccmfirm  confidence.^  The  prohibi-
tion extends  not  only  to  exports,  but  to  the  exporter.
Congress  can  no  more  rightfully  tax  the  one,  than  the
other.*

§  1013.  The  next  clause  contains  a  prohibition  on  the
states  for  the  like  objects  and  purposes.  ^  No  state
^  shall,  tmthout  tke  cansefU  ofcaugress^  lay  any  knposts,
^  or  duties  on  imports  or  exports,  except  what  may  be
^'  absolutely  necessary  for  executing  its  inspection  laws ;
^  and  the  nett  produce  of  all  duties  and  imposts  laid  by
^^  any  state  on  imports  and  exports  shall  be  for  the  use
"  of  the  treasury  of  the  United  States ;  and  all  such
^  laws  shall  be  subject  to  the  revision  and  control  ot
"congress.  No  state  shall,  without  the  consent  of
"congress,  lay  any  tonnage  duty.*'  In  the  first  draft  of
the  constitution,  the  clause  stood, "  no  state,  without
"  the  consent,"  &c.  "  shall  lay  imposts  or  duties  on  im-

1  Joum.  of  Convention,  222,  275.  »  Id.  275,  276.

3  JouHL  of  Convention,  301, 318 ;  Id.  377,  378.

4  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  252,  253  ;  Id.  2d4.
d  Brwm  y.  Mctnfiandj  12  Wheat  R.  449.


Digitized  by


Google


472 COKSTITtTTIOir  OF  TflS  U.  STAINS. [bOOK  HI.

ports."  The  clause  was  then  amended  by  adding,  ^or
exports,"  not  however  withqut  opposition,  six  states
voting  in  the  affirmative,  and  five  in  the  negative ; "  ^
and  again  by  adding,  **  nor  with  such  consent,  but  for
the  use  of  the  treasury  of  the  United  States,"  by  a  vote
of  nine  states  against  two.'  In  the  revised  draft,  the
dause  was  reported  as  thus  amended.  The  clause
was  then  altered  to  its  present  shape  by  a  vote  of  ten
states  against  one ;  and  the  clause,  which  respects  the
duty  on  tonnage,  was  then  added  by  a  vote  of  six
states  against  /four,  one  being  divided.'  So,  that  it
Beems,  that  a  struggle  for  state  powers  was  constandy
maintained  with  zeal  and  pertinacity  throughout  the
whole  discussion.  If  there  is  wisdom  and  sound  policy
in  restraining  the  United  States  from  exercising  the
power  of  taxation  unequally  in  the  states,  there  is,  at
least,  equal  wisdom  and  policy  in  restraining  the  states
themselves  from  the  exercise  of  the  same  power  inju-
riously to  the  interests  of  each  other.  A  petty  war-
fare of  regulation  is  thus  prevented,  which  would  rouse
resentments,  and  create  dissensions,  to  the  ruin  of  the
harmony  and  amity  of  the  states.  Thd  power  to  en-
force their  respective  laws  is  still  retained,  subject  to
the  revision  and  control  of  (Congress ;  so,  that  sufficient
provision  is  made  for  the  convenient  arrangement  of
their  domestic  and  internal  trade,  whenever  it  is  not
injurious  to  the  general  interests.^

§  1014.  Inspection  laws  are  not,  strictly  speakmg,
regulations  of  commerce,  though  they  may  have  a

1  Journ.  of  Convention,  227,303.  a  Id.  303,304.

»  Journ.  of  Convention,  359,  380,  381.  See  9  American  Museom,
534  ;  Id.  540.

4  The  Federalist,  No.  44 ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Couim.  App.  252, 3ia
See  also  2  Elliot's  Debates,  354  to  356 ;  Journ.  of  Convention,  294,
295.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OP  CONGRESS TAXES.  473

remote  and  considerable  influence  on  commerce.  The
object  of  inspection  laws  is  to  improve  the  qual-
ity of  articles  produced  by  the  labour  of  a  country ;  to
fit  them  for  exportation,  or  for  domestic  use.  These
laws  act  upon  the  subject,  before  it  becomes  an  ar-
ticle of  commerce,  foreign  or  domestic,  and  prepare
it  for  the  purpose.  They  form  a  portion  of  that
immense  mass-  of  legislation,  which  embraces  every
thing  in  the  territory  of  a  state  not  surrendered  to  the
general  government.  Inspection  law^s>  quarantine  laws,
and  health  laws,  as  well  as  laws  for  regulating  the  in-
ternal commerce  of  a  state,  and  others,  which  respect
roads,  fences,  &c.  are  component  parts  of  state  legis-
lation, resulting  from  the  residuary  powers  of  state
sovereignty.  No  direct  power  over  these  is  given  to
congress,  and  consequently  they  remain  subject  to
state  legislation,  though  they  may  be  controlled  by  con-
gress, when  they  interfere  with  their  acknowledged
powers.^  Under  the  confederation,  there  was  a  provis-
ion, that  "no  state  shall  lay  any  imposts  or  duties,
which  may  interfere  with  any  stipulations  of  treaties
entered  into  by  the  United  States,*'  &lc.  &c.  This
prohibition  was  notoriously  (as  has  been  already  stat-
ed) disregarded  by  the  states ;  and  in  the  exercise  by
the  states  of  their  general  authority  to  lay  imposts  and
.  duties,  it  is  equally  notorious,  that  the  most  mischiev-
ous restraints,  preferences,  and  inequalities  existed  ;
so,  that  very  serious  h-ritations  and  feuds  were  con-
stantly generated,  which  threatened  the  peace  of  the
Union,  and  indeed  must  have  inevitably  led  to  a  disso-
lution of  it.* The  power  to  lay  duties  and  imposts  on

1  Gibbons  V.  Ogden,  9  Wheat  R.  1,  203  to  206,  210, 235,  236,311  j
Broum  v.  Maryland,  12  Wheat  R.  419,  438,  439,  440.
a  The  Federalist,  No.  7,22.

VOL.  II.  60


Digitized  by


Google


474  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

imports  and  exports,  and  to  lay  a  tonnage  duty,  are
doubdess  properly  considered  a  part  of  the  taxing
power ;  but  they  may  also  be  applied,  as  a  regulation
of  commerce.*

§  1015.  Until  a  recent  period,  no  diflSculty  occurred
in  regard  to  the  prohibitions  of  this  clause.  Congress,
with  a  just  liberality,  gave  full  effect  to  the  inspection
laws  of  the  states,  and  required  them  to  be  observed  by
the  revenue  officers  of  the  United  States.*  In  the
year  1821,  the  state  of  Maryland  passed  an  act  requir-
ing, that  all  importers  of  foreign  articles  or  commodi-
ties, &LC.  by  bale  or  package,  or  of  wine,  rum,  &c.  &c,,
and  other  persons  sellmg  the  same  by  wholesale,  bale,
or  package,  hogshead,  barrel,  or  tierce,  should,  before
they  were  authorized  to  sell,  take  out  a  license,  for
which  they  were  to  pay  Jijiy  dollars,  under  certain
penalties.  Upon  this  act  a  question  arose,  whether  it
w^as,  or  not  a  violation  of  the  constitution  of  the  United
States,  and  especially  of  the  prohibitory  clause  now
under  consideration.  Upon  solemn  argument,  the
Supreme  Court  decided,  that  it  was.'  The  judgment
of  the  Supreme  Court,  delivered  on  that  occasion^  con-
tains a  very  full  exposition  of  the  whole  subject ;  and
although  it  is  long,  it  seems  difficult  to  abridge  it  with-
out marring  the  reasoning,  or  in  some  measure  leaving
imperfect  a  most  important  constitutional  inquiry.  It
is,  therefore,  mserted  at  large.

^  1016.  "  The  cause  depends  entirely  on  the  question,
whether  the  legislature  of  a  state  can  constitutionally
require  the  importer  of  foreign  articles  to  take  out  a

- 1  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  9  Wheat  R.  1,  199,  200,  201 ;  Broum  v.  Mary-
land, 12  Wheat  R.  446,  447.

a  Act  of  2d  April,  1790,  cb.  5 ;  Act  of  2d  March,  1799,  ch.  128,  §  93.

'  Broum  v.  Maryland,  12  Wheat  R.  419;  The  Federalist,  No.  278.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWEHS  OF  CONGRESS TAXES.  475

license  froin  the  state,  before  he  shall  be  permitted  to
sell  a  bale  or  package  so  imported.  It  has  been  truly
said,  that  the  presumption  is  in  favour  of  every  legis-
lative act,  and  that  the  whole  burthen  of  proof  lies  on
those,  who  deny  its  constitutionality.  The  plaintiffs  in
error  take  the  burthen  upon  themselves,  and  insist,  that
the  act  under  consideration  is  repugnant  to  two  provis-
ions in  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  (1.)  To
that,  which  declares,  that  *  no  state  shall,  without  the
consent  of  congress,  lay  any  imposts  or  duties  on  im-
ports or  exports,  except  what  may  be  absolutely  ne-
cessary for  executing  its  inspection  laws.'  (2.)  To  that,
which  declares,  that  congress  shall  have  power  ^  to  reg-
ulate commerce  with  foreign  nations,  and  among  the
several  states,  and  with  the  Indian  tribes.'

^  1017.  "  1.  The  first  inquiry  is,  into  the  extent  of  the
prohibition  upon  states,  *  to  lay  any  imposts  or  duties
on  imports  or  exports.'  The  counsel  for  the  state  of
Maryland  would  confine  this  prohibition  to  laws  impos-
ing duties  on  the  act  of  importation  or  exportation.
The  counsel  for  the  plaintiffs  in  error  give  them  a  much
wider  scope.  In  performing  the  dehcate  and  impor-
tant duty  of  construing  clauses  in  the  constitution  of
our  country,  which  involve  conflicting  powers  of  the
government  of  the  Union,  and  of  the  respective  states,
it  is  proper  to  take  a  view  of  the  literal  meaning  of  the
words  to  be  expounded,  of  their  connexion  with  other
words,  and  of  the  general  objects  to  be  accomplished
by  the  prohibitory  clause,  or  by  the  grant  of  power.
What,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  *  imposts  or
duties  on  imports  or  exports  1 '  An  impost  or  duty  on
imports,  is  a  custom  or  a  tax  levied  on  articles  brought
into  a  country,  and  is  most  usually  secured  before  the
importer  is  allowed  to  exercise  his  rights  of  ownership


Digitized  by


Google


476  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

over  them,  because  evasions  of  the  law  can  be  prevent-
ed more  certamly  by  executing  it,  while  the .  articles
,  are  in  its  custody. It  would  not,  however,  be  less  an
impost  or  duty  on  the  articles,  if  it  were  to  be  levied
on  them  after  they  were  landed. The  policy  and  con-
sequent practice  of  levymg  or  securing  the  duty  before,
or  on  entering  the  port,  does  not  limit  the  power  to
that  state  of  things,  nor,  consequently,  the  prohibition,
unless  the  true  meanmg  of  the  clause  so  confines  it
What,  then,  are  *  imports  ?  ' The  lexicons  inform  us,
they  are  *  things  imported.' If  we  appeal  to  usage  for
the  meaning  of  the  word,  we  shall  receive  the  same
answer. They  are  the  articles  themselves,  which  are
brought  into  the  country. *  A  duty  on  imports,'  then,
is  not  merely  a  duty  on  the  act  of  importation,  but  is  a
duty  on  the  thing  imported. It  is  not,  taken  in  its  lit-
eral sense,  confined  to  a  duty  levied,  while  the  article
is  entering  the  country,  but  extends  to  a  duty  4e vied
after  it  has  entered  the country. The  succeeding
words  of  the  sentence,  which  limit  the  prohibition,  show
the  extent,  in  which  it  was  understood. The  Umita-
tion  is,  *  except  what  may  be  absolutely  necessary  for
executing  its  inspection  laws.' Now,  the  inspection
laws,  so  far  as  they  act  upon  articles  for  exporta-
tion, are  generally  executed  on  land,  before  the  arti-
cle is  put  on  board  the  vessel ;  so  far,  as  they  act  upon
importations,  they  are  generally  executed  upon  articles,
wUch  are  landed. The  tax  or  duty  of  inspection,  then,
is  a  tax,  which  is  frequently,  if  not  always,  paid  for  ser-
vice performed  on  land, while  the  article  is  in  the
bosom  of  the  country. Yet  this  tax  is  an  exception  to
the  prohibition  on  the  states  to  lay  duties  on  imports
or  exports. The  exception  was  made,  because  the  tax
would  otherwise  have  been  within  the  prohibition. If


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS TAXES.  477 '

it  be  a  rule  of  interpretation,  to  which  all  assent,  that
the  exception  of  a  particular  thing  from  general  words
proves,  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  lawgiver,  the  thing
excepted  would  be  within  the  general  clause,  had  the
exception  not  been  made,  we  know  no  reason,  why
this  general  rule  should  not  be  as  applicable  to  the  con-
stitution, as  to  other  instruments.  If  it  be  applicable,
then  this  exception  in  favour  of  duties  for  the  support
of  inspection  laws,  goes  far  in  proving,  that  the  framers
of  the  constitution  classed  taxes  of  a  similar  character
with  those  imposed  for  the  purposes  of  inspection,  with
duties  on  imports  and  exports,  and  supposed  them  to  be
prohibited.

§  1018.  "  If  we  quit  this  narrow  view  of  the  subject,
and,  passing  from  the  literal  interpretation  of  the  words,
look  to  the  objects  of  the  prohibition,  we  find  no  yea-
son  for  withdrawing  the  act  under  consideration  from
its  operation.  From  the  vast  inequality  between  the
diflFerent  states  of  the  confederacy,  as  to  commercial
advantages,  few  subjects  were  viewed  with  deeper  in-
terest, or  excited  more  irritation,  than  the  manner,  in
which  the  several  states  exercised,  or  seemed  disposed
to  exercise,  the  power  of  laying  duties  on  imports.
From  motives,  which  were  deemed  sufficient  by  the
statesmen  of  that  day,  the  general  power  of  taxation,
indispensably  necessary,  as  it  was,  and  jealous,  as  the
states  were,  of  any  encroachment  on  it,  was  so  far
abridged,  as  to  forbid  them  to  touch  imports  or  exports,
with  the  single  exception,  which  has  been  noticed.
Why  are  they  restrained  from  imposing  these  duties  ?
Plainly,  because,  in  the  general  opinion,  the  interest  of
all  would  be  best  promoted  by  placing  that  whole  sub-  ^
ject  under  the  control  of  congress.  Whether  the  pro-
hibition to  *  lay  imposts,  or  duties  on  imports  or  ex-


Digitized  by


Google


478 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES.  [bOOK  Iir.

ports/  proceeded  from  an  apprehension,  that  the  power
might  be  so  exercised,  as  to  disturb  that  equality  smiong
the  states,  which  was  generally  advantageous,  or  that
harmony  between  them,  which  it  was  desirable  to  pre-
serve ;  or  to  maintain  unimpaired  our  commercial  con-
nexions with  foreign  nations  ;  or  to  confer  this  source  of
revenue  on  the  government  of  the  Union  ;  or,  what-
ever other  motive  might  have  induced  the  prohibition  ;
it  is  plain,  that  the  object  would  be  as  completely  de-
feated by  a  power  to  tax  the  article  in  the  hands  of
the  importer,  the  instant  it  was  landed,  as  by  a  power
to  tax  it,  while  entering  the  port  There  is  no  differ-
ence, in  effect,  between  a  power  to  prohibit  the  sale
of  an  article,  and  a  power  to  prohibit  its  introduction
into  the  country.  The  one  would  be  a  necessary  con-
sequence of  the  other.  No  goods  would  be  imported,
if  none  could  be  sold.  No  object  of  any  description
can  be  accomplished  by  laying  a  duty  on  importation,
which  may  not  be  accomplished  with  equal  certainty
by  laying  a  duty  on  the  thing  imported  in  the  hands  of
the  importer.  It  is  obvious,  that  the  same  power,  which
imposes  a  light  duty,  can  impose  a  very  heavy  one,
one  which  amounts  to  a  prohibition.  Questions  of
power  do  not  depend  on  the  degree,  to  which  it  may
be  exercised.  If  it  may  be  exercised  at  all,  it  must  be
exercised  at  the  will  of  those,  in  whose  hands  it  is
placed.  If  the  tax  may  be  levied  in  this  form  by  a
state,  it  may  be  levied  to  an  extent,  which  will  defeat
the  revenue  by  impost,  so  far,  as  it  is  drawn  from  im-
portations into  the  particular  state.

§  1019.  We  are  told,  that  such  a  wild  and  irrational
abuse  of  power  is  not  to  be  apprehended,  and  is  not  to
be  taken  into  view,  when  discussing  its  existence.  All
power  may  be  abused ;  and  if  the  fear  of  its  abuse  is


Digitized  by


Google


CH. XIY.] POWERS OF CONGRESS TAXES.  479

to  constitute  an  argument  against  its  existence,  it  might
be  urged  against  the  existence  of  that,  which  is  univer-
sally acknowledged,  and  which  is  mdispensable  to  the
general  safety.  The  states  will  never  be  so  mad,  as  to
destroy  their  own  commerce,  or  even  to  lessen  it
We  do  not  dissent  from  these  general  propositions.
We  do  not  suppose  any  state  would  act  so  unwisely.
But  we  do  not  place  the  question  on  that  ground.
These  arguments  apply  with  precisely  the  same  force
against  the  whole  prohibition.  It  might,  with  the  same
reason  be  said,  that  no  state  would  be  so  blind  to  its
own  interests,  as  to  lay  duties  on  importation,  whict
would  either  prohibit,  or  diminish  its  trade.  Yet  the
framers  of  our  constitution  have  thought  this  a  power,
which  no  state  ought  to  exercise.  Conceding,  to  the
full  extent,  which  is  required,  that  every  state  would,  in
its  legislation  on  this  subject,  provide  judiciously  for  its
own  interests,  it  cannot  be  conceded,  that  each  would
respect  the  interests  of  others.  A  duty  on  imports  is
a  tax  on  the  article,  which  is  paid  by  the  consumer.
The  great  importing  states  would  thus  levy  a  tax  on
the  non-importing  states,  which  would  not  be  less  a  tax,
because  their  interest  would  afford  ample  security
against  its  ever  being  so  heavy,  as  to  expel  commerce
from  their  ports.  This  would  necessarily  produce
countervailing  measures  on  the  part  of  those  states,
whose  situation  was  less  favourable  to  importation.
For  this,  among  other  reasons,  the  whole  power  of  lay-
ing duties  on  imports  was,  with  a  single  and  slight  ex-
ception, taken  from  the  states.  When  we  are  inquir-
ing, whether  a  particular  act  is  within  this  prohibition,
the  question  is  not,  whether  the  state  may  so  legislate,
as  to  hurt  itself,  but  whether  the  act  is  within  the  words
and  mischief  of  the  prohibitory  clause. It  has  already


Digitized  by


Google


480 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

been  shown,  that  a  tax  on  the  article  in  the  hands  of
the  importer  is  within  its  words ;  and  we  think  it  too
clear  for  controversy,  that  the  same  tax  is  within  its
mischief.  We  think  it  unquestionable,  that  such  a  tax
has  precisely  the  same  tendency  to  enhance  the  price
of  the  article,  as  if  imposed  upon  it,  while  entering  the
port.

^  1020.  "  The  counsel  for  the  state  of  Maryland  m-
sist  with  great  reason,  that  if  the  words  of  the  pro-
hibition be  taken  in  their  utmost  latitude,  they  will
abridge  the  power  of  taxation,  which  all  admit  to  be
essential  to  the  states,  to  an  extent,  which  has  never
yet  been  suspected ;  and  will  deprive  them  of  resources,
which  are  necessary  to  supply  revenue,  and  which
they  have  heretofore  been  admitted  to  possess.  These
words  must,  therefore,  be  construed  with  some  limita-
tion ;  and,  if  this  be  adniitted,  they  insist,  that  enter-
ing the  country  is  the  point  of  time,  when  the  prohibi-
tion ceases,  and  the  power  of  the  state  to  tax  com-
mences. It  may  be  conceded,  that  the  words  of  the
prohibition  ought  not  to.be  pressed  to  their  utmost  ex-
tent ;  that  in  our  complex  system  the  object  of  the
powers  conferred  on  the  government  of  the  Union,  and
the  nature  of  the  often  conflicting  powers,  which  re-
main in  the  states,  must  always  be  taken  into  view,  and
may  aid  in  expounding  the  words  of  any  particular
clause.  But  while  we  admit,  that  sound  principles  of
construction  ought  to  restrain  all  courts  from  carrying
the  words  of  the  prohibition  beyond  the  object,  which  the
^constitution  is  intended  to  secure  ;  that  there  must  be
a  point  of  time,  when  the  prohibition  ceases,  and  the
power  of  the  state  to  tax  commences ;  we  cannot  ad-
mit, that  this  point  of  time  is  the  instant,  that  the  articles
enter  the  country.  It  is,  we  think,  obvious,  that  this
construction  would  defeat  the  prohibition.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS TAXES.  481

^1021.  "The  constitutional  prohibition  on  the  states
to  lay  a  duty  on  imports,  a  prohibition,  which  a  vast
majority  of  them  must  feel  an  interest  in  preserving,
may  certainly  come  in  conflict  with  their  acknowledged
power  to  tax  persons  and  property  within  their  terri-
tory. The  power,  and  the  restriction  on  it,  though
quite  distinguishable,  when  they  do  not  approach  each
other,  may  yet,  Uke  the  intervening  colors  between
white  and  black,  approach  so  nearly,  as  to  perplex  the
understanding,  as  colors  perplex  the  vision  in  marking
the  distinction  between  them.  Yet  the  distinction
exists,  and  must  be  marked,  as  the  cases  arise.  Till
they  do  arise,  it  might  be  premature  to  state  any  ride,
as  being  universal  in  its  application.  It  is  sufficient  for
the  present,  to  say,  generally,  that  when  the  importer
has  so  acted  upon  the  thing  imported,  that  it  has  be-
come incorporated  and  mixed  up  with  the  mass  of
property  in  the  country,  it  has,  perhaps,  lost  its  distinc-
tive character,  as  an  import,  and  has  become  subject
to  the  taxing  power  of  the  state.  But,  while  remaining
the  property  of  the  importer,  in  his  warehouse,  in  the
original  form  or  package,  in  which  it  was  imported,  a
tax  upon  it  is  too  plainly  a  duty  on  imports  to  escape
the  prohibition  in  the  constitution.

^  1022.  "The  counsel  for  the  plaintiffs  in  error  con-
tend, that  the  importer  purchases,  by  payment  of  the
duty  to  the  United  States,  a  right  to  dispose  of  his
merchandise,  as  well  as  to  bring  it  into  the  country ;
and  certainly  the  argument  is  supported  by  strong  rea-
son, as  well  as  by  the  practice^f  nations,  including  our
own.  The  object  of  importation  is  sale  ;  it  constitutes
the  motive  for  paying  the  duties  ;  and  if  •the  United
States  possess  the  power  of  conferring  the  right  to
seU,  as  the  consideration,  for  which  the  duty  is  paid,

VOL.  II.  61

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


482 CONSTITUTIOl^  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  UI.

every  principle  of  fair  dealing  requires,  that  they  should
be  understood  to  confer  it.  The  practice  of  the  most
commercial  nations  conforms  to  this  idea.  Duties,  ac-
cording to  that  practice,  are  charged  on  those  articles
oaly^  which  are  intended  for  sale  or  consumption  in  the
country.  Thus,  sea  stores,  goods  imported  and  re-
exported in  the  same  vessel,  goods  landed  and  carried
over  land  for  the  purpose  of  being  re-exported  from
some  other  port,  goods  forced  in  by  stress  of  weath-
er, and  landed,  but  not  for  sale,  are  exempted  from
the  payment  of  duties.  The  whole  course  of  legisla-
tion on  the  subject  shows,  that,  in  the  opinion  of  the
legislature,  the  right  to  sell  is  connected  with  the  pay-
ment of  duties.

5)^  1023.  *^  The  counsel  for  the  defendant  in  error  have
endeavoured  to  illustrate  their  proposition,  that  the
constitutional  prohibition  ceases  the  instant  the  goods
enter  the  country,  by  an  array  of  the  consequences,
which  they  suppose  must  follow  the  denial  of  it.  If
the  importer  acquires  the  right  to  sell  by  the  payment
of  duties,  he  may,  they  say,  exert  that  right,  when,
where,  and  as  he  pleases ;  and  the  state  cannot  regulate
it.  He  may  sell  by  retail,  at  auction,  or  as  an  itinerant
pedlar.  He  may  introduce  articles,  as  gun-powder,
which  endanger  a  city,  into  the  midst  of  its  population ;
he  may  introduce  articles,  which  endanger  the  public
health,  and  the  power  of  self-preservation  is  dem'ed.
An  importer  may  bring  in  goods,  as  plate,  for  his  own
use,  and  thus  retain  much  valuable  property  exempt
from  taxation.  ^

^  1024  "These  objections  to  the  principle,  if  well
jbunded,  would  certamly  be  entitled  to  serious  considera-
tion. But,  we  think,  they  will  be  found,  on  examination,
uot  to  belong  necessarily  to  the  principle,  and*  conse-


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS — TAXES.  483

quently,not  to  prove,  that  it  may  not  be  resorted  to  with
safety,  as  a  criterion,  by  which  to  measure  the  extent
of  the  prohibition.  This  indictment  is  against  the  im-
porter for  selling  a  package  of  dry  goods  in  the  form,
in  which  it  was  imported,  without  a  license.  This
state  of  things  is  changed,  if  he  sells  them,  or  otherwise
mixes  them  with  the  general  property  of  the  state,  by
breaking  up  his  packages,  and  travelling  with  them,  as
an  itinerant  pedlar.  In  the  first  case,  the  tax  intercepts
the  import,  as  an  import,  in  its  way  to  become  incor-
porated with  the  general  mass  of  property,  and  denies
it  the  privilege  of  becoming  so  incorporated,  until  it
shall  have  contributed  to  the  revenue  of  the  state.  It
denies  to  the  importer  the  right  of  using  the  privilege,
which  he  has  purchased  from  the  United  States,  until
he  shall  have  also  purchased  it  from  the  state.  In  the
last  case,  the  tax  finds  the  article  already  incorporated
with  the  mass  of  property  by  the  act  of  the  importer.
He  has  used  the  privilege  he  had  purchased,  and  has
himself  mixed  them  up  with  the  common  mass,  and  the
law  may  treat  them,  as  it  finds  them.  The  same  obser*
vations  apply  to  plate,  or  other  furniture  used  by  the
importer.  So,  if  he  sells  by  auction.  Auctioneers  are
persons  licensed  by  the  state,  and  if  the  importer
chooses  to  employ  them,  he  can  as  littie  object  to  pay-
ing for  this  service,  as  for  any  other,  for  which  he  may
apply  to  an  officer  of  the  state.  The  right  of  sale  may
very  well  be  annexed  to  importation,  without  annexing
to  it,  also,  the  privilege  of  using  the  officers  licensed  by
the  state  to  make  sales  in  a  peculiar  way.  The  power
to  direct  the  removal  of  gun-powder  is  a  branch  of  the
police  power,  which  unquestionably  remains,  and  ought
to  remain  with  the  states.  If  the  possessor  stores  it
himself  out  of  town,  the  removal  cannot  be  a  duty  <m


Digitized  by


Google


484 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V. STATES. [BOOK  lU.

imports,  because  it  contributes  nothing  to  the  revenue.
If  he  prefers  placing  it  in  a  public  magazine,  it  is  be-
cause he  stores  it  there,  in  his  own  opinion,  more
advantageously  than  elsewhere.  We  are  not  sure,  that
this  may  jaot  he  classed  among  inspection  laws.  The
removal  or  destruction  of  infectious  or  unsound  articles
is,  undoubtedly,  an  exercise  of  that  power,  and  forms
an  express  exception  to  the  prohibition  we  are  consid-
ering. Indeed,  the  laws  of  the  United  States  expressly
sanction  the  health  laws  of  a  state.

§  1025.  "The  principle,  then,  for  which  the  plam-
tiffs  in  error  contend,  that  the  importer  acquires  a  right,
not  only  to  bring  the  articles  into  the  country,  but  to
mix  them  with  the  common  mass  of  property,  does  not
interfere  with  the  necessary  power  of  taxation,  which  is
acknowledged  to  reside  in  the  states,  to  that  dangerous
extent,  which  the  counsel  for  the  defendants  in  error  seen^
to  apprehend.  It  carries  the  prohibition  in  the  consti-
tution no  farther,  than  to  prevent  the  states  from  doing
that,  which  it  was  the  great  object  of  the  constitution  to
prevent

§  1026.  "But  if  it  should  be  proved,  that  a  duty  on
the  article  itself  would  be  repugnant  to  the  constitution,
it  is  still  argued,  that  this  is  not  a  tax  upon  the  article,  but
on  the  person.  The  state,  it  is  said,  may  tax  occupations,
and  this  is  nothing  more.  It  is  impossible  to  conceal  from
ourselves,that  this  is  varying  the  form,  without  varymg
the  substance.  It  is  treating  a  prohibition,  which  is  gen-
eral, as  if  it  were  confined  to  a  particular  mode  of  doing
the  f(H*bidden  thmg.  All  must  perceive,  that  a  tax  on
the  sale  of  an  article,  imported  only  for  sale,  is  a  tax
on  the  article  itselfl  It  is  true,  the  state  may  tax  occu-
pations generally ;  but  this  tax  must  be  paid  by  those,
Inrho  employ  the  individual,  or  is  a  tax  on  his  business.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  COI^ORESS  —  TAXES.  486

The  lawyer,  the  physician,  or  the  mechanic,  must  either
charge  more  on  the  article,  in  which  he  deals,  or  the
thing  itself  is  taxed  through  his  person.  This  the  state
has  a  right  to  do,  because  no  constitutional  prohibition
extends  to  it.  So,  a  tax  on  the  occupation  of  an  im-
porter is,  in  like  manner,  a  tax  on  importation.  It  must
add  to  the  price  of  the  article,  and  be  paid  by  the  con-
sumer, or  by  the  importer  himself,  in  like  manner,  as  a
direct  duty  on  the  article  itself  would  be  made.  This
the  state  has  not  a  right  to  do,  because  it  is  prohibited
by  the  constitution.

^  1027.  "  In  support  of  the  argument,  that  the  pro-
hibition ceases  the  instant  the  goods  are  brought  into
the  country,  a  comparison  has  been  drawn  between  the
opposite  words,  export  and  import.  As,  to  export,  it  is
said,  means  only  to  carry  gdods  out  of  the  country ;  so,
to  impoit,  means  only  to  bring  them  into  it  But,  sup-
pose we  extend  this  comparison  to  the  two  prohibitions.
The  states  are  forbidden  to  lay  a  duty  on  exports,  and
the  United  States  are  forbidden  to  lay  a  tax  or  duty  on
articles  exported  from  any  state.  There  is  some  diver-
sity in  language,  but  none  is  perceivable  in  the  act,
which  is  prohibited.  The  United  States  have  the  same
right  to  tax  occupations,  which  is  possessed  by  the
states.  Now,  suppose  the  United  States  should  re-
quire every  exporter  to  take  out  a  hcense,  for  which  he
should  pay  such  tax,  as  congress  might  think  proper  to
impose ;  would  the  government  be  permitted  to  shield
itself  from  the  just  censure,  to  which  this  attempt  to
evade  the  prohibitions  of  the  constitution  would  expose
it,  by  saying,  that  this  was  a  tax  on  the  person,  not  on
the  article,  and  that  the  legislature  had  a  right  to  tax
occupations  1  Or,  suppose  revenue  cutters  were  to  be
stationed  off  the  coast  for  the  purpose  of  levying  a  duty


Digitized  by


Google


486 CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

on  all  merchandise  found  in  vessels,  which  were  leaving
the  United  States  for  foreign  countries ;  would  it  be
received,  as  an  excuse  for  this  outrage,  were  the  gov-
ernment to  say,  that  exportation  meant  no  more  than
carrying  goods  out  of  the  country,  and  as  the  prohibi-
tion to  lay  a  tax  on  imports,  or  things  imported,  ceased
the  instant  they  were  brought  into  the  country,  so  the
prohibition  to  tax  articles  exported  ceased,  when  they
were  carried  out  of  the  country  1

§  1028.  "We  think,  then,  that  the  act,  under  which
the  plaintiffs  in  error  were  mdicted,  is  repugnant  to  that
article  of  the  constitution,  which  declares,  that  *  no  state
shall  lay  any  impost  or  duties  on  imports  or  ex-
ports.' "  *

^  1029.  As  the  power  of  taxation  exists  in  the  states
concurrently  with  the  United  States,  subject  only  to  the
restrictions  imposed  by  the  constitution,  several  ques-
tions have  from  time  to  time  arisen  in  regard  to  the  na-
ture and  extent  of  the  state  power  of  taxation.

§  1030.  In  the  year  1818,  the  state  of  Maryland
passed  an  act,  laying  a  tax  on  all  banks,  and  branches
thereof,  not  chartered  by  the  legislature  of  .that  state;
and  a  question  was  made,  whether  the  state  had  a  right
under  that  act,  to  lay  a  tax  on  the  Branch  Bank  of  the
United  States  in  that  state.  This  gave  rise  to  a  most
animated  discussion  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Uni-
ted States ;  where  it  was  finally  decided,  that  the  tax
was,  as  to  the  Bank  of  the  United  States,  unconstitution-
al* The  reasoning  of  the  Supreme  Court,  on  this  sub-
ject, was  as  follows.

1  The  opinion  alao  proceeded  to  declare,  that  the  act  was  a  violation
of  the  exclusive  power  of  congress  to  reg^ate  commerce.  But  the  ex-
amination of  this  part  of  the  qaestion  properly  belongs  to  another  bead.

9  M^CuUdch  V.  SUtU  o/Matyland^A  Whe^L  R.  316;  1  Kent's  Comm.
Lect  19,  p.  398  5  Id.  401.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS TAXES.  487

§  1031.  "Whether  the  state  of  Maryland  may,  with-
out violatmg  the  coDStitution,  tax  that  branch  1  That
the  power  of  taxation  is  one  of  vital  importance;
that  it  is  retained  by  the  states ;  that  it  is  not  abridg-
ed by  the  grant  of  a  similar  power  to  the  government
of  the  Union ;  that  it  is  to  be  concurrendy  exercised
by  the  two  governments:  are  truths,  which  have
never  been  denied.  But,  such  is  the  paramount  char-
acter of  the  constitution,  that  its  capacity  to  with-
draw any  subject  frojn  the  action  of  even  this  power
is  admitted.  The  states  are  expressly  forbidden  to  lay^
any  duties  on  imports  or  exports,  except  what  may  be
absolutely  necessary  for  executing  their  inspection  laws.
If  the  obligation  of  this  prohibition  must  be  conceded;
if  it  may  restrain  a  state  from  the  exercise  of  its  taxmg
power  on  imports  and  exports ;  the  same  paramount
character  would  seem  to  restrain,  as  it  certainly  may
restraun,  a  state  from  such  other  exercise  of  this  power,
as  is  in  its  nature  incompatible  with,  and  repugnant  to,
the  constitutional  laws  of  the  Union.  A  law,  absolutely
repugnant  to  another,  as  entirely  repeals  that  other,  as  if
express  terms  of  repeal  were  used.

^  1032.  "On  this  ground  the  counsel  for  the  bank
place  its  claim  to  be  exempted  from  the  power  of  a
state  to  tax  its  operations.  There  is  no  express  pro-
vision for  the  case;  but  the  claim  has  been  sustained  on
a  principle,  which  so  entirely  pervades  the  constitution ;
is  so  intermixed  with  the  materials,  which  compose  it ;
so  interwoven  with  its  web,  so  blended  with  its  texture,
as  to  be  incapable  of  being  separated  from  it  without
rending  it  into  shreds.  This  great  principle  is,  that  the
constitution  and  the  laws  made  in  pursuance  thereof  are
supreme ;  that  they  control  the  constitution  and  laws  of
the  respective  states,  and  cannot  be  controlled  by  them.


Digitized  by


Google


488  CONSTITUTION  OF  THJG  U.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

From  this,  which  may  be  almost  termed  an  axiom,
Other  propositions  are  deduced,  as  corollaries,  on  the
truth  or  error  of  which,  and  on  then-  application  to  this
case,  the  cause  has  been  supposed  to  depend.  These
are,  1st  that  a  power  to  create  implies  a  power  to  pre-
serve. 2nd.  That  a  power  to  destroy,  if  wielded  by  a
different  hand,  is  hostile  to,  and  incompatible  with  the
powers  to  create  and  to  preserve.  3d.  That  where  this
repugnancy  exists,  that  authority,  which  is  supreme,
must  control,  not  yield  to  that  over,  which  it  is  supreme.
These  propositions,  as  abstract  truths,  would,  per-
haps, never  be  controverted.  Their  application  to
this  case,  however,  has  been  denied;  and,  both  in
maintaining  the  afRrmative  and  the  negative,  a  splendor
of  eloquence,  and  strength  of  argument,  seldom,  if
ever,  surpassed,  have  been  displayed.

§  1033.  "The  power  of  congress  to  create,  and  of
course  to  continue,  the  bank,  was  the  subject  of  the
preceding  part  of  this  opinion  ;  and  is  no  longer  to  be
considered  as  questionable.  That  the  power  of  taxing
it  by  the  states  may  be  exercised  so,  as  to  destroy  it,  is
too  obvious  to  be  denied.  But  taxation  is  said  to  be  an
absolute  power,  which  acknowledges  no  other  limits,  than
those  expressly  prescribed  in  the  constitution;  and  like
sovereign  power  of  every  other  description,  is  trusted  to
the  discretion  of  those,  who  use  it.  But  the  very  terms
of  this  argument  admit,  that  the  sovereignty  of  the
state  in  the  article  of  taxation  itself,  is  subordinate  to,
and-maybe  controlled  by,  the  constitution  of  the  United
States.  How  far  it  has  been  controlled  by  that  instru-
ment, must  be  a  question  of  construction.  In  making
this  construction,  no  principle,  not  declared,  can  be  ad-
missible, which  would  defeat  the  legitimate  operations
of  a  supreme  government It  is  of  the  very  essence  of


Digitized  by


Google


€H.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  CONaRSSS  —  TAXES. '- 489

supremacy  to  remove  all  obstacles  to  its  action  within
its  own  sphere,  and  so  to  modify  every  power  vested
in  subordinate  governments,  as  to  exempt  its  own  opera-
tions from  their  own  influence.  This  effect  need  not
be  stated  in  terms.  It  is  so  involved  m  the  declaration
of  supremacy,  so  necessarily  implied  in  it,  that  the  ex-
pression of  it  could  not  make  it  more  certain.  We
must,  therefore,  keep  it  in  view,  while  construing  the
constitution.

§  1034.  "  The  argument,  on  the  part  of  the  state  of
Maryland,  is,  not  that  the  states  may  directly  resist  a
law  of  congress,  but  that  they  may  exercise  their  ac-
knowledged powers  upon  it,  and  that  the  constitution
leaves  them  this  right  in  the  confidence,  that  they  will
not  abuse  it  Before  we  proceed  to  examme  this  argu-
ment, and  to  subject  it  to  the  test  of  the  constitution,
we  must  be  permitted  to  bestow  a  few  considerations
on  the  nature  and  extent  of  this  original  right  of  taxa-
tion, which  is  acknowledged  to  remain  with  the  states.
It  is  admitted,  that  the  power  of  taxing  the  people  and
then*  property  is  essential  to  the  very  existence  of  gov-
ernment, and  may  be  legitimately  exercised  on  the  ob-
jects, to  which  it  is  applicable,  to  the  utmost  extent,  to
which  the  government  may  choose  to  carry  it  The
only  security  against  the  abuse  of  this  power  is  found
in  the  structure  of  the  government  itself.  In  imposing
a  tax  the  legblature  acts  upon  its  constituents.  This
is  in  general  a  sufficient  security  against  erroneous  and
oppressive  taxation.  The  people  of  a  state,  therefore,
give  to  their  government  a  right  of  taxing  themselves  and
their  property;  and  as  the  exigencies  of  government
cannot  beUmited,  they  prescribe  no  limits  to  the  exercise
of  this  right,  resting  confidendy  on  the  interest  of  the
legislator,  and  on  the  influence  of  the  constituents  over

VOL.  II.  62


Digitized  by


Google


490  CONSTITUTIOH  OF  THB  U.  STATES. [M)0K  IO.

their  representative,  to  guard  them  against  its  abuse.
But  the  means  employed  by  the  government  of  the
Union  have  no  such  security ;  nor  is- the  right  of  a  state
to  tax  them  sustained  by  the  same  theory.  Those
means  are  not  given  by  the  people  of  a  particular  state;
not  given  by  the  constituents  of  the  legislature,  which
claim  the  right  to  tax  them ;  but  by  the  people  of  aU  the
states.  They  are  given  by  all,  for  the  benefit .  of  all;
and  upon  theory,  should  be  subjected  to  that  govern-
ment only,  which  belongs  to  all.

^  1035.  "It  may  be  objected  to  this  definition,  that
the  power  of  taxation  is  not  confined  to  the  people  and
property  of  a  state.  It  may  be  exercised  upon  every
object  brought  within  its  jurisdiction.  This  is  true.
But  to  what  source  do  we  trace  this  right  1  It  is  ob-
vious, that  it  is  an  incident  of  sovereignty,  and  is  co-ex-
tensive with  that,  to  which  it  is  an  incident  AU  sub-
jects, over  which  the  sovereign  power  of  a  state  ex-
tends, are  objects  of  taxation ;  but  those,  over  which  it
does  not  extend,  are,  upon  the  soundest  principles,
exempt  from  taxatbn.  This  proposition  may  almost  be
pronounced  self-evident.  The  sovereignty  of  a  state
extends  to  every  thing,  which  exists  by  its  own  authority,
or  is  introduced  by  its  permission ;  but  does  it  extend  to
those  means,  which  are  employed  by  congress  to  cany
into  execution  powers  conferred  on  that  body  by  the
people  of  the  United  States  1  We  think  it  demonstrable,
that  it  does  not.  Those  powers  are  not  given  by  the  peo-
ple of  a  single  state.  They  are  given  by  the  people  of
the  United  States  to  a  government,  whose  laws,  made
in  pursuance  of  the  constitution,  are  declared  to  be'
supreme.  Consequently,  the  people  of  a  single  state
cannot  confer  a  .sovereignty,  which  will  extend  over
tbem.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIT.] POWSRS  OF  CX>]rOR£at — TAXB9*  491

§  1 036.  ^^  If  we  measure  the  power  of  taxatkm  redd-
ing  in  a  state,  by  the  extent  of  sovereignty,  which  the
people  of  a  single  state  possess,  and  can  confer  on  its
government,  we  have  an  intelligible  standard,  appfica-
ble  to  every  case,  to  which  the  power  may  be  applied.
We  have  a  principle,  which  leaves  the  power  of  taxmg
the  people  and  property  of  a  state  unimpaired ;  which
leaves  to  a  state  the  command  of  all  its  resources ;  and
which  places  beyond  its  reach  all  those  powers,  which
are  conferred  by  the  people  of  the  United  States  on
the  government  of  the  Unbn,  and  all  those  mean^
which  are  given  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  those
powers  into  execution.  We  have  a  principle^  which  is
safe  for  the  states,  and  safe  for  the  Union*  We  are  re*
lieved,  as  we  ought  to  be,  from  clashing  sovereignty ;
from  interfering  powers ;  from  a  repugnancy  between
si  right  in  one  government  to  pull  down,  what  there  is
an  acknowledged  right  in  another  to  build  up ;  from
the  incompatibility  of  a  right  in  one  government  to  des-
troy, what  there  is  a  ri j^ht  in  another  to  preserve.  •  We  are
not  driven  to  the  perplexing  inquiry,  so  unfit  for  the  judi-
dal  dep^trtment,  what  degree  of  taxation  is  the  legiti-
mate use,  and  what  degree  may  amount  to  the  abuse
of  the  power.  The  attempt  to  use  it  on  the  means
empk^ed  by  the  government  of  the  Union,  in  pursu-
ance of  the  constitution,  is  itself  an  abuse,  because  it  is
the  usurpation  of  a  power,  which  the  people  of  a  single
state  cannot  give.

§  1037.  "We  find,  then,  on  just  theory,  a  total  failure
of  this  original  right  to  tax  the  means  employed  by  the
government  of  the  Union,  for  the  execution  of  its  pow-
ers. The  right  never  existed ;  and  the  question,  wheth-
&  it  has  been  surrendered,  cannot  arise.

§  1096.  ^But  viraiving  diis  theory  for  the  present,  let


Digitized  by


Google


492 coNSTiTUTioir  or  the  u.  states,  [book  hi.

us  resume  the  inquiry,  whether  this  power  can  be  ex-
ercised by  the  respective  states,  consistently  with  a  fair
construction  of  the  constitution  1  That  the  power  to
tax  involves  the  power  to  destroy ;  that  the  power  to
destroy  may  defeat,  and  render  useless  the  power  to
create;  that  there  is  a  plain  repugnance  in  conferring  on
one  government  a  power  to  control  the  constitutional
measures  of  another,  which  other,  with  respect  to  those
very  measures,is  declared  to  be  supreme  over  that,  which
exerts  the  control,  are  propositions  not  to  be  denied
But  all  inconsistencies  are  to  be  reconciled  by  the  magic
of  the  word  confidence.  Taxation,  it  is  said,  doea  not
necessarily  and  unavoidably  destroy.  To  carry  it  to
the  excess  of  destruction  would  be  an  abuse,  to  pre-
sume which,  would  banish  that  confidence,  which  is
essential  to  all  government  But  is  this  a  case  of  confi-
dence? Would  the  people  of  any  one  state  trust  those
of  another  with  a  power  to  control  the  most  insignificant
operations  of  their  state  government?  We  know  they
would  not.  Why,  then,  should  we  suppose,  that  the
people  of  any  one  state  would  be  willing  to  trust  those
of  another  with  a  power  to  control  the  operations  of  a
government,  to  which  they  have  confided  their  most  im-
portant and  most  valuable  interests  ?  In  the  legislature  of
the  Union  alone  are  all  represented.  The  legislature  of
the  Union  alone,  therefore,  can  be  trusted  by  the  peo-
ple with  the  power  of  controlling  measures,  which  con-
cern all,  in  the  confidence,  that  it  will  not  be  abused.
This,  then,  is  not  a  case  of  confidence,  and  we  must
consider  it,  as  it  really  is.

§  1 039.  "If  we  apply  the  principle,  for  which  the  state
of  Maryland  contends,  to  the  constitution  generally,  we
shall  fiind  it  capable  of  changing  totally  the  character  of
that  instrum^it ,We  shall  find  it  csqpable  of  arresting


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XIV.] P0WXR8  OF  OONGRJESS  —  TAXES.  493

all  the  measures  of  the  goyemment,  and  of  prostrating
it,  at  the  foot  of  the  states.  The  American  people
have  declared  their  constitution,  and  the  laws  made  in
pursuance  thereof,  to  be  supreme ;  but  this  principle
would  transfer  the  supremacy,  m  fact,  to  the  states.
If  the  states  may  tax  one  instrument,  employed
by  the  government  in  the  execution  of  its  powers,
they  may  tax  any,  and  every  other  instrument.
They  may  tax  the  mail ;  they  may  tax  the  mint ;  they
may  tax  patent  rights ;  they  may  tax  the  papers  of  the
custom-house;  they  may  tax  judicial  process;  they
may  tax  all  the  means  employed  by  the  government,
to  an  excess,  which  would  defeat  all  the  ends  of  gov-
ernment. This  was  not  intended  by  the  American
people.  They  did  not  design  to  msdke  their  govern-
ment dependent  on  the  states.  Gendemen  wsay,  they  do
not  claim  the  right  to  extend  state  taxation  to  these  ob-
jects. They  limit  their  pretensions  to  property.  But
on  what  principle  is  this  distinction  made  1  Those,  who
make  it, have  furnished  no  reason  for  it;  and  the  principle,
for  which  they  contend,  denies  it.  They  contend,  that
the  power  of  taxation  has  no  other  limit,  than  is  found  in
the  10th  section  of  the  1st  article  of  the  constitution ;
that,  with  respect  to  every  thing  else,  the  power  of  the
states  is  supreme,  and  admits  of  no  control.  If  this  be
true,  the  distinction  between  property  and  other  subjects,
to  which  the  power  of  taxation  is  applicable,  is  merely
arbitrary,  and  can  never  be  sustained.  This  is  not  all.
If  the  controlling  power  of  the  states  be  established ;  if
their  supremacy,  as  to  taxation,  be  acknowledged;  what
is  to  restrain  their  exercising  this  control,  in  any  shape
they  may  please  to  give  it?  Their  sovereignty  is  not
confined  to  taxation.  This  is  not  the  only  mode,  in
which  it  might  be  displayed. The  question  is,  in  truth.


Digitized  by


Google


494.  COHSTITUTXON  OF  THE  U.  BTATSS. {BOOK  UU

a  question  of  supremacy;  and  if  the  right  of  the  states
to  tax  the  means  employed  by  the  gekieral  government
be  conceded,  the  declaration,  that  the  constitution,  and
the  laws  made  in  pursuance  thereof,  shall  be  the  su-
preme law  of  the  land,  is  empty  and  unmeaning  decla-
mation."

^  1040.  ^'It  has  also  been  insisted,  that,  as  tl^  porwer
of  taxation  in  the  general  and  state  governments,  is  ac-
knowledged to  be  concurrent,  every  argument,  which
would  sustain  the  right  of  the  general  government  to
tax  banks,  chartered  by  the  states,  will  equally  sustam
the  right  of  the  states  to  tax  banks,  chartered  by  the  gen-
eral government. But,  the  two  cases  are  not  on  the
same  reason. The  people  of  all  the  states  have  created
the  general  government,  and  have  conferred  upon  it  the
general  power  of taxation. The  people  of  all  the
states,  and  the  states  themselves,  are  represented  in
congress,  and,  by  then*  representatives,  exercise  thb
power. When  they  tax  the  chartered  institutbns  of
the  states,  they  tax  then*  constituents;  and  these  taxes
must  be  uniform. But,  when  a  state  taxes  the  (dera-
tions of  the  government  of  the  United  States,  it  acts
upon  institutions  created,  not  by  their  own  constituents,
but  by  people,  over  whom  they  claim  no  control. It
acts  upon  the  measures  of  a  govemmejit,  created  by
others,  as  well  as  themselves,  for  the  benefit  of  others
in  common  with  themselves. The  difference  is,  that,
which  always  exists,  and  always  must  exist,  between
the  action  of  th^  whole  on  a  part,  and  the  action  of  a
part  on  the  whole ;  between  the  laws  of  a  government
declared  to  be  supreme,  and  those  of  a  government,
which,  when  in  opposition  to  those  laws,  is  not  su-
preme. But  if  the  full  application  of  this  argument
could  be  admitted,  it  might  bring  into  queation  dto


Digitized  by


Google


€H.  XIT.] P0WSR8  OT  C0270RE88 — TAXSS.  496

right  of  congress  to  tax  the  state  banks,  and  could  not
prove  the  right  of  the  states  to  tax  the  bank  of  the
United  States.

:  §  1041.  "The  court  has  bestowed  on  this  subject  its
most  deliberate  consideration.  The  result  is  a  convic-
tion, that  the  states  have  no  power,  by  taxation  or
otherwise,  to  retard,  impede,  burden,  or  in  any  manner
control,  the  operations  of  the  constitutional  laws  enact-
ed by  congress,  to  carry  into  execution  the  powers
vested  in  the  general  government.  This  is,  we  think,
the  unavoidable  consequence  of  that  supremacy,  which
the  constitution  has  declared.  Wc  are  unanimously  of
opinion,  that  the  law  passed  by  the  legislature  of  Mary-
land, imposing  a  tax  on  the  bank  of  the  United  States,
is  unconstitutional  and  void/'*

^  1042.  In  another  case  the  question  was  raised,
whether  a  state  had  a  constitutional  authority  to  tax
stock  issued  for  loans  to  the  United  States ;  and  it  was
held  by  the  Supreme  Court,  that  a  state  had  not*
The  reasoning  of  the  court  was  as  follows.  "Is  the  stock,
issued  for  loans  made  to  the  government  of  the  Unit-
ed States,  liable  to  be  taxed  by  states  and  corpora-
tions? Congress  has  power,  *to  borrow  money  on
the  credit  of  the  United  States.'  The  stock  it  issues
is  the  evidence  of  a  debt  created  by  the  exercise  of  this
power.  The  tax  in  question  is  a  tax  upon  the  contract,
subsisting  between  the  government  and  the  individual.
It  bears  directly  upon  that  contract,  while  subsisting,


^  The  doctrine  was  again  re-examined  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  a
later  case,  and  deliberately  re-affirmed ;  Osbam  v.  Bank  qf  the  UniUd
Stales,  9  Wheat.  R.  73d,  859  to  868 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect.  1%  p.  235
to239.

9  Weston  y.  The  City  Cwnca  qf  Charteston,  2  Peters's  R.  449.


Digitized  by


Google


496  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

and  in  full  force.  The  power  operates  upon  the  con-
tract, the.  instant  it  is  framed,  and  must  imply  a  right  to
affect  that  contract.  If  the  states  and  corporations
throughout  the  Union,  possess  the  power  to  tax  a  con-
tract for  the  loan  of  money,  what  shall  arrest  this  prin-
ciple in  its  application  to  every  other  contract  ?  What
measure  can  government  adopt,  which  will  not  be  ex-
posed to  its  influence?

§  1043.  "But  it  is  unnecessary  to  pursue  this  princi-
ple, through  its  diversified  application  to  all  the  con-
tracts, and  to  the  various  operations  of  government.
No  one  can  be  selected,  which  is  of  more  vital  interest
to  the  cott^munity,  than  this  of  borrowing  money  on  the
credit  of  the  United  States. No  power  has  been  con-
ferred by  the  American  people  on  their  government,  the
free  and  unburthened  exercise  of  which  more  deeply
aflects  every  member  of  our  republic. In  war,  when
the  honour,  the  safety,  the  independence  of  the  nation
are  to  be  defended,  when  all  its  resources  are  to  be
strained  to  the  utmost,  credit  must  be  brought  in  aid  of
taxation,  and  the  abundant  revenue  of  peace  and  pros-
perity must  be  anticipated  to  supply  the  exigencies,
the  urgent  demands  of  the  moment The  people,  for
objects  the  most  important,  which  can  occur  in  the
progress  of  nations,  have  empowered  their  government
to  make  these  anticipations,  *  to  borrow  money  on  the
credit  of  the  United  States.' Can  any  thing  be  more
dangerous,  or  more  injurious,  than  the  admission  of  a
principle,  which  authorizes  every  state,  and  every  cor-
poration in  the  Union,  which  possesses  the  right  of  taxa-
tion, to  burthen  the  exercise  of  this  power  at  their  dis-
cretion ?

§  1044.  "If  the  right  to  impose  the  tax  exists,  it  is  a
right,  which  in  its  nature  acknowledges  no  Umits. It


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIT.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS TAXES.  497

may  be  carried  to  any  extent  within  the  jurisdiction  of
the  state  or  corporation,  which  imposes  it,  \<^hich  the
will  of  each  state  and  corporation  may  prescribe.  A
power,  which  is  given  by  the  whole  American  people
for  their  common  good ;  which  is  to  be  exercised  at  the
most  critical  periods  for  the  most  important  purposes ;
on  the  free  exercise  of  which  the  interests  certainly,
perhaps  the  liberty,  of  the  whole  may  depend ;  may  be
burthened,  impeded,  if  not  arrested,  by  any  of  the  or-
ganized parts  of  the  confederacy.

§  1044.  "In  a  society,  formed  like  ours,  with  one  su-
preme  government  for  national  purposes,  and  nume-
rous state  governments  for  other  purposes ;  in  many
respects  independent,  and  in  the  uncontrolled  exercise
of  many  important  powers,  occasional  interferences
ought  not  to  surprise  us.  The  power  of  taxation  is
one  of  the  most  essential  to  a  state,  and  one  of  the  most
extensive  in  its  operation.  The  attempt  to  maintain  a
rule,  which  shall  limit  its  exercise,  is  undoubtedly  among
the  most  delicate  and  difficult  duties,  which  can  de-
volve on  those,  whose  province  it  is  to  expound  the
supreme  law  of  the  land  in  its  application  to  the  cases
of  individuals.  This  duty  has  more  than  once  devolved
on  this  Court.  In  the  performance  of  it  we  have  con-
sidered it,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  from  the  su-
premacy of  the  government  of  the  whole,  that  its  ac-
tion m  the  exercise  of  its  legitimate  powers  should  be
free  and  unembarrassed  by  any  conflicting  powers  in
the  possession  of  its  parts ;  that  the  powers  of  a  state
cannot,  rightfully,  be  so  exercised,  as  to  impede  and
obstruct  the  free  course  of  those  measures,  which  the
government  of  the  United  States,  may  rightfully  adopt

§  1046.  "This  subject  was  brought  before  the  Court

VOL.  II.  63


Digitized  by


Google


498 COWSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

in  the  case  of  MCuUoch  v.  The  State  of  Marylandj^
when  it  was  thoroughly  argued,  and  deliberately  con-
sidered. The  question  decided  in  that  case  bears  a
near  resemblance  to  that,  which  is  involved  in  this.  It
was  discussed  at  the  bar  in  all  its  relations,  and  ex-
amined by  the  Court  with  its  utmost  attention.  We
will  not  repeat  the  reasoning,  which  conducted  us  to
the  conclusion  thus  formed ;  but  that  conclusion  was,
that  *  all  subjects,  over  which  the  sovereign  power  of  a
state  extends,  are  objects  of  taxation ;  but  those,  over
which  it  does  not  extend,  are,  upon  the  soundest  prin-
ciples, exempt  from  taxation.'  *The  sovereignty  of  a
state  extends  to  every  thing,  which  exists  by  its  own
authority,  or  is  introduced  by  its  permission ; '  but  not
*  to  those  means,  which  are  employed  by  congress  to
carry  into  execution  powers  conferred  on  that  body
by  the  people  of  the  United  States.'  *  The  attempt
to  use'  the  pdwer  of  taxation  ^  on  the  means  employ-
ed by  the  government  of  the  Union,  in  pursuance  of
the  constitution,  is  itself  an  abuse ;  because  it  is  the
usurpation  of  a  power,  which  the  people  of  a  single
state  cannot  give.'  *  The  states  have  no  power  by  taxa-
tion, or  otherwise,  to  retard,  impede,  burthen,  or  in  any
manner  control  the  operation  of  the  constitutional  laws,
enacted  by  congress  to  carry  into  execution  the  pow-
ers vested  in  the  generel  government.'  We  retam
the  opinions,  which  were  then  expressed.  A  con-
tract made  by  the  government  in  the  exercise  of
its  power,  to  Sorrow  money  on  the  credit  of  the
United  States,  is  undoubtedly  independent  of  the
will  of  any  state,  in  which  the  individual,  who  lends,
may  reside;  and  is  undoubtedly  an  operation  essential

1  4  Wheaton,  310.

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC .


CH.  XIV*] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS — TAXES.  499  »

to  the  important  objects,  for  which  the  government
was  created.  It  ought,  therefore,  on  the  principles
settled  in  the  case  o{  MCuUoch  v.  The  State  of  Mary*
land  to  be  exempt  from  state  taxation,  and  conse-
quently from  being  taxed  by  corporations,  deriving
their  power  from  states.

§  1046.  "It  is  admitted,  that  the-  power  of  the  gov-
ernment to  borrow  money  cannot  be  directly  opposed ;
and  that  any  law,  directly  obstructing  its  operaticms,
would  be  void.  But  a  distinction  is  taken  between
direct. opposition,  and  those  measures,  which  may  con-
sequentially affect  it ;  that  is,  a  law  proliibiting  loans  to
the  United  States,  would  be  void  ;  but  a  tax  on  them
to  any  amount  is  allowable.  It  is,  we  thmk,  impossible
not  to  perceive  the  intimate  connexion,  which  exists
between  these  two  modes  of  acting  on  the  subject
It  is  not  the  want  of  original  power  in  an  indepen-
dent sovereign  state,  to  prohibit  loans  to  a  foreign
government,  which  restrains  the  legislature  from
du-ect  opposition  to  those  made  by  the  United  States.
The  restraint  is  imposed  by  our  constitution.  The
American  people  have  conferred  the  power  of  borrow-
ing money  on  their  government ;  and  by  making  that
government  supreme,  have  shielded  its  action,  in  the
exercise  of  this  power,  from  the  action  of  the  local
governments.  The  grant  of  the  power  is  incompatible
with  a  restraining  or  controlling  power ;  and  the  decla-
ration of  supremacy  is  a  declaration;  that  no  such  res-
training or  controlling  power  shall  be  exercised.  The
right  to  tax  the  contract  to  any  extent,  when  made,
must  operate  upon  the  power  to  borrow,  before  it
is  exercised,  and  have  a  sensible  influence  on  the
contract The  extent  of  this  influence  depends  on


Digitized  by


Google


500 c6h8titution  of  the  u.  states,  [book  hi.

the  will  of  a  distinct  government.  To  any  extent,  how-
ever inconsiderable,  it  is  a  burthen  on  the  operations  of
government.  It  may  be  carried  to  an  extent,  which
will  arrest  them  entirely.

^  1047.  "It  is  admitted  by  the  counsel  for  the  defend-
ants, that  the  power  to  tax  stock  must  affect  the  terms,
on  which  loans  will  be  made.  But  this  objection,  it  is
said,  has  no  more  weight,  when  urged  against  the  ap-
plication of  an  acknowledged  power  to  government
stock,  than  if  urged  against  its  appUcation  to  lands  sold
by  the  United  States.  The  distmction  is,  we  think,  ap-
parent When  lands  are  sold,  no  connexion  remains  be-
tween the  purchaser  and  the  government.  The  lands
purchased  become  a  part  of  the  mass  of  property  in  the
country,  with  no  implied  exemption  from  common  bur-
thens. All  lands  are  derived  from  the  general  or  par-
ticular government,  and  all  lands  are  subject  to  taxa-
tion. Lands  sold  are  in  the  condition  of  money  bor-
rowed and  repaid.  Its  liability  to  taxation,  in  any  form
it  may  then  assume,  is  not  questioned.  The  connex-
ion between  the  borrower  and  the  lender  is  dissolved
It  is  no  burthen  on  loans ;  it  is  no  impediment  to  the
power  of  borrowing,  that  the  money,  when  repaid,  loses
its  exemption  from  taxation.  But  a  tax  upon  debts  due
from  the  government  stands,  we  think,  on  very  different
principles  from  a  tax  on  lands,  which  the  government
has  sold.  The  Federalist  has  been  quoted  in  the
argument,  and  an* eloquent  and  well  merited  eulogy
has  been  bestowed  on  the  great  statesman,  who  is  sup-
posed to  be  the  author  of  the  number,  from  which  the
quotation  was  made.  This  high  authority  was  also  re-
lied upon  in  the  case  oiMCuUoch  v.  The  State  of  Ma-
rylandf  and  was  considered  by  the  Court. Without


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XIV.] POWERS  OF  CONOR£88  —  TAXES.  501

repeating,  what  was  then  said,  we  refer  to  it,  as  exhibit-
ing our  view  of  the  sentiments  expressed  on  this  sub-
ject by  the  authors  of  that  work.

^  1048.  "It  has  been  supposed,  that  a  tax  on  stock
comes  within  the  exceptions  stated  in  the  case  of
MCulloch  V.  The  State  of  Maryland.  We  do  not  thmk
so.  The  bank  of  the  United  States,  is  an  instrument,
essential  to  the  fiscal  operations  of  the  government ;  and
the  power,  which  might  be  exercised  to  its  destruction,
was  denied.  But  property,  acquired  by  that  corpora-
tion in  a  state,  was  supposed  to  be  placed  in  the  same
condition  with  property  acquired  by  an  individual.
The  tax  on  government  stock  is  thought  by  this
Court  to  be  a  tax  on  the  contract,  a  tax  on  the
power  to  borrow  money  on  the  credit  of  the  United
States,  and  consequently  to  be  repugnant  to  the  con-
stitution."

^  1049.  It  is  observable,  that  these  decisions  turn
upon  the  point,  that  no  state  can  have  authority  to  tax
an  instrument  of  the  United  States,  or  thereby  to  di-
minish the  means  of  the  United  States,  used  in  the
exercise  of  powers  confided  to  it.  But  there  is  no  pro-
hibition upon  any  state  to  tax  any  bank  or  other  corpora-
tion created  by  its  own  authority,  unless  it  has  restrain-
ed itself,  by  the  charter  of  incorporation,  from  the  power
of  taxation.^  This  subject,  however,  will  more  properly
fall  under  notice  in  some  future  discussions.  It  may  be
added,  that  congress  may,  without  doubt,  tax  state
banks ;  for  it  is  clearly  withm  the  taxing  power  confid-
ed to  the  general  government.  When  congress  tax
the  chartered  institutions  of  the  states,  they  tax  their

1  Providence  Bank  v.  BiUingSy  4  Petere'a  R.  514.


Digitized  by


Google


502 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [BOOK  III.

own  constituents ;  and  such  taxes  must  be  uniform.*
But  when  a  state  taxes  an  institution  created  by  con-
gress, it  taxes  an  instrument  of  a  superior  and  indepen-
dent sovereignty,  not  represented  in  the  state  legisla-
ture.

1  APCSdhch  V.  Maryland,  4  Wheat  R.  316,  435.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XT.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS LOANS.  503

CHAPTER  XV.

POWER TO BORROW MONEY AND REGULATE COM-

MERCE*

^  1050.  Having  finished  this  examination  of  the
power  of  taxation,  and  of  the  accompanying  restrictions
and  prohibitions,  the  other  powers  of  congress  will  be
now  examined  in  the  order,  in  which  they  stand  in  the
eighth  section.

§  1051.  The  next,  is  the  power  of  congress  "to  bor-
"  row  money  on  the  credit  of  the  United  States.'*  This
power  seems  indispensable  to  the  sovereignty  and  ex-
istence of  a  national  government.  Even  under  the
confederation  this  power  was  expressly  delegated.*
The  remark  is  unquestionably  just,  that  it  is  a  power
inseparably  connected  with  that  of  raising  a  revenue,
and  with  the  duty  of  protection,  which  that  power  im-
poses upon  the  general  government.  Though  in  times
of  profound  peace  it  may  not  be  ordinarily  necessary
•  to  anticipate  the  revenues  of  a  state ;  yet  the  experi-
ence of  all  nations  must  convince  us,  that  the  burthen
and  expenses  of  one  year,  in  time  of  war,  may  more
than  equal  the  ordinary  revenue  of  ten  years.  Hence,
a  debt  is  almost  unavoidable,  when  a  nation  is  plunged
into  a  state  of  war.  The  least  burthensome  mode  of
contracting  a  debt  is  by  a  loan.  Indeed,  this  recourse
becomes  the  more  necessary,  because  the  ordinary  du-
ties upon  importations  are  subject  to  great  diminution
and  fluctuations  in  times  of  war ;  and  a  resort  to  direct
taxes  for  the  whole  supply  would,  under  such  ch'cum-


1  Article  9.


.  Digitized  by


Google


504 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  D.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

Stances,  become  oppressive  and  ruinous  to  the  agricul-
tural interests  of  the  country.^  Even  in  times  of  peace
exigencies  may  occur,  v^hich  render  a  loan  the  most
facile,  economical,  and  ready  means  of  supply,  either  to
meet  expenses,  or  to  avert  calamities,  or  to  save  the
country  from  an  undue  depression  of  its  staple  produc-
tions. The  government  of  the  United  States  has,  on
several  occasions  in  times  of  profound  peace,  obtained
large  loans,  among  w^hich  a  striking  illustration  of  the
economy  and  convenience  of  such  arrangements  will  be
found  in  the  creation  of  stock  on  the  purchase  of  Lou-
isiana. The  power  to  borrow  money  by  the  United
States  cannot  (as  has  been  already  seen)  in  any  way  be
controlled,  or  interfered  with  by  the  states.  The  grant-
ing of  the  power  is  incompatible  with  any  restraining  or
controlling  power ;  and  the  declaration  of  supremacy
in  the  constitution  is  a  declaration,  that  no  such  re-
straining or  controlling  power  shall  be  exercised,*

^  1052.  The  next  power  of  congress  is,  "  to  regulate
"  commerce  with  foreign  nations,  and  among  the  several
**  states,  and  with  the  Indian  tribes."

§  1053.  The  want  of  this  power  (as  has  been  already
seen)  was  one  of  the  leading  defects  of  the  confedera-
tion, and  probably,  as  much  as  any  one  cause,  con-
duced to  the  establishment  of  the  constitution.*  It  is  a
power  vital  to  the  prosperity  of  the  Union ;  and  with-
out it  the  government  would  scarcely  deserve  the  name
of  a  national  government ;  and  would  soon  sink  into
discredit  and  imbecility.^ It  would  stand,  as  a  mere


1  1  Tuck.  Black.  Oomm.  App-  245,  246 ;  The  Federalist,  No.  41.
«  JVtstm  V.  City  Council  of  Cfiarlr^tony  2  Peters's  R.  449,  468.

3  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  9  Wheat  R.  1,  225,  Johnson  J.'s  Opinion ;  Brwm
y.  Maryland^  12  Wheat  R.  445,  446.

4  The  FederaliBt,  No.  4,  7, 11, 22,  37.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Xy.] POWERS  OP  C0N0RES17 — COMMSROS. 605

shadow  of  sovereignty,  to  mock  our  hopes,  and  mvolre
us  in  a  common  ruin.

§  1054.  The  oppressed  and  degraded  state  of  com«
merce,  previous  to  the  adoption  of  the  constitution,  can
scarcely  be  forgotten.  It  was  regulated  by  forei^
nations  with  a  single  view  to  their  own  interests ;  and
our  disunited  eflforts  to  counteract  their  restrietionc^
were  rendered  impotent  by  a  want  of  combination^
Congress,  indeed^  possessed  the  power  of  making  trea-^
ties ;-  but  the  inability  of  the  federal  gdvemment  t»
enforce  them  had  become  so  apparent,  as  to  rendei^
that  power  in  a  great  degree  useless.  Those,  who  felt
the  injury  arising  from  this  state  of  things,  and  those^
who  were  capable  of  estimating  the  influence  of  com-^
merce  on  the  prosperity  of  nations,  perceived  the
necessity  of  giving  the  control  over  this  important  sub-
ject to  a  single  government  It  is  not,  therefore,,  mat^-
ter  of  surprise,  that  the  grant  should  be  as  extensive,
as  the  mischief,  and  should  comprehend  aH  fore%n
commerce,  and  all  commerce  among  the  states.*

^  1055.  But  this  subject  has  been  already  so  much
discussed,  and  the  reasons  for  conferring  the  power  so
fully  developed,  that  it  seems  unnecessary  to  dweH
farther  upon  its  hnportance  and  necessity^'  In  the
convention  there  does  not  appear  to  have  been  any
considerable  (if,  indeed,  there  was  any)  opposition  to
the  grant  of  the  power.  It  was  reported  in  the  first
draft  of  the  constitution  exactly,  as  it  now  stands,  ex*


1  Brown  v.  Stnte  of  Maryland,  12  Wheat  R.  419, 445^446 ;  1  Tucker**
Black.  Comtn.  App.  248  to  252 ;  1  Amer.  Musemn,  8,  f72, 1^  281,263,
288 ;  2  Amer.  Museum,  263  to27G ;  Id.  371, 372  j  The  Federaliat,  Na  7,
11,22;  Mr.  Madison's  Letter  to  Mr.  Cahell,  18th  Sept  1828;  5  Mar-
shall's Life  of  Washington,  ch.  2,  p.  74  to  80 ;  2  Pitkm's  Hist  189, 192.

a  The  Federalist,  No.  7, 11, 12,  22,  41, 42.

VOL.  XL  64


Digitized  by


Google


606  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U*  STATES. [bOOK  III*

cept  that  the  words,  "  and  with  the  Indian  tribes,"  were
afterwards  added  ;  and  it  passed  without  a  division.*

^  1056.  In  considering  this  clause  of  the  constitu-
tion several  important  inquiries  are  presented.  In  the
first  place,  what  is  the  natural  import  of  the  terms ;  in
the  next  place,  how  far  the  power  is  exclusive  of  that
of  the  states ;  in  the  tlurd  place,  to  what  purposes  and
for  what  objects  the  power  may  be  constitutionally  ap-
plied ;  and  in  the  fourth  place,  what  are  the  true  nature
and  extent  of  the  power  to  regulate  commerce  with  the
Indian  tribes.

^  1067.  In  the  first  place,  then,  what  is  the  constitu-
tional meaning  of  the  words, "  to  regulate  commerce  ;*'
for  the  constitution  being  (as  has  been  aptly  said)  one
of  enumeration,  and  not  of  definition,  it  becomes  neces-
sary, in  order  to  ascertain  the  extent  of  the  power,  to
ascertain  the  meaning  of  the  words.*  The  power  is  to
regulate ;  that  is,  to  prescribe  the  rule,  by  which  com-
merce is  to  be  governed.'  The  subject  to  be  regulated
is  commerce.  Is  that  limited  to  traffic,  to  buying  and
selling,  or  the  interchange  of  commodities  ?  Or  does
it  comprehend  navigation  and  intercourse  1  If  the  for-
mer construction  is  adopted,  then  a  general  term  appli-
cable to  many  objects  is  restricted  to  one  of  its  signifi-
cations. If  the  latter,  then  a  general  term  is  retained
in  its  general  sense.  To  adopt  the  former,  without
some  guiding  grounds  furnished  by  the  context,  or  the
nature  of  the  power,  would  be  improper.  The  words
being  general,  the  sense  must  be  general  also,  and  em-
brace all  subjects  comprehended  under  them,  unless
there  be  some  obvious  mischief,  or  repugnance  to  other

1  Journal  of  Convention,  22(),  257,  260,  356,  378.
s  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  9  Wheat  R.  189,
a  9  Wheat.  R.  196.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS COMMERCE. 507

clauses  to  limit  them.  In  the  present  case  there  is
nothing  to  justify  such  a  limitation.  Commerce  un-
doubtedly is  traffic ;  but  it  is  something  more.  It  is
intercourse*  It  describes  the  commercial  intercourse
between  nations,  and  parts  of  nations,  in  all  its  branches;
and  is  regulated  by  prescribing  rules  for  carrying  on
that  intercourse.  The  mind  can  scarcely  conceive  a
system  for  regulating  commerce  between  nations,  which
shall  exclude  all  laws  concerning  navigation;  which
shall  be  silent  on  the  admission  of  the  vessels  of  one
nation  into  the  ports  of  another ;  and  be  confined  to
prescribing  rules  for  the  conduct  of  individuals  in  the
actual  employment  of  buying  and' selling,  or  barter.^

§  1058.  If  commerce*  does  not  include  navigation,
the  government  of  the  Union  has  no  direct  power  over
that  subject,  and  can  make  no  law  prescribing,  what
shall  constitute  American  vessels,  or  requiring,  that
they  shall  be  navigated  by  American  seamen.  Yet
this  power  has  been  exercised  from  the  commence-
ment of  the  government ;  it  has  been  exercised  with  the
consent  of  all  America;  and  it  has  been  always,  under-
stood to  be  a  commercial  regulation.  The  power  over
navigation,  and  over  commercial  intercqurse,  was  one  of
the  primary  objects,  for  which  the  people  of  America
adopted  their  government ;  and  it  is  impossible,  that
the  convention  should  not  so  have  understood  the  word
^  commerce,''  as  embracing  it*  Indeed,  to  construe
the  power,  so  as  to  impair  its  efficacy,  would  defeat  the
very  object,  for  which  it  was  introduced  into  the  con-
stitution;'  for  there  cannot  be  a  doubt,  that  to  exclude

1  Gibbons  V.  Ogden,  9  Wheat.  189, 190;  Id.  229,  230.

2  9  Wheat.  R.  190, 191 ;  Id.  215,  216,  217;  Id.  22f),  230 ;  1  Tucker's
Black.  Comm.  App.  249  to  252.

3  12  Wheat  R.  446.


Digitized  by


Google


508 COirSTITUTION  OF  THE  IT.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

navigation  and  intercourse  from  its  scope  would  be  to
entail  upon  us  all  the  prominent  defects  of  the  confede-
ration, and  subject  the  Union  to  the  ill-adjusted  sys-
tems of  rival  states,  and  the  oppressive  preferences  of
foreign  nations  in  favour  of  their  own  navigation.^

^  1059.  The  very  exceptions  found  in  the  constitu-
^on  demonstrate  this ;  for  it  would  be  absurd,  as  well
^  useless,  to  except  from  a  granted  power  that,  which
was  not  granted,  or  that,  which  the  words  did  not  com-
prehend. There  are  plain  exceptions  in  the  constitU"
tion  from  the  power  over  navigation,  and  plain  inhibi-
tions to  the  exercise  of  that  power  in  a  particular  way.
Why  should  these  be  madje,  if  the  power  itself  was  not
jmderstood  to  be  granted?  The  clause  already  cited,
that  no  preference  shall  be  given  by  any  regulation  of
iDommerce  or  revenue  to  the  ports  of  one  state  over
those  of  another,  is  of  this  nature^  This  clause  cannot
})e  understood,  as  applicable  to-  those  laws  only,  which
fire  passed  for  purposes  of  revenue,  because  it  is  ex»-
pressly  applied  topommercial  regulations ;  and  the  most
pbvious  preference,  which  can  be  given  to  one  port
over  another,  relates  to  navigation.  But  the  remaining
part  of  the  sentence  directly  points  to  navigation.  "Nor
^hall  vessels,  bound  to  or  from  one  state,  be  obliged  to
pnter,  clear,  or  pay  duties  in  another.''  ^  In  short,  our
whole  system  for  the  encouragement  of  navigation  in
the  coasting  trade  and  fisheries,  is  exclusively  founded
upon  this  supposition.  Yet  no  one  has  ever  been  bold
enough  to  question  the  constitutionality  of  the  laws,
creating  this  system.'


1  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  247,  248,349.
a  9  Wheat  R.  l»l.

3  9  Wheat  R.  191,  215, 216 ;  JSTorth  Biver  Sleamboat  Company  v.  Lip-
ing$Umy  3  Cowen's  R.  713^


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS COMMERCE. 509

§  1060.  Foreign  and  domestic  intercourse  has  been
universally  understood  to  be  within  the  reach  of  the
power.  How,  otherwise,  could  our  systems  of  prohi-
bition and  non-intercourse  be  defended  ?  From  what
other  source  has  been  derived  the  power  of  laying  em-
bargoes in  k  time  of  peace,  and  without  any  reference
to  war,  or  its  operations  ?  Yet  this  power  has  been
universally  admitted  to  be  constitutional,  even  in  times
of  the  highest  political  excitement.  And  although  the
laying  of  an  embargo  in  the  form  of  a  perpetual  law  was
contested,  as  unconstitutional,  at  one  period  of  our  po-
litical history,  it  was  so,  not  because  an  embargo  was
not  a  regulation  of  commerce,  but  because  a  perpetual
embargo  was  afti  annihilation,  and  not  a  regulation  of
commerce.*  It  may,  therefore,  be  safely  affirmed,  that
the  terms  of  the  constitution  have_  at  all  times  been  un-
derstood to  mclude  a  power  over  navigation,  as  well  as
trade,  over  intercourse,  as  well  as  traffic  ;*  and,  that,  in
the  practice  of  other  countries,  and  especially  in  our  own,
there  has  been  no  diversity  of  judgment  or  opinion.
During  our  whole  colonial  history,  this  was  acted  upon
by  the  British  parliament,  as  an  uncontested  doctrine.
That  government  regulated  not  merely  our  traffic  with
foreign  nations,  but  our  navigation,  and  intercourse,  as
unquestioned  functions  of  the  power  to  regulate  com-
merce.'

1  9  Wheat  193;  1  Kent's  Coram.  Lect  19,  p.  404,  405;  The  Brigan-
tine  William,  2  Hall's  Law  Journal,  265 ;  Sergeant  on  Const,  ch.  28,
p.  290,  &c.

9  9  Wheat  193,  215,  216,  217;  Id.  226;  12  Wheat  R.  440,  447;
JSTorth  River  Steamboat  Company  v.  Livingston,  3  Cowen's  R.  713.

3  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  9  Wheaton's  R.  1,  201 ;  Ih.224;  lb.  225  to  228.
See  Mr.  Verplank's  letter  to  Col.  Drayton  in  1831 ;  Resolves  of  Con-
gress, 14th  Oct  1774,  (1  Joarnal  of  Congress,  27) ;  2  Marshall's  Life  of
Washington,  (in  five  volumes,)  p.  77,  81 ;  Dr.  Franklin's  ELy%minatioD,


Digitized  by


Google


510  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [bOOR  III.

^  1061.  This  power  the  constitution  extends  to
commerce  with  foreign  nations,  and  among  the  several
states,  and  with  the  Indian  tribes.  In  regard  to  for-
eign nations,  it  is  universally  admitted,  that  the  words
comprehend  every  species  of  commercial  intercourse.
No  sort  of  trade  or  intercourse  can  be  carried  on  be-
tween this  country  and  another,  to  which  it  does  not
extend.  Commerce,  as  used  in  the  constitution,  is  a
unit,  every  part  of  which  is  mdicated  by  the  term.  If
this  be  its  admitted  meaning  in  its  application  to  foreign
nations,  it  must  carry  the  same  meaning  throughout  the
sentence.^  The  next  words  are  "  among  the  several
states..*'  The  word  "among''  means  intermingled
with.  A  thing,  which  is  among  otherl,  is  intermingled
.  with  them.  Commerce  among  the  states  cannot  stop
at  the  external  boundary  line  of  each  state,  but  may  be
introduced  into  the  interior.  It  does  not,  indeed,  com-
prehend any  commerce,  which  is  purely  internal,  be-
tween man  and  man  in  a  single  state,  or  between  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  same  state,  and  not  extendmg  to,  or
affecting  other  states.  Commerce  among  the  states
means,  commerce,  which  concerns  more  states  than  one.
It  is  not  an  apt  phrase  to  indicate  the  mere  mterior
traffic  of  a  single  state.  The  completely  mtemal  coiH-
merce  of  a  state  may  be  properly  considered,  as  reserv-
ed to  the  state  itself.*

§  1062.  The  importance  of  the  power  of  regulating
commerce  among  the  states,  for  the  purposes  of  the

before  the  house  of  commons,  in  1766 ;  Dickerson's  Farmer's  Letters,
No.  2,  1767 ;  1  Jefferson's  Corresp.  7 ;  Burke's  Speech  on  American
Taxation,  1774.

1  GMom  ▼.  Ogden,  9  Wheaton's  R.  194.

8  Gibbon's  v.  Ogden,  9  Wheaton's  R.  194,  195,  196 ;  Brown  v.  Mary-
land,  12  Wheaton,  446, 447.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XV.] POW£RS  OF  CONGRESS COMMERCE. 611

Union,  is  scarcely  less^  than  that  of  regulating]  it  with
toreign  states.*  A  very  material  object  of  this  power  is
the  relief  of  the  states,  which  import  and  export  through
other  states,  from  the  levy  of  improper  contributions  on
them  by  the  latter.  If  each  state  were  at  liberty  to
regulate  the  trade  between  state  and  state,  it  is  easy  to
foresee,  that  ways  would  be  found  out  to  load  the  articles
of  import  and  export,  during  their  passage  through  the
jurisdiction,  with  duties,  which  should  fall  on  the  tnakers
of  the  latter,  and  the  consumers  of  the  former.*  The
experience  of  the  American  states  during  the  confed-
eration abundantly  establishes,  that  such  arrangements
could  be,  and  would  be  made  under  the  stimulating  in-
fluence of  local  interests,  and  the  desire  of  undue  gain.^
Instead  of  acting  as  a  nation  in  regard  to  fordgn  pow-
ers, the  states  individually  commenced  a  system  of
restraint  upon  each  other,  whereby  the  interests  of  for-
eign powers  were  promoted  at  their  expense.  When
one  state  imposed  high  duties  on  the  goods  or  vessels
of  a  foreign  power  to  countervail  the  regulations  of
such  powers,  the  next  adjoining  states  imposed  lighter
duties  to  invite  those  articles  into  their  ports,  that  they
might  be  transferred  thence  into  the  other  states,  se-
eming the  duties  to  themselves.  This  contracted  policy
in  some  of  the  states  was  soon  counteracted  by  etchers.
Restraints  were  immediately  laid  on  such  commerce
by  the  suffering  states  ;  and  thus  a  state  of  affairs  dis-
orderly and  unnatural  grew  up,  the  necessary  tendency

of  which  was  to  destroy  the  Union  itself.^ The  history

■ —  * '  '

1  See  the  Federalist,  No.  6,  7,  11,  12,  22,  41,  42;  J^.  R,  Steamboat
Company  v.  Livingston,  3  Cowen's  R.  713.
8  12  Wheaton'a  R.  448,  449;  9  Wheaton,  199  to  204.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  42 ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Coram.  App.  247  to  252.

4  See  President  Monroe's  Exposition  and  Message,  4  May,  1822,  p.
31,32.


Digitized  by


Google


512  CONSTITUTION OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

of  Other  nations,  also,  furnishes  the  same  admonition.
In  Switzerland,  where  the  union  is  very  slight,  it  has
been  found  necessary  to  provide,  that  each  canton  shall
be  obliged  to  allow  a  passage  to  merchandise  through
its  jurisdiction  into  other  cantons  without  an  augmen-
tation of  tolls.  In  Germany,  it  is  a  law  of  the  empire,
that  the  princes  shall  not  lay  tolls  on  customs  or  bridges^
rivers,  or  passages,  without  the  consent  of  the  emperor
and  diet  But  these  regulations  are  but  imperfectly
obeyed  ;  and  great  public  mischiefs  have  consequently
followed.^  Indeed,  without  this  power  to  regulate
commerce  among  the  states,  the  power  of  regulating
foreign  commerce  would  be  incomplete  and  ineffectual/
The  very  laws  of  the  Union  in  regard  to  the  latter,
whether  for  revenue,  for  restriction,  for  retaliation,  or
for  .encouragement  of  domestic  products  or  pursuits,
might  be  evaded  at  pleasure,  or  rendered  impotent*
In  short,  m  a  practical  view,  it  is  impossible  to  separate
the  regulation  of  foreigi^  commerce  and  domestic  com-
merce among  the  states  from  each  other.  The  same
public  policy  applies  to  each ;  and  not  a  reason  can  be
assigned  for  confiding  the  power  over  the  one,  which
does  not  conduce  to  establish  the  propriety  of  conced-
ing the  power  over  the  other.*^

^  1063.  The  next  inquiry  is,  whether  this  power
to  regulate  commerce  is  exclusive  of  the  same  power
in  the  states,  or  is  concurrent  with  it  * It  has  been


1  The  Federalist,  No.  42, 22. -
»  The  Federalist,  No.  42.

3  The  Federalist,  No.  11,  12.

4  See  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Justice  Johnson,  9  Wheaton's  R.  224  to  228.

5  In  the  convention,  it  was  moved  to  amend  the  article,  bo  as  to  give
to  congress  ^  the  solo  and  exclusive  "  power ;  hut  the  propo6iti«»  ^
rejected  by  the  vote  of  six  states  against  five.  *

*  Jovraol  of  Coovealion,  SfMVSZO/


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  ZV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS  —  COMMERCE. 613

settled  upon  the  most  solemn  deliberation,  that  the
power  is  exclusive  in  the  government  of  the  United
States.*  The  reasoning,  upon  which  this  doctrme  is
founded,  is  to  the  following  eflfect.  The  power  to  reg-
ulate commerce  is  general  and  unlimited  in  its  terms.
The  full  power  to  regulate  a  particular  subject  implies
the  whole  power,  and  leaves  no  residuum.  A  grant  of
the  whole  is  incompatible  with  the  existence  of  a  right
in  another  to  any  part  of  it.  A  grant  of  a  power  to
regulate  necessarily  excludes  the  action  of  sdl  others,
who  would  perform  the  same  operation  on  the  same
thmg.  Regulation  is  designed  to  mdicate'  the  entire
result,  applying  to  those  parts,  which  remain  as  they
were,  as  well  as  to  those,  which  are  altered.  It  pro-
duces a  uniform  whole,  which  is  as  much  disturbed  and
deranged  by  changing,  |What  the  regulating  power  de-
signs to  have  unbounded,  as  that,  on  which  it  has
operated.*

§  1064.  The  power  to  regulate  commerce  is  not  at
all  like  that  to  lay  taxes.  The  latter  may  well  be  con-
current, while  the  former  is  exclusive,  resulting  from
the  different  nature  of  the  two  powers.  The  power  of
congress  in  laying  taxes  is  not  necessarily,  or  niiturally
inoonsistent  with  that  of  the  states.  Each  may  lay  a  tax
on  the  same  property,  without  interfering  with  the  action
of  the  other ;  for  taxation  is  but  taking  small  portions
from  the  mass  of  property,  which  is  susceptible  of  ahnost
infinite  division.  In  imposing  taSces  for  state  purposes,
a  state  is  not  doing,  what  congress  is  empowered  to  do.

Congress  is  not  empowered  to  tax  for  those  purposes,

■

1  Gibbons  v.  Ogden,  9  Wheaton's  R.  1;  Brown  v.  Maryland^  12
Wheaton*s  R.  419,  445.  446;  1  Tucker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  180,  309;
JV.  R,  SUam  Boat  Company  ▼.  Lknngstofiy  3  Cowen's  R.  TISL

9  9  Wheaton's  R.  196, 196, 209 ;  lb.  237,  228.

VOL.  II.  66


Digitized  by


Google


514 coKSTmrrroic  or  ths  v.  statss. [book  hi.

which  are  within  the  exclusive  province  of  the  states.
When,  then,  each  government  exercises  the  power  of
taxation,  neither  is  exercismg  the  power  of  the  other.
But  when  a  state  proceeds  to  regulate  commerce  with
foreign  nations,  or  among  the  several  states,  it  is  ex^-
cising  the  very  power,  which  is  granted  to  congress ;  and
b  doing  the  very  thing,  which  congress  is  authorized
to  do.  There  is  no  analogy,  then,  between  the  power
of  taxation,  and  the  power  of  regulating  commerce.*

§  1065.  Nor  can  any  power  be  inferred  in  the  states
to  regulate  commerce  from  other  clauses  in  the  consti-
tution, or  the  acknowledged  rights  exercised  by  the
states.  The  constitution  has  prohibited  the  states  from
l^ing  any  impost  or  duty  on  imports  or  exports ;  but
this  does  not  admit,  that  the  state  might  otherwise  have
exercised  the  power,  as  a  regulation  of  commerce.  The
laying  of  such  imposts  and  duties  may  be,  and  indeed
often  is  used,  as  a  mere  regulation  of  commerce,  by
governments  possessing  that  power.*  But  the  laying
of  such  imposts  and  duties  is  as  certainly,  and  more
usually,  a  right  exercised  as  a  part  of  the  power  to  lay
taxes ;  and  with  this  latter  power  the  states  are  clearly
entrusted.  So,  that  the  prohibition  is  an  exception  from
the  acknowledged  power  of  the  state  to  lay  taxes,  and
not  from  the  questionable  power  to  regulate  commerce.
Indeed,  the  constitution  treats  these  as  distinct  and  in-
dependent powers.  The  same  remarks  apply  to'a  duty
on  tonnage.'

§  1066.  Nor  do  the  acknowledged  powers  of  the
states  over  certain  subjects,  having  a  connexion  with

1  Wheaton'8  R.  199,  200.

8  9  Wheaton'8  R.  201,  302;  1  Jefferaon'i  Corresp.  7;  The  Federalift,
No.  56;  12  Wheaton's  R.  446, 447.
S9Wheaton?8R.201,  202.


Digitized  by


Google


CfL  XVJ] TOWSRS  OF  OOHORCSS — COMMERCE. 516

commerce,  in  any  degree  impugn  this  reasoning.  These
powers  are  entirely  distmet  in  their  natm^  from  that  to
regulate  commerce ;  and  though  the  same  means  may
be  resorted  to,  for  the  purpose  of  carrymg  each  of  these
powers  into  effect,  this  by  no  just  reasoning  furnishes
any  ground  to  assert,  that  they  are  identical^  Among
these,  are  inspection  laws,  health  laws,  laws  regulating
turnpikes,  roads,  and  ferries,  all  of  which,  when  exer-
cised by  a  state,  are  legitimate,  arismg  from  the
general  powers  belonging  to  it,  unless  so  far  as  they
conflict  with  the  powers  delegated  to  congress.*  They
are  not  so  much  regulations  of  commerce,  as  of  police ;
and  may  truly  be  said  to  belong,  if  at  all  to  commerce,
to  that  which  is  purely  internal.  The  pilotage  laws  of
the  states  may  fall  under  the  same  description.  But
they  have  been  adopted  by  congress,  and  without  ques-
tion are  controllable  by  it.*

§1067.  The  reasoning,  by  which  the  power  given  to
congress  to  regulate  commerce  is  maintained  to  be  ei;:-
clusive,  has  not  been  of  late  seriously  controverted;
and  it  seems  to  have  the  cheerful  acquiescence  of  the
learned  tribunals  of  a  particular  state,  one  of  whose  acts
brought  it  first  under  judicial  examination.^

^  1068.  The  power  to  congress,  theod,  being  exclu-
sive, no  state  is  at  liberty  to  pass  any  laws  imposing  a


1  See  CinfiddY.  Cargm,4  Wash.  Cir.R.  371,  379,  ^.

»  9  Wheaton's  R.  203  to  207,  209.

«  9  Wheaton'8  R.  207,  208, 209.

«  1  Keat's  Corom.  Lect  19,  p.  404, 410, 411.  See  also  Rawie  on  die
CoMtitution,  ch.  9,  p.  81  to  84 ;  Sergeant  on  Const  cb.  28,  p.  291,  292.
^-  There  is  a  very  able  and  candid  review  of  the  whole  subject  by  Mr.
Chancellor  Kent  in  his  excellent  commentaries.  (I  Kent's  Comm.  Lect
19,  p.  404.)  I  gladly  avail  myself  of  this,  as  well  as  of  all  oth«r  occ»-
sions,  to  recommend  his  learned  labours  to  those,  who  seek  to  study  the
law,  or  the  constitution,  with  a  liberal  and  enlightened  sjnrit


Digitized  by


Google


516 coNSTiTirrioN  of  the  v.  states,  [book  hi.

tax  upon  importers,  importiDg  goods  from  foreign  comi-
trics,  or  from  other  states. It  is  wholly  immaterial,
whether  the  tax  be  laid  on  the  goods  imported,  or  on
the  person  of  the  importer. In  each  case,  it  is  a  restric-
tion of  the  right  of  commerce,  not  conceded  to  the  states.
As  the  power  of  congress  to  regulate  commerce  reaches
the  interior  of  a  state,  ^  it  might  be  capable  of  authoriz-
ing the  sale  of  the  articles,  which  it  introduces. Com-
merce is  mtercourse ;  *  and  one  of  its  most  ordinary
ingredients  is  traffic. It  is  inconceivable,  that  the
power  to  authorize  traffic,  when  given  in  the  most  com-
prehensive terms,  with  the  intent,  that  its  efficacy
should  be  complete,  should  cease  at  the  point,  when
its  continuance  is  indispensable  to  its  value. To  what
purpose  should  the  power  to  allow  importation  be  given,
unaccompanied  with  the  power  to  authorize  the  sale  of
the  dung  imported  ? Sale  is  the  object  of  importation ;
and  it  is  an  essential  ingredient  of  that  mtercourse,  of
which  importation  constitutes  a  part As  congress  has
the  right  to  authorize  importation,  it  must  have  a  right
to  authorize  the  importer  to  sell. What  would  be
the  language  of  a  foreign  government,  which  should  be
informed,  that  its  merchants  after  importation  were
forbidden  to  sell  the  merchandize  imported? What
answer  could  the  United  States  give  to  the  complamts
and  just  reproaches,  to  which  such  extraordinary  con-
duct would  expose  them  1 No  apology  could  be  re-
ceived, or  offered. Sued  a  state  of  things  would  anni-
hilate commerce. It  is  no  answer,  that  the  tax  may  be
moderate ;  for,  if  the  power  exists  m  the  states,  it  may
be  carried  to  any  extent  they  may  choose. If  it  does

1  9  Wbeaton's  R.  197  to  204.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XY.] P0WSR8  or  COKGR£89 — COMHXRCX. 617

not  exist,  every  exercise  of  it  is,  pro  tanto^  a  violation  of
the  power  of  congress  to  regulate  commerce.  *

^  1069.  How  far  any  state  possesses  the  power  to
authoHze  an  obstruction  of  any  navigable  stream  or
creek,  in  which  the  tide  ebbs  and  flows',  within  its  ter-
ritorial limits,  as  by  authorizing  the  erection  of  a  dam
across  it,  has  been  a  subject  of  much  recent  discussion.
If  congress,  in  regulating  commerce,  should  pass  any
act,  the  object  of  which  should  be  to  control  state  leg-
islation over  such  navigable  streams  or  creeks,  there
would  be  litde  difficulty  in  saying,  that  a  state  law  in
conflict  with  such  an  act  would  be  void.  But  if  con-
gress has  passed  no  general  or  special  act  on  the  sub-
ject, the  invalidity  of  such  a  state  act  must  be  placed
entirely  upon  its  repugnancy  to  the  power  to  regulate
commerce  in  its  dormant  state.  Under  such  circum-
stances, it  would  be  difficult  to  affirm,  that  the  sove-
reignty of  a  state,  acting  on  subjects  within  the  reach  of
other  powers,  beside  that  of  regulating  commerce,  and
which  belonged  to  its  general  territorial  jurisdiction,
would  be  intercepted  by  the  exclusive  power  of  com-
merce, unexercised  by  congress,  over  the  same  subject-
matter.  The  value  of  the  property  on  the  banks  of
such  streams  and  creeks  may  be  materially  enhanced
by  excluding  the  waters  from  them  and  the  adjacent  low
and  marshy  grounds,  and  the  health  of  the  inhabitants
be  improved.  Measures  calculated  to  produce  these
objects,  provided  they  do  not  come  into  collision  with
the  power  of  the  general  government,  are  undoubtedly
within  those,  which  arc  reserved  to  the  states.*

1  Brown  v.  State  of  Maryland,  12  Wheaton's  R.  419,  445  to  447;
9  Wheaton'sR.  197.  &c.  —  Mr.  Justice  ThomfMon  disaented  from  tbi«
doctrine,  as  will  be  seen  in  bis  opinion  in  12  Wheaton's  R.  449,  he.

>  WUmm  T.  EUtckbird  Creek  Company,  3  Peteis's  R.  345.


Digitized  by


Google


518  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [BOOK  UK

§  1070.  In  the  next  place,  to  what  extent,  and  for
what  objects  and  purposes  the  power  to  regulate  com-
merce may  be  constitutionally  applied,

§  1071.  And  first,  among  the  states.  It  is  not  doubt-
ed, that  it  extends  to  the  regulation  of  navigadon,  and
to  the  coasting  trade  and  fisheries,  within,  as  well  as
without  any  state,  wherever  it  is  connected  with  the
commerce  or  intercourse  with  any  other  state,  or  with
foreign  nations.^  It  extends  to  the  regulation  and  gov-
ernment of  seamen  on  board  of  American  ships ;  and
to  conferring  privileges  upon  ships  built  and  ovimed  in
the  United  States  in  domestic,  as  well  as  foreign  trade.^
It  extends  to  quarantine  laws,  and  pilotage  laws,  and
wrecks  of  the  sea.'  It  extends,  as  well  to  the  naviga-
tion of  vessels  engaged  in  carrymg  passengers,  and
whether  steam  vessels  or  of  any  other  description,  as
to  the  navigation  of  vessels  engaged  in  traffic  and  gen-
eral coasting  business.^  It  extends  to  the  laymg  of
embargoes,  as  well  on  domestic,  as  on  foreign  voyages.^
It  extends  to  the  construction  of  light-houses,  the  placing
of  buoys  and  beacons,  the  removal  of  obstructions
to  navigation  in  creeks,  rivers,  sounds,  and  bays,  and
the  establishment  of  securities  to  navigation  against  the
inroads  of  the  ocean.  It  extends  also  to  the  designa-
tion of  particular  port  or  ports  of  entry  and  delivery  for
the  purposes  of  foreign  commerce.*  These  powers
have  been  actually  exerted  by  the  national  government


I  QMant  v.  Ogden,  9  Wheat  R.  189 to  106 ;  Id.  211  to9i5;  1  Tuck.
Black.  Comm.  App.  247  to  249  ;  Id.  250.
s  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  252.

3  9  Wheat  R.  203,  204, 205, 206, 207,  206; 1  Tuck.  BlacL  Comm.
App.  251,  252.

4  9  Wheat  R.  214, 915  to  221.

ft  9  Wheat  R.  J91, 192;  1  Kent's  Comm.  Lect  19,  p.  404»  40S.
e  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  Ai^  249, 251 ;  9  Wheat  R.  206»  209


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XV.] P0WXR8  OF  OOlTGIUeSS-— COMMXSOB. 510

tinder  a  system  of  laws,  many  of  which  commenced
with  the  eariy  establishment  of  the  constitution ;  and
they  have  continued  unquestioned  unto  our  day,  if
not  to  the  utmost  range  of  their  reach,  at  least  to  that
of  their  ordinary  application.^

§  1072.  Many  of  the  like  powers  have  been  applied
in  the  regulation  of  foreign  commerce.  The  commer-
cial system  of  the  United  States  has  also  been  employ-
ed sometimes  for  the  purpose  of  revenue ;  sometimes
for  the  purpose  of  prohibition ;  sometimes  for  the  pur-
pose of  retaliation  and  commercial  reciprocity  ;  some-
times to  lay  embargoes ; '  sometimes  to  encourage  do-
mestic navigation,  and  the  shipping  and  mercantile  inter-
est by  bounties,  by  discriminating  duties,  and  by  special
preferences  and  privileges ; '  and  sometimes  to  regu-
late intercourse  with  a  view  to  mere  political  objects,
such  as  to  repel  aggressions,  increase  the  pressure  of
war,  or  vindicate  the  rights  of  neutral  sovereignty.  la
all  these  cases,  the  right  and  duty  have  been  conceded
to  the  national  government  by  the  unequivocal  voice  ct
the  people.

^  1073.  A  question  has  been  recently  made,  wheth-
er congress  have  a  constitutional  authority  to  apply  the
power  to  regulate  commerce  for  the  purpose  of  encour-
aging and  protecting  domestic  manufactures.  It  is  not
denied,  that  congress  may,  incidentally,  in  its  arrange-

1  Mr.  Hamilton,  in  bis  celebrated  argument  on  tbe  national  bank,
(23d  Feb.  1791,]  enumerates  tbe  following  as  witbin  tbe  power  to  regu-
late commerce,  viz.  tbe  regulation  of  policies  of  insurance,  of  salvage
upon  goods  found  at  sea,  and  tbe  disposition  of  sucb  goods  ;  tbe  regu-
lation of  pilots;  and  tbe  regulation  of  bills  of  excbange  drawn  by  one
mercbant  upon  a  mercbant  of  anotber  state  ;  and,  of  course,  tbe  regula-
tion of  foreign  bills  of  excbange."*

3  Sergeant  on  Const  Law  cb.  28,  (cb.  30, 2d  edlL)

3  See  1  Elliot's  Debates,  144.

*  1  Hamilton'f  Work'i,  134.


Digitized  by


Google


620 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  III*

ments  for  revenue,  or  to  countervail  foreign  restrictions,
encourage  tlie  growth  of  domestic  manufactures.  But
it  is  earnestly  and  strenuously  insisted,  that,  under  the
colour  of  regulating  commerce,  congress  have  no  right
permanently  to  prohibit  any  importations,  or  to  tax
any  unreasonably  for  the  purpose  of  securing  the  home
market  to  the  domestic  manufacturer,  as  they  thereby
destroy  the  commerce  entrusted  to  them  to  regulate,  and
foster  an  interest,  with  which  they  have  no  constitutional
power  to  interfere.*  This  opinion  constitutes  the  lead-
ing doctrine  of  several  states  in  the  Union  at  the  pres-
ent moment ;  and  is  maintained,  as  vital  to  the  existence
of  the  Union.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  as  eamesdy  ^d
strenuously  maintained,  that  congress  does  possess  the
constitutional  power  to  encourage  and  protect  manu-
factures by  appropriate  regulations  of  commerce ;  and
that  the  opposite  opinion  is  destructive  of  all  the  pur-
poses of  the  Union,  and  would  annihilate  its  value.

^  1074.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  becomes
indispensable  to  review  the  grounds,  upon  which  the
doctrine  of  each  party  is  maintained,  and  to  sift  them  to
the  bottom  ;  since  it  cannot  be  disguised,  that  the  con-
troversy still  agitates  all  America,  and  marks  the  divi-
sions of  party  by  the  strpngest  lines,  both  geographical
and  political,  which  have  ever  been  seen  since  the
establishment  of  the  national  government.

^  1076.  The  reasoning,  by  which  the  doctrine  is
maintained,  that  the  power  to  regulate  commerce  can-
not be  constitutionally  applied,  as  a  means,  du^cdy  to
encourage  domestic  manufactures,  has  been  in  part
already  adverted  to  in  considering  the  extent  of  the
power  to  lay  taxes. It  is  proper,  however,  to  present

1  See  Address  of  the  Philadelphia  Free  Trade  Convention,  in  Sep-
tember and  October  1831.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Xir.] POWERS  OF  COXTGRESS—* COMMERCE. 521

it  entire  in  its  present  connexion.  It  is  to  the  following
effect  —  The  constitution  is  one  of  limited  and  enu-
inerated  powers ;  and  none  of  them  can  be  rightfully
exercised  beyond  the  scope  of  the  objects,  specified  in
those  powers.  It  is  not  disputed,  that,  when  the  power
is  given,  all  the  appropriate  means  to  carry  it  into  effect
are  included.  Neither  is  it  disputed,  that  the  laying  of
duties  is,  or  may  be  an  appropriate  means  of  regulating
commerce.  But  the  question  is  a  very  different  one,
whether,  under  pretence  of  an  exercise  of  the  power  to
regulate  commerce,  congress  may  in  fact  impose  duties
for  objects  wholly  distinct  fit)m  commerce.  The  ques-
tion comes  to  this,  whether  a  power,  exclusively  for  the
regulation  of  commerce,  is  a  power  for  the  regula-
tion of  manufactures  1  The  statement  of  such  a  ques-
tion would  seem  to  involve  its  own  answer.  Can  a
power,  granted  for  one  purpose,  be  transferred  to  anoth-
er 1  If  it  can,  where  is  the  limitation  in  the  constitu-
tion 1  Are  not  commerce  and  manufactures  as  distinct,
as  commerce  and  agriculture  ?  If  they  are,  how  can  a
power  to  regulate  one  arise  from  a  power  to  regulate
the  other  ?  It  is  true,  that  commerce  and  manufactures
are,  or  may  be,  intimately  connected  with  each  other.
A  regulation  of  one  may  injuriously  or  beneficially  af-
fect the  other.  But  that  is  not  the  point  in  controversy.
It  is,  whether  congress  has  a  right  to  regulate  that,
which  is  not  committed  to  it,  under  a  power,  which  is
committed  to  it,  simply  because  there  is,  or  may  be  an
intimate  connexion  between  the  powers.  .  If  this  were
admitted,  the  enumeration  of  the  powers  of  congress
would  be  wholly  unnecessary  and  nugatory.  Agricul-
ture, colonies,  capital,  machinery,  the  wages  of  labour,
the  profits  of  stock,  the  rents  of  land,  the  punctual  per-
formance of  contracts,  and  the  diffu^on  of  knowledge
VOL.  II.  66


Digitized  by


Google


622  COKSTlTUTIOlf  OF  TH£  U.  STATES, [BOOK  HI.

would  all  be  within  the  scope  of  the  power ;  for  all  of
them  bear  an  ultimate  relation  to  commerce. The
result  would  be,  that  the  powers  of  congress  would
embrace  the  widest  extent  of  legislative  functions,  to
the  utter  demolition  of  all  constitutional  boundaries  be-
tween the  state  and  national  governments. When
duties  are  laid,  not  for  purposes  of  revenue,  but  of  retal-
iation and  restriction,  to  countervail  foreign  restrictic^
they  are  strictly  within  the  scope  of  the  powCT,  as  a
regulation  of  commerce. But  when  laid  to  encourage
manufactures,  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  it The
power  to  regulate  manufactures  is  no  more  confided  to
congress,  than  the  power  to  interfere  with  the  systems  of
education,  the  poor  laws,  or  the  road  laws  of  Uie  states.
It  is  notorious,  that,  in  the  conventiim^  an  attempt  wm
made  to  introduce  into the  omstitution  a  powar  to
encourage  manufactures ;  but  it  was  withheld.^ In
stead  of  granting  the  power  to  congress,  permission  was
given  to  the  states  to  impose  duties,  with  theconseaatof
that  body,  to  encourage  their  own  manufactures ;  and
thus^  in  the  true  spirit  of  justice,  imposing  the  burthen
on  those,  who  were  to  be  benefited.  •  It  is  true,  that
congress  may,  incidentally,  when  laying  duties  for  rev-
enue, consult  the  other  interests  of  the  country. They
may  so  arrange  the  details,  as  indirectly  to  aid  manu-
factures. And  this  is  the  whole  extent,  to  which  con-
gress has  ever  gone  until  the  tariffs,  which  have  given
rise  to  the  present  controversy. The  former  prece-
dents of  congress  are  not,  even  if  admitted  to  be  au-
thoritative, applicable  to  the  question  now  presented.*

1  ▲  proposition  was  leferred  to  the  committee  of  Details  and  Revi-
sion "  to  establish  public  institutions,  rewards,  and  immunities,  for  the
promotion  of  agriculture,  commerce,  trade,  and  manufactures."  The
committee  never  reported  on  it Journ.  of  Convention,  p.  261.

s  The  above  arguments  and  reasoning  have  been  gathered,  mtfu^B


Digitized  by


Google


€H^  XV.}  POWERS  OF  COlf CARESS —^  COSfMERCfi. 625

§  1076.  The  reasoning  of  those,  who  maintain  the
doctrine,  that  congress  has  authority  to  apply  the  power
to  regulate  commerce  to  the  purpose  of  protecting  ancf
encouraging  domestic  manufactures,  is  to  the  following
effect.  The  power  to  regulate  commerce,  being  in  its
terms  unKmited,  includes  all  means  appropriate  to  the
end,  and  all  means,  which  have  been  usually  exerted
under  the  power.  No  one  can  doubt  or  deny,  that  a
power  to  regulate  trade  involves  a  power  to  tax  it.  It
is  a  familiar  mode,  recognised  in  the  practice  of  all
nations,  and  was  known  and  admitted  by  the  United
States,  while  they  were  colonies,  and  has  ever  smce
been  acted  upoa  without  opposition  or  question.  The
American  cdonies  whoHy  denied  the  authority  of  the
British  parliament  to  tax  them,  except  as  a  regulation
of  commerce ;  but  they  admitted  this  exercise  of  power,
a6  legitimate  and  unquestionable.  The  distinction  was
with  diflSculty  msdntained  m  practice  between  laws  for
the  regulation  of  commerce  by  way  of  taxation,  and
laws,  which  were  made  for  mere  monopoly,  or  restric-
tiim,  when  they  incidentally  produced  revenue.^  And
it  is  certain,  that  the  main  and  admitted  object  of  par-
liamentary regulations  of  trade  with  the  colonies  was
the  encouragement  of  manufactures  in  Great-Britain.

t ■  .1  .

could  be,  from  documents  admitted  to  be  of  bigh  authority  by  those,  wbo
maintaia  the  restrictive  doctrine.  See  the  Exposition  and  Protest  of
the  South  Carolina  legislature,  in  Dec.  1828,  attributed  to  Mr.  Vice  Presi-
dent Calhoun ;  the  Address  of  the  Free  Trade  Convention  at  Philadel-
phia, in  Oct  1831^  attributed  to  Mr.  Attorney  General  Berrien  ;  the
Oration  of  the  Hon.  Mr.  Drayton,  on  the  4th  of  July,  1831 ;  and  the
Speech  of  Mr.  Senator  Hayne,  9th  of  Jan.  1832.  See  also  4  Jefferson's
Corresp.  421.

1  See  Mr.  Madison's  LeUer  to  Mr.  CabeU,  18th  Sept  1828;  Mr.  V«r-
planck's  Letter  to  Col.  Drayton,  in  1831 ;  Address  of  the  New- York  Con-
vention in  fevour  of  Domestic  Industry,  November,  1831,  p.  12,  13,  14
9Wh0at.K.2O0;  1  Pitk.  Hist  ch.  3,  p.  93  to  lOd


Digitized  by


Google


624  COlfSTITVTION  OF  THE  U.  8TATS8. [BOOK  III.

Other  nations  have,  in  like  manner,  for  like  purposes,
exercised  the  like  power.  So,  that  there  is  no  novelty
in  the  use  of  the  power,  and  no  stretch  in  the  range  of
the  power.

§  1077.  Indeed,  the  advocates  of  the  opposite  doc-
trine admit,  that  the  power  may  be  applied,  so  as  inci-
dentally to  give  protection  to  manufacturei?,  when  rev-
enue is  the  principal  design ;  and  that  it  may  also  be
applied  to  countervail  the  injurious  regulations  of  foreign
powers,  when  there  is  no  design  of  revenue. These
concessions  admit,  then,  that  the  regulations  of  com-
merce are  not  wholly  for  purposes  of  revenue,  or  wholly
confined  to  the  puiposes  of  commerce,  considered  per
se. If  this  be  true,  then  other  objects  may  enter  into
commercial  regulations;  and  if  so,  what  restraint  is
there,  as  to  the  nature  or  extent  of  the  objects,  to  which
they  may  reach,  which  does  not  resolve  itself  into  a
question  of  expediency  and  policy  ? It  may  be  ad-
mitted, that  a  power,  given  for  one  purpose,  cannot  be
perverted  to  purposes  wholly  opposite,  or  beside  its
legitimate  scope. But  what  perversion  is  there  in  ap-
plying a  power  to  the  very  purposes,  to  which  it  has
been  usually  applied  '\ Under  such  circumstances,  does
not  the  grant  of  the  power  without  restriction  concede,
that  it  may  be  legitimately  applied  to  such  purposes  1
If  a  different  intent  had  existed,  would  not  that  intent
be  manifested  by  some  corresponding  limitation  ?

§  1078.  Now  it  is  well  known,  that  in  commercial
and  manufacturing  nations,  the  power  to  regulate  com-
merce has  embraced  practically  the  encouragement  of
manufactures.  It  is  belie ved,xthat  not  a  single  exception
can  be  named.  So,  in  an  especial  manner,  the  power  has
always  been  understood  in  Great-Britadn,  fit)m  which
we  derive  our  parentage,  our  laws,  our  language,  and


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XT.] POWEES  07  COKGRE88  —  COMMERCS. 626

our  notions  upon  commercial  subjects. Such  was  con-
fessedly the  tiotion  of  the  diflferent  states  in  the  Union
under  the  confederation,  and  before  the  formation  of
the  present  constitution. One  known  object  of  the
policy  of  the  manufacturing  states  then  was,  the  protec-
tion and  encouragement  of  their  manufactures  by  regu-
lations of  commerce.* And  the  exercise  of  this  power
was  a  source  of  constant  difficulty  and  discontent ;  not
because  improper  of  itself;  but  because  it  bore  injuri-
ously upon  the  commercial  arrangements  of  other  states.
The  want  of  uniformity  in  the  regulations  of  commerce
was  a  source  of  perpetual  strife  and  dissatisfaction,  of
mequalities,  and  rivalries,  and  retaliations  among  the
states. When  the  constitution  was  framed,  no  one
ever  imagined,  that  the  power  of  protection  of  manu-
factures was  to  be  taken  away  from  all  the  states,  and
yet  not  delegated  to  the  Union. The  very  suggestion
would  of  itself  have  been  fatal  to  the  adoption  of  the
constitution. The  manufacturing  states  would  never
have  acceded  to  it  upon  any  such  terms ;  and  tl^ey  never
could,  without  the  power,  have  safely  acceded  to  it;  for  it
would  have  sealed  their  ruin. The  same  reasoning
would  apply  to  the  agricultural  states ;  for  the  regula-
tion of  commerce,  with  a  view,  to  encourage  domestic
agriculture,  is  just  as  important,  and  just  as  vital  to  the
interests  of  the  nation,  and  just  as  much  an  application
of  the  power,  as  the  protection  or  encouragement  of
manufactures. It  would  have  been  strange  indeed,  if
the  people  of  the  United  States  had  been  solicitous
solely  to  advance  and  encourage  commerce,  with  a  total
disregard  of  the  interests  of  agriculture  and  manufac-
tures, which  had,  at  the  time  of  the  adoption  of  the  con-


1  1  American  Museam,  16.


Digitized  by


Google


026 comnrrrvTioH  of  thb  u.  statss, [book  iu.

stitutioDy  an  unequiTocal  {M^ponderance  throughout  the
Union.  It  is  manifest  from  contemporaneous  docu-
ments, that  one  object  of  the  constitution  was,  to  en-
courage manufactures  and  agriculture  by  this  very  use
of  the  power.*

^  1079.  The  terms,  then,  o(  the  constitution  are  suf-
ficiendy  large  to  embrace  the  power ;  the  practice  of
other  nations,  and  especially  of  Great-Britain  and  o[  the
American  states,  has  been  to  use  it  in  this  maimer;
and  this  exercise  of  it  was  one  of  the  very  grounds^
upon  which  the  establi^ment  of  the  constitution  was
urged  and  vindicated.  The  argument,  then,  in  its
farour  would  seem  to  be  absdutely  irresisttt>te  under
this  aspect  But  there  are  other  very  weighty  consid*
erations,  which  enforce  it.

§  1080.  In  the  first  place,  if  congress  does  not  pos-
sess the  power  to  encourage  domestic  manu&etures  by
regulations  o(  commerce,  the  power  is  annihilated  for
the  whole  nation.  The  states  are  depiiTed  of  it.  They
have  made  a  voluntary  surrender  of  it;  and  yet  it  ex-
ists not  in  the  national  goyemment  It  is  then  a  mere
n(mentity.  Such  a  policy,  ydimtarily  adopted  by  a
free  people,  in  subversion  of  some  oi  their  dearest  rights
and  interests,  would  be  most  extraordinary  in  itsd^
without  any  assignable  motive  or  reason  for  so  great  a
sacrifice,  and  utterly  without  examine  in  the  history  of
the  world*  No  man  can  doubt,  that  domestic  agricul-
ture and  manufactures  may  be  most  essentially  promot*
ed  and  protected  by  regulations  of  commerce. No


1  1  £lbot*B  Debates,  74,  75, 76,  77, 115;  8  Elliot^kDebelet, 81,32, 93
3Amer.MQMajn,371,372,373;8Amer  Mueetm,  62,554,  556^557
The  Federalist,  No.  12,  41 ;  1  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  237,  238
}  American  Moaeam,  16,  282, 289, 429,  432 ;  Id.  434, 436 ;  Hamilton's
Report  on  Mannlactarea,  im  1791 ;  4  EUiol's  Debates,  App.  351  to  354.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XVJ] POW£RS  or  COlfOREfiS  — COMMXRCE. 627

man  can  doubt,  that  it  is  the  most  usual,  and  genenJly
the  most  efficient  means  of  producing  those  results.
No  man  can  question,  that  in  these  great  objects  the
different  states  of  America  have  as  deep  a  stake,  and  as
vital  interests,  as  any  other  naUon. Why,  then,  should
the  power  be  surrendered  and  annihilated? It  would
produce  the  most  serious  mischiefs  at  home ;  and  would
secure  the  most  complete  triumph  over  us  by  foreign
nations. It  would  introduce  and  perpetuate  national
debility,  if  not  national  ruin. A  foreign  nation  might,  as
a  ccmqueror,  impose  iqpon  us  this  restraint,  as  a  badge
of  dependence,  and  a  sacrifice  of  sovereignty,  to  sub-
serve its  own  interests ;  but  that  we  should  impose  it
upon  oorselvei,  is  inconceivable. The  achievement  of
our  mdependence  was  almost  worthless,  if  such  a  sys«
tem  WIS  to  be  pursued. It  would  be  in  effect  a  per*
petuaticm  of  that  very  system  of  monopoly,  of  encour-
agement of  foreign  manufactures,  and  depression  of
domestic  industry,  which  was  so  much  complained  of
during  our  colonial  dependence ;  and  which  kept  all
America  in  a  state  of  poverty,  and  slavish  devotion  to
British  mterests. Under  such  circumstances,  the  con-
stitution would  be  established,  not  for  the  purposes
avowed  in  the  preamble,  but  for  the  exclusive  benefit
and  advancement  of  foreign  nadons,  to  aid  their  manu-
factures, and  sustain  their  agriculture. Suppose  cotton,
rice,  tobacco,  wheat,  com,  sugar,  and  other  raw  materials
could  be,  or  should  hereafter  be,  abundantly  produced
in  foreign  countries,  under  the  fostering  hands  of  their
governments,  by  bounties  and  commercial  regulations,
so  as  to  become  cheaper  with  such  aids  than  our  own ;
are  all  our  markets  to  be  opened  to  such  products  with-
out any  restraint,  simply  because  we  may  not  want
revenue,  to  the  rum  of  our  products  and  industry  ?. Is


Digitized  by


Google


628 ooNSTiTimON  of  the  v.  states,  [book  Ilf

America  ready  to  give  every  thing  to  Europe,  without
any  equivalent ;  and  take  in  return  whatever  Europe
may  choose  to  give,  upon  its  own  terms  1  The  most
servile  provincial  dependence  could  not  do  more  evils.
Of  what  consequence  would  it  be,  that  die  national
government  could  not  tax  our  exports,  if  foreign  gov-
ernments might  tax  them  to  an  unlimited  extent,  so  as
to  favour  their  own,  and  thus  to  supply  us  with  the
same  articles  by  the  overwhelming  depression  of  our
own  by  foreign  taxation  1  When  it  is  recollected,  with
what  extreme  discontent  and  reluctant  obedience  the
British  colonial  restrictions  were  enforced  in  the  manu-
&cturing  and  navigating  states,  while  they  were  colo-
nies, it  is  incredible,  that  they  should  be  wilUng  to  adopt
a  government,  which  should,  or  might  entail  upon  them
equal  evils  in  perpetuity.  Commerce  itself  would  ulti-
mately be  as  great  a  sufferer  by  such  a  system,  as  the
other  domestic  interests.  It  would  languish,  if  it  did
not  perish.  Let  any  man  ask  himself,  if  New-England^
or  the  Middl^  states  would  ever  have  consented  to  rat-
ify a  constitution,  which  would  afford  no  protection  to
their  manufactures  or  home  industry.  If  the  constitu-
tion was  ratified  under  the  belief,  sedulously  propagated
on  all  sides,  that  such  protection  was  afforded,  would  it
not  now  be  a  fraud  upon  the  whole  people  to  give  a
different  construction  to  its  powers  1

§  1081.  It  is  idle  to  say,  that  with  the  consent  of
congress,  the  states  may  lay  duties,  on  imports  or  ex-
ports, to  favour  their  own  dcxnestic  manufactures.  In
the  first  place,  if  congress  could  constitutionally  ^ve
such  consent  for  such  a  purpose,  which  has  been  doubt-
ed ;  *  they  would  have  a  right  to  refuse  such  consent,

1  See  Mr.  Madison's  Letter  to  Mr.  Cabell,  ISth  Sept  1828 ;  4  Elliot's
Debates,  App.  345.


Digitized  by


Google


ch^xtJ powers  of  congress -^commerce. 529

and  would  certainly  refuse  it,  if  the  result  would
be  what  the  advocates  of  free  trade  contend  for.  In
the  next  place,  it  would  be  utterly  impracticable  with
such  consent  to  protect  their  manufactures  by  any  such
local  regulations.  To  be  of  any  value  they  must
be  general,  and  uniform  through  the  nation.  This  is
not  a  matter  of  theory.  Our  whole  experience  under
the  confederation  established  beyond  all  controversy
the  utter  local  futility,  and  even  the  general  mischiefs  of
independent  state  legislation  upon  such  a  subject  It
furnished  one  of  the  strongest  grounds  for  the  establish-
ment of  the  constitution.^

§  1082.  In  the  next  place,  if  revenue  be  the  sole
legitimate  object  of  an  impost,  and  the  encouragement
of  domestic  manufactures  be  not  within  the  scope  of  the
power  of  regulating  trade,  it  would  follow,  (as  has  been
already  hinted,)  that  no  monopolizing  or  unequal  regu-
lations of  foreign  nations  could  be  counteracted.  Un-
der such  ch'cumstances,  neither  the  staple  articles  of
subsistence,  nor  the  essential  implements  for  the  public
safety,  could  be  adequately  ensured  or  protected  at
home  by  our  regulations  of  commerce.  The  duty
might  be  wholly  unnecessary  for  revenue ;  and  inci-
dentally, it  might  even  check  revenue.  But,  if  con-
gress may,  in  arrangements  for  revenue,  incidentally  and
designedly  protect  domestic  manufactures,  what  ground
is  there  to  suggest,  that  they  may  not  incorporate  this
design  through  the  whole  system  of  duties,  and  select
and  arrange  them  accordingly  1  There  is  no  constitu-
tional measure,  by  which  to  graduate,  how  much  shall
be  assessed  for  revenue,  and  how  much  for  encourage-
ment of  home  industry. And  no  system  ever  yet

1  Mr.  MadisoQ's  Letter  to  Mr.  Cabell,  18th  Sept  1838,-  4  EUiof^
Debates,  App.  345.

yOL.  II.  67

,  Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


630 COirSTITUTION  OF  THE  JJ.  STATES. [BOOJC  IH.

adopted  bas  attempted,  and  in  all  probability  none
hereafter  adopted  will  attempt,  wholly  to  sever  the  one
object  from  the  other.  The  constitutional  objection  in
this  view  is  purely  speculative,  regardmg  only  future
possibilities.

§  1083.  But  if  it  be  conceded,  (as  it  is,)  that  the
power  to  regulate  commerce  includes  the  power  ct
laying  duties  to  countervail  the  regulations  and  restric-
tions of  foreign  nations,  then,  what  Umits  are  to  be
assigned  to  this  use  of  the  power  ?  ^  If  their  com-
mercial regulations,  either  designedly  or  incidentally,  do
promote  their  own  agriculture  and  manufactures,  and
injuriously  affect  ours,  why  may  not  congress  apply  a
remedy  coextensive  with  the  evil  1  If  congress  have,
as  cannot  be  denied,  the  choice  of  the  means,  they  may
countervail  the  regulations,  not  only  by  the  exercise  of
the  lex  talionis  in  the  same  way,  but  in  any  other  way
conducive  to  the  same  end.  If  Great  Britain  by  com-
mercial regulations  restricts  the  introduction  of  our  sta-
ple products  and  manufactures  into  her  own  territories,
and  levies  prohibitory  duties,  why  may  not  congress
apply  the  same  rule  to  her  staple  products  and  manu-
factures, and  secure  the  same  market  to  ourselves?
The  truth  is,  that  as  soon  as  the  right  to  retaliate  for-
eign restrictions  or  foreign  policy  by  commercial  regu-
lations is  admitted,  the  question,  in  what  manner,  and
to  what  extent,  it  shall  be  applied,  is  a  matter  of  legis-
lative discretion,  and  not  of  constitutional  authority.
Whenever  commercial  restrictions  and  regulations  shall
cease  all  over  the  world,  so  far  as  they  favour  the
nation  adopting  them,  it  will  be  time  enough  to  consider,
what  America  ought  to  do  in  her  own  regulations  of
commerce,  which  are  designed  to  protect  her  own

1  See  the  Federalist,  No.  1],  13.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


OH.  XV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS  —  COMMERCE. 631

industry  an^  counteract  such  favoritism.  It  will  then
become  a  question,  not  of  power,  but  of  policy.  Such  a
state  of  things  has  never  yet  existed.  In  fact  the  con*
cession,  that  the  power  to  regulate  commerce  may
embrace  other  objects,  dian  revenue,  or  even  than  com-
merce itself,  is  irreconcilable  with  the  foundation  of  the
argument  on  the  other  side.

§  1084^  Besides;  the  power  is  to  regulate  com-
merce. And  in  what  manner  regulate  it?  Why
does  the  power  involve  the  right  to  lay  duties  1  Sim-
ply, because  it  is  a  common  means  of  executing  the
power.  If  so,  why  does  not  the  same  right  exist  as
to  all  other  means  equally  common  and  appropriate  1
Why  does  the  power  involve  a  right,  not  only  to  lay
duties,  but  to  lay  dudes  for  revenue,  and  not  merely  for
the  reguladon  and  restriction  of  commerce,  considered
per  se  ?  No  other  answer  can  be  given,  but  that  rev-
enue is  an  incident  to  such  an  exercise  of  the  power*
It  flows  from,  and  does  not  create  the  power.  It  may
constitute  the  motive  for  the  exercise  of  the  power,  just
as  any  other  cause  may ;  as  for  instance,  the  prohibition
of  foreign  trade,  or  the  retaliadon  of  foreign  monopoly ;
but  it  does  not  constitute  the  power.

§  1085.  Now,  the  motive  of  the  grant  of  the  power
is  not  even  alluded  to  in  the  constitution.  It  is  not
even  stated,  that  congress  shall  have  power  to  promote
and  encourage  domestic  navigation  and  trade.  A  pow-
er to  regulate  commerce  is  not  necessarily  a  power  to
advance  its  interests.  It  may  in  given  cases  suspend
its  operations  and  restrict  its  advancement  and  scope.
Yet  no  man  ever  yet  doubted  the  right  of  congress  to
lay  duties  to  promote  and  encourage  domesdc  naviga-
tion, whether  in  the  form  of  tonnage  dudes,  or  other
preferences  and  privileges,  either  in  the  foreign  trade,  or


Digitized  by


Google


632 coirsTiTXTTioir  of  the  u.  states, [boojc  hi.

coasting  trade,  or  fisheries.^  It  is  as  certain,  as  any
thing  human  can  be,  that  the  sole  object  of  congress,  in
securing  the  vast  privileges  to  American  buik  ships,  by
such  preferences,  and  privileges,  and  tonnage  duties,
was,  to  encourage  the  domestic  manufacture  of  ships^
and  all  the  dependent  branches  of  business!'  It  speaks
out  m  the  language  of  all  their  laws,  and  has  been  as
constantly  avowed,  and  acted  on,  as  any  single  legisla-
tive policy  ever  has  been.  No  one  ever  dreamed,  that
revenue  constituted  the  slightest  ingredient  in  these
laws.  They  were  purely  for  the  encouragement  of
home  manufactures,  and  home  artisans,  and  home  pur*
suits.  Upon  what  grounds  can  congress  constitution-
ally apply  the  power  to  regulate  commerce  to  one  great
class  of  domestic  manufactures,  which  does  not  involve
the  right  to  encourage  all?  If  it  be  said,  that  naviga-
tion is  a  part  of  commerce,  that  is  true.  But  a  power
to  regulate  navigation  no  more  includes  a  power  to
encourage  the  manufacture  of  ships  by  tonnage  duties,
than  any  other  manufacture.  Why  not  extend  it  to  the
encouragement  of  the  growth  and  manufacture  of  cotton
and  hemp  for  sails  and  rigging ;  of  timber,  boards,  and
masts ;  of  tar,  pitch,  and  turpentine ;  of  iron  and  wool ;
of  sheetings  and  shirtings ;  of  artisans  and  mechanics,
however  remotely  connected  with  it  1  There  are  many
products  of  agriculture  and  manufactures,  which  are
connected  with  the  prosperity  of  commerce  as  inti-
mately, as  domestic  ship  building.  If  the  one  may  be
encouraged,  as  a  primary  motive  in  regulations  of  com-
merce, why  may  not  the  others  ?  The  truth  is,  that
the  encouragement  of  domestic  ship  building  is  within

I  See  Mr.  Jefferson's  Report  on  the  Fisheries,  1st  Feb.  1791, 10  Amer.
Mus.  App.  1,  dLc. ,  8,  &c.
*  See  Mr.  Williamson's  Speech  in  Congress,  8  Amer.  Mas.  140.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.XT.] POWERS  or  CONGRESS  —  COMMERCE. 633

the  scope  of  the  power  to  regulate  commerce,  simply,
because  it  is  a  known  and  ordinary  means  of  exercising
the  power.  It  is  one  of  many,  and  may  be  used  like
all  others  according  to  legislative  discretion.  The
motive  to  the  exercise  of  a  power  can  never  form  a
constitutional  objection  to  the  exercise  of  the  power.

§  1086.  Here,  then,  is  a  case  of  laying  duties,  an
ordinary  means  used  in  executing  the  power  to  regu-
late commerce ;  how  can  it  be  deemed  unconstitutional  1
K  it  be  said,  that  the  motive  is  not  to  collect  revenue,
what  has  that  to  do  with  the  power  ?  When  an  act  is
constitutional,  as  an  exercise  of  a  power,  can  it  be  un-
constitutional from  the  motives,  with  which  it  is  passed  ?
K  it  can,  then  the  constitutionality  of  an  act  must  de-
pend, not  upon  the  power,  but  upon  the  motives  of  the
legislature.  It  will  follow,  as  a  consequence,  that  the
same  act  passed  by  one  legblature  will  be  constitutional,
and  by  another  ujjiconstitutional.  Nay,  it  might  be
unconstitutional,  as  well  from  its  omissions  as  its  enact-
ments, since  if  its  omissions  were  to  favour  manufactures,
the  motive  would  contaminate  the  whole  law.  Such  a
doctrine  would  be  novel  and  absurd.  It  would  confuse
and  destroy  all  the  tests  of  constitutional  rights  and
authorities.  Congress  could  never  pass  any  law  with-
out an  inquisition  into  the  motives  of  every  member ;
and  even  then,  they  might  be  re-examinable.  Besides ;
what  possible  means  can  there  be  of  making  such  in-
vestigations ?  The  motives  of  many  of  the  members
may  be,  nay  must  be  utterly  unknown,  and  incapable  of
ascertainment  by  any  judicial  or  other  inquiry:  they
may  be  mixed  up  in  various  manners  and  degress ;  they
may  be  opposite  to,  pr  wholly  independentof  each  oth-
er. The  constitution  would  thus  depend  upon  pro-
cesses utterly  vague,  and  incomprehensible ;  and  the


Digitized  by  V.


Google


534 00K8TITUTI0K  OF  THE  U.  8TATE8.  [bOOK  UU

written  inteDt  of  the  legislature  upon  its  words  and  acts,
the  lex  scripta^  would  be  conti^icted  or  obliterated
by  conjecture,  and  parol  declarations,  and  fleeting  rey-
eries,  and  heated  imaginations.  No  government  on
earth  could  rest  for  a  moment  on  such  a  foundatiop.
It  would  be  a  constitution  of  sand  heaped  up  and  dis-
solved by  the  flux  and  reflux  of  every  tide  of  opinion.
Every  act  of  the  legislature  must  therefpre  be  judged
of  from  its  object  and  intent,  as  they  are  embodied  in
its  provisions ;  and  if  the  latter  are  within  the  scope  of
admitted  powers,  the  act  must  be  constitutional^  whether
the  motive  for  it  were  wise,  or  just,  or  otherwise.  The
manner  of  applying  a  power  may  be  an  abuse  of  it ;  but
this  does  not  prove,  that  it  is  unconstitutional

§  1087.  Passing  by  these  considerations,  let  the
practice  of  the  government  and  the  doctrines  maintain-
ed by  those,  who  have  administered  it,  be  deliberately
examined ;  and  they  will  be  found  to  be  in  entire  con^-
tency  with  this  reasoning.  The  very  first  congress,
that  ever  sat  under  the  constitution,  composed  in  a  con-
siderable degree  of  those,  who  had  framed,  or  assbted
in  the  discussion  of  its  provisions  in  the  state  conven-
tions, deliberately  adopted  this  view  of  the  power.
And  what  is  most  remarkable,  upon  a  subject  of  deep
interest  and  excitement,  which  at  the  time  occasioned
long  and  vehement  debates,  not  a  single  syllable  of
doubt  was  breathed  from  any  quarter  against  the  con-
stitutionality of  protecting  agriculture  and  manufactures
by  laying  duties,  although  the  intention  to  protect  and
encourage  them  was  constandy  avowed.^ Nay,  it  was

1  See  I  Lloyd's  Deb.  17,  19, 22, 23,  24,  26,  27,  28,  31, 34, 39,  43, 46,
47, 50, 51,  52, 55,  64  to  69,  71, 72,  74  to  83,  94,  95,  97,  109,  116, 145,
160,161,  211,212,  243,244,  254;  Id.  144,  163,  194,  206,  907.  8m
•Im  5  MarshiOl'i  Wadi.  ch.  3,  p.  189»  190.


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XV.] POWERS  or  C0NGRE8 8— COMMERCE.  536

contended  to  be  a  paramount  duty,  upon  the  faithful
fulfilment  of  which  the  constitution  had  been  adopted,
and  the  omission  of  which  would  be  a  political  fraud,
without  a  whisper  of  dissent  from  any  side.*  It  was
demanded  by  the  people  from  various  parts  of  the
Union ;  and  was  resisted  by  none.*  Yet,  state  jealousy
was  never  more  alive  than  at  this  period,  and  state  in-
terests never  more  actively  mingled  in  the  debates  of
congress.  The  two  great  parties,  which  afterwards  so
much  divided  the  country  upon  the  question  of  a  libe-
ral and  strict  construction  of  the  constitution,  were  then
distmctly  formed,  and  proclaimed  their  opinions  with
firmness  and  freedom.  If,  therefore,  there  had  been
a  point  of  doubt,  on  which  to  hang  an  argument,  it  canr
not  be  questioned,  but  that  it  would  have  been  brought
into  the  array  of  opposition.  Such  a  silence,  under  such
circumstances,  is  most  persuasive  and  convincing.

§  1088.  The  very  preamble  of  this  act  *  (the  second
passed  by  congress)  is,  •*  Whereas  it  is  necessary  for  the
"  support  of  the  government,  for  the  discharge  of  the
"  debts  of  the  United  States,  and  the  encouragement
**  and  protection  of  manufactures^  that  duties  be  laid
^  on  goods,  wares,  and  merchandises  imported,  Be  it
"enacted,"  &c.*  Yet,  not  a  solitary  voice  was  raised
against  it.  The  right,  and  the  duty,  to  pass  such  laws
was,  indeed,  taken  so  much  for  granted,  that  in  some  of
the  roost  elaborate  expositions  of  the  government  upon


1  See  1  Uoyd's  Deb.  24, 160, 161, 243,  344 ;  4  EUiot'i  Deb.  App.  351,
352

s  See  GrimU'8  Speech,  in  Dec.  1828,  p  58, 59,  63.

»  Act  of  4th  July,  1789.

4  It  is  not  a  little  remarkable,  that  the  culture  of  cotton  was  just  then
beginning  in  South  Carolina ;  and  her  statesmen  then  thought,  a  pro-
tecting duty  to  aid  agriculture  was  in  all  respects  proper,  and  constitu-
tional. 1  Uoyd's  Deb.  79 ;  Id.  210, 211, 212, 244.


Digitized  by


Google


636 CONSTITUTIOK  OF  THS  U.  STATS8. [bOOK  III.

the  subject  of  manufactures,  it  was  scarcely  alluded  ta^
The  Federalist  itself^  dealing  with  every  shadow  of  ob-
jection against  the  constitution,  never  once  alludes  to
such'  a  one  ;  but  incidentally  commends  this  power,  as
leading  to  beneficial  results  on  all  domesUc  interests.'
Every  successive  congress  since  that  time  has  constantly
acted  upon  the  system  through  all  the  changes  of  party
and  local  interests.  Every  successive  executive  has
sanctioned  laws  on  the  subject ;  and  most  of  them  have
actively  recommended  the  encouragement  of  manufac-
tures to  congress.*  Until  a  very  recent  period,  no  per-
son in  the  public  councils  seriously  relied  upon  any
constitutional  difficulty.'  And  even  now,  when  the
subject  has  been  agitated,  and  discussed  with  great
ability  and  zeal  throughout  the  Union,  not  more  than
five  states  have  expressed  an  opinion  against  the  con-
stitutional right,  while  it  has  received  an  unequivocal
sancdon  in  the  others  with  an  almost  unexampled  de-
gree of  unanimity.  And  this  too,  when  in  most  other
respects  these  states  have  been  in  strong  opposition  to
each  other  upon  the  general  system  of  polidcs  pursued
by  the  government.

§  1089.  If  ever,  therefore,  contemporaneous  exposi-
tion, and  the  uniform  and  progressive  operations  of
the  government  itself,  in  all  its  departments,  can  be  of
any  w;eight  to  settle  the  construction  of  the  constitution,
there  never  has  been,  and  there  never  can  be  more
decided  evidence  in  favour  of  the  power,  than  is  fur-
nished by  the  history  of  our  national  laws  for  the  en-
couragement of  domestic  agriculture  and  manufactures.
To  resign  an  exposition  so  sanctioned,  would  be  to  de-

1  Hamilton's  Report  on  Manufacturers  io  1791.

s  The  Federalist,  No.  10, 35,  41.

3  See  4  Elliot's  Debates,  App.  353, 354.


Digitized  by


Google


CH,  XV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS COMMERCE. 537

liver  over  the  country  to  interminable  doubts ;  and  to
make  the  constitution  not  a  written  system  of  govern-
ment, but  a  false  and  delusive  text,  upon  which  every
successive  age  of  speculatists  and  statesmen  might
build  any  system,  suited  to  their  own  views  and  opin-
ions. But  if  it  be  added  to  this,  that  the  constitution
gives  the power in  the  most  unlimited  terms,  and
neither  assigns  motives,  nor  objects  for  its  exercise;  but
leaves  these  wholly  to  the  discretion  of  the  legislature,
aciing  for  the  common  good,  and  the  general  interests;
the  argument  in  its  favour  becomes  as  absolutely  irresis-
tible, as  any  demonstration  of  a  moral  or  political  na-
ture ever  can  be. Without  such  a  power,  the  govern-
ment would  be  absolutely  worthless,  and  made  merely
subservient  to  the  policy  of  foreign  nations,  incapable
of  self-protection  or  self-support  ;*  with  it,  the  coun-
try will  have  a  right  to  assert  its  equality,  and  dignity,""
and  sovereignty  among  the  other  nations  of  the  earth.*
§  1089.  In  regard  to  the  rejection  of  the  proposition
in  the  convention  "to  establish  inslituiionSj  rewards^
and  immunities  for  the  promotion  of  agriculture,  com-
merce, trades,  and  manufactures,''*  it  is  manifest,  that  it
has  no  bearing  on  the  question. It  was  a  power  much

i  4  Jefferson's  Correspondence,  260,  281 ; 1  Pitkin's Hist  ch.  3,
p.  93  to  106.

9  The  foregoing  summary  has  been  principally  a)[)stracted  from  the
Letter  of  Mr.  Madison  to  Mr.  Cabell,  18th  Sept  1828 ;  4  Elliot's  Deb.  ^
345 ;  Mr.  Grimk^'s  Speech  in  Dec.  1828,  in  the  South  Carolina  senate ;
Mr.  Hug er's  Speech  in  the  South  Carolina  legislature,  in  Dec.  1630  ;  Ad«
dress  of  the  New  York  Convention  of  the  Friends  of  Domestic  Indus-
try, in  Oct  lo3l ;  Mr.  Verplanck's  Letter  to  Col.  Drayton,  in  1831 ;  Mr.
Clay's  Speech  in  the  senate,  in  Feb.  1832 ;  Mr.  Edward  Everett's  Ad-
dress to  the  American  Institute,  in  Oct  1831 ;  Mr.  Hamilton's  Report
on  Manufactures,  in  1791;  Mr.  Jefferson's  Report  on  the  Fisheries,  in
1791.  See,  also,  4  Jefferson's  Correspondeoce,  280, 28J.

3  Journal  of  Convention,  p.  261.

VOL.  n.  68


Digitized  by


Google


638 COlfSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK III.

more  broad  in  its  extent  and  objects,  than  the-  power
to  encourage  manufactures  by  the  exercise  of  another
granted  power.  It  might  be  contended  with  quite  as
much  plausibility,  that  the  rejection  was  an  implied
rejection  of  the  right  to  encourage  commerce,  for  that
was  equally  within  the  scope  of  the  proposition.  In
truth,  it  involved  a  direct  power  to  establish  institu-
tions^ rewards,  and  immunities  for  all  the  great  interests
of  society,  and  was,  on  that  account,  deemed  too
broad  and  sweeping.  It  would  establish  a  general,  and
not  a  Umited  power  of  government.

^  1090.  Such  is  a  summary  (necessarily  imperfect)
of  the  reasoning  on  each  side  of  this  contested  doc-
tnne.  The  reader  will  draw  his  own  conclusions ;  and
these  Commentaries  have  no  further  aim,  than  to  put
him  in  possession  of  the  materials  for  a  proper  exer-
cise of  his  judgment.

§  1091.  When  the  subject  of  the  regulation  of  com-
merce was  before  the  convention,  the  first  draft  of  the
constitution  contained  an  article,  that  *^  no  navigation
^*  act  shall  be  passed,  without  the  assent  of  two  thirds
"of  the  members  present  in  each  house."*  This  ar-
ticle wa^  afterwards  recommended  in  a  report  of  a
committee  to  be  stricken  out.  In  the  second  revised
draft  it  was  left  out ;  and  a  motion,  to  insert  such  a  re-
striction to  have  eflfect  until  the  year  1808,  was  nega-
tived by  the  vote  of  seven  states  against  three.*  An-
other proposition,  that  no  act,  regulating  the  commerce
of  the  United  States  with  foreign  powers,  should  be
passed  without  the  assent  of  two  thirds  of  the  mem-

l  Journal  of  CoDvention,  p.  22^2.

9  Jourua)  of  Convention,  223, 285,  286,  293,  358, 387.  See,  also,  3
American  Museumi  62, 4J9, 420 ;  3  American  Muaeum,  553 ;  2  PiUdn*8
Hist  261.


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XT.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS  —  COMMERCE. 639

bers  of  each  house,  was  rejected  by  the  vote  of  seven
states  against  four.*  The  rejection  was,  probably,  oc-
casioned by  two  leading  reasons.  First,  the  general  im-
propriety of  allowing  the  minority  in  a  government  to
control,  and  in  effect  to  govern  all  the  legislative  pow-
ers of  the  majority.  Secondly,  the  especial  inconve-
nience of  such  a  power  in  regard  to  regulations  of  com-
merce, where  the  proper  remedy  for  grievances  of  the
worst  sort  might  be  withheld  from  the  navigating  and
commercial  states  by  a  very  small  minority  of  the
other  states.*  A  similar  proposition  was  made,  after
the  adoption  of  the  constitution,  by  some  of  the  states ;
but  it  was  never  acted  upon.'

§  1092.  The  power  of  congress  also  extends  to
regulate  commerce  with  the  Indian  tribes.  This
power  was  not  contained  in  the  first  draft  of  the  con-
stitution. It  was  afterwards  referred  to  the  committee
on  the  constitution  (among  other  propositions)  to  con-
sider the  propriety  of  giving  to  congress  the  power
^^  to  regulate  affairs  with  the  Indians,  as  well  within,  as
without  the  limits  of  the  United  States.**  And,  in  the
revised  draft,  the  committee  reported  the  clause,  •*  and
with  the  Indian  Tribes,*'  as  it  now  stands.^

§  1093.  Under  the  confederation,  the  continental
congress  were  invested  with  the'  sole  and  exclusive
right  and  power  "of  regulating  the  trade  and  manag-
ing all  affairs  with  the  Indians,  not  members  of  any  of
the  states,  provided,  that  the  legislative  right  of  any
state  within  its  own  Umits  be  not  infiinged  or  vio-
lated.**^

^  Journal  of  ConventioD,  906.

s  See  The  Federalist,  No.  22;  1  TuckePi  Black.  Comm.  App.  253»
375.

3  1  Tacker's  Black.  Comm.  App.  253, 375.

4  Journal  of  Convention,  220, 260, 856.  «  Art  9.


Digitized  by


Google


640 OONSTITUTIOlf  OF  THE  U.  STATEjS. [bOOK  Ul.

§  1094.  Antecedently  to  the  American  Revoluticm
the  authority  to  regulate  trade  and  intercourse  with  the
Indian  tribes,  whether  they  were  within,  or  without
the  boundaries  of  the  colonies,  was  understood  to  be-
long to  the  prerogative  of  the  British  crown.^ And
after  the  American  Revolution,  the  like  power  would
naturally  fall  to  the  federal  government,  with  a  view  to
the  general  peace  and  interests  of  all  the  states.* Two
restrictions,  however,  upon  the  power  were,  by  the
above  article,  incorporated  into  the  confederation,  which
oocasicmed  endless  embarrassments  and  doubts. The
power  of  congress  was  restrained  to  Indians,  not  mem-
bers of  any  of  the  states ;  and  was  not  to  be  exercised,
80  as  to  violate  or  infringe  the  legislative  right  of  any
state  within  its  own  limits. What  description  of  In-
dians were  to  be  deemed  members  of  a  state  was  never
settled  imder  the  confederation;  and  was  aquestion  of  fre-
quent perplexity  and  contention  in  the  federal  councils.
And  how  the  trade  with  Indians,  though  not  members
of  a  state,  yet  residing  within  its  legislative  jurisdiction,
was  to  be  regulated  by  an  external  authority,  without
80  far  intruding  on  the  internal  rights  of  legislation,  was
absolutely  incomprehensible. In  this  case,  as  in  some
other  cases,  the  articles  of  confederation  inconsiderately
endeavoured  to  accomplish  impossibilities ;  to  reconcile
a  partial  sovereignty  m  the  Union,  with  complete  sove-
reignty in  the  states;  to subvert a mathematical
axiom,  by  taking  away  a  part,  and  letting  the  whole  re-
main.' The  constitution  has  wisely  disembarrassed  the

1  WorcesUr  y.  SUUe  qf  Georgia,  6  Petera's  R.  515;  JohntM  v.  Mek^
toih,  8  Wheat  R.  543;  Journal  of  Congress,  3  Augost,  1787, 19Ui  tol.
p.  81  to  86.

»  Ibid.

»  The  Federalist,  No.  42 ;  J  Tuck.  Black.  Comm.  App.  268  j  12  Jour,
of  CoQgreaa,  3  August,  1787,  p.  .81  to  64.


Digitized  by


Google


OEU  XT.] P0WEB8  OF  CONGRESS  ~- COMMSROE. 541

power  of  these  two  limitations ;  and  has  thus  given  to
congress,  as  the  only  safe  and  proper  depositary,  the
exclusive  power,  which  belonged  to  the  crown  in  the
ante-revolutionary  times ;  a  power  indispensable  to  the
peace  of  the  states,  and  to  the  just  preservation  of  the
rights  and  territory  of  the  Indians.*  In  the  former
illustrations  of  this  subject,  it  was  stated,  that  the
Indians,  from  the  first  settlement  of  the  country,  were
always  treated,  as  distinct,  though  in  some  sort,  as
dependent  nations.  Their  territorial  rights  and  sove-
reignty were  respected.  They  were  deemed  inca-
pable of  carrying  on  trade  or  intercourse  with  any  for-
eign nations,  or  of  ceding  then*  territories  to  them.
But  their  right  of  self-government  was  admitted ;  and
they  were  allowed  a  national  existence,  under  the  pro-
tection of  the  parent  country,  which  exempted  them
fix)m  the  ordinary  operations  of  the  legislative  power
of  the  colonies.  During  the  revdution  and  afterwards
they  were  secured  in  the  like  enjoyment  of  their  rights
and  property,  as  separate  communities.*  The  govern-
ment of  the  United  States,  since  the  constitution^  have
always  recognised  the  same  attributes  of  dependent
sovereignty,  as  belonging  to  them,  and  claimed  the
same  right  of  exclusive  regulation  of  trade  and  mter-
course  with  them,  and  the  same  authority  to  protect
and  guarantee  their  territorial  possessions,  immunities,
and  jurisdiction.'

i  Worcester  v.  The  State  ef  Georgioj  6  Peters*8  R.  515 ;  IS  Journ.  «f
Congress,  3  August,  1787,  p.  81  to  84.

«  Johnsim  ▼.  J^Mosh,  8  Wheat.  R.  543;  Fkteker  r.  Pedb,  6  CniBch,
146, 147,  per  Johnson  J. ;  The  Cherokee  MUion  v.  Oeorgioy  6  Peters^s  R.
1 ;  fForcester  v.  The  Slaie  o/ Oeoi^,  6  Peters's  R.  515;  laeJuon  ▼.  Good-
a,  30  Johnson's  R.  193 ;  3  Kent's  Comm.  Leet.  50,  p.  303  to  318.

3  Worcester  v.  Stosle  of  Georgia,  6  Peters's  R.  515 ;  Joam.  of  Congress
3  Aagost,  1787,  vol.  \%  p.  81  to  84.— Mr.  Blunt,  in  his  valuable  Historical
Sketch  of  the  Formation  of  the  Confederaey,  l&c.  has  given  ft  very  Ml


Digitized  by


Google


542 COKSTITUTION  OF  THE  JJ.  STATES. [bOOK  III.

§  1095.  The  power,  then,  given  to  congress  to  reg-
ulate commerce  with  the  Indian  tribes,  extends  equally
to  tribes  living  within  or  without  the  boundaries  of  par-
ticular states,  and  within  or  without  the  territorial  limits
of  the  United  States.  It  is  (says  a  learned  commen-
tator) wholly  immaterial,  whether  such  tribes  continue
seated  within  the  boundaries  of  a  state,  inhabit  part  of
a  territory,  or  roam  at  large  over  lands,  to  which  the
United  States  have  no  claim.  The  trade  with  them  is,
in  all  its  forms,  subject  exclusively  to  the  regulation  of
congress.  And  in  this  particular,  also,  we  trace  the
wisdom  of  the  constitution.  The  Indians,  not  distract-
ed by  the  discordant  regulations  of  different  states,
are  taught  to  trust  one  great  body,  whose  justice  they
respect,  and  whose  power  they  fear.^

^  1096.  It  has  lately  been  made  a  question,  whether
an  Indian  tribe,  situated  within  the  territorial  boundaries
of  a  state,  but  exercising  the  powers  of  government,
and  national  sovereignty,  under  the  guarantee  of  the
general  government,  is  a  foreign  state  in  the  sense  of
the  constitution,  and  as  such  entitled  to  sue  in  the
courts  of  the  United  States.  Upon  solemn  argument,
it  has  been  held,  that  such  a  tribe  is  to  be  deemed
politically  a  state  ;  that  is,  a  distinct  political  society,
capable  of  self-government ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  deemed
a  foreign  state,  in  the  sense  of  the  constitution.  It  is
rather  a  domestic  dependent  nation. Such  a  tribe

view  of  the  ante-revolutionary,  as  well  as  post-revolutionary  authority
exercised  in  regard  to  the  Indian  tribes.  See  Blunt's  Historicid
Sketch,  dLC.  (New- York,  1825.)  Mr.  Jefferson's  opinion  was,  that  the
United  States  had  no  more  than  a  right  of  pre-emption  of  the  Indian
lands,  not  amounting  to  any  dominion,  or  jurisdiction,  or  permanent  au-
thority whatever;  aUd  that  the  Indians  possessed  a  full,  undivided,  and
independent  sovereignty. 4  Jefferson's  Corresp.  478.

1  Rawle  on  the  Constitution,  ch.  9,  p.  84. See  also  1  Tack.  Black.
Conun.  App.  254 ;  1  Kent's  Comm.Lect  50,  p.  308  to  3ia


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS — COMMERCE. 643

may  properly  be  deemed  in  a  state  of  pupillage ;  and  its
relation  to  the  United  States  resembles  that  of  a  ward
to  a  guardian.*  *

1  The  Cherokee  J^atxon  v.  Georgia,  5  Peters'e  R.  1, 10,  17  ;  Jackson  v.
Goodell,  20  John.  R.  193  ;  3  Kent's  Coram.  Lect  50,  p.  308  to  318.  —
In  the  first  volume  of  Bioren  &,  Daane's  edition  of  the  laws  of  the  United
States,  there  will  be  found  a  history  of  our  Indian  Treaties  and  Laws
regulating  Intercourse  and  Trade  with  the  Indians.  1  United  States
Laws,  597  to  620.

*  While  this  sheet  was  passing  through  the  press,  President  Jackson's
Proclamation  of  the  10th  of  December,  18^  concerning  the  recent
Ordinance  of  South-Carolina  on  the  *  subject  of  the  tariff,  appeared.
That  document  contains  a  most  elaborate  view  of  several  questions,  which
have  been  discussed  in  this  and  the  preceding  volume,  especially  respect-
ing the  supremacy  of  the  laws  of  the  Union ;  the  right  of  the  judiciary  to
decide  upon  the  constitutionality  of  those  laws ;  and  the  total  repugnan*
cy  to  the  constitution  of  the  modem  doctrine  of  nullification  asserted  in
that  ordinance.  As  a  state  paper  it  is  entitled  to  very  high  praise  for
the  clearness,  force,  and  eloquence,  with  which  it  has  defended  the
rights  and  powers  of  the  national  government  I  gladly  copy  into  these
pages  some  of  its  important  passages,  as  among  the  ablest  commentaries
ever  ofiTered  upon  the  constitution.

^  Whereas,  a  convention  assembled  in  the  state  of  South-Carolina
have  passed  an  ordinance,  by  which  they  declare,  *  TJiat  the  several  acts
and  parts  of  acts  of  the  congress  of  the  United  States,  purporting  to  be
laws  for  the  imposing  of  duties  and  imposts  on  the  importation  of  for-
eign commodities,  and  now  having  actual  operation  and  efiect  within
the  United  States,  and  more  especially,'  two  acts  for  the  same  purpose
passed  on  the  29th  of  May,  1828,  and  on  the  14th  of  July,  1832,  <  are
unauthorized  by  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  and  violate  the
true  meaning  and  intent  thereof,  and  are  null  and  void,  and  no  law,'
nor  binding  on  the  citizens  of  that  state  or  its  officers  :  and  by  the  said
ordinance,  it  is  further  declared  to  be  unlawful  for  any  of  the  constituted
authorities  of  the  state,  or  of  the  United  States,  to  enforce  the  payment
of  the  duties  imposed  by  the  said  acts  within  the  same  state,  and  that  it
is  the  duty  of  the  legislature  to  pass  such  laws,  as  may  be  necessaiy  to
give  full  effect  to  the  said  ordinance :

**  And  whereas,  by  the  said  ^ordinance,  it  is  further  ordained,  that  in
no  case  of  law  or  equity,  decided  in  the  courts  of  said  state,  wherein
shall  be  drawn  in  question  the  validity  of  the  said  ordinance,  or  of  the
acts  of  the  legislature,  that  may  be  passed  to  givo  it  effect,  or  of  the
said  laws  of  the  United  States,  no  appeal  shall  be  allowed  to  the  Su-
preme Court  of  the  United  States,  nor  shall  any  copy  of  the  record  be


Digitized  by


Google


644  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  IIL

permitted  or  allowed  for  that  purpose,  and  that  any  person  attefiiptiiig
to  take  such  appeal  shall  be  punished  as  for  a  contempt  of  court :

**  And,  finally,  the  said  ordinance  declares,  that  the  people  of  South-
Carolina  will  maintain  the  said  ordinance  at  every  hazard  ;  and  that
they  will  consider  the  passage  of  any  act  by  congress,  abolishing  or  clos-
ing the  ports  of  the  said  state,  or  otherwise  obstructing  the  free  ingress
or  egress  of  vessels  to  and  from  the  said  ports,  or  any  other  act  of  the
federal  government  to  coerce  the  state,  shut  up  her  ports,  destroy  or
harass  her  commerce,  or  to  enforce  the  said  acts  otherwise,  than
through  the  civil  tribunals  of  the  country,  as  inconsistent  with  the  long-
er continuance  of  South-Carolina  in  the  Union  ;  and  that  the  people  of
the  said  state  will  thenceforth  hold  themselves  absolved  from  all  further
obligation  to  maintain  or  preserve  their  political  connexion  with  the  peo-
ple of  the  other  states,  and  will  forthwith  proceed  to  organize  a  separate
government,  and  do  all  other  acts  and  things,  which  sovereign  and  inde-
pendent states  may  of  right  do :

**  And  whereas,  the  said  ordinance  prescribes  to  the  people  of  South-
Carolina  a  course  of  conduct,  in  direct  violation  of  their  duty,  as  citizens
of  the  United  States,  contrary  to  the  laws  of  their  country,  subversive
of  its  constitution,  and  having  for  its  object  the  destruction  of  the  Union,
—  that  Union,  which,  coeval  with  our  political  existence,  led  our  fathers,
without  any  other  ties  to  unite  them,  than  those  of  patriotism  and  a
common  cause,  through  a  sanguinary  struggle  to  a  glorious  independ-
ence,— that  sacred  Union,  hitherto  inviolate,  which,  perfected  by  our
happy  constitution,  has  brought  us,  by  the  favour  of  Heaven,  to  a  state
of  prosperity  at  home,  and  high  consideration  abroad,  rarely,  if  ever,
equalled  in  tlie  history  of  nations.  To  preserve  this  bond  of  our  politcal
existence  from  destruction,  to  maintain  inviolate  this  state  of  national
honour  and  prosperity,  and  to  justify  the  confidence  my  fellow-citizens
have  reposed  in  me,  I,  Andrew  Jackson,  PrtsiderU  o/Uu  UniUd  SlattSt
have  thought  proper  to  issue  this  my  Proclamation,  stating  my  views
of  the  constitution  and  laws,  applicable  to  the  measures  adopted  by  the
copvention  of  South-Carolina,  and  to  the  reasons  they  have  put  forth  to
sustain  them,  declaring  the  course,  which  duty  will  require  me  to  pursue,
and,  appealing  to  the  understanding  and  patriotism  of  the  pf  ople,  warn
them  of  the  consequences,  that  must  inevitably  result  from  an  observance
of  the  dictates  of  the  convention.

**  Strict  duty  would  require  of  me  nothing  more,  than  the  exercise  of
those  powers,  with  which  I  am  now,  or  may  hereafter  be,  invested,  for
preserving  the  peace  of  the  Union,  and  for  the  execution  of  the  laws.
But  the  imposing  aspect,  which  opposition  has  assumed  in  this  case,  by
clothing  itself  with  state  authority,  and  the  deep  interest,  which  the  peo-
ple of  the  United  States  must  all  feel  in  preventing  a  resort  to  stronger
measures,  while  there  is  a  hope,  that  any  thing  will  be  yielded  to  rea*
■oning  and  remonstrance,  perhaps  demand,  and  will  certainly  ju8tify,4i
full  exposition  to  South-Carolina  and  the  nation  of  the  views  I  entertain


Digitized  by


Google


OH.  XV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS  —  COMMERCE. 645

of  this  important  qnestion,  as  well  as  a  distinct  enunciation  of  the  coarse,
which  my  sense  of  duty  will  require  me  to  pursue.

**  The  ordinance  is  founded,  not  on  the  indefeasible  right  of  resisting
acts,  which  are  plainly  unconstitutional  and  too  oppressive  to  he  endur-
ed ;  but  on  the  strange  position,  that  any  one  state  hm  y  not  only  declare
an  act  of  congress  void,  but  prohibit  its  execution, — that  they  may  do
this  consistently  with  the  constitution, —  that  the  true  construction  of
that  instrument  permits  a  state  to  retain  its  place  in  the  Union,  and  yet
be  bound  by  no  other  of  its  laws,  than  those  it  may  choose  to  consider
at onstitDtional. It  is  true,  they  add,  that  to  justify  this  abrogation  of
a  law,  it  must  be  palpably  controry  to  the  constitution  ;  but  it  is  evident,
that  to  give  the  right  of  resisting  laws  of  that  description,  coupled  with
the  cncontrollod  right  to  decide,  what  laws  deserve  that  character,  is  to
give  the  power  of  resisting  all  laws. For,  as  by  the  theory  there  is
no  appeal,  the  reasons  alleged  by  the  state,  good  or  bad,  must  prevail.
If  it  should  be  said,  that  public  opinion  is  a  sufficient  check  against  the
abuse  of  this  power,  it  may  be  asked,  why  it  is  not  deemed  a  sufficient
gnard  against  the  passage  of  an  unconstitutional  act  by  congress.  There
is,  however,  a  restraint  in  this  last  case,  which  makes  the  assumed  power
of  H  state  more  indefensible,  and  which  does  not  exist  in  the  other.
There  are  two  appeals  from  an  unconstitutional  act  passed  by  congress,
—  one  to  the  judiciary,  the  other  to  the  people,  and  the  states. There
is  no  appeal  from  the  state  decision  in  theory,  and  the  practical  illustra-
tion shows,  that  the  courts  are  closed  against  an  application  to  review  it,
both  judges  and  jurors  boing  sworn  to  decide  in  its  favour. But  rea-
soning on  this  subject  is  superfluous,  when  our  social  compact  in  express
terms  declares,  that  the  laws  of  the  United  States,  the  constitution,  and
treaties  made  under  it,  are  the  supreme  law  of  the  land ;  and  for  great-
er caution  adds, '  that  the  judges  in  every  state  shall  be  bound  thereby,
any  thing  in  the  constitution  or  laws  of  any  state  to  the  contrary  not-
withstanding.' And  it  may  be  asserted  without  fear  of  refutation,  that
no  federative  government  could  exist  without  a  similar  provision. Look
for  a  moment  to  the  consequence.  If  South-Carolina  oDnsiders  the  rev-
enue laws  unconstitutional,  and  has  a  right  to  prevent  their  execution  in
the  port  of  Charleston,  there  would  be  a  clear  constitutional  objection  to
their  collection  in  every  other  port,  and  no  revenue  could  be  collected
any  where  ;  for  all  imposts  must  be  equal. It  is  no  answer  to  repeat,
that  an  unconstitutional  law  is  no  law,  so  long  as  the  question  of  its
legality  is  to  be  decided  by  the  state  itself;  for  every  law,  operating  in-
juriously upon  any  local  interest,  will  be  perhaps  thought,  and  certainly
represented,  as  unconstitutional,  and,  as  has  been  shown,  there  is  no
appeal.

**  If  this  doctrine  bad  been  established  at  an  earlier  day,  the  Union
would  have  been  dissolved  in  its  infancy.  The  excise  law  in  Pennsyl-
vania ;  the  embargo  and  non-intercourse  law  in  the  Eastern  states ;  the
carriage  tax  in  Virginia,  were  all  deemed  unconstitutional,  and }

VOL.  II.  69


Digitized  by


Google


546  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATS8. [bOOK  UU

more  unequal  in  their  operation,  than  any  of  the  laws  now  complained
of;  but  fortunately  none  of  those  states  discovered,  that  they  had  the
right  now  claimed  by  South-Carolina.  The  war,  into  which  we  were
forced,  to  support  the  dignity  of  the  nation  and  the  rights  of  our  citizens^
might  have  ended  in  defeat  and  disgrace,  instead  of  victory  and  hooour,
if  the  states,  who  supposed  it  a  ruinous  and  unconstitutional  measure,  had
thought  they  possessed  the  right  of  nullifying  the  act,  by  which  it  wae
declared,  and  denying  supplies  for  its  prosf^cution.  Hardly  and  une-
qually, as  those  measures  bore  upon  several  members  of  the  Union,  to
liiie  legislatures  of  none  did  this  efficient  and  peaceable  remeily,  as  it  is
called,  suggest  itself.  The  iliscovery  of  this  important  feature  in  our
constitution  was  reset ved  to  the  present  day.  To  the  statesmen  of
South-Carolina  belongs  the  invention ;  and  U|ion  the  citizens  of  that
state  will  unfortunately  fall  the  evils  of  reducing  it  to  practice.

*'  If  the  doctrine  of  a  state  veto  upon  the  laws  of  the  Union  carries
with  it  internal  evidence  of  its  impracticable  absurdity,  our  constitutional
history  will  also  afford  abundant  proof,  that  it  would  have  been  repudi-
ated with  indignation,  had  it  l>e*$n  proposed  to  form  a  feature  in  our
government

^In  our  colonial  state,  although  dependent  on  another  power,  we  very
early  considered  ourselves,  as  connected  by  common  interest  with  etch
other.  Leagues  were  forme4i  for  common  dsfence,  and  before  the  Dec-
laration of  Independence  we  were  known  inour  aggregate  character,
as  Tub  United  Coi.omiks  or  AMKaiCA.  That  decisive  and  important
step  was  taken  jointly.  We  declared  ourselves  a  nation  by  a  joint,  not
by  several  acts ;  and  when  the  terms  nf  our  confederation  were  reduced
to  form,  it  was  in  that  of  a  solemn  league  of  several  states,  by  which  they
agreed,  that  they  would  collectively  form  one  nation,  for  the  purpoee  of
conducting  some  certain  domestic  concerns,  and  all  foreign  relations.
In  the  instrument  forming  that  union  is  found  an  article,  which  declares,
that  '  every  state  shall  abide  by  the  tleterminations  of  congress  on  all
questions,  which  by  that  confederation  should  be  submitted  to  them.'

*^  Under  the  confederation,  then,  no  state  could  legally  annul  a  decis-
ion of  the  congress,  or  refuse  to  submit  to  its  execution ;  but  no  pro-
Tision  was  made  to  enforce  these  decisions.  Congress  made  requisitions,
but  they  were  not  complied  with.  The  government  could  not  operate
ad  individuals.  They  bad  no  judiciary,  no  means  of  collecting  revenue,
**  But  the  defects  of  the  confederation  need  not  be  detailed.  Under
its  operation  we  could  scarcely  be  called  a  nation.  We  hid  neither
prosperity  at  home,  nor  consideration  abroad.  This  state  of  things  could
not  be  endured ;  and  our  present  happy  constitution  was  formed,  but
formed  in  vain,  if  this  fatal  doctrine  prevails.  It  was  formed  for  important
objects,  that  are  announced  in  the  preamble,  made  in  the  name  and  by
the  authority  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  whose  delegates  framed,
and  whose  conventions  approved  it.  The  most  important  among  these
objects,  that,  which  is  placed  first  in  rank,  on  which  all  the  others  reet,


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XV.] POWERS  or  COKGRESS COMMERCE. 547

18,  *  to/onn  a  more  perfect  VnionJ*  Now,  is  it  possible,  that  even  if  there
were  no  express  provision  giving  supremacy  to  the  constitution  and
kws  of  the  United  States  over  those  of  the  states,  it  can  be  conceived,
that  an  instrument,  made  for  the  purpose  of  *  forming  a  more  perfect
Uniofty*  than  that  of  the  confeJerntion,  could  be  so  constructed  by  the
assembled  wisdom  of  our  country,  as  to  substitute  for  that  confederation
a  form  of  government  dependent  for  its  existence  on  the  local  interest,
the  party  spirit  of  a  state,  or  of  a  prevailing  faction  in  a  state  ?  Every
man  of  plain,  unsophisticated  understanding,  who  hears  the  question,
will  give  such  an  answer,  as  will  preserve  the  Union.  Metaphysical
subtlety,  tn  pursuit  of  an  in^racticable  theory,  could  alone  have  devised
one,  that  is  calculated  to  destroy  it

^  I  consider,  then,  the  power  to  annul  a  law  of  the  United  States,  as-
sumed by  one  state,  incompeUible  with  the  existence  qfihe  Union;  conire^
dieted  expressly  by  the  letter  of  the  constitution ;  unauthorized  hy  its  spirit ;
inconsistent  with  every  principle,  on  which  it  was  founded;  and  destructive
of  the  great  object,  for  which  it  tons  formed,

**  After  this  gfeneral  view  of  the  leading  principle,  we  must  examine
the  particular  application  of  it,  which  is  made  in  the  Ordinance.

'*  The  preamble  rests  its  justification  on  these  grounds : — It  assumes,^
as  a  fact,  that  the  obnoxious  laws,  although  they  purport  to  be  laws  for
raising  revenue,  were,  in  reality,  intended  for  the  protection  of  manufac-
tures, which  purpose  it  asserts  to  be  unconstitutional ;  that  the  opera-
tion of  these  laws  is  unequal ;  that  the  amount  raised  by  them  is  greater,
than  ia  required  liy  the  wants  of  the  government ;  and  finally,  that  the
proceede  are  to  be  applied  to  objects  unauthorized  by  the  constitution.
These  are  the  only  causes  alleged  to  justify  an  open  opposition  to  the
laws  of  the  country,  and  a  threat  of  seceding  from  the  Union,  if  any
attempt  should  be  made  to  enforce  them.  The  first  virtually  acknow-
ledges, that  the  law  in  question  was  passed  under  a  power  expressly
given  by  the  constitution,  to  lay  and  collect  imposts  ;  but  its  constitu-
tionality is  drawn  in  question  from  the  motives  of  those,  who  passed  it
However  apparent  this  purpose  may  be  in  the  present  case,  nothing  can
be  more  dangerous,  than  to  admit  the  position,  that  an  unconstitutional
purpose,  entertained  by  the  members,  who  assent  to  a  law  enacted  under
a  constitutional  power,  shall  make  that  law  void  ;  for  how  is  that  purpose
to  be  ascertained  ?  Who  is  to  make  the  scrutiny  ?  How  often  may
bad  purposes  be  falsely  imputed  ?  in  how  many  cases  are  they  concealed
by  false  professions?  in  how  many  is  no  declaration  of  motive  made?
Admit  this  doctrine,  and  you  give  to  the  states  an  uncontrolled  right  to
decide  ;  and  every  law  may  be  annulled  under  this  pretext  If,  there-
fore, the  absurd  and  dangerous  doctrine  should  be  admitted^that  a  state
may  annul  nn  unconstitutional  law,  or  one  that  it  deems  such,  it  will  not
apply  to  the  present  case.

^'The  next  objection  is,  that  the  laws  in  question  operate  unequally.
This  objection  may  be  made»  with  truth,  to  every  law  that  has  been  or


Digitized  by


Google


548  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  UI.

ctn  be  passed.  The  wisdom  of  man  never  yet  contrived  a  system  of
taxation,  that  would  operate  with  perfect  equality.  If  the  unequal  opera-
tion of  a  law  makes  it  unconstitutional,  and  if  all  laws  of  that  descrip-
tio  may  be  abrogated  by  any  state  for  that  cause,  then,  indeed,  is  the
federal  constitution  unworthy  of  the  slightest  effort  for  its  preservat  on.
We  have  hitherto  relied  on  it,  as  the  perpetual  bond  of  oar  onion.  We
have  received  it,  as  the  work  of  the  assembled  wisdom  of  the  nation.
We  have  trusted  to  it,  as  the  sheet-anchor  of  our  safety  in  the  stormy  times
of  conflict  with  a  foreiirn  or  domestic  foe.  We  have  looked  to  it  with
■acred  awe,  as  the  palladium  of  our  liberties,  and  with  all  the  solemnities
of  religion  have  pledged  to  each  other  our  lives  and  fortunes  here,  and
oar  hopes  of  happiness  hereafter,  in  its  defence  and  support  Were 'we
mistaken,  my  countrymen,  in  attaching  this  importance  to  the  constitu-
tion of  our  country  ?  Was  our  devotion  paid  to  the  wretched,  inefficient,
clumsy  contrivance,  which  this  new  doctrine  would  make  it  ?  Did  we
jdedge  ourselves  to  the  support  of  an  airy  nothing,  a  bubble,  that  must
be  blown  away  by  the  first  breath  of  disaffection  ?  Was  this  self-de-
stroying, visionary  theory,  the  work  of  the  profound  statesmen,  the  ex-
alted patriots,  to  whom  the  task  of  constitutional  reform  was  entrust-
ed ?

**  Did  the  name  of  Washington  sanction,  did  the  states  deliberately
ratify  such  an  anomaly  in  the  history  of  fundamental  legislation  ?  No.
We  were  not  mistaken.  The  letter  of  this  great  instrument  is  free  from
this  radical  fault:  its  language  directly  contradicts  the  imputation:  its
spirit,  its  evident  intent,  contradicts  it  No,  we  did  not  err !  Oar
constitution  does  not  contain  the  absurdity  of  giving  power  to  make  laws,
and  another  power  to  resist  them.  The  sages,  whose  memory  will  al-
ways be  reverenced,  have  given  us  a  practical,  and,  as  they  hoped,  a
permanent  constitutional  compact  The  father  of  his  country  did  not
affix  his  revered  name  to  so  palpable  an  absurdity.  Nor  did  the  states,
when  they  severally  ratified  it,  do  so  under  the  impression,  that  a  veta
on  the  laws  of  the  United  States  was  reserved  to  them,  or  that  they
could  exercise  it  by  implication.  Search  the  debates  in  all  their  conven-
tions ,  examine  the  speeches  of  the  most  zealous  opposers  of  federal
authority  ;  look  at  the  amendments,  that  were  proposed ;  they  are  all
silent ;  not  a  syllable  uttered,  not  a  vote  given,  not  a  motion  made  to
correct  the  explicit  supremacy  given  to  the  laws  of  the  Union  over
those  of  the  states,  or  to  show  that  implication,  as  is  now  contended,
could  defeat  it  No ;  we  have  not  erred  !  The  constitution  is  still
the  object  of  our  reverence,  the  bond  of  our  Union,  our  defence  in  dan-
ger, and  the  source  of  our  prosperity  in  peace.  It  shall  descend,  as  we
have  received  it,  uncorropted  by  sophistical  construction,  to  our  posteri-
ty ;  and  the  sacrifices  of  local  interest,  of  state  prejudices,  of  personal
animosities,  that  were  made  to  bring  it  into  existence,  will  agaia  be  pa-
triotically offered  for  its  support


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XT.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS  —  COMMERCE. 549

^  The  two  remaining  objections  made  by  the  Ordinance  to  these  laws
are,  that  the  sums  intended  to  be  raised  by  them  are  greater,  than  are
required,  and  that  the  proceeds  will  be  unconstitutionally  employed.

^  The  constitution  has  given  expressly  to  congress  the  right  of  raising
revenue,  and  of  determining  the  sum  the  public  exigencies  will  require.
The  states  have  no  control  over  the  exercise  of  this  right,  other  tlian
that,  which  results  from  the  power  of  changing  the  representatives  v  ho
abuse  it,  and  thus  procure  redress.  Congress  may  undoubtedly  abuse
this  discretionary  power,  but  the  same  may  be  said  of  others,  with  which
they  are  vested.  Yet  the  discretion  must  exist  somewhere.  The  con-
stitution has  given  it  to,  the  representatives  of  all  the  people,  checked
by  the  representatives  of  the  states,  and  by  the  executive  power.  The
South-Carolina  construction  gives  it  to  the  legislature  or  the  convention
of  a  single  state,  where  neither  the  people  of  the  different  states,  nor
the  states  in  their  separate  capacity,  nor  the  chief  magistrate  elected  by
the  people,  have  any  representation.  Which  is  the  most  discreet  dispo-
sition of  the  power  ?  I  do  not  ask  you,  fellow  citizens,  which  is  the
constitutional  disposition ;  that  instrument  speaks  a  language  not  to  be
misunderstood.  But  if  you  were  assembled  in  general  convention,
which  would  you  think  the  safest  depository  of  this  discretionary  power
in  the  last  resort  ?  Would  you  add  a  clause,  giving  it  to  each  of  tho
states,  or  would  you  sanction  the  wise  provisions  already  made  by  your
constitution  ?  If  this  should  be  the  result  of  your  deliberations,  when
providing  for  the  future,  are  you,  can  you  be  ready  to  risk  all,  that  we
hold  dear,  to  establish,  for  a  temporary  and  a  local  purpose,  that,  which
you  must  acknowledge  to  be  destructive  and  even  absurd,  as  a  general
provision  ?  Carry  out  the  consequences  of  this  right  vested  in  the
different  states,  and  you  must  perceive,  that  the  crisis  your  conduct  pre-
sents at  this  day  would  recur,  whenever  any  law  of  the  United  States
displeased  any  of  the  states,  and  that  we  should  soon  cease  to  be  a  na-
tion.

'^  The  Ordinance,  with  the  same  knowledge  of  the  future,  that  charac-
terizes a  former  objection,  tells  you,  that  the  proceeds  of  the  tax  will  be
unconstitutionally  applied.  If  this  could  be  ascertained  >yith  ceitainty,
the  objection  would,  with  more  propriety,  be  reserved  for  the  law  so
applying  the  proceeds ;  but  surely  cannot  be  urged  against  the  laws  levy-
ing the  duty.

^  These  are  the  allegations  contained  in  the  Ordinance.  Examine
them  seriously,  my  fellow  citizens, — judge  for  yourselves.  I  appeal  to
you  to  determine,  whether  they  are  so  clear,  so  convincing,  as  to  leave
no  doubt  of  their  correctness ;  and  even  if  you  should  come  to  this  con-
clusion, how  far  they  justify  the  reckless,  destructive  course,  which  you
are  directed  to  pursue.  Review  these  objections,  and  the  conclusions
drawn  from  them,  once  more.  What  are  they  P  Every  law,  then,  for
raising  revenue,  according  to  the  South-Carolina  Ordinance,  may  be
rightfolly  annulled,  unless  it  be  so  framed,  as  no  law  ever  will  or  can


Digitized  by


Google


560  CONSTlTUTIOir  OF  THE  U.  STATES. [bOOK  UU

be  framed.  Congress  hnre  a  right  to  pass  laws  for  raising  revenue,  and
each  state  has  a  right  to  oppose  tlieir  exeeutioo,  —  two  rights  directly
opposed  to  each  other ;  —  and  yet  is  this  absurdity  supposed  to  be  con-
tained in  an  instrument,  drnwn  for  the  express  purpose  of  avoiding  colli-
sions between  the  states  and  the  ^reneral  government,  by  on  assembly
of  the  most  enlightened  statesmen  and  purest  patriots  ever  embodied  for
^  a  similar  purpose.

**  In  vain  have  these  sages  declared,  that  congress  shall  have  power
to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and  excises  ;  in  vain  have  they
provided,  that  they  shall  have  power  to  pass  laws,  which  shall  be  Leces-
sary  and  proper  to  carry  those  powers  into  execution  ;  that  those  laws
and  that  constitution  shall  be  the  ^  supreme  law  of  the  land,  and  that  the
judges  in  every  state  shall  be  bound  thereby,  any  thing  in  the  constitu-
tion and  laws  of  any  state  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.'  In  vain
have  the  people  of  the  several  states  solemnly  sanctioned  these  provi-
sions, made  them  their  paramount  law,  and  individually  sworn  to  sup-
port them  whenever  they  were  culled  on  to  execute  any  office.  Vain
provisions!  ineffectual  restrictions !  vile  profanations  of  oaths!  miserable
mockery  of  legislation !  if  the  bare  majority  of  the  voters  in  any  one
state  may,  on  a  real  or  supposed  knowledge  of  the  intent,  with  which  a
law  has  been  passed,  declare  themselves  free  from  its  operation,  —  say
here  it  gives  too  little,  there  too  much,  and  operates  unequally,  —  here
it  suffers  articles  to  be  free«  that  ought  to  be  taxed, —  there  it  taxes  those,
that  ought  to  be  free  —  in  this  case  the  proceeds  are  intended  to  be  ap-
plied to  purposes,  which  we  do  not  approve,  —  in  that  the  amount  raised
is  more  than  is  wanted.  Congress,  it  is  true,  are  invested  by  the  con-
stitution with  the  right  of  deciding  these  questions  according  to  their
sound  discretion ;  congress  is  composed  of  the  representatives  of  all
the  states,  and  of  all  the  people  of  all  the  states  ;  but  we,  part  of  the
people  of  one  state,  to  whom  the  constitution  has  given  no  power  on  the
subject,  from  whom  it  has  expressly  taken  it  away,  —  we.  who  have  sol-
emnly agreed,  that  this  constitution  shall  be  our  law,  —  we,  most  of
whom  have  sworn  to  support  it,  —  we  now  abrogate  this  law,  and  swear,
and  forte  others  to  swear,  that  it  shall  not  be  obeyed  ;  —  and  we  do  this,
not  because  congress  have  no  right  to  pass  such  laws ;  this  we  do  not
allege ;  but  because  they  have  passed  them  with  improper  views.  They
arc  unconstitutional,  from  the  motives  of  those,  who  passed  them,  which
we  can  never  with  certainty  know,  from  their  unequal  operation,  al-
though it  is  impossible,  from  the  nature  of  things,  that  they  should  be
equal,  and  from  the  disposition,  which  we  presume  may  be  made  of
their  proceeds,  although  that  disposition  has  not  been  declared.  This
is  the  plain  meaning  of  the  ordinance  in  relation  to  laws,  which  it  abro-
gates for  alleged  unconstitutionality.  But  it  does  not  stop  there.  It
repeals,  in  express  terms,  an  important  part  of  the  constitution  itself,  and
of  laws  passed  to  give  it  effect,  which  have  never  been  alleged  to  be  un-
constitotionaL The  constitution  declares,  that  the  judicial  powers  of


Digitized  by


Google


qH.  XV.] POWERS  OF  C0KGRSS8 — COMMERCE. 661

the  United  States  extend  to  cases  arisinsf  under  the  laws  of  the  United
States,  and  that  surh  laws^  the  constitotion  and  treaties,  shall  be  para-
mount to  the  state  constitutions  and  Inws.  The  judiciary  act  prescribes
the  mode,  by  which  the  case  may  be  brout*ht  before  a  court  of  the  United
States  hy  appeal,  when  a  stiite  tribunal  shall  decide  against  this  provi-
sion of  the  ronstitutioo.  The  ordinance  declares,  that  there  shall  be  no
appeal  —  makes  the  state  law  paramount  to  the  constitution  aud  laws  of
the^  United  Stales  ^  forces  judges  ami  jurors  to  swear,  that  they  will
disregard  their  provisions ;  and  even  makes  it  penal  in  a  suitor  to  at-
tempt relief  by  appeal.  It  furtlier  declares,  that  it  shall  not  be  lawful
for  the  authorities  of  the  United  States,  or  of  that  state,  to  enforce  the
payment  of  duties  imposed  by  the  revenue  laws  within  its  limits.

''Here  is  a  law  of  the  United  States,  not  even  pretended  to  be  uncon-
stitutional, repealed  by  the  authority  of  a  small  majority  of  the  voters  of
a  single  state.  Here  is  a  provision  of  the  coustitution,  which  b  solemnly
abrogated  by  the  same  authority.

**  On  such  expositions  and  reasonings,  the  ordinance  grounds  not  only
an  assertion  of  tiie  right  to  annul  the  law-«,  of  which  it  complains,  but  to
enforce  it  by  a  threat  of  seceding  from  the  Union,  if  any  attempt  is  made
to  execute  them.

'*  This  right  to  secede  is  deduced  from  the  nature  of  the  constitution,
which  they  say  is  a  compact  between  sovereign  states,  who  have  pre-
served their  whole  sovereignty,  and  therefore  are  subject  to  no  superior ;
that  because  they  made  the  compact,  they  can  break  it,  when,  in  their
opinion,  it  has  been  departed  from  by  the  other  states.  Fallacious  as
this  course  of  reasoning  is,  it  enlists  state  pride,  and  finds  advocates  in
tiie  honest  prejudices  of  those,  who  have  not  studied  the  nature  of  our
government  sufficiently  to  see  the  radical  eiror,  on  which  it  rests.

**  The  people  of  the  United  States  formed  the  coustitution,  acting
through  the  state  legislatures  in  making  the  compact,  to  meet  and  discuss
its  provisions,  and  acting  in  separate  conventions,  when  they  iratified
those  provisions ;  but  the  terms  used  in  its  construction,  show  it  to  be  a
government,  in  whicn  the  people  of  all  the  states  collectively  are  repre-
sented. We  are  onr  people  in  the  choice  of  president  and  vice-presi-
dent Here  the  states  have  no  other  agency,  than  to  direct  the  mode,  in
which  the  votes  shall  be  given.  The  candidates  having  the  majority  of
all  the  votes  are  chosen.  The  electors  of  a  majority  of  states  may  have
given  their  votes  for  one  ciindiilate,  and  yet  another  may  be  chosen.
The  people,  then,  and  not  the  stetes,  are  represented  in  the  executive
branch.

**  In  the  house  of  representatives  there  is  this  difference,  that  the  peo-
ple of  one  state  do  not,  as  iu  the  case  of  president  and  vice-president,
all  vote  for  the  same  officers.  The  people  of  all  the  states  do  not  vote
for  all  the  members,  each  state  electing  its  own  representatives.  But
this  creates  no  material  distinction.  When  chosen,  they  are  all  repre-
sentatives of  the  United  States,  not  representatives  of  the  particular


Digitized  by


Google


562  CONSTITUTION  OP  THE  V.  STATES. [BOOK  III.

state  from  whence  they  come.  They  are  paid  by  the  United  States,
not  by  the  state  ;  nor  are  they  accountable  to  it  for  any  act  done  in  the
performance  of  their  legislative  functions ;  and  however  they  may  in
practice,  as  it  is  their  .duty  to  do,  consult  and  prefer  the  interests  of  their
particular  constituents,  when  they  come  in  conflict  with  any  other  partial
or  local  interest,  yet  it  is  their  first  and  highest  duty,  as  representatives
of  the  United  States,  to  promote  the  general  good.

**  The  constitution  of  the  United  States,  then,  forms  a  government^
not  a  league ;  and  whether  it  be  formed  by  compact  between  the  s  tes,
or  in  any  other  manner,  its  character  is  the  same.  It  is  a  government,
in  which  all  the  people  are  represented,  which  operates  directly  on  the
people  individually,  not  upon  the  stotes ;  they  retainied  all  the  power
they  did  not  grant  But  each  state  having  expressly  parted  with  so
many  powers,  as  to  constitute  jointly  with  the  other  states  a  single  nation,
cannot  from  that  period  possess  any  right  to  secede,  because  such  seces-
sion does  not  break  a  league,  but  destroys  the  unity  of  a  nation ;  and
any  injury  to  that  unity  is  not  only  a  breach,  which  would  result  from  the
contravention  of  a  compact ;  but  it  is  an  offence  against  the  whole  Union.
To  say,  that  any  state  may  at  pleasure  secede  from  the  Union,  is  to  say
that  the  United  States  are  not  a  nation ;  because  it  would  be  a  solecism
to  contend,  that  any  part  of  a  nation  might  dissolve  its  connexion  with
the  other  parts,  to  their  injury  or  ruin,  without  committing  any  ofl^ence.
Secession,  like  any  other  revolutionary  act,  may  be  morally  justified  by
the  extremity  of  oppression ;  but  to  call  it  a  constitutional  right,  is  con-
founding the  meaning  of  terms  ;  and  can  only  be  done  through  gross
error,  or  to  deceive  those,  who  are  willing  to  assert  a  right,  but  would
pause  before  they  made  a  revolution,  or  incur  the  penalties  consequent
on  a  failure.

"  Because  the  Union  was  formed  by  compact,  it  is  said  the  parties  to
that  compact  may,  when  they  feel  themselves  aggrieved,  depart  from  it ;
but  it  is  precisely  because  it  is  a  compact,  that  they  cannot.  A  compact
is  an  agreement,  or  binding  obligation.  It  may,  by  its  terms,  have  a
sanction  or  penalty  for  its  breach,  or  it  may  not  If  it  contains  no  sanc-
tion, it  may  be  broken  with  no  other  consequence,  than  moral  guilt:  if  it
have  a  sanction,  then  the  breach  incurs  the  designated  or  implied  pen-
alty. A  league  between  independent  nations,  generally,  has  no  sanc-
tion, other  than  a  moral  one ;  or,  if  ii  should  contain  a  penalty,  as  there
is  no  common  superior,  it  cannot  be  enforced.  A  government,  on  the
contrary,  always  has  a  sanction,  express  or  implied ;  and  in  our  case,  it
is  both  necessarily  implied,  and  expressly  given.  An  attempt  by  force
of  arms  to  destroy  a  government,  is  an  offence,  by  whatever  means  the
constitutional  compact  may  have  been  formed ;  and  such  government
has  the  right,  by  the  law  of  self-defence,  to  pass  acts  for  punishing  the
offender,  unless  that  right  is  modified,  restrained,  or  resumed  by  the
constitutional  act  In  our  system,  although  it  is  modified  in  the  case  of
treason,  yet  authority  is  expressly  given  to  pass  all  laws  necessary  to


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  XV.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS  —  COMMERCE. 653

carry  its  powers  into  effect,  and  under  this  grant  provision  has  been
made  for  punishing  acts,  which  obstruct  the  due  administration  of  the

laws.

<'  It  would  seem  superfluous  to  add  any  thing  to  show  the  nature  of
that  Union,  which  connects  us ;  but  as  erroneous  opinions  on  this  sub-
ject are  the  foundati6n  of  doctrines  the  most  destructive  to  our  peace,
I  must  give  some  further  develo|)eraent  to  my  views  on  this  subject,  No
one,  fellow  citizens,  has  a  higher  reverence  for  the  reserved  rights  of  the
states,  than  the  magistrate,  who  now  addresses  you.  No  one  would
make  greater  personal  sacrifices,  or  official  exertions  to  defend  them
from  violation  ;  but  equal  care  must  be  taken  to  prevent,  on  their  part,
an  improper  interference  with,  or  resumption  of  the  rights  they  have
vested  in  the  nation.  The  line  has  not  been  so  distinctly  drawn,  as  to  avoid
doubts  in  some  cases  of  the  exercise  of  power.  Men  of  the  best  inten-
tions, and  soundest  views  may  differ  in  their  construction  of  some  parts
of  the  constitution ;  but  there  are  others,  on  which  dispassionate  reflec-
tion can  leave  no  doubt.  Of  this  nature  appears  to  be  the  assumed
right  of  secession.  It  rests,  as  we  have  seen,  on  the  alleged  undivided
sovereignty  of  the  states,  and  on  thrir  having  formed,  in  this  sovereign
capacity,  a  compact,  which  is  called  the  constitution,  from  which,  be-
cause they  made  it,  they  have  the  right  to  secede.  Both  of  these  positions
are  erroneous,  and  some  of  the  arguments  to  prove  them  so  have  been
anticipated.

**  The  states  severally  have  not  retained  their  entire  sovereignty.  It
has  been  shown,  that,  in  becoming  parts  of  a  nation,  not  members  of  a
league,  they  surrendered  many  of  their  essential  parts  of  sovereignty.
The  right  to  make  treaties,  declare  war,  levy  taxes,  exercise  exclusive
judicial  and  legislative  powers,  were  all  of  them  functions  of  sove-
reign power.  The  states,  then,  for  all  these  important  purposes,  were
na  longer  sovereign.  The  allegiance  of  their  citizens  was  transferred,
in  the  first  instance,  to  the  government  of  the  United  States ;  they  be-
came American  citizens,  and  owed  obedience  to  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  and  to  laws  made  in  conformity  with  the  powers  it  vested
in  congress.  This  last  position  has  not  been,  and  cannot  be  denied.
How,  then,  can  that  state  be  said  to  be  sovereign  and  independent,  whose
citizens  owe  obedience  to  laws  not  made  by  it.  and  whose  magistrates
are  sworn  to  disregard  those  laws,  when  they  come  in  conflict  with
those  passed  by  another  ?  What  shows  conclusively,  that  the  states
cannot  be  said  to  have  reserved  an  undivided  sovereignty,  is,  that  they
expressly  ceded  the  right  to  punish  treason ;  not  treason  against  their
separate  power,  but  treason  against  the  United  States.  Treason  is  an
offence  against  sovereignty^  and  sovereignty  must  reside  with  the  power
to  punish  it.  But  the  reserved  rights  of  the  states  are  not  less  sacred,
because  they  have,  for  their  common  interest,  made  the  general  govern-
ment the  depositary  of  these  powers.

"  The  unity  of  our  political  character,  (as  has  been  shown  for  another

VOL.  II.  70


Digitized  by


Google


554 CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  [bOOK  III.

purpose)  commenced  with  its  very  existence.  Under  the  royal  govern-
ment we  had  no  separate  character ;  our  opposition  to  its  oppressions
began  as  United  Colonies.  We  were  the  United  States  under  the
confederation,  and  the  name  was  perpetuated,  and  the  Union  rendered
more  perfect  by  the  Federal  constitution.  In  none  of  these  stages  did
we  consider  ourselves  in  any  other  light,  than  as  forming  one  nation.
Treaties  and  alliances  were  made  in  tiie  name  of  all.  Troops  were
raised  for  the  joint  defence.  How,  then,  with  all  these  proofs,  that  un-
der all  changes  of  our  position  we  had,  for  designated  purposes  and
with  defined  powers,  created  National  governments ;  how  is  it,  that  the
most  perfect  of  those  several  modes  of  Union  should  now  be  considered
as  a  mere  league,  that  may  be  dissolved  at  pleasure  ?  It  is  from  an
abuse  of  terms.  *  Compact '  is  used,  as  synonymous  with  *  league,'  although
the  true  term  is  not  employed,  because  it  would  at  once  show  the  fallacy
of  the  reasoning.  It  would  not  do  to  say,  that  our  constitution  was  only
a  league  ;  but  it  is  laboured  to  prove  it  a  compact,  (which  in  one  sense
it  is,)  and  then  to  argue,  that,  as  a  league  is  a  compact,  every  compact
between  nations  must  of  course  be  a  league,  and  that  from  such  an  en-
gagement every  sovereign  power  has  a  right  to  recede.  But  it  has  been
shown,  that  in  this  sense  the  states  are  not  sovereign,  and  that  even  if
they  were,  and  the  national  constitution  had  been  formed  by  compact,
there  woidd  be  no  right  in  any  one  state  to  exonerate  itself  from  its
obligations.

"  So  obvious  are  the  reasons,  which  forbid  this  secession,  that  it  is
necessary  only  to  allude  to  them.  The  Unior  was  formed  for  the  benefit
of  all.  It  was  produced  by  mutual  sacrifices  of  interests  and  opinions.
Can  those  sacrifices  be  recalled  ?  Can  tlie  states,  who  magnanimously
surrendered  their  title  to  the  territories  of  the  West,  recall  the  grant?
Will  the  inhabitants  of  the  inland  states  agree  to  pay  the  duties,  that
may  be  imposed  without  their  assent,  by  those  on  the  Atlantic  or  the
Gulf,  for  their  own  benefit  ?  Shall  there  be  a  free  port  in  one  state,  and
onerous  duties  in  another  ?  No  one  believes,  that  any  right  exists,  in  a
single  state,  to  involve  the  others  in  these  and  countless  other  evils,
contrary  to  the  engagements  solemnly  made.  Every  one  must  see,  that
the  other  states,  in  self-defence,  must  oppose  at  all  hazards.

"These  are  the  alternatives,  that  are  presented  by  the  convention :
A  repeal  of  all  the  acts  for  raising  revenue,  leaving  the  government  with-
out the  means  of  support ;  or  an  acquiescence  in  the  dissolution  of  our
Union  by  the  secession  of  one  of  its  members.  When  the  first  was  pro-
posed, it  was  known,  that  it  could  not  be  listened  to  for  a  moment.  It
was  known,  if  force  was  applied  to  oppose  the  execution  of  the  laws,
that  it  must  be  repelled  by  force  ;  that  congress  could  not,  without  in-
volving it'jplf  in  (lis^rraco,  ond  the  country  in  ruin,  accede  to  the  proposi-
tion ;  and  yet,  if  this  is  not  done  on  a  given  day,  or  if  any  attempt  is  made
to  execute  the  laws,  the  state  is,  by  the  ordinonce,  declared  to  be  out  of
the  Union. The  majority  of  a  convention  assembled  for  the  purpose


Digitized  by


Google


CH.  Xy.] POWERS  OF  CONGRESS — COMMERCE. 555

have  dictated  these  terms,  or  rather  this  rejection  of  all  terms,  in  the
name  of  the  people  of  South  Carolina.  It  is  true,  that  the  governor  of
the  state  speaks  of  the  submission  of  their  grievances  to  a  convention
of  all  the  states,  which,  he  says,  they  'sincerely  and  anxiously  seek  and
desire.'  Yet  this  obvious  and  constitutional  mode  of  obtaining  the  sense
of  the  other  states,  on  the  construction  of  the  federal  compact,  and
amending  it,  if  necessary,  has  never  been  attempted  by  those,  who  have
urged  the  state  on  to  this  destructive  measure.  The  state  might  haVe
proposed  to  call  for  a  general  convention  to  the  other  states ;  and  con-
gress, if  a  sufficient  number  of  them  concurred,  must  have  called  it.
But  the  first  magistrate  of  South  Carolina,  when  he  expressed  a  hope,
that,  <  on  a  review  by  congress  and  the  functionaries  of  the  general
government  of  the  merits  of  the  controversy,'  such  a  convention  will  be
accorded  to  them,  must  have  known,  that  neither  congress,  nor  any  func-
tionary of  the  general  government,  has  authority  to  call  such  a  con-
vention, unless  it  be  demanded  by  two  thirds  of  the  states.  .  This  sug-
gestion, then,  is  another  instance  of  the  reckless  inattention  to  the  pro-
visions of  the  constitution,  with  which  this  crisis  has  been  madly  hurried
on ;  or  of  the  attempt  to  persuade  the  people,  that  a  constitutional  reme-
dy had  been  sought  and  refused.  If  the  legislature  of  South  Carolina
*  anxiously  desire '  a  general  convention  to  consider  their  complaints,
why  have  they  not  made  application  for  it,  in  the  way  the  constitution
points  out?  The  assertion,  that  they  ' earnestly  seek '  it,  is  completely
negatived  by  the  omission."
