REMARKS ON SOME PARTS OF THE ANIMAL THAT WAS CAST ASHORE ON THE ISLAND OF STRONSA, SEPTEMBER 1808 — WITH AFFIDAVITS
By Dr. John Barclay, with affidavits and correspondence — Memoirs of the Wernerian Natural History Society, Vol. I (Edinburgh, 1811), pp. 418-444
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text extracts Dr. Barclay's paper with the sworn affidavits and related correspondence from Vol. I of the Memoirs of the Wernerian Natural History Society (1811), as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier memoirsofwerneri11811wern). The 1811 publication is in the public domain. The extraction is complete: Barclay's remarks, the affidavits, and the appended letters (including Donald MacLean's sea-serpent account).

========================================================================

of Stronsa, September 1808.


By Dr Barctay.


Cae caee abies: by several Affidavits, relating to the’
Animal.)


5
Bale


I Hap formerly the honour of rea ing to this
Society a description te four of the vertebrz ta-
ken from the animal that was cast ashore on the
island of Stronsa, one of the Orkneys. The sub-
stance of that description was as follows.—These
vertebrz, on a cursery view, present a number of
the striking characters which are Ccommon-tothe
vertebre of most fishes. They exhibit, each,
two hollow cones, joined at the apex * ; these hol-
low cones, formed of concentric circles :, ; and these
circles the terminations of concentric cylinders, —
extending between one cone and the other f.

A number of the outermost of these cylinders
are divided longitudinally, by 49 or 50 sulci or


* Plate x. fig. 4. 3. + Id. fig. 3.@.: + Id, ie. aoe


Latex


P. Syme del?


Orgahart del?


EMitehell fo.


’ Symre del? "hh eC
4 Fy Mi Tehedl pou z


* ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. A1g


fissures, that leave between them thin plates or la-
mine *. These laminz are formed by fibres that
radiate from the axis to the circumference of the
different cylinders +. The plates of the cylinders
are about the thickness of a shilling; and the
spaces interposed between two plates, though not
always equal, are generally four or five times lar-
ger than that which is occupied by the thickness
- of the cylindrical plate. The cylinders were nearer
to one another towards the centre and the cir-
cumferences, than in the space intervening {.

In four places, two on the dorsal and two on
the sternal aspect, the fissures or sulci penetrate
through all the cylinders ||. hese four deep sulci
serve for the attachment of two cartilaginous
tubes, that run longitudinally on the vertebral co-

lumn; the one on the dorsal aspect, containing
the spinal marrow, and that on the sternal aspect,
the large blood vessels §. ,

What occasions a singular appearance in these
vertebra, is their want of processes. In the ver-
tebre of many fishes, we observe nothing like ar-
ticular processes; but in these vertebra there are
neither transverse nor spinous processes, nor any
thing calculated to suggest an idea of them. These
vertebra, therefore, are susceptible of inflection to
an equal extent dorsad, sternad, dextrad and sini-
strad.


: pd 2
* Plate x. fig. 3. d, f Ad. fig. 5. 2, 6,
t Id. fig. 4. f. l] Id. fig. 6. b,c, d.


$20. fig..3.° 8, c.


420 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. ©


Another remarkable appearance, and whith’
still may be observed in those vertebre which:
are preserved in the Museum of the Univer-


sity, is the difference of diameter, and the


difference of length, that occur alternately as
you pass in succession from the one to the
other; a larger vertebre being interposed be-
tween two that are smaller, and a smaller inter-
posed between two that are larger*. In the
first set of vertebre which I saw, taken from the
caudal or sacral extremity, eecording. to what LE
conceive a most accurate report, (that of Mr Ur-
quhart, a gentleman who saw the animal, and @
gentleman, too, of respectability and education,
and well-known to our President and Secretary to
be ardent in his pursuit of natural history), none
of them seemed to taper like a conte, but regular-
ly preserved the cylindrical form, the larger and
the smaller vertebrz, as they occurred alternate-
ly, gradually becoming less and less than the pre-
ceding of the same kind, as they approached the
caudal extremity. The cause of this singular
structure I cannot explain, unless it be to favour
the action of the muscular fibres, which, by this
contrivance, must have entered the' two contigu-
ous vertebrz at less acute angles than if they had


been more parallel to the axis. If this be the rea-


son, the difference of diameter in contiguous ver-
tebrz becomes a substitute for the processes that
are wanting, and, like the processes, is made to


* Plate x. fig. 3.


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. 421


furnish more advantageous levers for the mus-
cles. ,
In systematic connection, the contiguous verte-
bre present to one another the bases of their
cones, united by an intervertebral ligament *. The
intervertebral space over which it stretches, is
from two to three quarters of an inch. The li-
gament itself. is very elastic, and about a quarter
of an inch in thickness. It is composed of diffe-
rent strata, and each stratum of circular fibres.
‘These strata form the inner side of the base, where
they firmly adhere; are reflected on the inner
side of the two cones, towards their apex + ; but al-
ways thinner as they advance from the base to the
apex, forming every where the lining or internal
stratum of the twe cones.

In the wet state, the ligament where it is re-
flected on the inner side of the cones, resembles.a
ligamento-cartilaginous substance in the dried
state. This appears under the form of a strong
alense membrane.

The cavity formed by the two cones and the li-
gament was filled with a fluid, opaque, whitish,
and fetid; but became less opaque, white and fe-
tid, when exposed to the heat of boiling water.
One use of this fluid in the vertebre of fishes, is
well known ; it is the ball on which the vertebre
move with the least possible degree of friction, and
is infinitely superior to the ball and socket joint
in the works of art. There is something similar


* Plate x. fig. 3. £7 /- + Ud. fig. 4. ao


422 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL.


to this ball and socket joint even in the humar
species; and, therefore, when the humours be- »
come scanty, as in old age, the vertebra: approach
on the sternal aspect, the spine grows shorter, and
is bent forward. ‘The spine is shortened, too, by
a long continuance in the erect posture, which
compresses the intervertebral cartilages, opposes
the influx, but favours the efflux or the absorp-
tion of the intervertebral fluids. A closer eniggei
however, to this ball and socket joint of fishes,

to be found in different quadrupeds ; and a near
resemblance to the ball and socket joint of art,
my be scen in the articulation of the femur with
eis pelvis, and of the humerus with the scapula,
in maa, and most quadrupeds,—in all the verte-
bre of the viper, and in the cervical vertebrz of
the horse. aN le.

The fluid is supplied by exhaling arteries, and
in these vertebre the arteries seem to have en-
tered by the sulci or fissures.. The interstices
between the cylinders were filled with a fluid not
unlike in colour to that of the joint, but, in point
of consistency, more resembling a jelly. This
fluid escapes, as well as that of the joint, by eva-
poration; and this evaporation is the cause that
the space between the cylinders appears empty in
the dried verrebras, 29
The whole osseous part of these vertebrae is un-
commonly soft and porous; and as the cartilagi-
nous part predominates, the dimensions of the
vertebra are considerably diminished when they


5 MME ie a


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. 423


are dried. The base of each cone terminates in a
ligamento-cartilaginous ring, about a quarter of
an inch in depth, measuring longitudinally *; so
that the sulci do not extend between base and
base, but between ring and ring.

To these rings, on the inner side, is attached -
the intervertebral tegument; so that when the
vertebre are pressed together, the rings are inter-
posed, to protect the soft osseous structure. These
rings, and the sulci, are admirably represented in
Mr Sime’s drawing, which exhibits also a striking
dikeness of the cartilaginous ridges,


carne ED i a:


~


Some months after reading the above descrip-
tion of these vertebrz to this Society, 1 saw in
the London Philosophical Transactions a descrip-
tion of two vertebrze of the Squalus maximus of
Linneeus, by Everard Home, Esq. ‘These verte-
bre of the Squalus maximus, though on a reduced
scale, are similar in size to the vertebre which I
have described, and, like the vertebrae of many
other fishes, have a general resemblance in articu-
lation and structure; but the figure which Mr
Home has given, must have been very carelessly
and inaccurately executed, if the vertebree which
he has described, and the vertebre which you
have seen, and may still see in the presses before
you, belonged to the same species of animal.

In his figure, we do not observe the concentric
cylinders extending from cone to cone, excepting

pd 4 |


* Plate x. fig. 3.2.


424 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL,


on one side of one of the vertebra, and that near


the axis of the cones. All his other cylinders, i in-
stead of extending : from cone to cone, terminate at
a definite line, and at a small distance from the
surface of the cone in which they commence. In
the vertebre taken from the animal of Stronsa,
the cones thicken from the apex to the base, as in
the squalus; but the thickness of the interverte-
bral ligament was very different, even after mace-
ration in water,

There are no osseous lamine radiating from.
the centre, in Mr Home’s figure ; and no mention
in his verbal description, of the ligamento-cartila-
ginous rings, and the various sulci extending
through the cylinders. Perhaps they existed,
though he has not described them; and yet it
would be uncandid, without stronger evidence
than I have, to suppose such defects in Mr Home’s
description, | a


Since reading the first paper of Mr Home,
where he treats of the vertebre of the Squalus
maximus, I have seen another, entitled “ An AS
“* tomical Account of the Squalus maximus.”’ In
this last paper, he seems to be convinced, that the
animal of Stronsa is 2 Squalus maximus. The


scale on which he draws his figure of the squalus,


isa scale of half an inch toa foot,


Measuring by this scale, the head of his squalus


is five feet and a half, from the point of the up-
per jaw to the gills. The dried and shrivelled
head of the el of Stronsa, measures only twelve


ee


et
7


0 a et


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. 423


inches from the first cervical vertebra to the far-
thest part that remains of the jaw.

The diameter of the head of the Squalus maxi-
mus, from right to left, at the angle of the mouth,
was, according to Mr Home, five feet. The
broadest part of the head of the animal of Stronsa
is, In its present state, only,seven inches,

The diameter of the larger vertebra, near the
head, in the squalus, was, according to Mr Home,
seven inches. The first cervical vertebra in the


animal of Stronsa, is still ad! hering to the head *
and is only : two inches in diameter.


‘Yet some of the vertebre of this animal, which


are still preserved, are six inches and a half in
diameter; and the first vertebrae which I saw,


were from four to five and a half inches across.
The smallness of the cervical vertebra, i in the ani-


mal of Stronsa, confirms the account of those who
saw it, that the animal had a neck. But the Squa-


jus maximus, if Mr Home’s figure be accurate,


had nothing resembling a neck. And, indeed,
Artedi observes, that “ sine pisces qui pulmoni-
* bus destit uuntur, collo quoque carent: Erea
ie soli pisces cetacei collum habent +.’ The pre-
sence of a neck, therefore, as ‘peculiar to cetace.~
ous fishes, confirms pier the account of the
spiracula or air-holes, ascribed to this animal of
ptronsa.


* Plate a fig, i By


T Artedi, “ Partes Piscium,’’ § 25,.


¥


426 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL,


The length of Mr Home’s squalus was thirty
feet stx inches. The length of the animal of
Stronsa, by actual measurement, was fifty-five
feet, or, exclusive of the head, fifty-four ; and yet
a part of the tail was supposed to be wanting.

The circumference of the animal of Stronsa was,
by actual measurement, about ten feet, meant, I sup-
pose, at the thickest part. If the animal had been
cylindrical at that part, the diameter from the dor-
sal to the sternal aspect must have been about three
feet four inches. The diameter of the squalus, at
the thickest part, measuring from the dorsal to
the sternal aspect, is nearly six feet; its circum-
ference, had it been cylindrical, nearly eighteen
feet. 7

The animal of Stronsa had a mane, extending
from the shoulder to near the caudal extremity,
(z. ¢. about thirty-nine feet,) after deducting the
length of the head and neck, which, when toge-.
ther, were sixteen feet. I have still a specimen
of that mane, which I got from Mr Urquhart ;
and all the specimens which were brought here,
confirm the accounts that were sent of it from the
Orkneys. The bristles of that. mane are not like
the radii of a fin, nor, although they were, has the
Squalus a fin extending from the shoulder to the
tail.

A drawing, which was sent to me by our very
active and obliging Secretary, Mr Neill; was
executed, I am told, from the original, by Mr


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. 427


Urquhart; and its accuracy is confirmed by the
dried specimens now before us. It represents the
sternum, and two parts corresponding to scapula,
and those organs which are named paws*. Mr
Home says, that these organs resemble the pec-
toral fins of his squalus. But the length of the
pectoral fins, measuring along the upper margin,
is four feet ; the length of the paw cannot be de-
termined, as part of it is wanting ; the part that
remains, measures seventeen inches.

The breadth of the fin, measuring across the ra-
dii, is three feet and seven inches; while the
greatest breadth of the paw, in its dried state, is
only five inches and three quarters.

_ Those parts which in form resemble the sca-
pule, and exhibit articular surfaces at each ex-
tremity, were probably ribs.

Mr Home concludes by observing, that “ it
$6) OF importance to science, that it should be
“ ascertained, that this fish is not a new animal,
“ unlike any of the ordinary productions of na-
“‘ ture.” Of what importance it is to science to
admit no new genera or species into our catalogues
of natural history, I cannot conceive. But it is
certainly of much importance to science, that the
naturalist should be cautious not to determine the
species of an animal upon vague evidence. Now
what evidence had Mr Home that this animal was
a squalus, and even to suppose that it was a squa-~
lus maximus ?


* Plate ix. fig. 2y As


%


428 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMALé


Par? of that evidence, founded on the compa-
«vison of some organs belonging to the Squalus and
the animal of Stronsa, has been already detailed ;
the remaining part is in the following affidavits.
The solemn declarations in these affidavits, it must
be confessed, do not always agree, even where they
relate to the same things; and part of this differ-
ence may have arisen, from the persons who emitted
the declarations not being accustomed to the acy
curacy required in zoological descriptions, —from
their having seen the animal separately, at diffe-
rent periods, in different states, and in different
positions. Be these declarations, however, true or
false, there is nothing in them which, when taken
literally, indicates a Squalus or a Squalus maxi-
mus. This Mr Home seems willing to admit,
and therefore is at some pains to explain how the


sight of a Squalus, or, more probably, a Squalus


maximus, produced such truly wonderful effects
on the senses, the judgment, the imagination, and
the veracity of these Orcadians, as to have made
their solemn declarations so widely different from
nature and from truth. If these odd effects on
the minds of the Orcadians, could have proceeded


ie | tes


-.
a


* 1X2 cE


Baroy prog ge sry wb s Bray si


“Spe


hh


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. 42g


from nothing else than the sight of a Squalus or a
Squalus maximus, Mr Home is certainly entitled
to the credit of having discovered, if not a new
species of fish, at least a new and remarkable va-
riety of the human species, inhabiting the Ork-
neys.

Our own opinion is, that the facts before us
lead to nothing precise and determinate as to the
species or genus of the animal; and that if the
characters of genus and species be to rest on such
vague and conjectural evidence, as that which
proves this animal a Squalus, we'may as soon get
acquainted with nature through the dreams of
cosmogony, or the tales of a tub, as through the
observations of natural history.


Outlines of the two animals which Mr Home
has considered as of the same species, are given
m Plate XI. The outline, however, of the animal
of Stronsa, we can easily suppose, is not very accu-
rate; though, accurate or not, it must have had
some general resemblance to the original, as it re-
called the appearance of the animal to the recol-
lection of those who had seen it.

The story of Pontoppidan’s Snake, the account
of this animal of Stronsa, and what is related of
another animal seen near the coast of Coll, by the


.*


430 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL.


Reverend Mr Maclean *, seem grounds sufficient
to awaken the curiosity of naturalists, who, if
were to be wished, were always men of accurate
discrimination; and sound judgment,—not prone


to indulge a passion for the marvellous, nor apt to


be infected with the silly conceit, that their
knowledge of nature is already so complete, that
little of importance remains to be discovered.


_* See Mr MacteEan’s letter, swbhjoined to the affida-
vits.


OP ag


aaa


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. 43%


ee ae RO Oy RE a ee etter


THE
AFFIDAVITS


At Kirkwall, Nov. 10. 1808.


In presence of Dr Rosert Groat, Physician
m Kirkwall, and Matcoitm Laine, Esq;
M.P. Two of his Majesty’s Justices of the
Peace for the County of Orkney,


Comprartp Tuomas ForBeRINGHAME, house-
carpenter in Kirkwall; who solemnly decla-
red, That being in Stronsa during the gales of
wind in October last, he went to see the strange
fish that was driven ashore in Rothiesholm Bay :
That he measured its length with a foot-rule,
which was exactly fifty-five feet, from the junc-
tion of the head and neck, where there was the
appearance of an ear, to the tail: That the length
of the neck, from the ear to the shoulder, was ten
feet three inches, as nearly as he recollects. And
being shewn a drawing of the animal, he declared,


£52 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL.


That the neck appeared to him to be too long :
That the fins or arms, or, as they were called on
the istand, the wings of the animal, were jointed
to the body nearer the ridge of the back than they
appear in the drawing: That the toes were less
spread out, and tapering more to a point, unless
when purposely lifted up; but were not webbed
unless for the space of an inch and a half in
breadth, where they joined each other; and the
length seemed to be about eight inches: That he
measured one of the wings next the head, which


' was four feet and a half in length, and m shape,


from the first joint to the extremity, it resembled
a goose-wing without the feathers: That the
hollow between the snout and the upper part of
the skull, appeared to him not to be quite so deep
as represented in the drawing: That in every
other respect the drawing appears to be so exact,
that if the fish had not been mentioned, it would
have brought it to his recollection : That from the
ridge of the back to the belly, the body appeared
to be four feet in depth, and the circumference
rather oval than round; but that he did not mea-
sure either: That the mane or bristles of the back
extended from the shoulder to within two feet and
a half of the tail, and were of a shining appear-
ance when wet; but shrunk up, and turned yel-
low, when dried: That the mane was thin, about
two inches and a half in breadth towards the
shoulder, and two inches in breadth at the tail:


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL, | 433


That the skin seemed to be elastic when com-
pressed, and of a greyish colour, without any
scales: it was rough to the feeling, on drawing
the hand over it, towards the head; but was
smooth as velvet when the hand was drawn to-
wards the tail: That the extremity of the tail was
about two inches in thickness, and somewhat
rounded ; and as he saw no part of the bones, he |
cannot say whether any part of the tail had been
broken. off or not: That the eyes appeared to be
no larger than those of a seal: That there were
two spout-holes on each side of the neck, about —
an inch and a fourth in diameter, and at the same
distance from the head as appears in the drawing:
That he lifted up the snout, and examined the
, throat, which was too narrow to admit his hand:
That a part of the bones of the lower jaw, resem-
bling those of a dog, were remaining at that time,
with some appearance of teeth, which were soft,
and could be bent by the strength of the hand:
- That he observed no nipples, or organs of genera-
tion; the belly having been burst open by the
violence of the sea: That the stomach was about
the size of a ten gallon cask; and the bowels
about the bulk of those of a cow: That the
bristles of the back, which had been pulled off
through curiosity, were luminous in the dark,
while they continued wet. And all this he de-
elares to be truth, &c. |
(Signed) THomas ForHERINGHAME.


Ee


434 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL,


Kirkwall, Nov. 19. 1808.


Compeared Joun PEACE, tenant in Douna-
toun in Rothiesholm ; and being interrogated, s0-
lemnly declares, That on the 26th day of Septem-
ber last, he went a fishing off the east part of Ro-
thiesholm-head, when he perceived, as he imagi-
ned, a dead whale, on some sunk rocks, about a
quarter of ; a mile from the Head : That his atten-
tion was first directed to it by the sea-fowl scream-
ing and flocking about it ; and on approach of it,
in his boat, he found the middle part of it above ;
the surface of the water: That he then observed
it to be different from a whale, particularly i in ha-
ving fins or arms, one of which he raised with his
boat- hook above the surface of the water : That
this was one of the arms next the head, which was
larger and broader than the others nearer the tail;
and at that time the fin or arm was edged all
around, from the body to the extremity of the
toes, with a row of bristles about ten inches long, }
some of which he pulled off, and examined in the
boat : ‘That about ten days afterwards, a gale of
south-east wind came on, and the surge drove the
fish ashore on ‘Rothiesholm-head : That he mea-
sured it by fathoms, and found it about nine fa-
thoms, rather more than less; that is, about fifty-
four or fifty- five feet in length : That be observed
the six arms, or wings as they are calied on the |
island ; but perceived no part of the bristles then


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. 435 .


round the edges of the fins or arms, and supposes,
that being in a putrid state, they had been beaten
off by the sea, or wasted away: That a small part
of the belly was broke up when he saw it then,
from which the stomach, as he now supposes it to
have been, had fallen out: That the stomach,
which he took at first for the penis, was about —
four feet in length, and about the thickness of a
half anker cask: That he supposed it to have been
the penis, from the one end of it being joined to
the body; but on seeing it after it was opened, he
concluded it to have been the stomach, as it re-
sembied the second stomach of a cow: That he
did not measure the circumference of the animal,
but it appeared to be of the thickness of a middle
sized horse round the girth, of twelve or thirteen
hands high. And being shewn a drawing of the
animal, and desired to point out the resemblance
er difference, he declared, That the joint of the
_ foremost leg was broader than represented in the
drawing, being more rounded from the body to
the toes, and narrower at the upper end than at its
junction with the toes: That the dimb itself was
larger than the hinder ones, and the uppermost
joint or shoulder was altogether attached to the
body: That in all other respects the drawing ap-
pears to him to be an exact resemblance of the
fish, as it lay on the beach: That the mane came
-no farther than the shoulder, and extended to the
tail, part of which appeared to have been broken
E¢ 2 :


436 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL.


off: That the length of the neck, the situation of
the snout-holes, and of the eye; the shape of the
snout, the position and distance of the limbs from
each other, appear to him to be exactly preserved
in the drawing: That the lower j jaw was awant-
ing when he saw it: That the fish was of a grey- ©
ish colour: That he observed no nipples or organs
of generation, unless as above mentioned: That.
the part of the belly which was burst open, and
from which the stomach had fallen out, was be-
tween the two limbs that are situated in the
middle of the animal. And allthis he solemnly
declares to be truth, = declares he cannot
write.


Eodem die.

Compeared Mr GrorGE SHERAR, tacksman
of Rothiesholm, in the island of Stronsa ; who
being interrogated, solemnly declared, That on —
the 20th of October, being in Rothiesholm-head,
he saw the crew of John Peace’s boat examining
something on the water, which he took to be a
dead whale : That about ten days afterwards, a
gale of east wind having taken place, he went to
see if the whale was driven ashore, and found it in
a creek, lying on its back, about a foot under wa-
ter ; and from the view which he had of its figure,
length and limbs, his curiosity induced him to re- ~
turn a day or two after the gale had abated, when
he found it thrown upon the beach, a little below


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. 437 -


high-water mark, and lying on its belly, as repre-
sented in the drawing: That he returned next
morning with a foot-rule, purposely to measure it,
and found it to be exactly fifty-five feet in
length, from the hole in the top of the skull,
(which he has brought to town with him), to the
extremity of the tail: That the length of the
neck was exactly fifteen feet, from the same hole
to the beginning of the mane: That he measured
also the circumference of the animal as accurately
as he could, which was about ten feet, more or
less; and the whole body, where the limbs were
attached to it, was about the same circumference ?
That the lower jaw of mouth was awanting ; but
there were some substances or bones of the jaw
remaining, when he first examined it, which are
now away: That it had two holes on each side of
- the neck, besides the one on the back of the skull:
That the mane or bristles were about fourteen
inches in length each, of a silvery colour, and
particularly luminous in the dark, before they
were dried: That the upper part of the limbs,
which answers to the shoulder-blade, was joined
to the body like the shoulder-blade of a cow,
forming a part of the side: That a part of the
tail was awanting, being incidentally broken off
at the extremity ; where the last joint of which
was bare, was an inch and a half in breadth:
That the bones were of a gristly nature, like those ©
ef a halibut, the back-bone excepted, which was
Ee 3


438 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL.


the only solid bone in the body : That the tail was
quite flexible, turning in every direction, as he
lifted it; and he supposes the neck to have been
equally so, from its appearance at the time: That
he has brought in, to deliver to Mr Laing, the
skull, two joints of one of the largest limbs, next
the head, with different parts of the back-bone,
beside the bones that were formerly sent in: That
there were either five or six toes upon each paw,
about nine inches long, and of a soft substance:
That the toes were separate from each other, and
not webbed, as far as he could observe ; and that
the paw was about half a foot each way, in length
and breadth : That a few days thereafter, a gale of
wind came on, and drove it to another part of the
shore, where it was broken to pieces by the surge,
and when Mr Petrie came out to take a drawing
of it, no part of the body remained entire: That
he endeavoured to convey an idea of the animal to
Mr Petrie, by drawing the figure of it as. accu-
rately as he could, with chalk, on the table, ex-
actly as it lay upon the shore, after which Mr Pe-
trie made six or seven different sketches or plans
of the fish, before he could bring it to correspond,
in each minute particular, with the strong idea
which he retains of its appearance: That he was
the more attentive to.its shape, dimensions and fi-
gure, in order to be able to give an accurate ac-
count of it to any travellers that might come to
Rothiesholm ; and that he is ready to make oath,


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. 435


that the drawing is am exact resemblance of the
fish, as it appeared when he measured it; and
corresponds in all particulars with the idea which
he entertains of the figure, dimensions, and pro-
portions of the fish: That the substance of the
body appeared like coarse, ill- coloured beef, inter-
larded with fat or tallow, without the least resem-
blarice or affinity to fish; but when put into a
lamp, and the lamp bineea on the fire, it neither
flamed nor melted, but burned away like a grist-
ly substance: That he perceived no teeth in the
upper jaw; the lower jaw and tongue being a-
wanting, and the palate also away: That the aper-
ture of the throat appeared to be so wide, that he
might have put his foot down through it: That —
_the joints of the limbs weve not united by a ball
and socket, but were lapped overt each other, and
united by some means which he doés not com-
prehend: That there were two canals, one above,
and another below the back-bone, large enough to
admit one’s finger, and extending from the verte-
bre of the neck, to the extremity of the tail, con-
_ taining two ligaments, which, he supposed, ena-
bled the animal to raise itself up, or to bend its
body in a spiral form: That a tract of strong
easterly wind had prevailed, before the body was
discovered upon the shore, and that he saw the
body on two or three different occasions, after he
had measured it, and before it went to pieces.
And all this he declares to be truth, &c.
(Signed) GEO. SHERAR.


Ee4


440 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL.


Compeared Mr Witi1am Fotszrrer, tacks-
man of Whitehall, in the island of Stronsa :
who being interrogated, solemnly declared, That
having heard that it was a dead whale that had
come on shore in Rothiesholm-head, he did not see
the body till about the 28th day of October, when
it had gone to pieces: That he saw about nine or
ten feet of the back-bone, and some bones of the
paws, and what was supposed to be the stomach,
which last he had the curiosity to open; that it

_was about four feet long, and as thick as a firkin,
but flatter: That the membranes that formed the
divisions, extended quite across the supposed sto-
mach, and were about three-sixteenths of an imch
in thickness, and at the same distance from each
other, and of the same substance, with the sto-


mach itself: That the section of the stomach, af-


ter it was opened, had the appearance of a wea-
ver’s reed : That he opened about a fourth part of
the supposed stomach, which contained nothing
but a reddish substance, like blood and water, and


a


emitted a fetid smell: That he was very doubtful —


at the time whether it was really the stomach or
not; but that each end of it had the appearance
of terminating in a gut. And all this he solemnly
declares to be truth, &c.

(Signed) Wm. FoLsEtrTer.


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL, 441


The said Mr Grorce Suerar being again
interrogated, declares, That he examined the sup-
posed stomach, after it had been opened by Mr
Folsitter, and that he laid it open to the farther
end: That there was something like a gut at the
end which he opened, about two inches long, with
a small aperture: That the stomach had the same
appearance from end to end, and contained no-
thing but a substance like blood and water : That
the large bone, of which a drawing was taken, was
considered as the collar-bone; and that it was si-
tuated with the broad and thick parts downwards,
and the open part towards the vertebre of the
back: That he observed no appearance of fins
about the neck or breast, or other parts of the bo-
dy, except the six paws already described. And
all this he solemnly declares to be truth, &c.

(Signed ) GEO. SHERAR.


442 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL.


LETTER from the Reverend Mr MacLean of
Small Isles.


|


To THE SECRETARY OF THE WERNERIAN NATURAL
Historr Socierr.


SIR, Eigg Island, 24th April 1809.


Your letter of the ist instant I received, and
would have written in answer thereto sooner, had
I not thought it desirable to examine others re
lative to the animal of which you wish me to give
a particular account: . shania

According to my best recollection, I saw it in
June 180%, not on the coast of Eigg, but on that
of Coll. Rowing along that coast, I observed, at
about the distance of half a mile, an object to
windward, which gradually excited astonishment.
At first view, it appeared like a small rock.
‘Knowing there was no rock in that situation, I
fixed my eyes on it close. Then I saw it eleva-


ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL. 443


ted considerably above the level of the sea, and af-
ter a slow movement, distinctly perceived one of
its eyes. Alarmed at the unusual appearance and
magnitude of the animal, I steered so as to be at
no great distance from the shore. When nearly
in a line betwixt it and the shore, the monster di-
| recting its head (which still continued above wa-
ter) towards us, plunged violently under water.
Certain that he was in chace of us, we plied hard
to get ashore. Just as we leaped out ona rock,
taking a station as high as we conveniently could,
we saw it coming rapidly under water towards
the stern of our boat. When within a few yards
of the boat, finding the water shallow, it raised its
monstrous head above water, and, by a winding
course, got, with apparent difficulty, clear of the
creek where our boat lay, and where the monster
seemed in danger of being imbayed. It conti-
nued to move off, with its head above water, and
with the wind, for about half a mile, before we
lost sight of it.—Its head was rather broad, of a
form somewhat oval. Its.neck somewhat smaller.
Its shoulders, if I can so term them, considerably
broader, and thence it tapered towards the tail,
which last it kept pretty low in the water, so that
a view of it could not be taken so distiisctly as I
wished. It had no fin that I could perceive, and
seemed to me to move progressively by undula-
tion up and down. Its length I believed to be
from 70 to 80 fect. When nearest to me, it did


444 ON THE ORKNEY ANIMAL,


not raise its head wholly above water, so that the
neck being under water, I could perceive no shi-
ning filaments thereon, if it had any. Its pro-
gressive motion under water I took to be rapid,
from the shortness of the time it took. to come up
to the boat. When the head was above water, its
motion was not near so quick ; and when the head
was most elevated, it appeared evidently to take a
view of distant objects. |

About the time I saw it, it was seen about the
island of Canna. The crews of thirteen fishing-
boats, I am told, were so much terrified at its ap-
pearance, that they in a body fled from it to the
nearest creek for safety. On the passage from
Rum to Canna, the crew of one boat saw it co-
ming towards them, with the wind, and its head
high above water. One of the crew pronounced
its head as large as a little boat, and each of its
eyes as large as a plate. The men were much
terrified, but the monster offered them no mole-
station.—From those who saw it, I could get no
interesting particulars additional to those above


™~


mentioned.
I remain, Sir, &c.


Donatp MAcLEAN.


L445]
