A Collection of Esoteric Writings
========================================
T. Subba Row (1895) — Subba Row's theosophical writings — the great Indian theosophist's doctrinal legacy. Source: https://archive.org/details/collectionofesot00subbiala. Public domain.

COLLECTION 

OF 

ESOTERIC  WRITINGS 

OF 

T.  SUBBA  ROW,   F.T.S.,  B  A.,  2  L. 

PUBLISHED  FOR    THE    BOMBAY  THEOSOPHICAL 
PUBLICATION  FUND 

BY 

RAJARAM    TOOKARAM. 

S^mfea^. 

PRIN-TEDAT    *'THBTATt4-VlVPCaAKA"   PUBSS. 

11  iO. 

Price  Re.  1-8. 

THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 

i 

THEOSOPHICAL 

BOOK  CONCERN 

Krotona,  Hollywood 

California 

Esoteric  Writings  by  T.  Siibba  Roio.  Pub- 
lished by  The  Theosophical  Publishing  House, 
Adyar,  Madras,  India.     Price,  cloth,  $4.25. 

This  revised  and  enlarged  edition  of  T. 
Subba  Row's  Esoteric  Writings  will  be  wel- 
comed by  students  of  the  sacred  writings  of 
the  East.  The  author  was  a  valued  member 
of  the  Theosophical  Society  in  the  early  days 
and  his  unexpected  death  at  the  age  of  thirty- 
four  was  a  great  loss  to  the  Society  and  a 
shock  to  its  members. 

The  present  collection  of  his  writings  con- 
sists mainly  of  articles  contributed  to  the 
Theosophist,  and  many  of  them  are  of  a  con- 
troversial nature,  consisting  largely  of  reviews 
of  articles  contributed  to  the  magazine  and 
discussions  of  occult  subjects. 

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 

http://www.archive.org/details/collectionofesotOOsubbiala 

COLLECTION 

OF 

ESOTERIC  WRITINGS 

OF 

T.  SUBBA  ROW,   P.T.S..  B.A.,  B.L. 

PUBLISHED  FOR    THE   BOMBAY  TMEOSOPHtCAL 
PUBLICATION  FUND 

BY 

RAJARAM   TOOKARAM. 

^fe®>-^\®^^- 

PRtStBt)  AT    "  THB  TaTVA-VIVBCHAKA  "  PRBSS. 

1910. 
J'rice  Re,  IS. 

CONTENTS.        ■S>fV/c^ 
/f/5 

Pages. 
1      A  Sketch  ot  the  Life  of  the  late  T.  Subba  Rao,  B.  A., 

B.L.,  F.  T.  S i— iv 

2.  The  Twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  1 —  13 

3.  The  Aryan-Arhat  Esoteric  Tenents  oo  the    Seven-fold 

Principle  in  Man        ...          ...          ...          ...          ...  14 —  33 

4.  Appendix  by  Madame  H.  P.  Blavateky         34 —  39 

5.  The  Philosophy  of  Spirit          40—72 

6.  Esoteric  Spiritaalidoi  ...          ...  72 —  83 

7.  A  Personal  and  an  Impersonal  God ...  83 —  98 

8.  Will 98—102 

9.  Adwaita  Philosophy 103 — 107 

10.  •'H- X" and  G>>d  Personal  and  Impersonal 107—108 

11.  In  re  Adwaita  Philosophy       109 — H5 

12.  The  Ahnora  Swami  upon   Philosophy  in  general   and 

our  failings  in  particular...  ...  ...  ...  115 jlg 

13.  The  Swami  of  Alraora  to  his  Opponents         118 130 

14.  Prakriti  and  Purusha 130 — 140 

15.  Shri  Shankaraoharya's  Date  and  Doctrine       ...  ...  14o 162 

IC.     Age  of  Lord    Buddha's  Death  ...         ...  ...  i(;2 165 

17.  Buddhism  and  Ancient  Wisdom-Religion       166 — 167 

18.  The  "Occult  World" 167—173 

19.  Notes  on  Occult  Philosophy 174 — 185 

20.  Thoughts  of  Kama-Loka         185—191 

21.  Nadigr.inthams  and  their  Interpreters...  ...  ...  191 — 203 

22.  Places  of  Pilgrimage  in  India 204 — 213 

23.  The  Virgin  of  the  World         213 

24.  Correspondence — "The  Virgin  of  the  World" 226 233 

25.  BhagavadGita 234—240 

26.  The  Idyl  of  the   White  Lotus 240 252 

27.  Notes  on  Hata-Yoga 253 255 

28.  Classification  of  •'Principles" ...  256 268 

29.  The  Contstitution  of  the  Microcosm       ...         ...         ...  269 280 

30.  Re-Classification  of  Principles...  ...         ...         ...  281 286 

31.  The  Constitution  of  the  Microcosm       ...  ...         ...  287 298 

82.  The  Bhagavad  Gita  and  the  Microcosmic  Principles    ...  299 308 

83.  The  Forms  of  Vak 307—308 

84.  The  Occultism  of  Southern  India        309 325 

85.  A  Ijetfer  to  Madame  U.  P.  Blavatsky 316 

86.  Observation  on   "a  letter  to  the    Fellows  of  the  London 

Lodge   of  the    Theosophical  Society,  by  the  President  and 

a  Vice  President  of  the  Lodge" 317 356 

PREFACE. 

Whilst  presenting  this  little  volame  to  the  pnblic,  vre 
cannot  but  pay  dae  tribute  to  the  memory  of  one  who  had 
done  such  good  service  to  the  cause  of  Occult  Science. 
The  late  lamented  Mr.  T.  Subba  Row,  b.a.,  b.l.,  of  the  Madras 
University,  was  one  of  the  highest  Occultists  of  Southern 
India.  We  tried  our  utmost  to  collect  as  many  facts  relating 
to  his  life  as  we  conld  possibly  get  from  his  relatives  and 
friends,  to  enable  ns  to  write  a  short  sketch  of  his  life  to  go 
with  this  book.  But,  we  regret  to  say,  that  our  endeavours  in 
this  direction  have  been  without  fruit.  We  have,  therefore, 
had  no  alternative  but  to  reproduce  the  notice  of  his  death 
taken  by  Col.  H.  S.  Olcott,  in  the  "  Theo8ophist,*'in  its  place. 

Mr.  Subba  Row  was  a  member  of  the  Theosophical  Society,and 
was  highly  respected  not  only  by  all  its  members,  but  also  by 
Madame  H.  P.  Blavatsky,  for  his  great  erudition  and  profici- 
ency in  almost  all  the  branches  of  Occult  Science.  Madame 
Blavatsky  used  always  to  consult  him  whenever  there  were 
diflficult  and  intricate  problems  to  be  solved.  And  we  know 
she  had,  at  one  time,  sent  the  manuscripts  of  her  most 
valuable  work,  "  The  Secret  Doctrine,*'  to  him  for  correction 
and  alteration  ;  but  he  declined  to  undertake  the  work 
because  he  believed  the  world  was  not  yet  prepared  to  accept 
the  disclosures  of  those  secrets  which  had  been,  for  good 
reason,  hitherto  kept  within  the  knowledge  of  the  sacred  few. 

Mr.  T.  Subba  Row  had  written  no  book  on  Occult  Science, 
but  he  has  left  behind  him  a  series  of  lectures  and  articles 
which  he  used  every  now  and  then  to  contribute  to  the 
"  Theosophist,  "  and  which  display  the  real  depth  of  his 
knowledge,  and  his  worth  as  an  Occultist.  He,  in  the  year 
1887,  at  the  Convention  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  held  at 
Adyar,  Madras,  gave  a  course  of  lectures  to  assist  Theosophists 
and  others  in  their  study  of  the  Philosophy  of  Bhagwad  Gita. 
We  all  know  how  difficult  to  understand  is  the  Philosophy  of 
the  Gita,  notwithstanding  the  commentaries  written  thereon 
in  Sanskrit  as  well  as  in  many  modern  Eastern  and  even 
Western  languages.  The  reason  of  this  is  obvious.  Every- 
one acquainted  with  the  description  of  the  great  war  between 
the  P^ndavas  and  the  Kauravas  knows  that  the  Bhagwad 
Gita  was  preached  by  Bhagwan  Shri»  Krishna  to  his  friend 

11 

and  disciple  Arjaa,  becaase  of  the  disinclination  expressed  by 
the  latter  to  fight  ou  the  battlefield.  This  description,  as  a 
matter  of  coarse,  as  there  was  no  time  to  be  lost,  must  have 
been  recited  in  a  short  space  of  time,  iu  the  form  of  A[>horisra8 
in  short  sentences,  conveying  a  deep  hidden  meaning.  Shri 
Krishna  knew  that  Arjun  was  able  accurately  to  comprehend 
in  all  its  fullness  the  significance  of  this  teaching. 

Mr.  Siibba  Row  has  written  a  commentary  on  this  Philosophy, 
and  has  done  his  best  to  make  it  as  elucidative,  consistent, 
and  clear  as  possible.  We  have  printed  these  lectures  iu  a 
separate  book,  and  the  readers  will  find  on  its  stud)*  what  an 
amount  of  learning  the  lecturer  must  have  had. 

These  very  lectures  are  conspicuous  for  the  fact  of  having 
created  between  Mr.  Snbba  Row  and  Madame  Blavatsky  a 
difference  of  opinion  regarding  the  Koshas  (^rt)  or  principles 
of  which  the  human  being  is  formed.  Tliis  resulted  iua 
written  controversy  between  them,  which  the  reader  will  fiud 
reprinted  in  this  book. 

Though  most  of  the  articles  reproduced  here  are  of  contro- 
versial character,  the  reader  will  find  them  of  sterling  worth  and 
merit  on  account  of  the  originality  of  thought  displayed  and  the 
able  treatment  of  the  various  points  controverted.  And, 
moreover,  they  teem  with  learned  and  useful  suggestions  for 
progress  of  the  students  of  Occult  Science.  Those  who  had  read 
and  studied  these  articles  in  the  various  numbers  of  the  "  Theo- 
sophist,  "  as  they  appeared  from  time  to  time,  had  more  than 
once  requested  us  to  reprint  them  in  a  collected  form  for  the 
benefit  to  students  of  Occult  learning. 

Besides  these  articles,  we  are  in  possession  of  several  notes 
of  a  miscellaneous  character,  regarding  the  private  instruc- 
tions given  by  Mr.T.  Subba  Row  to  the  "chosen  few  "who  had 
the  good  fortune  to  be  in  close  contact  with  him.  But  we  are 
sorry  to  say  that  they  are  incomplete,  and  were  given  by  him 
only  under  the  pledge  of  secrecy.  It  has,  therefore,  been 
thought  desirable  not  to  publish  them.  Mr.  T.  Subba  Row  had 
also  made  contributions  to  the  local  newspapers  and  maga- 
zines, but  we  think  it  unnecessary  to  reprint  these,  as  they 
are  solely  on  questions  political  and  social. 

Here  we  cannot   help  thanking   our  respected  brother,  the 
Hon'ble  Mr.  Subramaniyar   for  the  valuable  help,  pecuniary 
and  otherwise,   he  has  rendered  us  iu  publishing  some  of  our 
works. 
Bombay,  Ut  April  1895,  T.  T. 

A  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE   OF  THE  LATE  ' 
T.  SUBBAROW,  B.A.,B.L.,  F.  T.  S. 

Thb  announcement,  I  am  now  compelled  to  make  of  the 
death  of  this  brilliant  yonng  Indian  mystical  philosopher 
will  shock  the  Theosophical  reading  public.  Wherever  our 
work  has  extended,  ^tbere  has  his  reputation  spread.  He 
was  an  intellectual  phenomenon,  and  his  mental  history  goes 
as  far  as  anytliing  conceivable  to  support  the  theory  of 
palingenesis.  The  facts  bearing  upon  the  case,  as  I  derived 
them  from  his  venerable  mother  on  the  day  of  the  cremation, 
will  presently  be  given.  When  he  last  visited  the  Head- 
quarters, the  first  week  in  April  last,  the  mysterious  cutaneous 
disease  to  which  he  ultimately  succumbed,  had  begun  to 
show  itself  in  an  outbreak  of  boils.  Neither  he  nor  either  of 
US  dreamt  that  it  was  at  all  serious.  But  shortly  after  he 
had  to  keep  to  his  room,  then  to  his  lounge,  and  he  never 
went  out  again  save  once,  when  he  was  taken  to  a  different 
house  for  change  of  air.  In  the  beginning  of  June  he  sent 
me  a  touching  request  to  come  and  see  him,  which  of  course, 
I  did.  He  was  a  piteous  sight  :  his  body  a  mass  of  sores 
from  crown  to  sole,  and  he  not  able  to  bear  even  a  sheet  over 
him,  nor  to  lie  in  any  comfortable  position,  not  get  sound 
sleep.  He  was  depressed  and  despairing,  and  begged  me  to 
try  if  I  could  not  help  him  a  little  by  mesmerism.  I  did 
try  with  all  my  will,  and  it  seemed  with  some  success,  for 
he  began  to  mend  from  that  evening,  and  at  my  third  visit 
he  and  1  thought  he  was  convalescent,  and  so  informed  his 
unhappy  family.  But  suddenly  there  came  a  relapse,  his 
disease  finished  its  course  rapidly,  and,  on  Tuesday,  the  24th 
June,  at  10  p.  m.,  he  expired,  without  a  word  or  a  sign  to 
those  about  him. 

The  last  wordly  business  he  attended  to  was  to  declare  on 
the  morning  of  24th  idem  in  the  presence  of  his  relatives 
and  friends,  among  them,  Dewan  Bahadur  P.  Shrinivasa  Rao, 

11 

that  he  had  anthorized  his  wife  to  adopt  a  son  after   his 
death— there  being  no  issue  of  his  marriage. 

At  noon  on  that  day,  he  said  his  Gara  called  him  to 
come,  he  was  going  to  die,  he  was  now  about  beginning 
his  tdpas  (  mystical  invocations  ),  and  he  did  not  wish  to  be 
disturbed.  From  that  time  on,  he  spoke  to  no  one.  When 
he  died,  a  great  star  fell  from  the  firmament  of  Indian  con- 
temporary thought.  Between  Subba  Row,  H.  P.  Blavatsky, 
Damodar  and  myself  there  was  a  close  friendship.  He  was 
chiefly  instrumental  in  having  us  invited  to  visit  Madras 
in  188::^,  and  in  inducing  us  to  choose  this  city  as  the  per- 
manent Head-quarters  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  Subba 
Row  was  in  confidential  understanding  with  us  about 
Damodar's  mystical  pilgrimage  towards  the  North,  and  more 
than  a  year  after  the  latter  crossed  into  Tibet,  he  wrote  him 
about  himself  and  his  plans.  Subba  Row  told  me  of  this 
long  ago,  and  reverted  to  the  subject  the  other  day  at  one  of 
my  visits  to  his  sick-bed.  A  dispute — due  in  a  measure  to  third 
parties — which  widened  into  a  breach,  arose  between  H.  P.  B. 
and  himself  about  certain  philosophical  questions,  bub  to 
the  last  he  spoke  of  her,  to  us  alid  to  his  family,  in  the  old 
friendly  way.  When  we  last  saw  each  other  we  had  a  long 
talk  about  esoteric  philosophy,  and  he  said  that  as  soon  as 
he  could  get  out,  he  should  come  to  Head-quarters  and  draft 
several  metaphysical  questions  that  he  wished  Mr.  Fawcett 
to  discuss  with  him  in  the  Theosophiat.  His  interest  in  our 
movement  was  unabated  to  the  last,  he  read  the  Theosophist 
regularly  and  was  a  subscriber  to  H.  P.  B.'s  Lucifer. 

Our  great  Vedantin  was  of  the  Niyogi  caste  of  the 
Smartha  (  Advaita  )  Brahmaus.  He  was  born  on  the  6th 
July  1856.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  aged  but  nearly 
34  years.  His  native  country  was  the  Godavery  District  on 
the  Goromandal  Coast  of  India  ;  his  vernacular  tongue  the 
Telngu.  His  grandfather  was  the  Sheristedar  of  the  District, 
and  his  maternal  uncle  was  Dewan  (  Prime  Minister  )  to  the 
Rajah  of  Pittapur.    His  father  died   when   he   was  but  six 

months'  baby,  and  the  nncle  brought  him  up.  He  first  attended 
the  Goconada  Hindu  School,  where  he  was  not  at  all  suspected 
of  possessing  any  surprising  talent.  He  passed  his  first 
Matriculation  examination  at  the  Hindu  School,  Goconada,  then 
under  the  direction  of  Mr.  J.  Kenny.  From  thence  he  passed 
in  1872,  into  the  Madras  Presidency  College,  where  his  career 
was  a  brilliant  one,  and  ended  in  his  passing  B.  A.  in  1876 
as  the  first  of  the  University  in  his  class.  In  the  latter  part 
of  the  same  year  that  astute  satesman,  Sir  T.  Madhava 
Row,  then  Dewan  of  Baroda,  oflfered  him  the  Registrarship 
of  the  High  Court  of  that  State,  and  Subba  Row  stopped 
there  about  a  year,  but  then  returned  to  Madras  and  prepared 
himself  for  and  passed  the  B.  L.  examination,  number  4  in 
the  class.  Having  adopted  the  law  as  his  profession,  he 
served  his  apprenticeship  under  Messrs.  Grant  and  Laing 
and  was  enrolled  a  Vakil  (  Pleader  )  of  the  High  Court  in  the 
latter  part  of  1880.  His  practice  became  lucrative,  and 
might  have  been  made  much  more  so  had  he  given  less 
attention  to  philosophy  ;  however,  as  he  told  me,  he  was 
drawn  by  an  irresistible  attraction.  As  an  example  of  his 
extraordinary  cleverness,  his  friends  cite  his  successful  passing 
of  the  examination  in  geology  for  the  Statutory  Civil  Service 
in  1885,  though  it  was  a  new  subject  to  him,  and  he  had  had 
only  a  week  for  preparation.  He  leaves  a  young  widow 
of  24  years,  and  an  aged  mother — herself  a  learned  Brahman 
lady — who  mourns  ths  loss  of  her  great  son,  the  pride  of  her 
soul,  most  bitterly.  The  cremation  took  place  at  9  o'clock 
on  the  morning  after  his  death.  Our  brother,  Judge  P. 
Sreeuivas  Row,  was  with  him  at  the  last,  and  T.  Vijiara- 
ghava  Charlu  saw  him  two  hours  before  the  event  occurred. 

It  is  remarked  above  that  T.  Subba  Row  gave  no  early 
signs  of  possessing  mystical  knowledge :  even  Sir  T.  Madhava 
Row  did  not  suspect  it  in  him  while  he  was  serving  under 
him  at  Baroda.  I  particularly  questioned  his  mother  on  this 
point,  and  she  told  me  that  her  son  first  talked  metaphysics 
after  forming  a  connection  with  the  Founders  of  the  Theo- 
sophical  Society  :    a  connection  which  began  with  a  corres- 

iV 

pondence  between  himself  and  H.  P.  B.  and  Damodar,  and 
became  personal  after  oar  meeting  him,  in  1882,  at  Madras. 
It  was  as  though  a  storehouse  of  occult  experience,  long 
forgotten,  had  been  suddenly  opened  to  him  ;  recollection  of 
his  last  preceding  birth  came  in  upon  him ;  he  recognized  his 
Guru,  and  thenceforward  held  intercourse  with  him  and  other 
Mahatmas;  with  some,  personally  at  our  Head-quarters. 
with  others  elsewhere  and  by  correspondence.  He  told  his 
mother  that  H.  P.  B.  was  a  great  Yogi,  and  that  he  had  seen 
many  strange  phenomena  in  her  presence.  His  stored  up 
knowledge  of  Sanskrit  literature  came  back  to  him,  and  his 
jTbrother-iu-law  told   me   that  if  you  would  recite  any  verse  of 

y  jGita,  Brahma-Hutras  or  Upanishads,  he  could  at  once  tell  you 
jwhence  it  was  taken  and  in  what  connection  employed.  Those 
who  had  the  fortune  to  hear  his  lectures  on  Bhagvad  Gita 
before  the  T.  S.  Convention  of  1886  at  Adyar,  can  well  believe 
this,  so  perfect  seemed  his  mastery  of  that  peerless  work. 
For  a  man  of  his  abilities,  he  left  scarcely  any  monument 
the  paper  she  contributed  to  these  pages  and  the  one-volume 
Report  of  his  four  Adyar  Lectures  being  almost  his  entire 
literary  remains.  As  a  conversationalist  he  was  most  brilliant 
and  interesting  ;  an  afternoon's  sitting  with  him  was  as 
edifying  as  the  reading  of  a  solid  book.  But  this  mystical 
side  of  his  character  he  showed  only  to  kindred  souls.  What 
may  seem  strange  to  some  is  the  fact  that,  while  he  was 
obedient  as  a  child  to  his  mother  in  wordly  afiairs,  he  was 
strangely  reticent   to  her,  as  he  was  to  all  his  relatives  and 

t  .  ordinary  acquaintances,  about  spiritual  matters.  His  constant 
I  answer  to  her  importunities  for  occult  instruction  was  that 
he  "  Dared  not  reveal  any  of  the  secrets  entrusted  to  him  by 
his  Guru."  He  lived  his  occult  life  alone.  That  he  was 
habitually  so  reserved,  gives  the  more  weight  to  the  con- 
fidential statements  he  made  to  the  members  cf  his  own 
household.  H.  S.  0. 

The  above,  having  been   considered  in   family-council,   was  endorsed  as 
follows  :— "Read  and    found    correct.— D.  .T.   R.,   Brother-in-Law   of   T. 
Subba  Row. " 
—^Iheosophist. 

COLLECTION  OF  ESOTERIC  WRITINGS 

OF 

T.  SUBBA  ROW,  F.T^.,  B.A.  B.L. 
THE  TWELVE  SIGNS  OF  THE  ZODIAC, 

Thb  division  of  the  Zodiac  into  different  signs  dates  from 
immemorial  antiquity.  It  has  acquired  a  world-wide  celebrity 
and  is  to  be  found  in  the  astrological  systems  of  several 
nations.  The  invention  of  the  Zodiac  and  its  signs  has  been 
assigned  to  different  nations  by  different  antiquarians.  It  i» 
stated  by  some  that,  at  first,  there  were  only  ten  signs,  that 
one  of  these  signs  was  subsequently  split  up  into  two  separate 
signs,  and  that  a  new  sign  was  added  to  the  number  to  render 
the  esoteric  significance  of  the  division  more  profound  and  at 
the  same  time  to  conceal  it  more  perfectly  from  the  uniniti- 
ated public.  It  is  very  probable  that  the  real  philosophical 
conception  of  the  division  owes  its  origin  to  some  particular 
nation,  and  the  names  given  to  the  various  signs  might  have 
been  translated  into  the  languages  of  other  nations.  The 
principal  object  of  this  article,  however,  is  not  to  decide  which 
nation  had  the  honour  of  inventing  the  signs  in  question,  but 
to  indicate  to  some  extent  the  real  philosophical  meaning  in- 
volved therein  and  the  way  to  discover  the  rest  of  the  meaning 
which  yet  remains  undisclosed.  But  from  what  is  herein 
stated,  an  inference  may  fairly  be  drawn  that,  like  so  many 
other  philosophical  myths  and  allegories,  the  invention  of  the 
Zodiac  and  its  signs  owes  its  origin  to  ancient  India. 

What  then  is  the  real  origin  of  these  signs,  the  philosophical 
conception  which  the  Zodiac  and  its  signs  are  intended  to 
represent  ?  Do  the  various  signs  merely  represent  the  shape 
or  configuration  of  the  different  constellations  included  in  the 
divisions,  or,  are  they  simply  masks  designed    to    veil   some 

bidden  meaning  ?  The  former  snpposition  is  altogether  unten- 
able for  two  reasons,  viz, : — 

I.  The  Hindoos  were  acquainted  with  the  precession  of 
equinoxes  as  may  be  easily  seen  from  their  works  on  Astro- 
nomy and  from  the  almanacs  published  by  Hindu  astronomers. 
Consequently  they  were  fally  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  con- 
stellations in  the  various  Zodiacal  divisions  were  not  fixed. 
They  could  not,  therefore,  have  assigned  particular  shapes  to 
these  shifting  groups  of  fixed  stars  with  reference  to  the  divi- 
sions of  the  Zodiac  But  the  names  indicating  the  Zodiacal 
signs  have  been  allowed  to  remain  unaltered.  It  is  to  be 
inferred,  therefore,  that  the  names  given  to  the  various  signs 
have  no  connection  whatever  with  the  configurations  of  the 
constellations  included  in  them. 

II.  The  names  assigned  to  these  signs  by  the  ancient 
Sanskrit  writers  and  their  esoteric  or  literal  meanings  are  as 
follows  : — 

The  names  of  the  The  esoteric  literal 

signs.  meanings. 

1  Mesham Ram  or  Aries. 

2  Rishabham Bnll  or  Taurus. 

Z  Mithunam Twins  or  (rg/w/;««'(male  and  female), 

4  Karkatakam Cancer  or  Crab. 

5  Simham Lion  or  Leo. 

6  Kanya Virgo*  or  Virgin. 

7  Tula Libra  or  Balance. 

8  Vrischikam Scorpion. 

9  Dhanus Sagittarius  or  Archer. 

10  Makaram Capricornns  or  Crocodile. 

11  Kumbham Aquarias  or  Waterbearer. 

12  Meenam Pisces  or  Fish. 

*  Vir^-Scorpio,  when  none  but  the  initiates  knew  there  were  12  signs. 
Virgo-Scorpio  was  then  followed  (for  the  profane)  by  Sagittarius.  At  the 
middle  or  jnnction-point  where  now  stands  Libra  and  at  the  sign  now  called 
YirgOy  two  mystical  signs  were  inserted  which  remained  unintelKgible  to 
the  profane.— Ed.  Tbbos. 

The  figares  of  the  constellations  incladed  in  the  signs  at 
the  time  the  division  was  first  made  do  not  at  all  resemble 
the  shapes  of  the  animals,  reptiles  and  other  objects  denoted 
by  the  names  given  them-  The  truth  of  this  assertion  can  be 
ascertained  by  examining  the  configurations  of  the  various 
constellations.  Unless  the  shape  of  the  crocodile*  or  the 
crab  is  called  up  by  the  observer's  imagination,  there  is  very 
little  change  of  the  stars  themselves  suggesting  to  his  idea 
that  figure,  upon  the  blue  canopy  of  the  starry  firmament. 

If,  then,  the  constellations  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
origin  of  the  names  by  which  the  Zodiacal  divisions  are  in- 
^iicated,  we  have  to  seek  for  some  other  source  which  might 
have  given  rise  to  these  appelations.  It  becomes  my  object 
to  unravel  a  portion  of  the  mystery  connected  with  these 
Zodiacal  signs,  as  also  to  disclose  a  portion  of  the  sublime 
conception  of  the  ancient  Hindu  philosophy  which  gave  rise  to 
them.  The  signs  of  the  Zodiac  have  more  than  one  meaning. 
From  one  point  of  view  they  represent  the  different  stages  of 
creation  up  to  the  time  the  present  material  universe  with  the 
five  elements  came  into  phenomenal  existence.  As  the  author 
of  **Isis  Unveiled"  has  stated  in  the  second  volume  of  her 
admirable  work,  "the  key  should  be  turned  Seven  titnes^'  to 
understand  the  whole  philosophy  underlying  these  signs.  But 
I  shall  wind  it  only  once  and  give  the  contents  of  the  ^rst 
Chapter  of  the  History  of  Creation.  It  is  very  fortunate  that 
the  Sanskrit  names  assigned  to  the  various  divisions  by  the 
Aryan  philosophers  contain  within  themselves  the  key  to  the 
solution  of  the  problem.  Those  of  my  readers  who  have 
studied  to  some  extent  the  ancient  "  Mantra"  and  the  "Tantra 
Sastras"  f  of  India,  would  have  seen  that  very  often  Sanskrit 
words  are  made  to  convey  a  certain  hidden  meaning  by  means 
of  certain  well-known  pre-arranged  methods  and  a  tacit  con- 
vention,  while   their  literal  significance  is  something  quite 

*  This  coastellation  was  never  called  OrocodUe  by  the  Western  ancient 
«6troQomen  who  described  it  as  a  horned  goat  and  called  it  BO—Capriromufp 
—Ed.  Thkos. 

t  Works  on  Incantation  and  Magic. 

different  from  the  implied  meaning.  The  following  are  some  of 
the  rnles  which  may  help  an  enquirer  in  ferreting  out  the 
deep  significance  of  the  ancient  Sanskrit  nomenclatnre  nsed 
in  the  old  Aryan  myths  and  allegories:— 

1.  Find  ont  the  synonyms  of  the  word  used  which  have 

other  meanings. 

2.  Find  out  the  numerical  value  of  the  letters  compos- 
ing the  word  according  to  the  methods  given  in 
ancient  T&ntrik  works. 

3.  Examine  the  ancient  myths  or  allegories,  if  there  *re 

any,  which  have  any  special  c(mnection  with   the 
word  in  question. 

4.  Permute  the  different  syllables  composing  the  word 
and  examine  the  new  combinations  that  will  thus  be 
formed  and  their  meanings,  &c.,  &c. 

1  shall  now  apply  some  of  the  above   given  rules  to  the 
names  of  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

I.  Mesham.  One  of  the  synonyms  of  this  word  is  Aja 
Now,  Aja  literally  means  that  which  has  no  birth 
and  is  applied  to  the  Eternal  Brahmam  in  certain 
portions  of  the  Upanishads.  So  the  first  sign  is 
intended  to  represent  Parabrahmam,  the  self-exist- 
ent, eternal,  self-sufficient  cause  of  all. 
II.  Rishabham,  This  word  is  nsed  in  several  places  in 
the  Upanishads  and  the  V6da  to  mean  Pranava 
(Aum).  Sankar&charya  has  so  interpreted  it  in 
several  portions  of  his  commentary.* 
HI.  Miihunam.  As'the  word  plainly  indicates,  this  sign 
is  intended  to  represent  the  first  androgyne,  the 
Ardhanareesicara,  the  bisexual  Sephira-Adam  Kad- 
mon. 
IV.  Karkatakam,  "When  the  syllables  are  converted  into 
the  corresponding  numbers  according  to  the  general 

*  Example  "Bishibhas;^— ChaQdasam  Risbabhasya  Pradhauasj;<i  Pr*n»-^ 

mode  of  transmutation  so  often  alluded  to  in  Mantra 
Shastta,  the  word  in  question  will  be  represented 
by  ///A  This  sign  then  is  evidently  intended  to 
represent  the  sacred  Tetragram;  the  Parabrahma- 
thdrakam  ;  the  Pranava  resolved  into  four  separate 
entities  corresponding  to  its  four  Mdtras  ;  the  four 
Avastkds  indicated  by  Jagrath  (  waking  )  Avastha, 
Swapna  (  dreamy  )  Avastha,  Shnshupti  (deep  sleep) 
Avastha,  and  Turiya  (  the  last  stage,  i.  e.  Nirvana  ) 
Avastha,  (as  yet  in  potentiality);  the  /our  states  of 
Brahma  called  Vaiswanara,  Taijasa  (or  Hiranya- 
garbha),  Pragna,  and  Eswara  and  represented  by 
;  Brahma,   Vishnu,  MahSswara,    and    Sadasiva;  the 

four  aspects  of  Parabrahmam  as  Sthoolam,  Sook- 
shmam,  Beejam  and  Sakshi  ;  the  four  stages  or  con- 
ditions of  the  Sacred  word  named  Para,  Pasyanti, 
Madhyama  and  Vykhari  ;  Nadam,  Bindu^  Sakti 
and  Kala.  This  sign  completes  the  first  quaternary. 

T.  Simham.  This  word  contains  a  world  of  occult  mean- 
ing within  itself ;  and  it  may  not  be  prudent  on  my 
part  to  disclose  the  whole  of  its  meaning  in  this 
article.  It  will  be  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  this 
article  to  give  a  general  indication  of  its  significance. 

Two  of  its  synonymous  terms  are  Fanchasyam  and  Hari^ 
and  its  number  in  the  order  of  the  Zodiacal  divisions  (being 
the  fifth  sign)  points  clearly  to  the  former  synonym.  This 
synonym — Panchasyam — shows  that  fche  sign  is  intended  to 
represent  theT^c^  Brhamas^  viz,^ — Es^nam,  Aghoram,  Tatpnrn- 
sham,  Vamadevam,  and  Sadyojdtam — the  five  Buddkas. 
The  second  synonym  shows  it  to  be  Ndrdyana,  the  Jeev^tma, 
or  Pratyagatma.  (The  Sukarahasy  Upanishad  will  show 
that  the  ancient  Aryan  philosophers  looked  upon  N^r^yana  as 
the  Jeevatma.*     The  Vaishnavites  may  not  admit  it.    But  as 

*  In  its  lowest  or  most  material  state,  as  the  life-principle  which  ani- 
xuates  the  material  bodies ,of  the  animal  aad  regetable  worlds,  iu:.,>-£o. 
Tkxob. 

an  Advaiti,  I*  look  npon  Jeev&tma  as  identical  with  Param- 
atma  in  its  real  essence  when  stripped  of  its  fictitious  attri- 
butes created  by  Agn^nam  or  Avidya — ignorance.)  The 
Jeev^tma  is  correctly  placed  in  the  fifth  sign  counting  from 
Mesham,  as  the  fifth  sign  is  the  putrasthdnam  or  the  son's 
house  according  to  the  rules  of  Hindu  Astrology.  The  sign 
in  question  represents  Jeev^tma — the  son  of  Param^tma  as  it 
were.  (I  may  also  add  that  it  represents  the  real  Christ,  the 
anointed  pure  spirit,  though  the  missionaries  may  frown  at 
this  interpretation.)*  I  will  only  add  here  that  unless  the 
nature  of  this  sign  is  fully  comprehended  it  will  be  impossible 
to  understand  the  real  order  of  the  next  three  signs  and  their 
full  significance.  The  elements  or  entities  that  have  mere- 
ly a  potential  existence  in  this  sign  become  distinct,  separate 
entities  in  the  next  three  signs.  Their  union  into  a  single 
entity  leads  to  the  destruction  of  the  phenomenal  universe,, 
and  the  recognition  of  the  pure  spirit,  and  their  separation 
has  the  contrary  effect.  It  leads  to  material  earth-bound 
existence  and  brings  into  view  the  picture  gallery  of  Avidya 
(Ignorance)  or  M&ya  (Illusion).  If  the  real  orthography 
of  the  name  by  which  the  sign  in  question  is  indicated  is  pro- 
perly understood  it  will  readily  be  seen  that  the  next  three 
signs  are  not  what  they  ought  to  be.  Kanya  or  Virgo  and 
Vrischikam  or  Scorpio  should  form  one  single  sign,  and  Tula 
must  follow  the  said  sign  if  it  is  at  all  necessary  to  have  a 
separate  sign  of  the  name.  But  a  separation  between  Kanya 
and  Vrischikam  was  efiected  by  interposing  the  sign  Tula 
between  the  two.  The  object  of  this  separation  will  be  under- 
stood on  examining  the  meaning  of  the  three  signs. 

*  Nevertheless  it  is  »  true  one.  The  JiV'OtvfUi  in  the  (Mieroeogm  man)  is 
the  same  spiritnal  essence  which  animates  the  Macrocosm  (universe),  the 
dificrentiation,  or  specific  difference  between  the  two  Jveatmai  presenting 
itself  but  in  the  two  states  or  conditions  of  the  same  and  one  Force.  Hence 
"this  son  of  Param&tma"  is  an  eternal  correlation  of  the  Father-Cause, 
Parnsha  manifesting  himself  as  Brahma  of  the  "golden  egg"  and  becoming 
"Viradja — the  universe.  We  are  "all  bom  of  Aditi  from  the  water"  (hymns 
of  theMamtsX  632;  and  "Being  was  bom  from  not-being"  {Rx&-Vedaj 
Mandala  1,  S<lkta  166),— Ed.  Thkos. 

VI.  Kanyd  means  a  virgin  and  represents  Sakti  or 
Mahdmaya.  The  sign  in  question  is  the  6th  Rdsi 
or  division  and  indicates  t^at  there  are  six  primary 
forces  in  nature.  These  forces  have  diflFerent  sets 
of  names  in  Sanskrit  philosophy.  According  to 
one  system  of  nomenclature  they  are  called  by  the 
following  names; — (  1  )  Parasakti ;  (  2  )  Gnanastaki; 
(  3  )  Itchdsakti  (  will-power  );  (  4  )  Kriyasakti;  (  5  ) 
Knndalinisakti;  and  (  0 )   Matrikasakti.*     The    six 

*  Parasakti: — Literally  the  great  or  supreme  force  or  power.  It  meana 
and  includes  the  powers  of  light  and  "heat. 

GnanosaWi:— Literally  the  power  of  intellect  or  the  power  of  real  wisdom 
or  knowledge.  It  has  two  aspects  : 

I.  The  following  are  some  of  its  manifestations  when  "placed  under  th» 
influence  or  control  of  material  cenditiona: — 

(  a  )The  power  of  the  mind  in  interpreting  onr  sensations.  (  &  )  its  power 
iu  recalling  past  ideas  (  memory  )  and  raising  future  expectations,  (e  )  Its 
power  as  exhibited  in  what  are  called  by  modem  psychologists  "the^laws  of 
association  "  which  enables  it  to  form  per»isting  connections  between  varioos 
gronps  of  sensations  and  possiblities  of  sensations  and  thus  generate  the 
notion  or  idea  of  an  external  object.  ( <2  )  Its  power  in  connecting  our  ideas 
together  by  the  mysterious  link  of  memory  and  thns  generating  the  notion 
of  self  or  individuality. 

II.  The  following  are  some  of  its  manifestations  whtn  liberated  from  the 
hands  of  matter: — 

(  a  )  Clairvoyance,  (h)   Psychometry.  * 

Itehdsakti: — Literally,  the  power  of  Ihe  will.  Its  most  ordinary  manifesta- 
tion is  the  generation  of  certain  nerve  currents  which  set  in  motion  sach 
muscles  as  are  required  for  the  accomplishment  of  the    desired  objec t. 

KriyAsakti:— The  mysterious  power  of  thought  which  enables  it  to  produce 
external,  perceptible,  phenomenal  resnlt  by  its  own  inherent  energy.  The 
ancients  held  that  any  idea  will  manifest  itself  externally  if  one's  attention 
is  deeply  concentrated  upon  it.  Similarly  an  intense  volition  will  be  follow- 
ed by  the  desired  result. 

A  Yogi    generally  performs    his    wonders  by     means  of    Itohasakti    and 

Kriyasakti. 

Kundalinisakti: — Literally,  the  power  or  force  which  moves  in  a  serpentine 
or  curved  path.  It  is  the  universal  life-principle  which  everywhere  mani- 
fests itself  in  nature.  This  force  includes  in  itself  the  two  great  forces  of 
attraction  and  repulsion.  Electricity  and  magnetism  are  but  manifestations 
cf  it.     This  is   the   power  or  force    which  brings   about   that  **  coutinuooi 

8 

forces  are  in  their  unity  represented  by  the  Astral 
light* 

Vlf.  Tula,  When  represented  by  numbers  according  to 
the  method  above  alluded  to,  this  word  will  be  con- 
verted into  36.  This  sign,  therefore,  is  evidently 
intended  to  represent  the  86  Tatwams,  (The  number 
of  Tatwams  is  different  according  to  the  views  of 
different*  philosophers;  but  by  S&kteyas  generally 
and  by  several  of  the  ancient  Rishis  such  as  Agas- 
tya,  Doorw^sa  and  Parasur^ma,  &c.,  the  number 
of  Tatwams  has  been  stated  to  be  36).  Jeevatma 
differs  from  Paramatma,  or  to  state  the  same  thing 
in  other  words,  "Baddha"  differs  from  "Mnkta"  t  in 
being  encased  as  it  were  within  these  36  Tatwams, 
while  the  other  is  free.    This  sign  prepares  the  way 

adjustment  of  internal  relatione  to  external  relations"  which  is  the  essence 
of  life  according  to  Herbert  Spencer  and  that  ''continuous  adjustment  of 
extendi  rdatiant  to  internal  reiatiotit,"  which  is  the  basis  of  b'ansmigration 
of  sonli  or  pnnarjanman  (re>birth)  according  to  the  doctrines  of  the  ancient 
Hindu  philosophers. 

A  Yogi  mast  thoroughly  subjagate  this  power  or  force  before  he  can  at- 
tain Moksham.    This  force  is,  in  fact,  the  great  serpent  of  the  Bible. 

Mairikdsahti  .-—Literally,  the  force  or  power  of  letters  or  speech  or 
music.  The  whole  of  the  ancient  Mantra  Shastra  has  this  force  or  power  in 
all  its  manifestations  for  its  subject.matter.  The  power  of  The  Word  which 
Jesus  Christ  speaks  of  is  a  manifestation  of  this  Sakti.  The  influence  of 
music  is  one  of  its  ordinary  manifestations.  The  power  of  the  mirific  inef- 
fable name  is  the  crown  of  this  Sakti. 

Modern  science  has  but  partly  investigated  the  first,  second  and  fifth  of 
the  forces  or  powers  above-named,  but  it  is  altogether  in  the  dark  as  regards 
the  remaining  powers. 

*  Even  the  very  name  of  Eanyd  (Virgin)  shows  how  all  the  ancient 
«soteric  systems  agreed  in  all  their  fundamental  doctrines.  The  Eabalists 
and  the  Hermetic  philosophers  call  the  Astral  Light  the  "  heavenly  or  celes- 
tial Virgin."  The  Astral  Light  in  its  unity  is  the  7Ui.  Hence  the  seven 
principles  dilSused  in  every  unity  or  the  6  and  onb — two  triangles  and  a 
crown — ^Ed.  Theos. 

t  As  the  Infinite  differs  from  the  Finite  and  the  Unconditioned  from  the 
conditioned.— Bd.    Theos. 

to  earthly  Adam,  to  Nara.    As  the  emblem  of  Nara 
it  is  properly  placed  as  the  seventh  sigD. 
VIII.     Vrischikam.  It  is  stated  by  ancient  philosophers  that 
the   san   when   located   in   this   Rasi  or  division  is 
called  by  the  name  of  Yisknu  (see  the  12th  Skandba 
of  Bhagavata).    The  sign  is  intended  to  represent 
Vishnu.      Vishnu     literally   means    that  which  is 
expanded'-'exp&uded  as  Viswam  or  Universe.    Pro- 
perly speaking,  Viswam  itself  is  Vishnu  (see  Sanka- 
rach&rya's  commentary   on    Vishnusahasranamam). 
I  have  already   intimated   that   Vishnu  represents 
the  Swapndvastha  or  the  Dreamy   State.    The   sign 
in   question   properly    signifies    the     Universe     in 
thought  or  the  universe  in  the  divine  conception. 
It  is  properly  placed  as  the  sign  opposite  to  Rishabham  or 
Pranava.     Analysis  from   Pranava   downwards   leads   to  the 
Universe  of  Thought,  and  synthesis  from  the  latter   upwards 
leads  to  Pranava  (Aum).    We  have  now  arrived  at  the  ideal 
state  of  the   universe   previous   to  its  coming  into   material 
existence.     The  expansion  of  the  Beejam   or  primitive  germ 
into  the  universe  is   only  possible  when  the  36  "Tatwams"* 
are  interposed  between  the  Maya  and  Jeevatma.    The  dreamy 
«tate  is  induced  through   the  instrumentality  of  these  "Tat- 
wams."    It   is  the  existence   of  these  Tatwams  that   brinsrs 
Hamsa  into  existence.      The   elimination   of  these   Tatwams 
anarks  the  beginning  of  the  synthesis  towards   Pranava  and 
Brahmam  and  converts  Ilamsa,  into  Sdham,    As  it  is  intended 
to  represent  the  different  stages    of  creation   from  Brahmam 
downwards  to  the  material  universe,  the  three   signs   Kanya, 
Tula,  and  Vrischikam  are  placed  in  the  order  in  which   they 
now  stand  as  three  separate  signs. 

IX.  Dhanus  {Sagittarius).  When  represented  in  numbers, 
the  name  is  equivalent  to  9,  and  the  division  in 
question  is  the  9th  division  counting  from   Mesham. 

'  *  34  is  three  times  12,  or  9  Tetniktis,  or  12  Triads,  the  most  sacred  num- 
ber in  the  Eabalistic  and  Pythagoreaa  numerals. — Sd.Tueos. 

10 

The  sign,  therefore,  clearly  indicates  the  ^Brakmds — 
the  9  ParajapatJs  who  assisted  the  Deminrgus  in. 
constrncting  the  material  nniverse. 

X.  Makaram,  There  is  some  difficulty  in  interpreting 
this  word ;  nevertheless  it  contains  within  itself  the 
cine  to  its  correct  interpretation.  The  letter  Ma  is- 
equivalent  to  number  5  and  Kara  means  hand. 
Now  in  Sanskrit  Tribhujam  means  a  triangle, 
bhnjam  or  karam  (both  are  synonymous)  being 
understood  to  mean  a  side.  So,  Makaram  or  Pan- 
chakaram  means  a  Pentagon  .* 

Now,  Makaram  is  the  tenth  sign  and  the  term  "Dasa- 
disa"  is  generally  used  by  Sanskrit  writers  to  de- 
note the  faces  or  sides  of  the  universe.  The  sign  in 
question  is  intended  to  represent  the  faces  of  the 
universe  and  indicates  that  the  figure  of  the  universe 
is  bounded  by  Pentagons.  If  we  take  the  pen- 
tagons as  regular  pentagons  (on  the  presumption  or 
supposition  that  the  universe  is  symmetrically  con- 
structed) the  figure  of  the  material  universe  will,  of 
course,  be  a  Dodecahedron,  the  geometrical  model 
imitated  by  the  Demiurgus  in  constructing  the 
material  universe.  If  Tula  was  subsequently  in- 
vented and  if,  instead  of  the  three  signs  "Kanya,'* 
"  Tula  *'  and  *'  Vrischikam,"  there  had  existed 
♦  formerly  only  one  sign  combining  in  itself  Kanya 
and  Vrischikam,  the  sign  now  under  consideration 
was  the  eighth  sign  under  the  old  system,  and  it  is 
a  significant  fact  that  Sanskrit  writers  generally 
speak  also  of  "Ashtadisa"  or  eight  faces  bounding 
space.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  number  of 
disa  might  have  been  altered  from  8  to  10  when  the 

•  See  the  article  in  the  August  (1881)  number  "the  Five-Pointed  Star,." 
where  we  stated  that  the  fire-pointed  star  or  pentagram  represented  the 
fire  limbs  of  man. — Ed.  Tubos. 

11 

formerly  existing  Virgo-Scorpio  waa  split  up  into 
three  separate  signs. 

Again,  Kara  may  be  taken  to  represent  the  project- 
ing triangles  of  the  five-pointed  star.  This  figure 
may  also  be  called  a  kind  of  regular  pentagon 
(see,  Todhunter's  Spherical  Trigonometry,  p.  148). 
If  this  interpretation  is  accepted,  the  Rasi  or 
sign  in  question  represents  the  "Microcosm,"  But 
the  "  microcosm "  or  the  world  of  thought  \a 
really  represented  by  Vrischikam.  From  an  objec- 
tive point  of  view  the  "  microcosm  "  is  repre- 
sented by  the  human  body,  Makaram  may  be 
taken  to  represent  simultaneously  both  the  micro- 
cosm and  the  macrocosm,  as  external  objects  of 
perception. 

In  connection  with  this  sign  I  shall  state  herein  a  few 
important  facts  which  I  beg  to  submit  for  the  consideration  of 
those  who  are  interested  in  examining  the  ancient  occult 
sciences  of  India.  It  is  generally  held  by  the  ancient  philo- 
sophers that  the  macrocosm  is  similar  to  the  microcosm  in 
having  a  Sthoola  Sarlram  and  a  Sookshma  Sariram.  The  visible 
universe  is  the  Sthoola  Sariram  of  Vis  warn;  the  ancient  philo- 
sophers held  that  as  a  substratum  for  this  visible  universe, 
there  is  another  universe — perhaps  we  may  call  it  the  universe 
of  Astral  Light — the  real  universe  of  Noumena,  the  soul  as  it 
were  of  this  visible  universe.  It  is  darkly  hinted  in  certain 
passages  of  the  VMa  and  the  Upanishads  that  this  hidden 
universe  of  Astral  Light  is  to  be  represented  by  an  Icosahedron. 
The  connection  between  an  Icosahedron  and  a  Dodecahedron 
is  something  very  peculiar  and  interesting  though  the  figures 
seem  to  be  so  very  dissimilar  to  each  other.  The  connection 
may  be  understood  by  the  undermentioned  geometrical  con- 
struction. Describe  a  Sphere  about  an  Icosahedron;  let 
perpendiculars  be  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  Sphere  on  its 
faces  and  produced  to  meet  the  surface  of  the  Sphere.  Now, 
if  the   points  of  intersection  be  joined,  a   Dodecahedron  is 

Ifir 

fori^eU  withiD  the  Sphere.  By  a  similar  process  an  Icosa- 
hedron  may  be  constracted  from  a  Dodecahedron.  (See 
Todhnnter's  Spherical  Trigonometry,  p.  141,  art.  193).  The 
figure  constrncted  as  above  described  will  represent  the 
universe  of  matter  and  the  universe  of  Astral  Light  as  they 
actually  exist,  I  shall  not  now,  however,  proceed  to  show  how 
the  universe  of  Astral  Light  may  be  considered  in  the  light  of 
an  Icosahedron.  1  shall  only  state  here  that  this  conception 
of  the  Aryan  philosophers  is  not  to  be  looked  upon  as  mere 
"theological  twaddle"  or  as  the  outcome  of  wild  fancy.  The 
real  significance  of  the  conception  in  question  can,  I  believe,  be 
explained  by  reference  to  the  psychology  and  the  physical 
science  of  the  ancients.  But  I  must  stop  here  and  proceed  to 
consider  the  meaning  of  the  remaining  two  signs. 

XL  Kumbham  {or  AqtM?nu8).  When  represented  by 
numbers,  the  word  is  equivalent  to  14.  It  can  be 
easily  perceived,  then,  that  the  division  in  question 
is  intended  to  represent  the  "Ghaturdasa  Bhuva- 
nam"  or  the  14  lokams  spoken  of  in  Sanskrit 
books. 

XII,  Mee?iam  {or  Pisces).  This  word  again  is  represented 
by  5  when  written  in  numbers  and  is  evidently  in- 
tended to  convey  the  idea  of  PayichamahabhtUams  or 
the  5  elements.  The  sign  also  suggests  that  water 
(not  the  ordinary  water,  but  the  universal  solvent 
of  the  ancient  alchemists,)  is  the  most  important 
amongst  the  said  elements. 

I  have  now  finished  the  task  which  I  have  set  to  myself  in 
this  article.  My  purpose  is  not  to  explain  the  ancient  theory 
of  creation  itself,  but  to  show  the  connection  between  that 
theory  and  the  Zodiacal  divisions.  I  have  herein  brought  to 
light  but  a  very  small  portion  of  the  philosophy  imbedded  in 
these  signs.  The  veil  that  was  dexterously  thrown  over  certain 
portions  of  the  mystery  connected  with  these  signs  by  the 
■ancient  philosophers  toill  nemr  be  lifted  up  for  the  amuse' 
ment  or  edification  oj  the  uninitiated  public. 

13 

Now  to  sammarize  the  facts  stated  in  this  article,  the  con- 
tents of  the  first  chapter  of  the  history  of  this  nniverse  are  a» 
follows  : — 

(1).    The  Self-existent,  eternal  Brahmatn. 

(J).    Pranava  (Anm). 

(3).  The  androgyne  Brahma,  or  the  bisexaal  Sephira- 
Adam  Kadmon. 

(4),  The  Sacred  Tetragram — the  fonr  matras  of  Pranava— 
the  foar  ayasthas — the  fonr  states  of  Brahma — the 
Scared  Thdrakam. 

(5).  The  five  Brahmas — the  five  Baddhas — representing  in 
their  totality  the  Jeevatma. 

(6).  The  astral  light — the  holy  virgin— the  six  forces  io 
nature. 

(7).     The  thirty-six  Tatwams  born  of  Avidya. 

(8).  The  universe  in  thought — the  Swapna  Avastha— the 
miscrocosm  looked  at  from  a  subjective  point  of 
view. 

(9).    The  nine  Prajapatis— the  assistants  of  the  Demiur- 
gus.* 

(10).    The  shape  of  the   material  universe  in  the  mind  of 
the  Demiurgus — the  Dodecahedron. 

(11).     The  fourteen  lokams. 

(12).    The  five  elements. 

The  history  of  creation  and  of  this  world  from  its  beginningN 
up  to  the  present  time  is  composed  of  Seven   chapters.    The  I  * 
Seventh  chapter  is  not  yet  completed.  / 

Tbiplioakb,  Madras,  lith  September,  1881. 

*  The  nine  Kabalistic  Sephirotha  emanated  from  Bephira,  the  Iflth,  and  the 
head  Sephiroth  are  identical.  Three  trinities  or  triads  with  their  emanative 
principle  from  the  Pythagorean  mystic  Decad,  the  sum  of  aU  which  repre- 
sents the  whole  £otmo8:—E,D,  Theos. 

THE  ARYAN-ARHAT  ESOTERIC  TENEIfTS  ON 
THE  SEVENFOLD  PRINCIPLE  IN  MAN* 

.  .  .  Probably  the  Aryan  (we  shall  for  the  present  call 
it  by  that  name)  and  the  Chaldeo-Tibetan  esoteric  doctrines 
are  fundamental ly  identical  and  the  secret  doctrine  of  the  Je- 
wish Kabalists  merely  an  offshoot  of  these.  Nothing,  perhaps, 
can  be  more  interesting  now  to  a  student  of  occult  philosophy 
than  a  comparison  between  the  two  principal  doctrines  above 
mentioned.  H.  F.  B.'s  letter  seems  to  indicate  two  divisions 
in  the  Chaldeo-Tibetan  doctrine  :  (1)  that  of  the  so-called 
Lamaists;  and  (2)  that  of  the  so-called  Arhats,  (in  Buddhism 
Arahat,  or  Rahats)  which  has  been  adopted  by  the  Himalayan 
or  Tibetan  Brotherhood.  "What  is  the  distinction  between 
these  two  systems  ?  Some  of  our  ancient  Brahmanical  writers 
have  left  us  accounts  of  the  main  doctrines  of  Buddhism  and 
the  religion  and  philosophy  of  the  Arhats — the  two  branches 
of  the  Tibetan  esoteric  doctrine  being  so  called  by  them.  As 
these  accounts  generally  appear  in  treatises  of  a  polemical 
character,  I  cannot  place  much  reliance  upon  them. 

It  is  now  very  difficult  to  say  what  was  the  real  ancient 
Aryan  doctrine.  If  an  enquirer  were  to  attempt  to  answer  it 
by  an.  analysis  and  comparison  of  all  the  various  systems  of 
esotericism  prevailing  in  India,  he  will  soon  be  lost  in  a  maze 
of  obscurity  and  uncertainty.  No  comparison  between  our 
real  Brahmanical  and  the  Tibetan  esoteric  doctrines  will  be 
possible  unless  one  ascertains  the  teachings  of  that  so-called 
"Aryan  doctrine,"  ....  and  fully  comprehends  the 
whole  range  of  the  ancient  Aryan  philosophy.  Kapila's 
**Sankhya,"  Patanjali's  "  Yoga  philosophy,"  the  different 
systems  of  '*Saktaya"  philosophy,  the  various  Agamas  and 
Tantrds  are  but  branches  of  it.  There  is  a  doctrine  though, 
which  is  their  real  foundation  and  which  is  sufficient  to  ex- 
plain the  secrets  of  these  various  systems  of  philosophy  and 

*  Extracts  from  the  letter  of  T.  Sabbhft  Bao  to  H.  P.  B.— Ed. 

15 

'harmonize  their  teachings.  It  probably  existed  long  before 
the  Yedas  were  compiled,  and  it  was  studied  by  oar  ancient 
Rishis  in  connection  with  the  Hindu  scriptares.  It  is  attri- 
ijuted  to  one  mysterioos  personage  called  Maha*.     .    . 

The  Upanishads  and  such  portions  of  the  Vedas  as  are  not 
chiefly  devoted  to  the  public  ceremonials  of  the  ancient  Aryans 
are  hardly  intelligible  without  some  knowledge  of  that  doctrine. 
Even  the  real  significance  of  the  grand  ceremonials  referred 
to  in  the  Vedas  will  not  be  perfectly  apprehended  without  its 
light  being  thrown  upon  them  .  .  The  Vedas  were  perhaps 
compiled  mainly  for  the  use  of  the  priests  assisting  at  public 
ceremonies,  but  the  grandest  conclusions  of  our  real  secret 
doctrine  are  therein  mentioned.  I  am  informed  by  persons 
competent  to  judge  of  the  matter,  that  the  Vedas  have  a 
distinct  dual  meaning — one  expressed  by  the  literal  sense  of 
the  words,  the  other  indicated  by  the  meter  and  the  szvara 
which  are,  as  it  were,  the  life  of  the  Vedas  .  .  .  Learned 
Pundits  and  philologists,  of  course,  deny  that  Swara  has  any 
thing  to  do  with  philosophy  or  ancient  esoteric  doctrines.  But 
the  mysterious  connection  between  Swara  and  light  is  one  of 
its  most  profound  secrets. 

Now  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  show  whether  the  Tibetans 
derived  their  doctrine  from  the  ancient  Rishis  of  India,  or  the 
ancient  Brahmans  learned  their  occult  science  from  the  adepts 
of  Tibet;  or  again  whether  the  adepts  of  both  countries  pro- 
fessed originally  the  same  doctrine  and  derived  it  from  a 
common  source,  t  If  you  were  to  go  to  the  Sramana  Bala- 
gula  and  question  some  of  the  Jain  Pundits  there  about 
the  authorship  of  the  Vedas  and  the  origin  of  the  Brahmanical 
esoteric  doctrine,  they  would  probably  tell  you  that  the  Vedas 
were  composed   by   Rdhshasdst   or   Daityas   and  that    the 

*  The  very  little  of  the  present  chief  of  the  Esoteric  Himalayan  Broth«r-> 
hood.— Ed. 

t  See  Appendix^  Note  1 — Ed. 

t  A  kind  of  demons — DevH.Eo, 

16 

Brahmans  had  derived  their  secret  knowledge  from  them.*  Da 
these  assertions  meaQ  that  the  Yedas  and  the  Brabmanical 
esoteric  teachings  had  their  origin  in  the  lost  Atlankis-^^the 
continent  that  once  occupied  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
•xpanse  of  the  Southern  and  the  Pacific  oceans  ?  The  asser-- 
tion  in  "lais  Unveiled"  that  Sanskrit  was  the  lanffaasre  of 
the  inhabitants  of  the  said  continent,  may  induce  one  to  sup- 
pose that  the  Vedas  had  probably  their  origin  there, — where- 
ever  else  might  be  the  birth-place  of  the  Aryan  esotericism.f 
Bnt  the  real  esoteric  doctrine  as  well  as  the  mystic  allegori- 
cal philosophy  of  the  Vedas  were  derived  from  another  source 
again,  whatever  that  source  may  be — perchance,  from  the 
divine  inhabitants  (gods)  of  the  sacred  Island  which  once 
existed  in  the  sea  that  covered  in  days  of  old  the  sandy 
tract  now  called  Gobi  Desert.  However  that  may  be,  the 
knowledge  of  the  occult  powers  of  nature  possessed  by  the 
inhabitants  of  the  lost  Atlantis  was  learnt  by  the  ancient 
adepts  of  India  and  was  appended  by  them  to  the  esoteric 
doctrine  taught  by  the  residents  of  the  sacred  Island. t  The 
Tibetan  adepts,  however,  have  not  accepted  this  addition  to 
their  esoteric  doctrine.  And,  it  is  in  this  respect  that  one 
should  expect  to  find  a  difierence  between  the  two  doctrines. § 
The  Brabmanical  occult  doctrine  probably  contains  every- 
thing that  was  taught  about  the  powers  of  nature  and  their 

*  And  80  would  the  Christian  p&drl«.  But  they  would  nerer  admit  that 
iheir  "fallen  angles"  were  borrowed  from  the  Eak»hdsas\  that  their  "DeTil" 
is  the  illegitimate  son  of  Dewel — the  Sinhalese  female  demon,  or  that 
the  "War  in  Heaven"  of  the  Apocalypse— thQ  foundation  of  the  Christian 
dogma  of  the  **Fallen  Angles" — was  copied  from  the  Hindu  story  about 
Siva  hurling  the  T&rakasura-wVo  rebelled  against  Brahma  into  Andhak^ra,— 
the  Abode  of  Darkness,  according  to  Brabmanical  Shastrdt. — Ed. 

t  Not  necessarily.— See  Appendix^  Note  II.  From  rareMSS.  just  received 
we  will  shortly  prove  Sanskrit  to  have  been  spoken  in  J&va  and  adjacent 
islands  from  remote  antiquity. — Ed, 

X  A  locality  which  is  spoken  of  to  this  day  by  the  Tibetans  and  called  by 
them  "Scham-bha-la"  the  Happy  LanJ.— See  Appendix,  Note  III. — Ed. 

$  To  comprehend  this  passage  fully,  the  reader  must  turn  to  Vol.  I.f  pp. 
589-694,  liit  Unvtiled.—^\). 

ir 

hi«rs  either  in  the  mysterious  Island  of  the  North,  or  in  the 
^nally  mysterions  continent  of  the  Sonth.  And,  if  yoa  mean 
to  compare  the  Aryan  and  the  Tibetan  doctrines  as  regards 
their  teachings  abont  the  occult  pov^ers  of  nature,  you  must 
beforehand  examine  all  the  classifications  of  these  powers, 
their  laws  and  manifestations  and  the  real  connotations  of  the 
various  names  assigned  to  them  in  the  Aryan  doctrine.  Here 
are  some  of  the  classifications  contained  in  the  Brahmanical 
system  : 

I.    Classification  of  the  occult  powers   as   appertaining 

to    Parabrahmam   and   exist- 
ing in  the  Macrocosm. 
II.        do.  do.        as  appertaining   to  man   and 

existing  in  the  Microcosm, 

III.  do.  do.        for   the   purposes  of    Tdraka 

Yoga  or  Pranava  Yoga. 

IV.  do.  do.         for  the  purposes  of  Sdnkhya- 

Yoga  (where  they   are,   as  it 

were,  the   inherent   attributes 

of  Prakriti). 

V.        do.  do,        for  the  purposes  of  Hata  Ydga. 

VI.        do.  do.        for    the    purposes    of    Koula 

Agama, 
VII.         do.  do.        for    the  purposes    of    Sdkta 

Agama, 
VIII.        do.  do.        for     the    purposes     of    Siva 

Agama. 
IX.        do.  do.        for      the    purposes     of    Sree- 

ckakram,  (The  Sreechakram 
referred  to  in  "Isis  Unveiled" 
is  not  the  real  esoteric 
Sreechakram  of  the  ancient 
adepts  of  Aryavarta).* 
X.        do.  do.        in  Atharvana  Veda,  fc. 

'  Very  truo.    But  who  would  be  allowed   (o  give  out   tlio   "  real  esoteric 
one"?— Ed. 

18 

.  Id  all  these  classifications,  sobdivisions  have  been-  mnlti'' 
plied  indefioitely  by  conceiving  new  combinations  of  the 
Primary  Powers  in  different  proportions.  Bat  1  most  now 
drop  this  sabject  and  proceed  to  consider  the  article  headed 
the  ^*Fra-gment&  of  Occult  Truth"  (since  embodied  in  "Esoteric 
Buddhism.") 

I  have  carefolly  examined  it,  and  find  that  the  resnlts 
arrived  at  (in  the  Bnddhist  doctrine)  do  not  seem  to  differ 
mnch  from  the  conclasious  of  oar  Aryan  philosophy,  though 
our  mode  of  stating  the  arguments  may  differ  in  form.  I  shall 
now  discuss  the  question  from  my  own  stand-point,  though 
following  for  facility  of  comparison  and  convenience  of  discus- 
sion the  seqaence  of  classification  of  the  seven-fold  entities  or 
Principles  constituting  man  which  is  adopted  in  your  article. 
The  questions  rais»ed  for  discussion  are :  (1)  whether  the  cUs- 
embodied  sjoiriU  of  human  beings  (as  they  are  called  by 
Spiritualists)  appear  in  the  stance-rooms  and  elsewhere;  and 
(2)  whether  the  manifestations  taking  place  are  produced 
wholly  or  partly  through  their  agency. 

It  is  hardly  possible  to  answer  these  two  questions  satisfac- 
torily unless  the  meaning  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the 
expression  '■^disembodied  spirits  oj  human  beings'''  be  accurate- 
ly defined.  The  words  Spiritualism  and  Spirit  are  very 
misleading.  Unless  English  writers  in  general,  and  Spiritual- 
ists in  particular,  first  ascertain  clearly  the  connotation  they 
mean  to  assign  to  the  word  spirit  there  will  be  no  end  of 
confusion,  and  the  real  nature  of  these  so-called  spiritualistic 
phenomena  and  their  modus  occurrendi  can  never  be  clearly 
defined.  Christian  writers  generally  speak  of  only  two  entities 
in  man — the  body,  and  the  soul  or  spirit  (both  seeming  to 
mean  the  same  thing  to  them).  European  philosophers 
generally  speak  of  Bod^  and  Mind^  and  argue  that  soul  or 
spirit  cannot  be  anything  else  than  mind-  They  are  of  opinion 
that  any  belief  in  Lingasariram*  is  entirely  unphilosophical. 
These    views    are   certainly    incorrect,  and    are    based    oa 

*  The  Astral  Body— so  eaU«tU— Ed. 

19 

miwarranted  assamptions  as  to  the  possibilities  of  nature,  and 
on  an  imperfect  understanding  of  its  laws.  I  shall  now  examine 
(from  the  stand-point  of  the  Brahmanical  esoteric  doctrine) 
the  Spiritual  constitution  of  man,  the  various  entities  or 
principles  existing  in  him,  and  ascertain  whether  either  of 
those  entities  entering  into  his  composition  can  appear  on 
earth  after  his  death;  and,  if  so,  ttshat  it  is  that  so  appears. 

Professor  Tyndall  in  his  Excellent  papers  on  what  he  calls 
the  "Germ  Theory"  monies  to  the  following  ooncinsions  as 
the  result  of  a  series  of  well-planned  experiments  : — Even  in 
a  very  small  volume  of  space  there  are  myriads  of  protoplas- 
mic germs  floating  in  ether.  If,  for  instance,  say, — water 
(clear  water^  is  exposed  to  them  and  if  they  fall  into  it,  some 
form  of  life  or  other  will  be  evolved  out  of  them.  Now,  what 
are  the  agencies  for  the  bringing  of  this  life  into  existence  ? 
Evidently  : — 

I.  The  watery  which  is  the  field,  so  to  flay,  for  the  growth 
of  life. 

II.  The  protoplasmic  germ,  oat  of  which  life  or  a  living 
organism  is  to  be  evolved  or  developed.    And,  lastly — 

>  III.  The  power,  energy,  force  or  tendency  which  springs 
into  activity  at  the  touch  or  combination  of  the  protoplasmic 
germs  and  the  water,  and  which  evolves  or  develops  life  and 
its  natural  attributes. 

Similarly,  there  are  three  primary  causes  which  bring  the 
human  being  into  existence.  I  shall  call  them  for  the  pur- 
pose of  discussion  by  the  following  names  : — 

(1)  Purabrakmam — The  Universal  Spirit. 

(2)  SakfA  (The  crown  of  the  astral  light  combining  in 
itself  all  the  powers  of  nature). 

(3)  Prakriti,  which  in  its  original  or  primary  shape  is 
represented  by  Akasa  (really,  every  form  of  matter  is  finally 
reducible  to  Akasa),* 

*  The  Tibetan  esoteric  Buddhist  doctrine  teaches  that  Prakriti  is  cosmie 
■tatter,  out  of  which  all  visible  forms  are  proadced;  and  Akasa  that  same 
«oamic  matter, — but  gtill  more  subjective,  its  spirit,  as  it  were,  "PraArtti" 
Mug  the  body  or  tuhtatv^e,  aud^Akasa-Sakti""  its  soul  or  eaergy, — BD. 

20 

It  is  ordinarily  stated  that  Prakriti  or  Akasa  is  the  Kshet- 
ram  or  the  basis  which  corresponds  to  water  in  the  example 
we  have  taken  ;  Brahmam  the  germ^  and  Sakti  the  power  or 
energy  that  comes  into  existence  at  their  anion  or  contact.' 

Bnt  this  is  not  the  view  which  the  Upaniskads  take  of  the 
qnestion.  According  to  them,  Brahmam  f  is  the  Kshetram  or 
basis,  Akasa  or  Frakriti^  the  germ  or  seed,  and  Sakti  the 
power  evolved  by  their  union  or  contact.  And  this  is  the  real 
scientific,  philosophical  mode  of  stating  the  case. 

Now,  according  to  the  adepts  of  ancient  Aryavarta,  seveif^ 
principles  are  evolved  out  of  these  three  primary  entities. 
Algebra  teaches  us  that  the  number  of  combinations  of  n  things 
taken  one  at  a  time,  two  at  a  time,  three  at  a  time  and  so 
ioxih=2n—\. 

Applying  this  formula  to  the  present  case,  the  number  of 
entities  evolved  from  different  combinations  of  these  three 
primary  causes  amounts  to  23 — 1=8 — 1=7. 

As  a  general  rule,  whenever  seven  entities  .are  mentioned 
in  the  ancient  occalt  science  of  India,  in  any  connection  what- 
soever, you  must  sappose  that  those  seven  entities   came  into 

*  Or,  in  other  words,  "Praleri%i  Swabbdvdt  or  Akasa  la — Space  as  the 
Tibetans  have  it ;  Space  filled  with  whatsoever  substance  or  no  substance  at 
all ;  i.e.  with  substance  so  imperceptible  as  to  be  only  metaphysically  con- 
ceivable. Brahmam^  then,  would  be  the  germ  thrown  into  the  soil  of  that 
field,  and  Sakci  that  mysterious  energy  or  force  which  develops  it,  and  which 
is  called  by  the  Buddhist  Arahats  of  Tibet— FO-HAT.  ''That  which  we  calleci 
form  (Rupa)  is  not  different  from  that  which  we  call  space  (SCknyata)  .  • 
Space  is  not  different  from  Form.  Form  is  the  same  as  Space;  Space  is  the 
same  as  form.  And  so  with  the  other  skandhas,  whether  vedana,  or  sanjua 
or  sanskara  or  vijnana,  they  arc  each  the  same  as  their  opposite"  .  .  , 
(Book  of  «m-fe»ny  or  the  "Heart  Sutra,".  Chinese  translation  of  the  "Maha- 
Prajna-Paramita-Hridayft-Sutra."  (Chapter  on  the  "Avalokiteshwara,"  or 
the  manifetted  Buddha.')  So  that,  the  Aryan  and  Tabetan  or  Arhat  doc* 
trines  agree  perfectly  in  substance,  differing  but  in  names  given  and  the 
way  of  putting  it.  A  distinction  resulting  from  the  fact  that  the  Vodantin 
BrabmauB  believe  in  Farabrahman,  a  deifio  power  impersonal  though  it 
may  be,  while  the  Buddhists  entirely  reject  it. — Eo. 

t  See  A^pciidifit  Note  IV,- Ed. 

%% 

existence  from  three  'primary  entities  and  that  these  three 
entities,  again,  are  evolved  oat  of  a  single  entity  or  Monad. 
To  take  a  familiar  example,  the  seven  coloured  raya  in  tha 
solar  ray  are  evolved  oat  oi three  'primary  coloured  rays;  and 
the  three  primary  colours  co-exist  with  the  four  secondary 
colours  in  the  solar  rays.  Similarly,  the  three  primary  entitiea 
which  brought  man  into  existence  co-exist  in  him  with  the 
four  secondary  entities  which  arose  from  different  combinations 
of  the  three  primary  entities. 

Now  these  ^even  entities  which  in  their  totality  constitata 
man,  are  as  follows  : — I  shall  enumerate  them  in  the  order 
adopted  in  the  "Fragments"  as  far  as  the  two  orders  (the 
Brahmanical  and  the  Tibetan)  coincide  : — 

Corresponding  names  in  Esoteric 
Bnddhism. 

Prakriti.  Stk'dlasariram  (  Physical  Body  ). 

The  entity  evolved  ^ 

out  of  the  combina-  /  Sukshmasariram  or    LingasarU 
tion  oi  Prakriti  and  T         ram  (Astral  Body). 
Sakti.  ) 

Sakti. 

1. 
11. 

III. 
IV. 

V. 

VI. 

Kdmar'Apa  (the  Perisprit), 
The  entity   evolved  "\ 

out  oF  the  combina-  !  -r    ^     ,  ,t  ^      c    i 
tion  of  Brahmam,  Ui^atrnd  {Life-Soul), 

Sakti  and  Prakriti.  J 

The    entity  evolved  "\ 

out  of  the  combina-  /  Physical  Intelligence  (or  animal 

tion   of  Brahmam  T     soal). 

and  Prakriti.  J 

The  entity  evolved 

out  of  the  combina- 

tion   of   5ra/^;;,a7n^^P^"*^"^^^^*^«"^°«°<^«<<>''^°^)- 

and  Sakti. 

Vll.    Brahmam.- 

i  The  emanation   from  the   Abso- 
\     LUTE,  &c.  (or  pure  spirit). 

22 

Before  proceeding  to  examine  the  natnre  of  these  seven 
entities,  a  few  general  explanations  are  indispensably  ne- 
cessary. 

I.  The  secondary  principles  arising  out  of  the  combination 
of  primary  principles  are  quite  different  in  their  natnre  from 
the  entities  out  of  whose  combination  they  came  into  existence. 
The  combinations  in  question  are  not  of  the  nature  of  mere 
mechanical  juxtapositions,  as  it  were.  They  do  not  even 
correspond  to  chemical  combinations.  Consequently  no  valid 
inferences  as  regards  the  nature  of  the  combinations  in 
question  can  be  drawn  by  analogy  from  the  nature  [variety?] 
of  these  combinations. 

II.  The  general  proposition  that  when  once  a  cause  is 
removed  its  eflfect  vanishes,  is  not  universally  applicable. 
Take,  for  instance,  the  following  example  : — if  you  once 
communicate  a  certain  amount  of  momentum  to  a  ball,  velocity 
of  a  particular  degree  in  a  particular  direction  is  the  result. 
Now,  the  cause  of  this  motion  ceases  to  exist  when  the  in- 
stantaneous sudden  impact  or  blow  which  conveyed  the 
momentum  is  completed  ;  but,  according  to  the  first  Law  of 
Mction,  the  ball  will  continue  to  move  on  for  ever  and  ever 
with  undiminished  velocity  in  the  same  direction  unless  the 
said  motion  is  altered,  diminished,  neutraliaed  or  counteracted 
by  extraneous  causes.  Thus,  if  the  ball  stop,  it  will  not  be  on 
account  of  the  absence  of  the  cause  of  its  motion,  but  in  con- 
sequence of  the  existence  of  extraneous  causes  which  produce 
the  said  result. 

Again,  take  the  instance  of  subjective  phtnomena,  • 

Now  the  presence  of  this  ink-bottle  before  me  is  producing 
in  me  or  in  my  mind  a  mental  representation  of  its  form, 
volume,  colour  and  so  forth.  The  bottle  in  question  may  be 
removed,  but  still  its  mental  picture  may  continue  to  exist. 
Here,  again,  you  see,  the  effect  survives  the  cause.  Moreover, 
the  effect  may  at  any  subsequent  time  be  called  into  conscious 
existence,  whether  the  original  cause  be  present  or  not. 

23 

■  Now,  in  the  case  of  the  fifth  principle  above-mentioned— 
the  entity  that  came  into  existence  by  the  combination  of 
Brahmam  and  Prakriti, — if  the  general  proposition  (in  the 
"Fragments  of  Occult  Truth")  is  correct,  this  principle  which 
corresponds  to  the  Physical  intelligence  must  cease  to  exist 
whenever  the  Brahmam  or  the  seventh  principle  should  cease 
to  exist  for  the  particular  individual;  but  the  fact  is  certainly 
otherwise.  The  general  proposition  under  consideration  is  ad- 
duced in  the  "Fragments"  in  support  of  the  assertion  that 
whenever  the  seventh  principle  ceases  to  exist  for  any  parti- 
cular individual,  the  sixth  principle  also  ceases  to  exist  for  him. 
The  assertion  is  undoubtedly  true  though  the  mode  of  stating 
it  and  the  reasons  assigned  for  it  are  to  my  mind  objectionable. 

It  is  said  that  in  cases  where  tendencies  of  a  man's  mind 
are  entirely  material,  and  all  spiritual  aspirations  and 
thoughts  were  altogether  absent  from  his  mind,  the  seventh 
principle  leaves  him  either  before  or  at  the  time  of  death,  and 
the  sixth  principle  disappears  with  it.  Here,  the  very  propo- 
sition that  the  tendencies  of  the  particular  individual's  mind 
are  entirely  material,  involves  the  assertion  that  there  is  no 
spiritual  intelligence  or  spiritual  Ega  in  bim.  It  shonld 
then  have  been  said  that,  whenever  spiritual  intelligence 
ceases  to  exist  in  any  particular  individual,  the  seventh  principle 
ceases  to  exist  for  that  particular  individual  for  all  purposes. 
Of  course,  it  does  fly  off  anywhere.  There  can  never  be 
anything  like  a  change  of  position  in  the  case  of  Brahmam.* 
The  assertion  merely  means  that  when  there  is  no  recognitioo 
■whatever  of  Brahmam,  or  spirit^  or  spiritual  life,  or  spiritual 
consciousness,  the  seventh  principle  has  ceased  to  exercise  any 
influence  or  control  over  the  individual's  destinies. 

*  Trne — from  the  ataodpoint  of  Aryan  E»oterici*m,  and  the  Upanishads; 
not  quite  so  in  the  case  of  the  Araliat  or  Tibetan  esoteric  doctrine>aud  it  i» 
only  on  this  solitary  point  that  the  two  teachings  disagree,  as  far  aa  we 
know.  The  difference  is  very  triEing  though,  resting,  as  it  does,  solely  npoa 
the  two  various  methods  of  viewing  the  one  and  th«  same  thing  from  two 
different  aspects — See  A^pewlix,  Note  XV. — Eo. 

24 

r  shall  now  state  what  is  meant  (in  the  Aryan  doctrine)  by 
the  seven  principles  above  ennmerated. 

I. — Prakriti.  This  is  the  basis  of  Sthillasarlram  and 
represents  it  in  the  above-mentioned  classification. 

II.  Prakriti  and  Sakti, — This  is  the  Lingaaariram^  or 
astral  body. 

III.  Sakti. — This  principle  corresponds  to  yonr  Kdmarupa. 
This  power  or  force  is  placed  by  ancient  occultists  in  the 
Ndbhichakram.  This  power  can  gather  akdsa  or  prakriti  and 
mould  it  into  any  desired  shape.  It  has  very  great  sympathy 
with  the  fifth  principle,  and  can  be  made  to  act  by  its 
Influence  or  control. 

IV.  Brakmam,  Sakti,  and  Prakriti.  — This  again  corresponds 
to  your  second  principle,  Jivtdmd.  This  power  represents  the 
universal  life-principle  which  exists  in  nature.  Its  seat  is  the 
Andkatachakram  (heart).  It  is  a  force  or  power  which 
constitutes  what  is  called  Jiva^  or  life.  It  is,  as  you  say, 
indestructible,  and  its  activity  is  merely  transferred  at  the 
time  of  death  to  another  set  of  atoms,  to  form  another  organ- 
ism. But  it  is  not  called  Jivdtmd  in  our  philosophy.  The 
term  Jwdtmd  is  generally  applied  by  our  philosophers  to  the 
seventh  principle  when  it  is  distinguished  from  Para7ndtma 
or  Parabrakmam.* 

V.  Brakm  and  Prakriti. — This,  in  our  Aryan  philosophy, 
corresponds  to  your  fifth  principle,  called  the  Physical  iTitel" 
ligence.  According  to  our  philosophers,  this  is  the  entity  in 
which  what  is  called  Mind  has  its  seat  or  basis.  This  is  the 
most  difficult  principle  of  all  to  explain,  and  the  present 
discussion  entirely  turns  upon  the  view  we  take  of  it. 

*  The  impersonal  Parahrahmam  thus  being  made  to  merge  or  separate 
itself  into  a  jMr«onaZ**Jiv4tma"  or  the  personal  god  of  every  human  creature. 
This  18,  again,  a  difference  necessitated  bj  the  Brahmanical-l)elie£  in  a  Gkni 
whether  personal  or  impersonal,  while  the  Baddhist  Arahats,  rejecting  this 
idea  entirely,  recognise  no  deity  apart  from  man. — Sec  A^tndix,  i^oto 
v.— Ed. 

Now,  what  ia  mind  ?  It  is  a  mysterions  something  which 
is  considered  to  be  the  seat  of  conacionsneas— of  sensations, 
emotions,  volitions  and  thoughts.  Psychological  analysis 
shows  it  to  be  apparently  a  congeries  of  mental  states,  and 
possibilities  of  mental  states,  connected  by  what  is  called 
memory,  and  considered  to  have  a  distinct  existence  apart 
from  any  of  its  particnlar  states  or  ideas.  Now  in  what 
entity  has  this  mysterions  Something  its  potential  or  actual 
existence  ?  Memory  and  expectation  which  form,  as  it 
were,  the  real  foundation  of  what  is  called  tndimdualitf/,  or 
Ahankdramy  must  have  their  seat  of  existence  somewhere. 
Modern  psychologists  of  Europe  generally  say  that  the  mate- 
rial substance  of  5/*a«w  is  the  seat  of  mind;  and  that  past 
subjective  experiences^  which  can  be  recalled  by  memory,  and 
which  in  their  totality  constitute  what  is  called  indididualitt/^' 
exist  therein  in  the  shape  of  certain  unintelligible  mysterious' 
impressions  and  changes  in  the  nerves  and  nerve-centres  of 
the  cerebral  hemispheres.  Consequently,  they  say,  the  mind — 
the  individual  mind — ^is  destroyed  when  the  body  is  destroyed j 
so  there  is  no  possible  existence  after  death. 

But  there  are  a  few  facts  among  those  admitted  by  these 
philosophers  which  are  sufficient  for  us  to  demolish  their 
theory.  In  every  portion  of  the  human  body,  a  constant 
change  goes  on  without  intermission.  Every  tissue,  every 
muscular  fibre  and  nerve-tube,  and  every  ganglionic  centre  in 
the  brain  is  undergoing  an  incessant  change.  In  the  course 
of  a  man's  lifetime  there  may  be  a  series  of  complete  transform 
mations  of  the  substance  of  his  brain.  Nevertheless  the 
memory  of  his  past  mental  states  remains  unaltered.  There 
may  be  additions  ot  new  subjective  experiences  and  some 
mental  states  may  be  altogether  forgotten,  but  no  individual 
mental  state  is  altered.  The  person's  sense  oj  irtdimduaHty 
remains  the  same  throughout  these  constant  alterations  in  the 
brain  substance.*     It  is   able   to  survive   all   these  changes, 

*  This  is  also  sound  Buddhist  philosophy,  the  transformation  iu  question 
beiug  kauwn  as  the  chaogc  of  the  ska,ndhif.  — £d. 

2e 

and  it  cjin  survive  also  the  complete  destruction  of  the  mate- 
rial substance  of  the  brain. 

This  individuality  arising  from  mental  consciousness  has 
its  seat  of  existence,  according  to  our  philosophers,  in  an 
occult  power  or  force  which  keeps  a  registry,  as  it  were,  of  all 
our  mental  impressions.  The  power  itself  is  indestructible, 
though  by  the  operation  of  certain  antagonistic  causes  its 
impressions  may  in  course  of  time  be  effected,  in  part  or 
wholly. 

I  may  mention  in  this  connection  that  our  philosophers 
have  associated  seven  occult  powers  with  the  seven  principles 
or  entities  above-mentioned.  These  seven  occult  powers  in 
the  microcosm  correspond  with,  or  are  the  counterparts  of  the 
occult  powers  in  the  macrocosm.  The  mental  and  spiritual 
consciousness  of  the  individual  becomes  the  general  conscious- 
ness oi  Brahmam  when  the  barrier  of  individuality  is  wholly 
removed,  and  when  the  seven  powers  in  the  microcosm  are 
placed  en  rapport  with  the  seven  powers  in  the  macrocosm. 

There  is  nothing 'very  strange  in  a  power  or  force,  or  sakti 
carrying  with  it  impressions  of  sensations,  ideas,  thoughts,  or 
other  subjective  experiences.  It  is  now  a  well-known  fact, 
that  an  electric  or  magnetic  current  can  convey  in  some 
mysterious  manner  impressions  of  sound  or  speech  with  all 
their  individual  peculiarities  ;  similarly,  I  can  convey  my 
thoughts  to  you  by  a  transmission  of  energy  or  power. 

Now  this  fifth  principle  reptesents  in  our  philosophy,  the 
mind,  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  the  power  or  force  above 
described,  the  impressions  of  the  mental  states  therein,  and 
notion  of  individuality  or  Ahankaram  generated  by  their 
collective  operation.  This  principle  is  called  merely  physical 
intelligence  in  the  "Fragments."  1  do  not  know  what  is  really 
meant  by  this  expression.  It  mny  be  taken  to  mean  that 
intelligence  which  exist  in  a  very  low  state  of  development  in 
the  lower  animals.  Mind  may  exist  in  different  stages  of 
developmeut,  from  the  very  lowest  forms  of  organic  life,  where 

27 

the  signs  of  its  existence  or  operation  can  hardly  be  distinctly 
realised,  up  to  man,  in  whom  it  reaches  its  highest  state  of 
development. 

In  fact,  from  the  first  appearance  of  life*  ap  to  Tkureeya 
Avastka,  or  the  state  of  Nirvana,  the  progress  is,  as  it  were 
continuous.  We  ascend  from  that  principle  up  to  the  seventh 
by  almost  imperceptible  gradations.  Bat  four  stages  are 
recognised  in  the  progress  where  the  change  is  of  a  peculiar 
kind,  and  is  such  as  to  arrest  an  observer's  attention.  These 
four  stages  are  ai?  follows : — 

(1)  Where  life  (fourth  principle)  makes  its  appearance. 

(2)  Where  the  existence  of  mind  becomes  perceptible  in 

conjunction  with  life. 

(3)  Where  the  highest  state  of  mental  abstraction  ends, 

and  spiritual  consciousness  commences. 

(4)  Where  spiritual  consciousness  disappears,  leaving  the 

seventh  principle  in  a  complete  state  of  Nirvana^  or 
nakedness. 

According  to  our  philosophers,  the  fifth  principle  under 
consideration  is  intended  to  represent  the  mind  in  every  poS' 
sible  state  of  development^  from  the  second  stage  up  to  the  third 
stage, 

VI.  Brahmam  and  Sakti. — This  principle  corresponds  to 
your  " spiritual  intelligence."  It  is,  in  fact,  Buddhi  (I  use 
the  word  Buddhi  not  in  the  ordinary  sense,  but  in  the  sense 
in  which  it  is  used  by  our  ancient  philosophers^  ;  in  other 
words,  it  is  the  seat  of  Bddha  or  Atmabodha,  One  who  has 
Atma-hudha  in  its  completeness  is  a  Buddha.  Buddhists  know 
very  well  ivhat  this  term  signifies.  This  principle  is  described 
in  the  '*  Fragments  "  as  an  entity  coming  into  existence  by  the 
combination  of  Brahmxim  and  Prakriti.     I  do  not  again  know 

*  In  the  Aryan  doctrine  which  blends  Brahmam,  Sakti,  and  Prakriti  in 
one,  it  is  the  fourth  principle,  then ;  in  tlie  Duadhist  esotericism  the  second 
in  combination  with  th^  first,— Bu, 

28 

in  what  particular  sense  the  word  Praki'iti  is  nscd  in  this  con- 
nection. According?  to  onr  philosophers  it  is  an  entity  arising 
from  the  nnion  of  Brahm  and  Sakti.  I  have  already  explained 
the  connotation  attached  by  our  philosophers  to  the  words 
Prakriti  and  Sakti, 

I  stated  that  Prakriti  in  its  primary  state  is  Akdsa.m 

If  Akdsa  be  considered  to  be  Sakti  or  Power,!  then 
my  statement  as  regards  the  ultimate  state  of  Prakriti  is 
likely  to  give  rise  to  confusion  and  misapprehension  unless 
I  explain  the  distinction  between  Akasa  and  Sakti.  Akdsa 
is  not,  properly  speaking,  the  Crown  of  the  Astral  lights 
nor  does  it  by  itself  constitute  any  of  the  six  primary  forces. 
But,  generally  speaking,  whenever  any  phenomenal  result  is 
produced,  Sakti  acts  in  conjunction  with  Akdsa.  And,  more- 
over, Akdsa  serves  as  a  basis  or  Adhisthanum  for  the  transmis- 
sion of  force  currents  and  for  the  formation  or  generation  of 
force  or  power  correlations.^ 

In  Mantrasastra  the  letter  "  Ha  *'  represents  Akdsa,  and 
yon  will  find  that  this  syllable  enters  into  most  of  the  sacred, 
formulae  intended  to  be  used  in  producing  phenomenal  results. 

*  According  to  the  Buddhists  in  Ak^sa  lies  that  eternal,  potential  energy 
whose  fanction  it  is  to  evolve  all  visible  things  out  of  itself. — Ed. 

'  '\  It  was  never  so  considered,  as  we  have  shawn  it.  Bat  as  the  "  Frag- 
mentjs"  are  written  in  English,  a  language  lacking  such  an  abundance  of 
metaphysical  terms  to  express  every  minute  change  of  form,  substance  and 
state  as  found  in  the  Sanskrit,  it  was  deemed  useless  to  confuse  the  Western 
reader  nntrained  in  the  methods  of  Eastenji  expression  more  than  necessaiy, 
with  a  too  nice  distinction  of  proper  technical  terms.  As  •'  Prakriti  in  its 
primary  state  is  4^i€*a,  and  Sakti "  is  an  ^tribute  of  *' A  kasha,"  it  becomes 
evident  that  for  the  uninitiated  it  is  all  one.  Indeed,  to  speak  of  the  ''Union 
of  Brahmam  and  Prakriti  "  instead  of  "Brahmam  and  Sakti  "  is  no  worse 
than  for  a  theist  to  write  that  "  man  has  come  into  existence  by  the  com- 
bination of  spirit  and  matter,"  whereas,  his  words  framed  in  orthodox  shape, 
ought  to  read  »*  man  as  a  living  soul  was  created  by  the  power  (  or  breath  )  of 
God  over  matter" — Ed. 

X  That  is  to  say,  the  Ary4n  AkSM  h  another  word  for  Buddhist  SPACE  (iu 
its  welapbysical  meaning)— Bp«  , 

29 

Bnt  by  itself  it  does  not  represent  any  Sakti.  Yon  may,  if  yoa 
please,  call  Sakti,  an  attribute  of  Akdsa. 

I  do  not  think  that  as  regards  the  nature  of  this  principle 
there  can,  in  reality,  exist  any  difference  of  opinion  between 
the  Buddhist  and  Brahmanical  philosophers. 

Bnddhist  and  Brahmanical  initiates  know  very  well  that 
mysterious  circular  mirror  composed  of  two  hemispheres 
which  reflects  as  it  were  the  rays  emanating  from  the  "burn- 
ing bush"  and  the  blazing  star — the  Spiritual  sun  shining  in 
ChidakIsam. 

The  spiritual  impressions  constituting  this  principle  have 
their  existence  in  an  occult  power  associated  with  the  entity 
in  question.  The  successive  incarnations  of  Buddha,  in  fact, 
mean  the  successive  transfers  of  this  mysterious  power  or  the 
impressions  thereon.  The  transfer  is  only  possible  when  the 
Mahatma*  who  transfers  it,  has  completely  identified  himself 
with  his  seventh  principle,  has  annihilated  his  Ahankdiam^ 
and  reduced  it  to  ashes  in  Chidagnikundam  and  has  succeeded 
in  making  his  thoughts  correspond  with  the  eternal  laws  of 
nature  and  in  becoming  a  co-worker  with  nature.  Or  to  put 
the  same  thing  in  other  words,  when  he  has  attained  the  state 
of  Nirvdna,  the  co7idition  of  final  negation,  negation  oj  indivi- 
dual  or  separate  existence.^ 

VII.  Atma. — The  emanation  from  the  absolute  ;  corres- 
ponding to  the  seventh  principle.  As  regards  this  entity  there 
exists  positively  no  real  difference  of  opinion  between  the 
Tibetan  Buddhist  adepts  and  our  ancient  Eishis. 

We  must  now  consider  which  of  these  entities  can  appear 
after  the  individual's  death  in  stance-rooms  and  produce  the 
so-called  spiritualistic  phenomena. 

Now,  the  assertion  of  the  Spiritualists  that  the  '^disembodi- 
ed  spirits"  of  particular  human  beings  appear  in  seance-rooms 

*  The  highest  adept — Ed. 

■(■  In  the  words  of  a  gathd  in  the  "Maha-pari-Nirvana  Sfitra"— 

*'  We  reach  a  condition  of  licst," 

>^  Beyoud  the  Uroit  oi  an;  bumaa  knowledge''— £o. 

30 

aecessarily  implies  that  the  entity  that  so  appears  bears   the 
stamp  of  some  particular  iudividnal's  individuality. 

So,  we  have  to  ascertain  beforehand  in  what  entity  or 
eutities  individuality  has  its  seat  of  existence.  Apparently  it 
exists  in  the  person's  particular  formation  of  body,  and  in  his 
subjective  experiences,  (called  his  mind  in  their  totality). 
On  the  death  of  the  individual  his  body  is  destroyed  ;  his 
lingasariram  being  decomposed,  the  power  associated  with  it 
becomes  mingled  in  the  current  of  the  corresponding  power  ia 
the  macrocosm.  Similarly,  the  third  and  fourth  principles 
are  mingled  with  their  corresponding  powers.  These  entities 
may  again  enter  into  the  composition  of  other  organisms.  As 
these  entities  bear  no  impression  of  individuality,  the  Spiri- 
tualists have  no  right  to  say  that  the  '^disembodied  spirit"  of 
the  human  being  has  appeared  in  the  seance-room,  whenever 
any  of  these  entities  may  appear  there.  In  tact,  they  have  no 
means  of  ascertaining  that  they  belonged  to  any  particular 
individual. 

Therefore,  we  must  only  consider  whether  any  of  the  last 
three  entities  appear  in  stance-rooms  to  amuse  or  to  instruct 
Spiritualists.  Let  us  take  three  particular  examples  of  in- 
dividuals and  see  what  becomes  of  these  three  principles  after 
death. 

I.  One  in  whom  spiritual  attachments  have  greater  force 
than  terrestrial  attachments. 

II.  One  in  whom  spiritual  aspirations  do  exist,  but  are 
merely  of  secondary  importance  to  him,  his  terrestrial  in- 
terests occupying  the  greater  share  of  his  attention. 

III.  One  in  whom  there  exist  no  spiritual  aspirations 
whatsoever,  one  whose  spiritual  Ego  is  dead  or  non-existent 
to  his  apprehension. 

We  need  not  consider  the  case  of  a  complete  Adept  in  this 
connection.  In  the  first  two  cases,  according  to  our  supposi- 
tion, spiritual  and  mental  experiences  exist  together  ;  when 
spiritual  consciousness  exists,  the  existence  of  the  seventh 
principle  being  recognised,  it  maintains  its  couaections  with 

31 

the  fifth  and  sixth  principles.  But  the  existence  of  terrestrial 
attachments  creates  the  necessity  of  punarjanmam,  the  latter 
signifying  the  evolution  of  a  new  set  of  objective  and  sub- 
jective experiences,  constituting  a  new  combination  of  sur- 
rounding circumstances  or,  in  other  words,  a  new  world.  The 
period  between  death  and  the  next  subsequent  birth  is  occupied 
with  the  preparation  required  for  the  evolution  of  these  new 
experiences.  During  the  period  of  incubation,  as  you  call  it, 
the  spirit  will  never  of  its  own  accord  appear  in  this  world, 
nor  can  it  so  appear. 

There  is  a  great  law  in  this  universe  which  consists  in  the 
reduction  of  subjective  experience  to  objective  phenomena 
and  the  evolution  of  the  former  from  the  latter.  This  ia 
otherwise  called  "cyclic  necessity."  Man  is  subjected  to  this 
law  if  he  does  not  check  and  counterbalance  the  usual  destiny  or 
fate,  and  he  can  only  escape  its  control  by  subduing  all  his  ter- 
restrial attachments  completely.  The  new  combination  of  cir- 
cumstances under  which  he  will  then  be  placed  may  be  better 
or  worse  than  the  terrestrial  conditions  under  which  he  lived. 
But  in  his  progress  to  a  new  world,  you  may  be  sure  he  will 
never  turn  around  to  have  a  look  at  his  spiritualistic  friends.* 

In  the  third  of  the  above  three  cases  there  is,  by  our  sup- 
position, no  recognition  of  spiritual  consciousness  or  of  spirit. 
So  they  are  non-existing  so  far  as  he  is  concerned.  The  case 
is  similar  to  that  of  an  organ  or  faculty  which  remains  unused 
for  a  long  time.     It  then  practically  ceases  to  exist. 

These  entities,  as  it  were,  remain  his  or  in  his  possession, 
when  they  are  stamped  with  the  stamp  of  recognition.  When 
such  is  not  the  case,  the  whole  of  his  individuality  is  centered 
in  his  fifth  principle.  And  after  death  this  fifth  principle  is 
the  only  representative  of  the  individual  in  question. 

By  itself  it  cannot  evolve  for  itself  a  new  set  of  objective 
experiences,  or  to  say  the  same  thing  in  other  words,  it  has  no 

•  As  M.  A.  (Oxon)  will,  see  the  Spiritualists  have  still  less  chance  of 
having  their  claims  recoguis'Jil  by  Brahmaaical  than  by  Budtlhiat  occultists. 
—Ed. 

32 

punarjanmam.  It  is  sncb  an  entity  that  can  appear  in  stance- 
rooms  ;  but  it  is  absurd  to  call  it  a  diseinbodied  spirit*  It  is 
merely  a  power  or  force  retaining  the  impressions  of  the 
thoughts  or  ideas  of  the  individual  into  whose  composition  it 
originally  entered.  It  sometimes  summons  to  its  aid  the 
Kdmariipa  power;  and  creates  for  itself  some  particular  ethereal 
form  (not  necessairly  human). 

Its  tendencies  of  action  will  be  similar  to  those  of  the  in- 
dividual's mind  when  he  was  living.  This  entity  maintains 
its  existence  so  long  as  the  impressions  on  the  power  associat- 
ed with  the  fifth  principle  remain  intact.  In  course  of  time 
they  are  efiaced,  and  the  power  in  question  is  then  mixed  up 
in  the  current  of  its  correspondiug  power  in  the  Macrocosm, 
as  the  river  loses  itself  in  the  sea.  Entities  like  these  may 
afford  signs  of  there  having  been  considerable  intellectual 
power  in  the  individuals  to  which  they  belonged  ;  because 
very  high  intellectual  power  may  co-exist  with  utter  absence 
of  spiritual  consciousness.  But  from  this  circumstance  it 
cannot  be  argued  that  either  the  spirits  or  the  spiritual  Egos 
of  deceased  individuals  appear  in  s^ance^rooms. 

There  are  some  people  in  India  who  have  thoroughly  studied 
the  nature  of  such  entities  (  called  pisacham  ).  I  do  not  know 
much  about  them  experimentally,  as  I  have  never  meddled 
with  this  disgusting,  profitless,  and  dangerous  branch  of 
investigation. 

Your  Spiritualists  do  not  know  what  they  are  really  doing. 
Their  investigations  are  likely  to  result  in  course  of  time  either 
in  wicked  sorcery  or  in  the  utter  spiritual  ruin  of  thousands 
of  men  and  women.f 

The  views  I  have  herein  expressed  have  been  often  illus- 
trated by  our  ancient  writers  by  comparing  the  course  of  a 
man's  life  or  existence  to  the  orbital  motion  of  a  planet  round 

•  It  is  especially  on  this  point  that  the  Aryan  abd  Arahat  doctrines  quite 
agree,  the  teaching  and  argument  that  follow  are,  in  evoiy  respect,  those 
of  the  Buddhist  Himalayan  Brotherhood.— El). 

\  We  bharc  entirely  in  this  idea. —Ed. 

33 

the  snn.  Centripetal  force  is  gpiritaal  attraction  and  centri- 
fogal,  terrestrial  attraction.  As  the  centripetal  force  increases 
in  power  in  comparison  with  the  centrifugal  force,  the  planet 
approaches  the  sun — the  individual  reaches  a  higher  plane  of 
existence.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  centrifugal  force  becomes 
greater  than  the  centripetal  force,  the  planet  is  removed  to  a 
greater  distance  from  the  sun,  and  moves  in  a  new  orbit  at 
that  distance — the  individual  comes  to  a  lower  level  of  exist- 
ence, These  are  illustrated  in  the  first  two  instances  I  have 
noticed  above. 

We  have  only  to  consider  the  two  extreme  cases. 

When  the  planet  in  its  approach  to  the  sun  passes  over  the 
line  where  the  centripetal  and  centrifugal  forces  completely 
neutralize  each  other  and  is  only  acted  on  by  the  centripetal 
force,  it  rushes  towards  the  sun  with  a  gradually  increasing 
velocity  and  is  finally  mixed  up  with  the  mass  of  the  sun's 
body.    This  is  the  case  of  complete  Adept, 

Again,  when  the  planet  in  its  retreat  from  the  sun  reaches 
a  point  where  the  centrifugal  force  becomes  all-powerful  it 
flies  off  in  a  tangential  direction  from  its  orbit,  and  goes  into 
the  depths  of  void  space.  When  it  ceases  to  be  under  the 
control  of  the  sun,  it  gradually  gives  np  its  generative  heat 
and  the  creative  energy  that  it  originally  derived  from  the 
Bun,  and  remains  a  cold  mass  of  material  particles  wandering 
through  space  until  the  mass  is  completely  decomposed  into 
atoms.  This  cold  mass  is  compared  to  the  fifth  principle  nnder 
the  conditions  above  noticed,  and  the  heat,  light,  and  energy 
that  left  it  are  compared  to  the  sixth  and  seventh  principles. 

Either  after  assuming  a  new  orbit  or  in  its  course  of  divia- 
tion  from  the  old  orbit  to  the  new,  the  planet  can  never  go 
back  to  any  point  in  its  old  orbit,  as  the  various  orbits  lying 
in  different  planes  never  intersect  each  other. 

This  figurative  representation  correctly  explains  the  ancient 
Brahmanical  theory  on  the  subject.  It  is  merely  a  branch  of 
what  is  called  the  Great  Law  of  the  Universe  by  the  ancient 
mystics • 

APPENDIX 

BY 
MADAME   H.  P.  BLAVATSKY. 

Note  I. 

In  this  connection  it  will  be  well  to  draw  the  reader's  at- 
tention to  the  fact  that  the  country  called  "Si-dzang"  by  the 
Chinese,  and  Tibet  by  "Western  geographers,  is  mentioned  in 
the  oldest  books  preserved  in  the  province  of  Fo-kien  (the 
chief  head-qnarters  of  the  aborigines  of  China) — as  the  great 
seat  of  occult  learning  in  the  archaic  ages.  According  to 
these  records,  it  was  inhabited  by  the  'Teachers  of  Light," 
the  "Sons  of  Wisdom"  and  the  "Brothers  of  the  Sun."  The 
Emperor  Yu  the  "Great"  (2207  B.  C),  a  pious  mystic,  is 
credited  with  having  obtained  his  occult  wisdom  and  the  sys- 
tem of  theocracy  established  by  him — for  he  was  the  first  one 
to  unite  in  China  ecclesiastical  power  with  temporal  authority 
—from  Si-dzang.  That  system  was  the  same  as  with  the  old 
Egyptians  and  the  Chaldees  ;  that  which  we  know  to  have 
existed  in  the  Brahmauical  period  in  India,  and  to  exist  now 
in  Tibet;  namely,  all  the  learning,  power,  the  temporal  as  well 
as  the  secret  wisdom  were  concentrated  within  the  hierarchy 
of  the  priests  and  limited  to  their  caste.  Who  were  the  abori- 
gines of  Tibet  is  a  question  which  no  ethnographer  is  able  to 
answer  correctly  at  present.  They  practise  the  Bhon  religion 
their  sect  is  a  pre — andanti — Buddhistic  one,  and  they  are  to 
Le  found  mostly  in  the  province  of  Kam — that  is  all  that"  is 
known  of  them.  But  even  that  would  justify  the  supposition 
that  they  are  the  greatly  degenerated  descendants  of  mighty 
and  wiee  forefathers.  Their  ethnical  type  shows  that  they 
are  not  pure  Turanians,  and  their  rites — now  those  of  sorcery, 

incantations,  and  nature-worship,  remind  one  far  more  of   the 
popular   rites   of  the  Babylonians,   as    found   in  the  records 

preserved  ou  the  excavi^ted  cyliwd^rs,  thau  of  the  religious 

35 

practices  of  the  Chinese — sect  of  Tao-sse — a  reh'gion  based 
npon  pnre  reason  and  spiritnality — as  alleged  by  some. 
Generally,  little  or  no  differnce  is  made  even  by  the  Kye- 
lang  missionaries  who  mix  greatly  with  these  people  on 
the  borders  of  British  LahonI — and  ongbt  to  know  better — 
between  the  Bhons  and  the  two  rival  Baddhist  sects, 
the  Yellow  Caps  and  the  Red  Caps.  The  latter  of  these  have 
opposed  the  reform  of  Tzong-ka-pa  from  the  first  and  have 
always  adhered  to  old  Bnddhism  so  greatly  mixed  up  now  with 
the  practices  of  the  Bhons.  Were  onr  Orientalists  to  know 
more  of  them,  and  compare  the  ancient  Babylonian  Bel  or 
Baal  worship  with  the  rites  of  the  Bhons,  they  would  find  an 
undeniable  connection  between  the  two.  To  begin  an  argu- 
ment here,  proving  the  origin  of  the  aborigines  of  Tibet  as 
connected  with  one  of  the  three  great  races  which  superseded 
each  other  in  Babylonia,  whether  we  call  them  the  Akkatiians 
(invented  by  F.  Lenormant,)  or  the  primitive  Turanians, 
Chaldees  and  Assyrians — is  out  of  question.  Be  it  as  it  may, 
there  is  reason  to  call  the  trans-Himalayan  esoteric  doctrine 
Chaldeo-Tibetan.  And,  when  we  remember  that  the  V^das 
came — agreeably  to  all  traditions — from  the  Maussorowar  Lake 
in  Tibet,  and  the  Brahmins  themselves  from  the  far  North,  we 
are  justified  in  looking  ou  the  esoteric  doctrines  of  every  people 
who  once  had  or  still  has  it — as  having  proceeded  from  one 
and  the  same  source:  and,  to  thus  call  it  the  "Aryan-Chaldeo- 
Tibetau"  doctrine,  or  Universal  Wisdom  Religion.  "Seek  for 
the  Lost  Word  among  the  hierophants  of  Tartary,  China  and 
Tibet,"  was  the  advice  of  Swedenborg,  the  seer. 

Note  IL 

Not  necessarily — we  say.  The  Vedas,  Brahraanism,  and 
along  with  these,  Sanskrit,  were  importations  into  what  we 
now  regard  as  India*  They  were  never  indigenous  to  its  soil. 
There  was  a  time  when  the  ancient  nations  of  the  West 
included  under  the  generic  name  of  India,  many  of  the 
countries  of  Asia  now  classified  under  other  names.  There 
was  an  Upper,  a  Lower,  and  a  Western  India,  even  during 

m 

the  comparatively  late  period  of  Alexander ;  and  Persia 
(Iran)  is  called  Western  India  in  some  ancient  classics.  The 
countries  now  named  Tibet,  Mongolia,  and  Great  Tartary 
•were  considered  by  them  as  forming  part  of  India.  When  wo 
say,  therefore,  that  India  has  civilized  the  world  and  was  the 
Alma  Mater  of  the  civilizations,  arts  and  sciences  of  all  other 
nations  (Babylonia,  and  perhaps  even  Egypt,  included)  we 
mean  archaic,  pre-historic  India,  India  of  the  time  when  the 
great  Gobi  was  a  sea,  and  the  lost  "Atlantis"  formed  part  of 
an  unbroken  continent  which  began  at  the  Himalayas  and 
ran  down  over  Southern  India,  Ceylon,  Java,  to  far-away 
Tasmania. 

Note  III. 

To  ascertain  such  disputed  questions,  one  has  to  look  into 
and  study  well  the  Chinese  sacred  and  historical  records — a 
people  whose  era  begins  nearly  4,600  years  back  (2697  B.  C). 
A  people  so  accurate  and  by  whom  some  of  the  most  important 
inventions  of  modern  Europe  and  its  so  much  boasted  modern 
science,  were  anticipated— such  as  the  compass,  gun-powder, 
porcelain,  paper,  printing,  &c. — known,  and  practised  thousands 

of  years  before  these  were  rediscovered  by  the  Europeans, 

ought  to  receive  some  trust  for  their  records.  And  from  Lao- 
tze  down  to  Hiouen-Thsang  their  literature  is  filled  with 
allusions  and  references  to  that  island  and  the  wisdom  of  the 
Himalayan  adepts.  In  the  Catena  of  Buddhist  Scriptures 
from  the  Chinese  by  the  Rev.  Samuel  Beal,  there  is  a  chapter 
"On  the  Tian-Ta'i  School  of  Buddhism"  (pp.  244-258)  which 
our  opponents  ought  to  read.  Translating  the  rules  of  that 
most  celebrated  and  holy  school  and  sect  in  China  founded  by 
Chin-che-K'hae,  called  Che-chay  (the  wise  one)  in  the  year 
575  of  our  era,  when  coming  to  the  sentence  which  reads; 
"That  which  relates  to  the  one  garment  (seamless)  worn  by 
the  Great  Teachers  of  the  Snowy  Mountains,  the  school  of 
the  Haimavatas"  (p.  256)  the  European  translator  places 
after  the  last  sentence  a  sign  of  interrogation,  as  well  he  may. 
The  statistics  of  the  school  of  the  "Haimayatas"  or  of  our 

37 

Himalayan  Brotherhood,  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  General 
Censns  Records  of  India.  Farther,  Mr.  Beal  translates  a  Rale 
relating  to  "the  great  professors  of  the  higher  order  who  live 
in  raoantain  depths  remote  from  men,"  the  Aranyakds,  or 
hermits. 

So,  with  respect  to  the  traditions  concerning  this  island,  and 
apart  from  the  (to  them,)  historical  records  of  this  preserved  ia 
the  Chinese  and  Tibetan  Sacred  Books:  the  legend  is  alive 
to  this  day  among  the  people  of  Tibet.  The  fair  Island  is  no 
more,  bat  the  country  where  it  once  bloomed  remains  there 
still,  and  the  spot  is  well-known  to  some  of  the  "great  teachers 
of  the  snowy  mountains,"  however  much  convulsed  and 
changed  its  topography  by  the  awful  cataclysm.  Every 
seventh  year,  these  teachers  are  believed  to  assemble  in  Sgham- 
Cha-lo,  the  "happy  land.''  According  to  the  general  belief 
it  is  situated  in  the  north-west  of  Tibet.  Some  place  it  within 
the  unexplored  central  regions,  inaccessible  even  to  the  fear- 
less nomadic  tribes;  others  hem  it  in  between  the  range  of  the 
Gangdisri  Mountains  and  the  northern  edge  of  the  Gobi 
Desert,  South  and  North  and  the  more  populated  regions  of 
Khoondooz  and  Kashmir,  of  the  Gya-Pheling  (British  India), 
and  China,  West  and  East,  which  affords  to  the  curious  mind 
a  pretty  large  latitude  to  locate  it  in.  Others  still  place  it 
between  Namur  Nur  and  the  Kuen-Lun  Mountains — but  one 
and  all  firmly  believe  in  Scham-bha-la,  and  speak  of  it  as  a 
fertile,  fairy-like  land,  once  an  island,  now  an  oasis  of  incompa- 
rable beauty,  the  place  of  meeting  of  the  inheritors  of  the  esote- 
ric wisdom  of  the  god-like  inhabitants  of  the  legendary  Island. 

In  connection  with  the  archaic  legend  of  the  Asian  Sea  and 
the  Atlantic  Continent,  is  it  not  profitable  to  note  a  fact 
known  to  all  modern  geologists — that  the  Himalayan  slopes 
afibrd  geological  proof,  that  the  substance  of  those  lofty  peaks 
was  once  a  part  of  an  ocean  floor  ? 

Note  IV. 
We  have  already  pointed  out  that,  in  our  opinion,  the  whole 
difference  between  Buddhistic  and  Vedautic  philosophies  was 

38 

that  the  former  was  a  kind  of  Rationalistic  Vedantisra,  while 
the  latter  might  be  regarded  as  Transcendental  Buddhism.  If 
the  Aryan  esotericism  applies  the  term  Jtvdtmd  to  the  seventh 
principle,  the  pnre  and  per  se  unconscious  spirit — it  is  be- 
cause the  Vedanta  postulating  three  kinds  of  existence — (1) 
the  paramdrthika, — {the  true^  the  only  real  one,)  (2),  the 
Tyavahdrika  (the  practical,)  and  (3)  the  pratibhasika  (the 
apparent  or  illusory  life) — makes  the  first  life  or  Jiva  the  only 
truly  existent  one.  Brahma  or  the  one's  self  is  its  only 
representative  in  the  universe,  as  it  is  the  universal  Life  in 
toto,  while  the  other  two  are  but  its  "phenomenal  appear- 
ance," imagined  and  created  by  ignorance,  and  complete 
illusions  suggested  to  us  by  our  blind  senses.  The  Buddhists* 
on  the  other  hand,  deny  either  subjective  or  objective  reality 
even  to  that  one  Self-Existence.  Buddha  declares  that  there 
is  neither  Creator  nor  an  Absolute!  Being.  Buddhist  ra- 
tionalism was  ever  too  alive  to  the  insuperable  difficulty  of 
admitting  one  absolute  consciousness,  as  in  the  words  of  Flint 
— "wherever  there  is  consciousness  there  is  relation,  and 
wherever  there  is  relation  there  is  dualism."  The  One  Life 
is  either  *'mukta"  (absolute  and  unconditioned)  and  can  have 
no  relation  to  anything  nor  to  any  one;  or  it  is  "Baddha" 
(bound  and  conditioned),  and  then  it  cannot  be  called  the 
ABSOLUTE  ;  the  limitation,  moreover,  necessitating  another 
deity  as  powerful  as  the  first  to  account  for  all  the  evil  in  this 
world.  Hence,  the  Arahat  secret  doctrine  on  cosmogony 
admits  but  of  one  absolute,  indestrnctible,  eternal,  and  uncreat- 
ed UNCONSCIOUSNESS  (so  to  translate),  of  an  element  (the  word 
being  used  for  want  of  a  better  term)  absolutely  independent 
of  everything  else  in  the  universe;  a  something  ever  present 
or  ubiquitous,  a  Presence  which  ever  was,  is  and  will  be, 
whether  there  is  a  God,  gods,  or  none;  whether  there  is  a 
universe,  or  no  universe;  existing  during  the  eternal  cycles  of 
Maha  Yugs,  during  the  Pralayas  ;  as  during  the  periods  of 
Manvantara:  and  this  is  Space,  the  field  for  the  operation  of 
the  eternal  Forces  and  natural  Law,  the  basis  (as  Mr.  Siibba 
Row  rightly  calls  it)  upon  which  take  place  the  eternal 

3ft 

intercorrelations  of  Akftsa-Prakriti,  guided  by  the  nnconscions 
regnlar  palsations  of  Sakti — the  breath  or  power  of  a  conscious 
deity,  the  theists  would  say, — the  eternal  energy  of  an  eternal, 
unconscious  Law,  say  the  Buddhists.  Space  then,  or  "Fan, 
Bar-uang"  (Maha  Sunyata)  or,  as  it  is  called  by  Lao-tze,  the 
"Emptiness"  is  the  nature  of  the  Buddhist  Absolute.  (See 
Confncins'  '*Praise  of  the  Abyss.'"}  The  word  jha^  then  could 
never  be  applied  by  the  Arahats  to  the  Seventh  Principle,  since 
it  is  only  through  its  correlation  or  contact  with  matter  that 
Fohat  (the  Buddhisb  active  energy)  can  develop  active 
conscious  life;  and  that  to  the  question  "how  can  Unconscious- 
ness generate  consciousness  T*  the  answer  would  be  "Was  the 
seed  which  generated  a  Bacon  or  a  Newton  self-conscious?" 

Note  V. 
To  our  European  readers:  Deceived  by  the  phonetic  similarity, 
it  must  not  be  thought  that  the  name  "Brahman"  is  identical 
in  this  connection  with  Brahma  or  Iswara — the  personal  God. 
The  Upanishads — the  Vedanta  Scriptures — mention  no  such 
God  and  one  would  vainly  seek  in  them  any  allusions  to  a 
conscious  deity.  The  Brahmam,  or  Parabrahm,  the  absolute 
of  the  Vedantins,  is  neuter  and  unconscious,  and  has  no  connec- 
tion with  the  masculine  Brahma  of  the  Hindu  Triad,  or 
■Trimurti.  Some  Orientalists  rightly  believe  the  name  derived 
from  the  verb  "Brih,"  to  grow  or  increase^  and  to  be  in  this 
sense,  the  universal  expansive  force  of  nature^  the  vivifying  and 
spiritual  principle,  or  power,  spread  throughout  the  universe 
and  which  in  its  collectivity  is  the  one  Absoluteness,  the  one 
Life  and  the  only  Reality, 

*'rHE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  SPIRIT: 

The  book  bearing  the  above  title,  and  professing  to  exponnd 
"the  philosophy  of  spirit"  contained  in  the  Bhagaiatgita^  has 
already  been  introduced  to  the  readers  of  the  "Thesophist" 
by  the  review  that  appeared  in  the  December  nnfnber,  and  the 
author's  reply  thereto  published  in  the  copy  of  March.  Con- 
Bidering  the  importance  of  the  issues  raised  by  the  author's 
publication,  and  the  two  articles  above  referred  to,  I  persuade 
myself  that  I  shall  be  justified  in  sifting,  with  some  minute- 
ness, the  conclusions  arrived  at  by  the  author  regarding  the 
authorship  and  philosophy  of  the  Bhagavatgita  and  its  esoteric 
basis  or  foundation.  As  the  author  has  not  merely  published 
his  own  speculations  regarding  the  subjects  dealt  with  in  that 
ancient  work,  but  informs  the  public  that  his  speculations  are 
in  perfect  accordance  with  the  ancient  philosophy  of  Vyasa,  1 
believe  I  have  a  right,  as  a  Hindu,  to  object  to  the  position 
taken  by  him,  if,  in  my  humble  opinion,  his  views  should  be  at 
variance  with  those  of  the  orthodox  pundits  and  the  initiates 
of  ancient  Aryavarta,  as  much  as  with  those  of  modern  India. 
And  I  hope  the  learned  gentleman  will  be  good  enough  to 
excuse  me,  if,  in  this  article,  I  may  be  under  the  painful 
necessity  of  dwelling  longer  on  what  1  conceive  to  be  the 
defects  of  his  work  than  on  its  merits.  Though  the  author 
does  not  seem  to  be  a  Spiritualist  in  the  sense  in  which  that 
term  is  used  by  the  so-called  modern  professors  of  that  name, 
still  he  has  attempted  to  give  a  philosophical  shape  to  their 
crude  notions  about  "disembodied  spirits";  and  any  intelligent 
and  profitable  discussion  of  the  real  points  of  difference  between 
Theosophy  and  Spiritualism  is  only  possible  with  writers  like 
Mr.  Oxley. 

In  this  article  I  shall  first  examine  the  author's  theory 
about  the  real  origin  of  sacred  writings  in  general  and  of  the 
Bhagavatgita  in  particular,  and  next,  in  his  remarks,  scattered 
throughout  the  book,  about  what  he  calls  the  Astro-Masonic 
basis  of  the  said  treatise,  and  his  views  about  some  of  the 
doctrines  therein  expluiued. 

41 

At  the  ontset,  it  is  necessary  to  apprehend  correctly 
Mr.  Oxley's  opinions  about  the  constitution  of  man  and  the 
progress  of  what  the  learned  author  is  pleased  to  call  •*  life- 
principle  "  after  death.  The  author  recognizes  the  trinity 
of  man,  and  names  the  three  entities  that  constitute  him — 
body,  spirit  and  soul.  He  calls  "  Soul  "  the  "  inmost  of  all," 
"  eternal,  incorruptible,  unchangeable  and  inseparable  from 
the  grand  Life,  called  God,"  while  describing  "  Spirit"  as  the 
*'  inner  or  intermediate  active  agent  which  guides,  propels 
and  uses  as  its  instrument  the  body,  or  that  covering  which 
is  exterior  to  itself"  (p.  221).  From  these  explanations  it  is 
apparent  that  the  author  means  by  "soul"  and  "  spirit  "  the 
same  entities  as  are  denoted  by  the  two  Sanskrit  terms  Atma 
(7th  principle)  and  Sookskmasatiram^  or  Lingasariram^  re- 
spectively. The  author  is  at  liberty  to  attach  any  connotations 
he  pleases  to  these  words,  as  no  definite  meaning  has  yet 
been  attached  to  them  by  English  writers.  But  1  do  not 
think  he  has  used  the  word  Spirit  in  the  sense  above  indicated 
throughout  his  book  ;  for,  he  further  says  that  there  are  12 
degrees  or  stages  of  ascent  (  p.  40  ),  which  the  life-principle  in 
man  has  to  pass  through  in  its  spiritual  progress  ;  and  we 
are  also  informed  that,  on  reaching  the  12th  stage,  man  be- 
comes an  angel.  Further  progress  from  angel-hood  upwards 
or  inwards  is  admitted,  though  the  author  does  not  undertake 
to  describe  it.  He  farther  proceeds  to  say  (  pp.  53,  56,  181, 
&c.,  )  that  particular  individuals  are  in  some  mysterious  way 
connected  with  particular  spiritual  communities  "  receiving 
their  life-influx"  from  them  and  imbibing  their  influence. 
And  every  human  being  will,  in  the  course  of  his  progress, 
become  an  angel  of  some  particular  description  or  other. 

Now  I  beg  to  submit,  with  all  due  respect  to  the  author's 
guru^  that  these  views  do  not  harmonize  with  the  teachings  of 
Vyasa  and  the  other  Rishis  of  ancient  Aryavarta.  The  dif- 
ference between  the  doctrines  of  the  ancient  Aryan  esoteric 
science  and  the  propositions  above  laid  down,  will  not  be  pro- 
perly appreciated  unless  the  meaning  attached  by  the  author 
6 

42 

to  the  word  angel  i»  first  ascertaitteil,  Thong-h  the  said  word 
is  no-wbere  defined  ia  his  book,  yefe  from  a  foot-note  in  page 
&3,  it  can  be  easily  seen  that  an  angel  means  Derata.  Those, 
who  are  aeqnainted  with  Sanskrit  mythology,  know  very  well 
that  there  are  several  classes  of  I>evata  ;  that  these  classes 
perish  at  the  end  of  each  Mantoantara*  and  that  new  classes 
or  tribes  {Ganants)  come  into  existence  at  the  beginning  of 
every  snbeeqnent  Manwantara.  It  will  also  be  seen,  from 
the  Hindu  turanas  and  the  Makabkarata  itself,  that  neither 
the  individnals  of  these  various  tribes,  nor  yet  the  tribes 
collectively,  undergo  any  change,  transmigration*  or  transla- 
tions into  a  higher  state,  or  a  higher  plane  of  existence.  No 
Hindn  has  ever  heard  of  a  Takska  or  Gandharva')  becoming 
a  Leva,  and  of  a  J)eva  becoming  a  higher  being.  The  really 
important  difference,  however,  between  the  author's  theory 
and  the  doctrines  of  the  ancient  Rishis,  consists  in  the  view 
taken  of  the  various  degress  or  "  states-being*'  in  a  man  and 
their  esoteric  significance.  The  author's  desire  to  find  some 
reference  to  the  12  signs  of  the  Zodiac  in  almost  everything 
connected  with  the  ancient  Aryan  religion  and  philosophy, 
has  probably  led  him  to  the  belief  that  there  are  12  degrees  in 
man  corresponding  to  the  12  signs  ot  the  Zodiac;  and  it 
would  also,  appear  that  such  was  his  gurus  teaching.  The 
author,  however,  has  no  right,  it  seems  to  me,  to  import  into 
the  Aryan  doctrine  either  his  guru's  teaching  or  his  own 
fancies,  unless  he  is  in  a  position  to  show  that  they  are  in 
aiccordance  with  the  teachings  of  the  ancient  Rishis.  1  shall 
now  state  what  the  Aryan  doctrine  really  teaches  as  regards 
these  states  or  degrees,  as  far,  of  course,  as  I  am  permitted  to 
say  in  an  article  intended  for  publication. 

The  5ei-6/i-/o^rf  classification  in  man  was  already  prominently 
brought  to  the  notice  of  the  readers  of  the  "  Theosophist"  in 

*  The  period  oi  Hegeneratton,  or  the  active  life  ol  the  nnirerse  between 
two  Pralayat  cr  universal  Desfcrnotion  :  the  former  being  called  the  "  day  " 
and  the  latter  the  "  night "  of  Brahma — En. 

t  Yaksha,  the  earth-spirit  or  GDome;  the  Oandharva,  akin  to  th« 
Christian  cherub  or  singing  teraph.  There  are,  says  Athana  Fcda^XI, 
&,  2,  ),  6,3"J3,  Gaiidharvas  in  tbeir  Loka. — Eir. 

4* 

Hie  article  headed  "Fragments  of  Occult  Truth,"*  and  in  a 
subseqaent  article,  referring  to  aad  completing  it,  published  in 
the  January  naraber  of  the  said  journal. f  These  sevea 
entities  in  man  represent  the  7  principles  that  constitute  him. 
Bat  the  Rishis  also  recognized  16  stages  of  ascent — not  12  as 
the  author  has  erroneously  supposed — from  Prithioi  Tattram 
np  to  **  the  eternal  aad  infinite  monad" — the  anfoides  that 
overshadows  every  mao,  the  blaeing  star  at  the  end  of  Skoda- 
santum  (end  of  the  16th  stage  of  ascent).  Busiris  himself, 
when  in  hatnan  form  cus  Krishni  Dwypayana  (!),  spoke  of 
Shodaidvttum,^  as  may  be  seen  from  the  many  sacred  writings 
attributed  to  Vyasa,  From  the  stand-poiat  of  Aryaa  phtlo* 
sophy,  the  author  is  right  in  saying  that  a  man  becomes 
perfect  on  reaching  the  11th  stage,  but  he  ia  wrong  in  saying 
that,  on  attaining  the  next  higher  step,  he  becomes  an  "angel" 
or  Deva.  The  nature  of  the  last  5  stages,  spoken  of  by  the 
ancient  Rishis,  is  not  clearly  understood  even  by  the  ordinarif 
imtiate.X  It  is  not  surprising,  then,  that  an  author,  like 
Mr.  Oxley,  who  attempts  to  interpret  the  ancient  Aryan  doc- 
trine without  knowing  either  the  Sanskrit  language,  the  Hindu 
systems  of  mythology,  the  Eastern  modes  of  allegorizing  spiri- 
tual truths,  or  the  physiology  and  psychology  as  taught  by  the 
ancients,  should  have  misunderstood  the  meaning  of  the  12th 
stage.  No  one,  who  correctly  understands  the  meaning  of  the 
8th  Adhyaya  (chapter)  of  the  Bhagavatgita,  and  compares  the 
original  with  the  author's  translation  of  the  said  chapter,  wilJ 
be  inclined  to  doubt  the  correctness  of  our  assertion.  In  that 
chapter,  Krishna,  speaking  of  the  future  state  of  the  human 
being  after  death,  says  that,  generally  speaking,  "the  life- 
printjiple"  in  man  (the  Karanasariram  probably  ?)  assumes 
the  shape  and  nature  of  that  being  or  entity  on  whom,  or  on 
which,  the  human  being  concentrates  his  attention  deeply. 
Therefore,   and  as  it  is  not  desirable  for  a  human  being  to 

*  "THEosPHIgT,"  October,  1881. 

\  <'  Tbe  Arjau-Arbat  Esoteric    Tenets    on  the  SereQ-Fold  Priaciple  ia 
Man. 
;  Au  iaitiat3  0l  the  pc«Iimin»r7  degrees. 

44 

contemplate  aoy  other  spiritual  entity  or  being  than  Krishna 
himself,  he  advises  Arjuna  to  centre  his  thoughts  in  him. 
Bat,  who  is  Krishna  ?  The  Bhagavatgita  does  not  leave  as 
in  any  doubt  about  this  question.  In  giving  an  account  of 
his  Vibhuti  (as  it  is  called  in  Sanskrit  )  Krishna  commences 
by  saying  "  Ahamatma  "*  (I  am  Atma—the  7th  principle 
in  man).  To  use  the  author's  phraseology,  he  is  the  "  soul" 
— the  inmost  principle  in  man.  The  author  admits  this  view 
in  certain  portions  of  his  book,  though,  for  the  purpose  of 
establishing  the  claims  of  Busiris  to  the  authorship  of  the 
"Mahabharata,"  a  diflferent  interpretation  would  perhaps  be 
necessary.  And,  in  recommending  the  contemplation  or 
Dhyan  of  one's  own  atma,  Krishna  points  out  two  different 
modes  of  doing  it,  in  the  9th,  12th  and  13th  Slokamihs  of  the 
chapter  above  mentioned.  The  author's  translation  of  the 
9th  Slokam  is  enough  to  convince  me  that  he  has  no  defininte 
idea  about  the  esoteric  meaning  therein  found,  and  that  he 
mistook  the  spiritual  being  or  entity  described  in  the  said 
Slokam  for  his  favourite  angel.  He  translates  the  significant 
Sanskrit  adjective — Furananit  as  if  it  meant  ^The  Ancient 
Angel,'*  I  shall  be  very  happy  indeed  to  learn  in  what 
Sanskrit  Lexicon  is  this  meaning  given,  or  what  are  the 
Sanskrit  words  used  in  the  Slokam  that  could  ever  suggest 
that  idea  of  an  "angel."  From  this  instance  of  mis-transla- 
tion, as  well  as  from  other  similar  instances,  which  will  be 
noticed  further,  I  am  justified  in  thinking  that  the  author's 
theories  were  formed  before  he  had  carefully  ascertained  the 
esoteric  meaning  of  the  Bhagavatgita\  and  that  he  simply 
attempted  to  find  support  for  his  individual  speculation  in  it, 
and  to  identify  modern  Spiritualism  (however  advanced)  with 
what  he  is  pleased  to  call  "  Ancient  Yogiuism"  (P.  87). 

In  fact,  in  the  Slokatn,  or  verse  in  question,  there  is  no  re- 
ference whatsoever  to  any  angel,  Deva  or  God.  The  last  five 
stages  in  the  ladder  of  ascent  have  exactly  the  same  meaning 

*  The  "I  AM,  That  I  am"  of  the  Biblical  Jehovah,  the  "I  am  who 
I  AM,"  or  Mazdao"  of  Ahuramazda  in  the  Zeud  Avcsta,  &c.  All  tbeije  are 
names  for  the  7tb  principle  in  man,— Ed. 

45 

that  is  given  by  the  esoteric  Baddhism  to  the  fonr  celestial 
*'  Dhyan-Baddhas"  and  "  Adi-Baddha."  Krishna  significantly 
alludes  to  the  Dhyan-Baddhas  in  the  9th  and  10th  Slokas,  and 
speaks  of  "Adi-Baddha" — the  state  or  condition  represented 
by  Pranava — in  the  succeeding  verses.*  While  he  applies 
the  wore  Purusha  to  these  "  Dhyan-Buddhas  "  he  speaks  of 
Adi-Buddhas,  as  if  it  were  merely  a  state  or  condition.f  The  two 
expressions,  Anusasitarum  and  Aditya-Varnam^  in  the  9th 
verse  may  give  the  author  a  clue  to  the  mystery  connected 
with  these  *'  Dhyan-Buddhas."  I  am  not  permitted  to  state  in 
an  article  the  views  of  the  ancient  Rishis  concerning  these  5 
stages — the  spiritual  counterparts  oithe  5  chambers  of  construe^ 
Hon  above  the  King's  chamber  in  the  great  Pyramid  of  Egypt 
— or  the  phliosophy  underlying  the  Buddhist  doctrine  regard- 
ing these  5  Buddhas.  Bat  it  is  enough  for  my  present  pur- 
pose to  state  that  these  celestial  "  Dhyan-Buddhas"  came  into 
existence  (according  to  Vyasa)  before  the  last  work  of  creation 
or  evolution  commenced,  and  consequently,  before  any  Deva 
or  Angel  was  evolved.  Therefore,  they  are  to  be  regarded  as 
occupying  a  higher  position  (in  a  spiritual  sense)  than  even 
Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Ishwara,  the  three  highest  gods  of  the 
Hindu  Pantheon — as  they  are  the  direct  emanations  of  Paj-a- 
brahman.  The  author  will  understand  my  meaning  clearly, 
when  he  examines  the  accounts  of  '*  creation  "  given  in  the 
Hindu  Puranas,  and  comes  to  comprehend  what  the  ancient 
Rishis  meant  by  Sanaha^  Sanandana^  Sanatkumara^  and  <Sa- 
natsujata. 

From  the  teachings  of  Krishna  himself,  as  disclosed  in  the 
chapter  under  examination,  it  is  clear  that  the  transformation 

*  Hence,  the  great  veneration  of  the  Buddhists  for  Bhagavatqita, — Ed. 

t"Adi' Buddha"  creates  the  four  celestial  Buddhas  or  "  Dhjans,"  in  our 
eaoteric  philosophy.  It  is  but  the  gross  misinterpretation  of  European 
Orieataiistfi,  entirely  ignorant  of  the  Arhat-doctrine,  tnat  gave  birth  to  the 
absurd  idea  that  the  Lord  Gautama  Buddlia  is  alleged  to  have  created  the 
five  Dhyan  or  celestial  Buddhas,  Adi-Buddha,  or,  in  one  sense,  Nirvana, 
"creating"  the  four  Buddhas  or  degrees  of  perfection — is  pregnant  with 
meaning  to  him  who  has  studied  even  the  fiindameatal  principle  of  the 
BcAhmAuical  and  Arbat  esQteric  doctriacii.— £o» 

46 

into  an  angel  after  death  (eveu  into  a  Bnsiris,  the  light-giver) 
is  not  a  state  or  position  which  is  so  devontly  to  be  wished 
for,  by  any  trne  Yogi.  The  ancient  Rishis  of  Aryavarta  have 
taken  considerable  pains  to  impress  npon  the  minds  of  their 
followers  tliat  the  human  spirit  (7th  principle)  has  a  dignity, 
power  and  sacreduesw  which  cannot  be  claimed  by  any  other 
God,  Deva  or  angel  of  the  Hinda  Pautheon;  •  and  hnniau 
beings  are  stated  in  the  Puranas  to  have  performed  actions 
which  all  the  33  crores  of  Devas  in  Swarga  were  unable  to 
perform.  Rama  in  ktiman  shape^  conqners  Ravana,  a  giant, 
who  drove  before  him  all  the  angel-bands  of  Heaven.  Krishna 
again,  in  human  form,  conqners  Narakasnra,  and  several  other 
Rakshasas  whom  even  Iiidra  was  unable  to  oppose.  And 
again  Arjnna — a  man  significantly  calld  by  Vyasa  "Nara," 
— succeeds  in  destroying  the  "Kalakayas"  and  the  **Nivata- 
kavachas"  (two  tribes  of  Rakshas  or  demons)  who  were  found 
invincible  by  the  "Devas,"  and  actaally  defeats  Indra  him- 
self with  the  help  of  his  friend,  Krishna.  If  the  learned 
author  is  pleased  to  read  between  the  lines  of  our  Puranas 
and  to  ascertain  the  grand  idea  which  found  expression  in 
«uch  myth«  and  allegories,  he  will  be  in  a  better  position  to 
know  the  opinion  of  oar  ancient  teachers  regarding  the  human 
spirit  (7th  principle)  and  its  supremacy  over  all  the  angels 
of  Swarga.  Even  on  "this  mundane  plane  of  existence  a 
Hindu  "Yogi"  or  a  Buddhist  "Arhat'*  aims  at  a  result  immea- 
surably higher  than  the  mere  2Xi^mmento{  Sioargam-. — name- 
ly, a  state  of  eternal  rest,  which  even  the  devas  do  not  com- 
prehend. And  I  can  safely  assure  the  author  that  an  eastern 
adept  wocild  not  consider  it  a  compliment  if  he  were  told  that 
he  would  reach  Swargam  after  death  or  that  he  would  become 
an  "angel."     Krishna  goes  to  the  length  of  saying  (chap.  8) 

*  In  view  of  this,  Qautama  Buddfaa,  after  his  inititatioti  into  the  myt- 
terie$  by  the  old  Brahman,  Hit  Ouru^  renouncing  gods,  Devas  and  personal 
deitj,  feeling  that  ttie  path  to  salvation  lay  not  in  vain  glorions  dogmas, 
and  the  lecognition  of  a  deity  outside  of  oneself,  renoancud  every  f^rrn  of 
theism  and — became  Buddha,  the  one  enlujhtened.  "  Aham  eva  param 
Bmhma,  "  1  am  my^eU  a  Br.ihma  (  a  god  ),  is  the  motto  of  every  Initiate. 
— Eo. 

47 

that  even  residence  in  Brahma  Loka  is  not  desirable  for  a 
man  who  cares  for  Sivaswarupa^nandm — the  KNOWLEDGE 
OF  SELF. 

Under  snch  circumstances,  it  i»  with  considerable  astonish- 
ment that  every  Hiudn  will  receive  the  author's  astoanding 
assertion  that  "Bosiris,  the  angel'* — (viewing  him  absolntely 
in  the  sense  that  the  author  would  have  as  view  him) — made 
an  announcement  sometime  ago  in  a  seance-room  at  MaO' 
Chester  or  London  to  the  effect  that  he  was  the  author  of  the 
Mahahharata  ?  If  the  author's  declaration  or  announcenrent 
means  the  entity  or  life  "life-principle,"  which  was  represent- 
ed by  Vyasa  on  the  mundane  plane  of  exsitence  5,000  years 
ago,  is  now  represented  by  Bnsiris  on  the  Angelic  plane  of 
existence,  or,  to  express  the  same  thing  in  other  words,  thai 
Vyasa  is  now  an  angel  called  Bnsiris — his  Hindu  readers  will 
not  be  able  to  reconcile  it  with  the  teachings  of  their  ancient 
Rishis;  unless  they  are  willing  to  admit  that  Vyasa^  insted  of 
being,  during  his  life-time,  a  great  Risbi  on  earth,  was 
neither  an  adept,  not  even  an  initiate,  but  merely  a  worshipper 
of  a  particular  Angel  or  Deva,  who  spent  his  life-time  in  the 
contemplation  of  that  Deva  longing  all  the  while  for  "angel- 
hood," a  dwelling  in  Staargam  (or  paradise)  after  death. 

With  these  preliminary  remarks,  1  shall  now  proceed  to 
consider  the  claims  of  Busiris  to  the  authorship  of  the  MaTta^ 
bharata.  The  various  passages,  referring  to  this  subject,  in 
Mr.  Oxley's  book,  may  point  to  either  of  the  following  con- 
clusions:— 

(1)  That  Vyasa  is  now  an  angel,  called  "Bnsiris,"  as  ex- 
plained in  the  foregoing,  and  that,  in  writing  his  epic  poena, 
he  was  inspired  by  the  angel— collectively  called  Bnsiris, 

(2)  That,  even  supposing  Vyasa  has  already  attained  M^k' 
ska^  or  Nirvana,  and  reached  a  higher  plane  of  existence  thaa 
that  of  an  angel,  still  he  is  changed  with  having  composed  the 
Mahabharata  and  the  Bhagicatgita,  through  inspiration  re- 
ceived from  the  band  of  angels  or  Detagnanam,  now  collectively 
represented  by  "Busiris,"  the  ligfd-giar. 

4^ 

Taking  either  of  those  two  propositionf,  one  may  natnrally 
expect  that  some  evidence  will  be  fonnd  either  in  the  Bhaga.- 
VATGITA  or  the  remaining  portions  of  the  Bharata  in  support 
of  them.  And,  as  the  author  assures  us  (p.  181)  that  the 
individuals,  who  collect  the  utterances  of  angelic  intelligences 
and  reduce  them  to  written  form,  very  "  wisely  keep  their  own 
personalities  in  the  shade,"  we  are  led  to  believe  that  this  ex- 
pectation is  likely  to  be  realised.  But  the  whole  of  the  inter- 
nal evidence,  gathered  by  the  author  on  behalf  of  his  angelic 
hero,  amounts  only  to  this  : — 

1.  Vyasa  means  a  "  Recorder:  "  therefore  the  word  was 
purposely  applied  to  Krishna  Dwapayana  to  indicate  his  real 
position  as  regards  the  authorship  as  the  Mahabharata. 

Now  1  beg  to  submit,  in  reply  to  this  argument,  that  Vyasa 
does  not  exactly  mean  a  recorder',  but  that  it  means  one  who 
expands  or  amplifies.  The  thing  or  doctrine  explained  or 
amplified  by  him,  is  a  mystery  to  the  uninitiated  public.  This 
terra  was  applied  to  the  HiaaEST  Gum  in  India  in  ancient 
times;  and  the  author  will  be  able  to  find  in  the  "  Linga 
Puran  "  that  the  author  of  the  Mahabharata  was  the  28th 
Vyasa  in  the  order  of  succession.  I  shall  not  now  attempt 
to  explain  the  real  meaning  of  the  28  incarnations  therein 
mentioned, t  bnt  I  shall  only  say   that  the  entity,   amplified 

•  In  no  case  can  the  term  be  translated  as  "Recorder,"  we  should  say. 
Bather  a  "Revealer,"  who  explains  the  mysteries  to  the  neophyte  or  candi- 
date for  initiation  by  expanding  and  amplifying  to  him  the   meaning. — Ed. 

t  To  one,  tvho  has  even  a  vague  notion  how  the  mysteries  of  old  were 
conducted,  and  of  the  present  Axhat  system  in  Tibet  vaguely  termed  the 
"Re-incarnation  System"  of  the  Dalai-Lamas,  the  meaning  will  be  clear. 
The  chief  Hierophant  who  imparted  the  "word"  to  his  successor  had  to  die 
bodily.  Even  Moses  dies  after  having  laid  his  hands  upon  Joshua,  who 
thus  became  '*full  of  the  spirit  of  wisdom  of  Moses,"  and — it  is  the  "Lord" 
who  is  said  to  have  buried  him.  The  reason  why  "  no  man  knoweth  of  his 
sepulchre  unto  this  day,"  is  plain  to  an  Occultist  who  knows  anything  of 
the  supreme  initiation.  There  cannot  be  tioo  "ELighcai"  Gurus  or  Hiero- 
phauts  on  earth,  living  at  the  same  time. — Eo. 

49 

and  expanded  by  these  Mahatmas*  for  the  instrnction  of  their 
highest  circle  of  disciples  was  Pkanava  ( see  "  Kurma 
Parana  '*  ).  The  author  will  be  able  to  learn  something  aboat 
this  mysterious  ampliiication  of  Pranava  only  in  the  sacred 
region  where  ISwedenbiirg  advised  his  readers  to  search  for  the 
"Lost  Word,"  and  in  a  few  unexplored  and  unknown  localities 
in  India. 

II.  5iiw?aya-^according  to  Mr.  Oxley— was  purposely 
introduced  into  the  story  to  give  to  the  reader  an  indication  of 
the  way  in  which  divine  truths  were  communicated  by  "  Busi- 
ris  "  to  Vyasa.  On  page  61  the  author  writes,  in  this  con- 
nection, as  follows  : — '*  Sanjaya  means  a  messenger^  (  and,  if 
interpreted  by  modern  Spiritualist  experiences,  refers  to  the 
communicating  spirit  or  angel )  who  is  gradually  absorbed  into 
the  individuality  of  the  organism  of  the  recorder  who  assumes 
the  name  or  title  of  Krishna.  " 

It  will  be  very  interesting  to  know  on  whose  authority  the 
author  says  that  Sanjaya  in  Sanskrit  means  a  messenger  ?  No 
one  would  feel  inclined  to  quarrel  with  him,  if  he  only  gave 
fanciful  names  to  imaginary  angels.  But  is  it  fair,  on  the 
author's  part,  to  misconstrue  Sanskrit  names  without  posses- 
sing any  knowledge  of  that  language,  and  to  represent,  to  the 
English  and  Indian  public,  that  the  "  crude  notions "  of 
modern  Spiritualists  and  his  own  speculations  completely  har- 
monize with  the  teachings  of  the  sacred  books  of  the  Aryans  ? 
The  author  says  (p.  55 )  that — 

*' An  understanding  of  the  grand  L'.w  of  Influx  (but  little 
dreamt  of  and  still  less  comprehended  by  the  mass),  enables  us 
to  receive  the  statement  of  the  new  Angel  Busiris,  that  he  was 
the  author  of  the  Mahabharata.  " 

Though  I  do  not  know  much  about  the  author's  *'  grand  Law 
of  Influx,  "  I  know  of  a  particular  Law  of  e^ux  (  but  little 
dreamt  of  by  authors  and  still  less   comprehended  by   their 

•  "  Grand  Souls "  in  literal  translation;  a  name  given  to  the  great 
adepts. — Ed. 

7 

50 

readers  )  which  enables  me  to  perceive  that  mere  fancies  are 
often  mistaken  for  realities,  especially  when  the  said  authors 
think  that  they  are  "inspired." 

If  Sanjaya  really  represented  the  angelic  intelligence  which 
communicated  the  truths  embodied  in  the  Bhagvatgita  to 
Vyasa,  it  is  surprising  to  find  in  the  last  chapter — the  very 
chapter,  in  fact,  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  author,  contains 
the  key  for  the  clear  understanding  of  the  whole  philosophy — 
Sanjaya  informing  Dhritarashtra  that  6y  favour  of  Vyasa 
(Vyasa  prasadana)  he  was  able  to  hear  the  mystic  truths  re- 
vealed by  Krishna.  Sanjaya's  meaning  would  be  rendered 
clear  by  the  account  of  the  arrangement  made  by  the  Vyasa 
for  getting  information  of  the  war  between  the  Pandavas  and 
the  Kouravas  to  the  blind  Dhritarashtra  given  at  the  com- 
mencement of  iiheeshmaparva.  Vycoa,  in  fact,  endowed 
Sanjaya,  for  the  time  being,  with  the  pow^is  of  Dooradrishti 
and  Doorasravanami  and  made  him  invulnerable,  so  that  he 
might  be  present  on  the  battle-field  and  report  everything  to 
the  blind  old  man.  These  facts  recorded  in  the  **Mahabhara- 
ta"  are  quite  inconsistent  with  the  author's  theory  unless  we 
are  prepared  to  admit  that  Vyasa  has  published  deliberate 
falsehoods,  with  the  intention  of  concealing  the  real  author- 
ship of  the  "Mahabharata.'*  But  the  author  informs  us  that 
"recorders,"  like  Vyasa,  "very  wisely  keep  their  own  person- 
alities in  the  shade."  I  must,  therefore,  assume  that  the 
author's  suppositions  about  Sanjaya  and  angelic  intelligences 
are  erroneous  until  the  facts  are  proved  to  be  incorrect. 

III.  Again  in  page  54  of  his  book,  in  giving  his  interpreta- 
tion of  the  words  Krishna  and  Dwypai/ana,  he  says  that 
Krishna  means  black,  and  Dwypayana,  difficult  to  attain^  which 
**spiritnally  interpreted  symbolises  the  states  of  mankind  to 
whom  the  revelation  was  made." 

The  author  evidently  means  to  suggest,  by  this  passage, 
that  the  appellation  given  to  Vyasa  contains  some  evidence 
of  the  revelation  made  by  Busiris.  And  here,  again,  the 
author  is  misinterpreting  the  Sanskrit  word  "  Dwypayana  "j 

51 

to  create  a  fresh  evidence  for  his  favonrite  thieory.  This  name 
was  given  to  Vyasa,  because  he  was  borne  in  a  Dweepam  or 
island  (on  the  Ganges)  as  will  be  seen  from  the  "Bharata** 
itself.  Unless  the  anthor  can  successfully  demonstrate  that 
all  the  Sanskrit  words  he  has  misconstrred  really  belong  to 
the  mysterious  language  to  which  the  two  words  she  has 
selected — "  Osiris  "  and  "  Busiris  '* — belong,  and  which  h& 
alone  can  understand,  mistakes,  like  these,  cannot  but  produce 
an  unfavourable  impression  upon  the  mind  of  the  Hindu 
reader. 

This  is  the  whole  of  the  internal  evidence  brought  to  light 
by  the  learned  author  in  support  of  the  claims  of  Busiris.  If 
such  evidence  is  really  worse  than  useless,  for  the  reasons 
above-mentioned,  on  what  other  grounds  are  we  to  admit  the 
truth  of  the  alleged  declaration  made  by  Busiris  in  England  ? 
The  author  is  likely  to  take  up  his  stand  on  his  theory  about 
the  composition  of  sacred  books  in  general,  and  on  the  direct 
evidence  supplied  by  the  claimant  himself. 

As  regards  the  first  of  the  two  propositions  above-mentioned^ 
I  have  already  shown  that,  to  the  Hindu  mind,  the  fact  that 
Vyasa  was  an  adept  and  a  Mahatma  in  his  life-time,  and  that 
other  fact  that  he  is  now  an  angel  or  Deva — are  irreconcilable* 
I  cidmit  that  there  is  no  prima  facie  improbability  in  the  fact 
of  an  angel  giving  information  to  a  mortal,  although  my 
opinions,  regarding  the  nature  of  so-called  "angels,**  differ 
vastly  from  those  of  Lhe  author.  But  no  one,  I  venture  to 
affirm,  who  is  acquainted  with  Eastern  adepts  and  the  powers 
possessed  by  them,  will  be  willing  to  admit  that  an  adept  like 
Vyasa  would  ever  be  under  the  necessity  of  learning  spiritual 
truths  from  an  angel  or  a  Deva.  The  only  infallible  source  of 
inspiration  with  respect  to  the  highest  spiritual  truths,  recog- 
nized and  respected  by  an  Eastern  adept,  is  the  eternal  and 
infinite  monad — his  own  Atma,  in  fact.  He  may  make  use  of 
the  assistance  of  the  elementals  and  the  semi-intelligent 
powers  of  nature  whenever  he  is  pleased  to  do  so.  But  his 
own  inherent  powers  can  give  him  all  the  iuformutiou,  or 

52 

instrnction  which  angels  like  Basiris  can  ever  give  him.  I  do 
not  profess  to  say  anything  about  the  way  in  which  spiritual 
truths  are  being  learnt  by  the  "adepts"  of  France,  the 
"adepts"  of  America,  and,  probably,  also  the  adepts  of 
Patagonia  and  Zululand  alluded  to  by  *'Alif"  in  his  review 
of  the  author's  book  in  the  "Psychological  Review,";  but 
Vyasa  was  an  Eastern  adept  ;  and,  it  must  be  presumed 
that  he  possessed  at  least  the  powers  now  exercised  by 
adepts  in  Tibet  and  India.  In  the  Hindu  PuranaSi  there  are, 
no  doubt,  instances  recorded  of  initiates  having  received  infor- 
mation and  instruction  through  the  assistance  of  intelligent 
powers  of  nature.  But  there  is  very  little  resemblance  between 
such  powers  and  angels  like  Busiris.  When  the  author  suc- 
ceeds in  finding  out  the  mode  in  which  an  adept  communicates 
with  these  powers,  and  obtains  a  clue  to  construe  the  cipher 
which  nature  herself  us33,  he  will  be  in  a  better  position  to 
understand  the  difference  between  spirit  communion  in  a 
stance-room  and  the  way  in  which  initiates  of  Ancient 
Aryavarta  gathered  their  information  on  various  subjects. 
But  what  necessity  was  there  for  anything  like  special  revela- 
tion in  the  case  of  the  Mahabharata  ?  As  regards  the  facts 
of  history  mentioned  thereiu,  there  could  not  be  any  need  for 
Vyasa's  interiors  being  opened;"  as  he  had  merely  to  record 
the  events  occurring  before  his  very  eyes.  He  was,  in  fact, 
the  "father"  of  Pandu  and  Dhritarashtra,  and  all  the  events 
mentioned  in  the  Mahabharata  took  place  during  his  lifetime. 
As  regards  the  various  philosophical  discourses  such  as 
Bhagvatgita  in  "Bheeshmaparvam,"  "Sanat  Sujatyam"  in 
<'Udyogaparvam"  and  Uttaragita  in  "Anisasanikaparvam," 
many  of  the  learned  Pundits  of  India  are  of  opinion  that 
orginally  they  were  not  iocluded  in  the  Mahabharata. 
Whatever  may  be  the  strength  of  the  reasons  given  by  them 
for  saying  so,  it  is  clear  to  those,  who  are  acquainted  with  the 
real  history  of  Aryan  thought,  that  all  the  esoteric  science  and 
philosophy  contained  in  the  Mahabharata  existed  long  before 
Vyasa  was  born.  This  work  did  not  mark  the  advent  of  a 
new  era  in  Aryan   philosophy  or  introduce  into  the  Aryan 

53 

world  a  new  Dispensation,  as  the  author  has  imagined. 
Though  Vyasa  is  generally  spoken  of  as  the  founder  of  the 
Vedantic  Doctrine,  it  was  not  for  the  Mahabharata,  or  any- 
thing contained  in  it,  that  he  obtained  this  title,  but  on 
account  of  his  celebrated  Brahmasutras  which  are  supposed 
to  contain  a  complete  exposition  of  the  doctrines  taught  by  the 
Vedantic  school.  This  book  is  particularly  referred  to  in  the 
5th  verse  of  the  13th  chapter  of  the  Bhagvatqita,  where 
Krishna  informs  Arjuna,  that  the  nature  of  Kshatram  and 
Kshatragna  has  been  fully  defiued  in  the  Bhrahmdsutras.  Not 
knowing  anything  about  the  exsitence  of  this  great  philosophi- 
cal work,  the  author  thought  that  the  Sanskrit  expression 
Brahmasutras  merely  meant  "  precepts  taught  of  troths 
divine."  If  the  author  had  known  anything  about  the  impor- 
tance of  the  work  in  question,  Busiris  would,  no  doubt,  have 
announced  himself  by  this  time  the  author  of  the  Brahmasut- 
ras also.  If  these  Sutras  were  composed  by  Vyasa  before 
Krishna  revealed  the  truths  of  the  Bhagvatgita  to  Arjuna,  as 
we  are  led  to  infer  from  the  words  used  in  this  Slokam,  there 
was  no  necessity  whatsoever  for  the  assistance  of  Busiris  in 
composing  the  Bhagvatgita,  as  the  "philosophy  of  spirit" 
contained  in  it  was  already  fully  contained  in  the  said  Sutras. 
The  author  will  probably  say  :  "  I  see  no  reason  why  I 
should  not  believe  the  statement  made  by  Busiris."  He  may 
argue  that  he  knows  for  certain  that  "  it  was  made  by  an 
angel ;  and  as  an  angel  cannot,  under  any  circumstances,  utter 
a  falsehood,"  he  has  to  believe  that  "the  Mahabharata  is 
really  the  production  of  Busiris." 

The  learned  author  has  informed  the  public  in  page  51  of 
his  book,  that,  after  making  the  important  declaration  that  he 
was  the  author  of  the  Mahabharata,  Busiris  proceeded  "to 
give  an  interesting  account  of  the  civilization  and  manners 
and  customs  of  the  inhabitants  in  his  day,  long  antecedent  to 
the  system  of  caste  which  now  prevails  in  India."  Unfor- 
tunately we  do  not  find  the  whole  of  this  interesting  account 
published  by  the  learned  author  for  the  benetit  of  the  public* 

-^54 

Bnt  the  only  statement  of  an  historical  importance  contained 
in  the  sentence  above  qnoted — that  the  system  of  caste  did  not 
prevail  at  the  time  when  Basiris  was  in  India  in  human  form — ■ 
is  such  as  to  make  everyone  who  is  acquainted  with  Indian 
history  doubt  the  veracity  of  Busiris.  Rig-veda  speaks  of  the 
four  castes  of  the  Hindus  (see  MaxMuller*s  Lectures,  &c.;, 
and,  as  the  author  admits  that  Rig-veda  existed  long  before 
the  composition  of  the  Mahabharata,  the  system  of  caste  must 
have  also  existed  before  Basiris  had  appeared  in  human  form 
in  this  country.  Again,  "  Santiparvam  "  and  "  Anusasanika- 
parvam "  of  the  Mahabharata  will  distinctly  show  to  the 
author  that  the  system  of  caste  existed  when  Busiris  was  living 
here  as  Vyasa.  And,  moreover,  in  the  13th  verse  of  the  4th 
chapter  of  the  Bkagvatgita  itself,  Krishna  says  that  he  had 
already  created  the  four  divisions  of  caste  ("  Chaturvarnam 
maya  sreshtam  ").  This  statement  of  Busiris,  then,  is  clearly 
wrong.  It  is  very  surprising  that  an  angel  should  lose  his 
memory  in  the  course  of  his  transformation  from  man  to  angel, 
or  should  wilfully  make  false  statements  with  reference  to 
well-known  facts  of  history.  Under  such  circumstances,  no 
one  will  be  prepared  to  admit  that  Busiris  was  the  author  of 
the  great  poem,  if  there  is  no  other  evidence  in  support  of  it, 
bat  the  value  of  his  own  statements. 

We  have  thus  seen  the  degree  of  reliance  that  can  be  placed 
on  the  revelation  from  angels,  who  delight  in  giving  now  and 
then  sensational  news  to  the  public  through  their  fr  ends  and 
admirers  in  seance-rooms.  So  long  as  the  so-called  celebrated 
"Historical  Controls"  continue  to  give  incorrect  information 
regarding  the  events  and  facts  in  history,  the  public  in 
general,  and  the  Hindus  in  particular,  ought  to  be  excused  for 
not  giving  credence  to  all  that  is  claimed  by  Spiritualists  on 
behalf  of  the  "disembodied  spirit"  and  "spirit  communion." 

I  have  purposely  abstained  from  saying  anything  about  the 
real  agency  at  work  in  producing  the  so-called  spirit  manifes- 
tations, and  from  testing  Busiris  and  his  pretensions  by  exa- 
mining the  very  basis  of  modern  Spiritualism   from   its  first 

55 

■principles.  Unless  the  real  points  of  divergence  between 
Spiritualism  and  Theosophy  in  their  fundamental  doctrines 
are  first  settled,  there  will  be  little  or  no  profit  in  stating 
merely  the  conclusions  arrived  at  by  Theosophists  about  the 
stance-room  phenomena.  Conclusions  based  on  the  systematic 
investigation  and  discoveries  made  by  the  brightest  intellects 
of  Asia,  for  thousands  of  years,  are  liable  to  be  often  mistaken 
for  idle  speculations  and  whimsical  hypotheses,  if  the  ground, 
on  which  they  rest,  is  masked  from  view.  I  can  hardly  be 
expected  to  undertake  a  complete  discussion  of  the  subject 
within  the  limits  of  one  article.  I  have  already  given  a  brief 
and  general  statement  of  my  views  about  Spiritualism  in  a 
paper  published  in  the  "  Theosophist" 

As  the  present  review  has  already  reached  an  inordinate 
length,  I  shall  now  bring  it  to  a  close.  The  author's  views 
about  the  Astro-Masonic  basis  of  the  Bhagvatgita  and  his 
elucidation  of  some  of  its  imporatant  doctrines  will  be  examined 
in  my  next  paper. 

An  article  by  Mr.  W-  Oxley,  under  the  above  heading, 
has  appeared  in  the  Theosophist.  It  is  intended  to  be  a 
reply  to  the  strictures  contained  in  my  review  of  "  Tho 
Philosophy  of  Spirit,"  published  in  the  Theosophist  ; 
but  a  considerable  portion  of  it  is  devoted  to  the  exposi- 
tion of  some  of  the  important  doctrines  of  what  is  termed 
"Hierosophy  and  Theosophy,"  as  understood  by  the  author. 
I  shall  first  examine  the  author's  defence  of  Busiris  and  the 
statements  contained  in  his  treatise  on  "  The  Philosophy 
of  Spirit "  regarding  the  authorship  of  Mahabharata,  and 
then  proceed  to  point  out  his  misconceptions  of  the  real 
doctrines  of  "  Theosophy,"  and  the  fanciful  nature  of  his 
speculations  on  the  doctrines  of  the  new  system  of  Esoteric 
Philosophy  and  Science,  which,  it  is  confidently  predicted,  will 
soon  supplant  the  existing  systems  of  Eastern  Brotherhoods^ 
and  which  is  hereufter  to  be  known  under  the  name  of 
"Hierosophy.'' 

58 

Mr.  Oxley  is  pleased  to  state  at  the  comraenceraent  of  his 
article,  that  whatever  may  be  the  views  of  ^'■orthodox  Bramr 
kins"  regarding  his  theories  and  specnlations,  "enlightened 
Buddhists"  would  not  be  unwilling  to  synapathize  with  and 
receive  him  as  an  ally  in  the  work  of  reform. 

Buddhists  may  not  be  very  much  interested  either  in  Bha- 
gavatgita,  its  authorship,  or  its  correct  interpretation,  and 
consequently  they  may  not  take  the  trouble  of  arriving  at  any 
particular  conclusions  about  the  correctness  of  the  authors* 
interpretation  of  its  philosophy,  or  the  justness  of  his  views 
concerning  its  authorship.  But  if  the  author  would  publish 
another  small  treatise  to  explain  the  philosophy  of  spirit 
contained  either  in  the  Tripitakas,  or  in  the  Dharma  Chakkra 
Pravartana  Sutra,  and  assert  that  the  real  authors  of  these 
works  were  better  known  to  certain  mediums  in  England  than 
to  all  the  Buddhist  Lamas  and  Arhats  put  together,  that  they 
were,  in  fact,  certain  angels  called  by  names  which  they  never 
heard  in  their  lives,  and  that  Gautama  Buddha's  interiors  were 
opened  to  let  in  spiritual  light  and  wholesome  life  influx  from 
the  sphere  of  solar  angels,  he  will  have  an  opportunity  of 
ascertaining  the  opinion  of  "enlightened  Buddhists"  on  the 
real  value  of  his  speculations  and  the  extent  of  their  usefulness 
in  promoting  the  cause  of  Buddhist  philosophy  and  Buddhist 
reform.  I  hardly  ever  expected  that  a  philosopher  of 
Mr.  Oxley's  pretensions  would  think  it  proper  to  attack  ortho- 
dox Bramhinism  and  inform  the  public  that  his  reading  of 
the  doings  of  orthodox  people  in  past  history  and  observations 
of  their  spirit  and  action  in  present  times  has  not  left  a  very 
favourable  impression  on  his  mind,  when  the  said  statement 
is  perfectly  irrelevant  to  the  argument  in  question.  Bnsiria 
must,  indeed,  have  been  reduced  to  desperate  straits  when  this 
counter-attack  on  "orthodox  Bramhinism"  is  considered 
necessary  to  save  him  from  annihilation.  But  what  does 
Mr.  Oxley  know  of  "orthodox  Bramhins.?"  So  far  as  I  can. 
Bee,  his  knowledge  of  the  doctrines  of  orthodox  Bramhinism 
is  all   derived  froni   the  perusal  of  a  few  incorrect  Englieh 

57 

translations  of  Bhagavat-Gita;  he  is  confessedly  ignorant  of 
the  Sanskrit  langnage,  and  is,  therefore,  unable  to  derive  in- 
formation from  any  ot  our  Sanskrit  works.  He  mast  have 
based  his  assertion,  perhaps,  on  the  statements  of  some  inter- 
ested missionaries,  who  are  generally  fond  of  abasing  orthodox 
Brahminism  when  they  find  themselves  unable  to  convert 
Hindus  to  their  creed  by  fair  argument.  Under  such  circum- 
stances, what  is  the  good  of  informing  his  readers  that  he  does 
not  patronize  "orthodox  Brahminism,"  when  he  is  not  pre- 
pared to  point  out  in  what  respects  orthodox  Brahminism  is 
bad,  and  how  far  my  connection  with  it  has  tended  to  vitiate 
my  arguments  against  the  claims  of  Busiris  to  the  authorship 
of  Mahabharata  ?  1  beg  to  inform  the  author  that  if  there  is 
reason  to  condemn  any  of  the  rites,  ceremonies,  or  practices 
of  modern  Brahmins,  their  Brahminism  would  be  heterodox 
Brahminism,  and  not  orthodox  Brahminism.  The  true  ortho- 
dox Brahmins  are  the  children  of  the  mysterious  Fire-mist 
known  to  Eastern  Occultists.  The  two  Sanskrit  words,  Badaba 
and  Badabaya,  generally  applied  to  Brahmins,  will  reveal  to 
the  author  the  real  basis  of  orthodox  Brahminism,  if  he  can 
but  understand  their  significance.  The  real  orthodox  Brahmin 
is  the  Astml  man  and  his  religion  is  the  only  true  religion  in 
the  world;  it  is  as  eternal  as  the  mighty  law  which  governs 
the  Universe.  It  is  this  grand  religion  which  is  the  founda- 
tion of  Theosophy.  Mr.  Oxley  is  but  enunciating  a  truism — a 
truism  to  Theosophists,  at  least, — when  he  says  that  *'esoteric 
truth  is  one  and  the  same  when  divested  of  the  external  garb 
in  which  it  is  clothed."  It  is  from  the  stand-point  of  this  esoteric 
trnth,  that  I  have  examined  the  theories  of  the  author  explained 
in  his  book,  and  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  they  were  mere 
fancies  and  speculations,  which  do  not  harmonize  with  the  doc- 
trines of  the  ancient  WiSDOM-RELroioN  which,  in  my  humble  opi- 
nion, is  identical  with  the  real  orthodox  Brahminism  of  ancient 
Aryavarta  and  the  pre-Vedic  Buddhism  of  Central  Asia.  I  shall 
now  request  my  readers  to  read  my  review  of  "The  Philosophy 
of  Spirit"  in  connection  with  the  article  under  consideration 
fully  to  appreciate  the  relevancy  of  Mr.  Oxley 's  arguments. 
8 

58 

I  stated  in  ray  review  that  as  regards  the  facts  of  history 
mentioned  in  Mahabharata,  there  conld  not  be  any  need  for 
Yyasa's  "interiors  being  opeoed,"  and  that  as  regards  the 
philosophy  contained  therein,  there  was  no  necessity  for 
anything  like  a  special  revelation  by  angels  like  Busiris. 
The  learned  author  objects  to  this  statement  for  two  reasons 
which  may  be  stated  as  follows  : — 

I, — Veclic  allegories  have  abont  as  mnch  literal  historical 
trnth  in  them  as  the  Hebraic  allegories,  &e. 

Therefore,  Mahabharata  does  not  contain  d^ny  facts  of  history. 
It  is  hardly  necessary  for  me  to  poiot  oat  the  fallacy  and 
worthlessness  of  such  an  argument.  Argument  No.  II.  is  still 
more  ridiculous;  when  stated  in  plain  language,  it  stands 
thus : — 

Orthodoxy  insists  on  a  literal  interpretation  of  such  books 
as  Mahabharata. 

Mr.  Oxley  is  not  favourably  disposed  towards  "Orthodoxy." 

And,  therefore,  it  necessarily  follows  that  Mahabharata 
contains  no  facts  of  history,  and  that  Vyasa's  "interiors  were 
opened"  to  let  in  light  from  Busiris, 

Having  urged  these  two  useless  arguments  in  defence  of 
Busiris,  the  learned  author  proceeds  to  notice  the  sixteen  states 
mentioned  in  my  review,  after  giving  me  due  warning,  that  1 
should  meet  him  as  a  Theosophist,  and  not  as  an  orthodox 
Brahmin.  He  says  that  as  his  twelve  states  are  qualities,  he 
has,  in  fact,  twenty-four  states  when  I  have  only  sixteen,  and 
treating  these  latter,  according  to  his  own  method,  he  asserts 
that  Eastern  Theosophists  have  not  gone  beyond  his  eighth 
stage  of  ascent.  If  I  were  to  tell  him  in  reply  to  this  state- 
ment, that  my  states  are  also  dualities,  he  will  probably  say 
that  his  twelve  states  are  so  many  trinities.  Any  how, 
Mr.  Oxley's  number  must  be  greater  than  my  number;  and  this 
is  the  grand  result  to  be  achieved  at  any  cost  Mr.  Oxley 
will  do  well  to  remember  that  just  as  a  geometrical  line  may 
be  divided   into  parts  in  an  infinite  number  .of  ways,  this  lin© 

59 

of  ascent  may  similarly  be  divided  into  various  stages  in  aa 
ittQamerable  number  of  ways-  And,  in  order  to  astertaia 
whether  the  very  last  stage  reached  by  Eastern  adepts  in 
higher  or  lower  than  the  last  stage  conceived  by  Mr.  Oxiey 
he  ought  to  examine  carefully  the  characteristics  of  our  last 
stage,  instead  of  merely  comparing  the  number  of  stages  with- 
out knowing  anything  about  the  basis  of  our  division.  I  beg 
to  submit  that  the  existence  of  any  state  or  condition  beyond 
the  Shodasanthnm  (sixteenth  state)  emntioned  in  my  review 
is  altogether  inconceivable.  For,  it  is  the  Thureeya-kala 
which  is  Nishkala  ;  it  is  the  Grajid  Nothing  from  which  is 
evolved,  by  the  operation  of  the  external  law,  every  existence^ 
whether  physical,  astral,  or  spiritual;  it  is  the  condition  of 
Final  Negation — the  Maha  Suuyam,  the  Nirvana  of  the 
Buddhists.  It  is  not  the  blazing  star  itself,  but  it  is  the 
condition  of  perfect  unconciousness  of  the  entity  thus  indi- 
cated, as  well  as  of  the  "*Sif«,"  which  is  supposed  to  be  beyond 
the  said  star. 

The  learned  author  next  points  out  that  there  cannot  be  any 
difficulty  or  objection  "to  accepting  as  a  possibility,  that  the 
actual  author  of  Mahabharata  should  put  in,  not  an  objective, 
but  a  subjective,  appearance  in  London,  or  elsewhere  if  he 
chose  so  tO'do^  Quite  true;  but  he  will  never  choose  to  do  so. 
And  consequently,  when  such  subjective  appearance  is  stated 
to  have  taken  place,  very  strong  grounds  will  be  required  to 
support  it.  So  far  as  I  can  see,  all  the  evidence  is  against  the 
said  statement.  Subjective  appearances  like  these  are  gener- 
ally very  deceptive.  The  mischievous  pranks  of  Pisachams  or 
clementals  may  be  often  mistaken  for  the  subjective  appear- 
ances of  solar  angles  or  living  adepts.  The  author's  statement 
about  the  supposed  astral  visits  of  "the  venerable  Koot- 
Hoomi"  is  now  contradicted  by  Koot-Hoomi's  chela  under  the 
orders  of  his  Master.  Unfortunately,  Bnsiris  has  no  chela  in 
human  form  to  contradict  Mr.  Oxley's  statements.  But  the 
account  of  Koot-Hoomi*s  visits  will  be  sufficient  to  show  how 
very  easily  the  learned  author  may  be  deceived  by  devils  and 
elemeutals,  or   by   his  own    uncontrolled    imagination.     I 

60 

respectfully  beg  to  suggest  to  Mr.  Oxley  that  itmaybe  argued 
in  conformity  with  his  own  mighty  "law  of  influx,"  that  the 
Pisacham  or  elemental,  whom  he  mistook  for  Vyasa,  might 
have  put  forth  a  false  statement,  being  unable  to  maintain 
"concurrent  consciousness  at  both  ends  of  the  line,"  or  for 
the  same  reason,  and  labouring  under  a  similar  difficulty  (for 
we  are  told  by  the  author  that  even  the  highest  Deva  cannot 
transcend  "  the  law  of  conditions "),  Busiris  might  have 
mistaken  himself  for  the  author  of  Mahabharata,  having  lost 
the  consciousness  of  what  he  really  was  before  he  had  put  ia 
the  subjective  appearance  in  question. 

The  learned  author  reminds  me  that  Krishna  Bwypayan^ 
"is  only  the  supposed  author  of  Mahabharata,"  and  confi- 
dently asserts  that  "no  man  living  knows  who  were  the 
authors  of  the  Hindu  sacred  records,  or  when  and  where  they 
were  written  and  published,"  relying  upon  the  authority  of 
Professor  Monier  Williams,  who  stated  in  his  book  on  "Hin- 
duism" that  Sanskrit  literature  is  wholly  destitute  of  trust- 
worthy historical  records, 

This  assertion  does  not  prove  that  Busiris  was  the  real 
author  of  Mahabharata  for  the  following  reasons: — 

I.  With  all  due  respect  to  the  learned  Professor,  I  venture 
to  affirm  that  the  general  proposition  relied  upon  is  not 
correct.  We  have  got  trustworthy  historical  records  which 
no  Buropeon  has  ever  seen;  and  we  have,  besides,  the  means 
of  finding  out  any  historical  fact  that  may  be  wanted,  or  of 
reproducing  in  its  entirety  any  work  that  might  have  beea 
lost.     Eastern  occult  science  has  given  us  these  powers. 

II.  Even  if  the  general  proposition  is  correct,  it  cannot 
reasonably  be  inferred  therefrom,  that,  when  the  names  of  the 
authors  of  Sanskrit  works  are  mentioned  in  the  said  works, 
themselves  or  in  other  books,  which  may  be  considered  an 
authoritative,  no  reliance  should  be  placed  on  such  statements, 

III.  Even  if  such  inference  were  permissible,  it  cannot  be 
contended,  in  the  absence  of  any  reliable  independent  evidence, 
that,  because  the    author  of  a  certaia  Sanskrit  book  is  not 

61 

known,  it  ghonld  be  presumed  to   be  the  prodaction  of  aQ 

angel. 

The  following  statement  is  to  be  fonnd  in  the  author's  book, 
p.  61  : — "Busiris  expressly  declared:  *I  am  the  author  of 
Mahabharata,  and  I  can  answer  for  five  thousand  years  of 
time,  for  I  was  then  on  earth';  and  he  goes  on  to  give  an 
inteaesting  account  of  the  civilization,  and  manners  and 
customs  of  the  inhabitants  of  his  day,  long  antecedent  to  the 
system  of  caste  which  now  prevails  in  India."  We  are  now 
informed  by  Mr.  Oxley  that  the  words,  *'long  antecedent  to 
the  system  of  caste  which  now  prevails  in  India,"  were  not 
uttered  by  Busiris,  but  that  they  were  written  by  himself. 
Even  then,  Busiris  has  undoubtedly  some  connection  with  the 
statement.  •' The  interesting  account  of  the  civilization,  and 
manners  and  customs  of  the  inhabitants  of  his  day,"  given  by 
Busiris,  is  either  consistent  with  the  existence  of  caste  at  that 
time,  or  it  is  not.  If  it  is,  the  author's  statement  does  not 
harmonize  with  the  account  of  Busiris,  and  I  do  not  suppose 
that  the  author  will  venture  to  contradict  the  statements  ot  an 
angel.  I  should,  therfore,  assume  that  the  aocount  given  by 
Busiris  is  incosistent  with  the  existence  of  caste  at  the  time 
he  appeared  in  human  form. 

If  80,  the  account  in  question  f  laty  contradicts  all  the  state- 
ments in  Mahabharata  itself,  which  refer  to  the  system  of 
caste  (see  Santiparvam  and  Anusasnikaparvam).  The 
author's  quotation  of  Professor  "Williams'  opinion  regarding 
Purusha  Sukta  does  not  show  that  it  does  not  properly  form  a 
portion  of  Rig- Veda,  and  no  reasons  are  given  for  holding 
that  the  system  of  caste  mentioned  in  Bhagvat-Gita  is  not 
properly  speaking  a  system  of  caste.  And  here  again  the 
author  thinks  it  necessary  to  condemn  orthodox  Brahminism 
for  the  purpose  of  enforcing  his  arguments.  If  the  author 
really  thinks  that  he  will  gain  his  cause  by  abusing  "orthodox 
Brahminism,"  he  is  entirely  mistaken. 

After  giving  us  a  brif  account  of  the  progress  of  the  United 
States  and  predictiog  the  future  downfall  of  orthodox  Brah- 

62  ^ 

minism,  the  learned  author  informs  his  readers  that  it  would 
be  better  not  to  notice  what  in  his  opinion  might  be  urged  to 
prove  that  my  criticisms  are  from  a  mistaken  stand-point. 
Certainly,  the  author  has  acted  very  prudently  in  making  this 
declaration  ;  any  attempt  on  his  part  to  answer  the  main  argu- 
ments urged  by  me  would  have  ended  in  a  disastrous  failure. 

It  is  always  difficult  for  a  foreigner  to  understand  our  reli- 
gious philosophy  and  the  mysteries  of  our  Pnranas,  even  when 
he  devotes  a  considerable  portion  of  his  time  and  energy  to  the 
study  of  Sanskrit  literature  and  the  real  secrets  of  Eastern 
occult  science  can  only  be  revealed  by  an  Initiate.  So  long 
as  Europeans  treat  the  opinions  of  Hindus  with  contempt  and 
interpret  our  religious  books  according  to  their  own  fancies, 
the  sublime  truths  contained  therein  will  not  be  disclosed  to 
Western  nations.  Mr.  Oxley  evidently  thinks  that  there  is  no 
initiate  in  India,  who  can  interpret  our  religious  books  properly, 
and  that  the  real  key  to  esotoric  Hinduism  is  in  his  possession. 
It  is  such  unreasonable  confidence  that  has  hitherto  prevented 
80  many  European  enquirers  from  ascertaining  the  real  truth 
about  our  ancient  religious  books. 

Mr.  Oxley  means  to  assume  a  certain  amount  of  importance 
by  putting  forth  the  following  astounding  assertion.  He  says 
in  his  article : — "What,  if  I  State  to  my  reviewer  that  per- 
chance— following  the  hint  and  guidance  of  Swedenbourg — I 
and  some  others  may  have  penetrated  into  that  sacred  region 
(  Central  Asia  )  and  discovered  the  'Lost  Word'"  I 

If  I  had  not  seen  the  author's  book  and  his  articles  in  the 
Theosophist,  I  would  have  refrained  from  saying  anything 
against  such  a  statement  on  the  assumption  that  no  man's 
statement  should  be  presumed  to  be  false,  unless  it  is  proved 
to  be  so.  But  from  the  following  considerations,  I  cannot 
help  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the  author  knows  nothing 
about  the  "Lost  Word". 

(1,)  Those  who  are  in  possession  of  it  are  not  ignorant  of 
the  "art  of  dominating  over  the  so-called  forces  of  Nature". 

63 

The  author  confesses  that  he  and  his  associates  are  ignorant 
of  the  said  art. 

(2.)  Those  who  are  acqnainted  with  the  Mighty  Law  em- 
bodied in  the  "Lost  Word"  will  never  affirm  that  the  "Infinite 
Monad  receives  inflnx  of  energy  from  the  Planetary  Spirits" 
as  stated  by  the  author. 

(3.)  The  author's  assertion  about  the  flow  of  energy  from 
solar  angles  shows  that  he  is  not  acqnainted  with  the  real 
source  of  creative  energy  indicated  by  the  Name. 

Here  ends  Mr.  Oxley's  reply  to  my  criticisms.  He  then 
proceeds  to  explain  the  doctrines  of  Hieroaopby.  I  shall 
examine  the  author's  theories  in  the  continuation  of  this  arti- 
cle which  will  appear  in  the  Theosophist, 

In  continuation  of  my  article  on  the  "Philosophy  of  Spirit," 
published  in  the  October  issue  of  the  Theos^phisi,  I  shall  now* 
examine  Mr.  Oxley's  notions  of  Theosophy  and  Hierosophy. 
It  is  not  easy  to  understand  his  definitions  of  the  two  systems 
of  philosophy  thus  indicated  ;  and  no  definite  issue  or  issues 
can  be  raised  regarding  the  important  distinction  between  the 
said  systems  from  the  meaning  conveyed  by  these  definitions. 
But  he  has  explained  some  of  the  important  doctrines  of 
theosophy  and  hierosophy  from  his  own  stand-point  for  the 
purpose  of  comparing  the  two  systems.  Though  he  believes 
that  "it  will  be  admitted"  that  he  has  "not  either  under-or 
over-stated  the  case  for  theosophy,"  I  respectfully  beg  to  sub- 
mit that  he  has  entirely  misunderstood  the  main  doctrines 
inculcated  by  it. 

The  learned  writer  says  that  theosophists  teach  that  in  the 
instance  of  wicked  and  depraved  people,  the  spirit  proper  at 
death  takes  its  final  departure.  This  statement  is  certainly 
correct ;  but  the  conclusions  drawn  from  it  by  Mr.  Oxley  are 
clearly  illogical.  If  this  doctrine  is  correct,  says  the  author, 
then  it  will  necessarily  follow  that  to  all  intents  and  purposes 
to  plain  John  Brown  "life  eternal  is  out  of  the  question."  He 
then   expresses   his  sympathy   for   pariahs,   vagabonds,  and 

64 

other  unfortnnate  poor  people  and  condemns  the  doctrine  for 
its  partiality  to  "Rajahs,  Maharajahs,  plutocrats,  aristocrats," 
&c.,  &c.,  and  rich  Brahmins,  and  its  want  of  charity  towards 
others  who  constitute  the  greater  portion  of  humanity.  Here 
it  is  quite  clear  that  the  fallacy  in  Mr.  Oxley*s  argument 
consists  in  the  change  of  adjectives.  From  the  main  doctrine 
in  question  it  follows  that  *'life  eternal  is  out  of  the  question" 
not  to  plain  John  Brown,  but  to  wicked  and  depraved  John 
Brown  ;  and  I  can  hardly  see  any  reason  why  the  author 
should  so  bitterly  lament  the  loss  of  immortality  so  far  as 
utterly  wicked  and  depraved  natures  are  coaoerned.  I  do  not 
thiuk  that  my  learned  opponent  will  be  prepared  to  maintain 
that  all  pariahs,  vagabonds,  and  other  poor  people,  are  all 
depraved  and  wicked,  or  that  all  Rajahs,  Maharajahs,  and  other 
rich  people  are  always  virtuous.  It  is  my  humble  opinion 
■  that  utterly  wicked  and  depraved  people  are  in  the  minority  ; 
and  loss  of  immortality  to  such  persons  cannot  seriously  be 
made  the  ground  of  an  objection  to  the  Theosophical  doctrine 
nnder  consideration.  Properly  speaking  theosophy  teaches 
not  "conditional  immortality,*'  as  the  author  is  pleased  to 
state,  but  conditional  mortality  if  1  may  be  permitted  to  use 
euch  a  phrase.  According  to  theosophy,  therefore,  annihila- 
tion is  not  the  common  lot  of  mankind  unless  the  learned 
author  is  in  a  position  to  state  that  the  greater  portion  of  the 
human  race  are  wicked  and  depraved — beyond  redemption. 
Theosophists  have  never  stated,  so  far  as  I  know,  that  adepts 
alone  attain  immortality.  The  condition  ultimately  reached 
by  ordinary  men  after  going  through  all  the  planetary  rounds 
during  countless  number  of  ages  in  the  gradually  ascending 
order  of  material  objective  existence  is  reached  by  the  adept 
within  a  comparatively  shorter  time,  than  required  by  the 
uninitiated.  It  is  thus  but  a  question  of  time  ;  but  every 
human  being,  unless  he  is  utterly  "wicked  and  depraved,*' 
may  hope  to  reach  that  state  sooner  or  later  according  to  his 
merits  and   Karma. 

The  corresponding   hierosophic   doctrine   is   not   fully  and 
definitely  stated  in  the  article  nnder  review,  but  the   views  of 

65 

the  author  regarding  the  same  may  be  gathered  from  his 
treatise  on  the  philosophy  of  spirit.  They  may  be  summarized 
as  follows: — 

(1.)  The  four  discreeted  degrees  in  the  hnman  being  "call- 
ed animal,  human,  angelic,  and  deific,"  show  that  every  human 
being  (however  wicked  and  depraved)  will  ultimately  reach 
immortality.* 

(2.)  There  is  no  re-birth  in  the  material  human  form 
there  is  no  retrogression  at  any  time. 

And  there  is  this  interesting  passage  in  the  author's  book: — 

(3.)  "The  thread  of  life  is  broken  up  at  the  point  where 
it  appeared  to  be  broken  off  by  physical  dissolution,  and  every 
one  will  come  into  the  use  and  enjoyment  of  his  or  her  own 
specific  life,  i,  e-,  whatever  each  one  has  loved  the  most,  he  or 
she  will  enter  into  the  spirit  of  it,  not  using  earthly  material 
or  organisms  for  the  same  but  spiritual  substances,  as  distinct 
from  matter  as  earth  is  from  at  atmospheric  air;  thus  the  artist, 
musician,  mechanic  inventor,  scientist,  and  philosopher  will 
still  continue  their  occupations  but  in  a  spiritual  manner," 

Now  as  regards  the  first  proposition,  it  is  not  easy  to  under- 
stand how  the  existence  of  four  discreeted  degrees  in  human 
being  or  any  number  of  such  degrees  necessarily  leads  to  un- 
conditional immortality.  Such  a  result  may  follow  if  deific  or 
angelic  existence  were  quite  consistet  with,  or  could  reconcile 
itself  to,  a  depraved  and  wicked  personality  or  individuality 
or  the  recollection  of  such  personality.  The  mere  existence  of 
an  immortality  principle  in  man  can  never  secure  to  him  un- 
conditional immortality  unless  he  is  in  a  position  to  purify  his 
nature,  either  through  the  regular  course  of  initiations  or 
successive  re-births  in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature  according 
to  the  great  cyclic  Law,  and  transfer  the  purest  essence  of  his 
individuality  and  the  recollection  of  his  past  births   and  lives 

*  Had  Mr.  Oxley  said  instead— "every  human  monad"  which  change*  its 
personalities  and  is  in  every  new  birth  a  new  "human  bein^,"  then  woald 
his  statement  have  been  unanswerable. 

9 

66 

.  to  his  immortal  Atma  and  the  developed  and  pnrified  spiritual 
Ego  in  which  they  inhere. 

The  second  proposition  above  stated  is  opposed  to  all  the 
ancient  traditions  of  Eastern  nations  and  the  teachings  of  all 
the  Eastern  adepts,  and  I  do  not  think  that  any  passage  in 
support  of  it  can  be  found  in  Bhagavat-Gita. 

j.p  The  last  statement  above-quoted  is  certainly  a  very  extra- 
'  ordinary  proposition ;  and  1  shall  be  very  happy  it  the  author 
can  point  out  any  authority  for  it  in  the  Bhagavat-Gita  or  in 
the  other  portions  of  Mahabharata. 

Whatever  may  be  the  nature  of  the  purely  ideal  or  subjec- 
tive existence  experienced  in  Devachan  after  death  and  before 
the  next  birth,  it  cannot  be  held  thai  the  artist  or  musician 
carries  on  his  "occupations"  except  by  way  of  ideation. 

I  shall  now  leave  it  to  the  readers  to  say  whether  this 
assertion  is  really  "based  upon  foundations  more  substantial 
than  mere  fancies  and  speculations". 

The  second  doctrine  of  Theosophy  which  Mr.  Oxley  notices 
in  his  article  is  that  **occult  powers  and  esoteric  wisdom  can 
only  be  attained  by  the  severest  asceticism  and  total  absten- 
tion from  the  use  of  the  sensual  degrees  in  nature  in  their 
physical  aspect."  If  this  doctrine  is  universally  admitted,  he 
says,  physical  embodiment  would  be  impossible.  I  can  safely 
assure  him  that  this  contingency  is  not  likely  to  happen  under 
the  present  conditions  of  our  planet;  and  I  am  unable  to 
understand  how  physical  embodiment  is  desirable  in  itself. 
It  yet  remains  to  be  proved  that  "occult  powers  and  esoteric 
wisdom"  can  be  acquired  from  the  teachings  of  Hierosophy 
;  .irithout  the  restrictions  imposed  by  esoteric  Theosophy. 

*"'*"   The  learned  author  further  adds  that  under  the   conditions 
•^'ibovementioned   "the  powers  of  adept  life  cannot  be  perpetu- 
ated by  hereditary  ^lescent".     He   evidently  thinks   that   this 
\    fact  discloses  a  very  great  defect  in  the   theosophical   system. 
But  why  should  adept  life  be  perpetuated  necessarily  by  here* 
ditary  descent?    Occult  wisdom   has  been  transmitted  from 

6;; 

Gara  to  disciple  without  any  serions  break  of  continuity 
during  thousands  of  years  in  the  East.  And  there  is  no 
danger  of  adept  life  ceasing  to  exist  from  want  of  transmis- 
sion by  hereditary  descent.  Nor  is  it  possible  to  bring  into 
existance  a  race  of  hierophants  in  whom  occult  knowledge  will 
be  acquired  by  birth  without  the  necessity  of  special  study  or 
initiation.  The  experiment  was  tried,  I  believe,  long  ago  in 
the  East,  but  without  success. 

The  author  will  be  in  a  position  to  understand  the  nature  of 
some  of  the  difficulties  which  are  to  be  encountered  in  making 
any  such  experiment  from  a  perusal  of  Bulwer  Lytton's 
"Zanoni." 

The  world  has  yet  to  see  whether  "under  the  sway  of  Solar 
Angels,"  the  adepts  trained  under  the  system  of  Hierosophy, 
can  retain  their  powers  and  knowledge  after  having  renounc- 
ed "asceticism,  abstinence  and  celibacy,"  and  transmit  the  so- 
called  "adept  life"  to  their  descendants. 

Speaking  of  the  attitude  of  Theosophists  towards  spiritual- 
ism, Mr.  Oxley  observes  that  they  hold  that  the  so-called 
spiritualistic  phenomena  are  due  to  the  "intervention  of  en- 
lightened living  men,  but  not  disembodied  spirits."  I  shall 
be  very  glad  if  the  learned  author  can  point  out  any  foundation 
for  this  statement  in  the  utterances  of  Theosophists.  Strangely 
enough,  he  says  further  on  that,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Theoso- 
phists, such  phenomena  are  due  to  "wandering  shells  and 
decaying  reliquios  of  what  was  once  a  human  being."  This  is 
no  doubt  true  in  the  case  of  some  of  the  phemomena  at  least. : 
and  the  author  should  not  presume  to  say  that  any  one  of 
these  phenomena  has  its  real  origin  in  the  action  of  disembodi- 
ed living  conscious  beings^*  unless  he  is  fully  prepared  to  state 
exactly  who  these  mysterious  beings  are,  and  demonstrate,  by 
something  weightier  than  mere  assumption,  the  fact  of  their 
re9,l  existence.  He  is  entirely  mistaken  in  supposing  that  the 
modus  operandi  in  the  case  of  the  socalled  spiritualistic 
phenomena  are  precisely  the  same  as  in  the  phenomena 
produced  by  Eastern  adepts.    However  I  do  not  mean  to  say 

68 

anything  forther  about  this  snbject  here  as  it  has  been  already 
fally  disoassed  in  the  columns  of  the  Tkeosophist, 

Mr,  Oxley  objects  to  my  statement  that  "the  human  spirit 
(7th  principle)  has  a  dignity,  power,  and  sacredness  which 
cannot  be  claimed  by  any  other  God,  Deva  or  Angel  of  the 
Hindu  Pantheon".  Although  I  had  taken  care  to  inform  my 
readers  that  by  human  spirit^  I  meant  the  immortal  and  un- 
born 7th  principle  or  Atma  in  man,  he  construed  the  ex- 
pression to  mean  the  spirit  or  life  principle  in  the  human  degree 
of  his  peculiar  classification.  It  would  have  been  better  if  he 
had  taken  the  pains  to  understand  my  language  before 
venturing  to  assert  that  my  statement  was  against  the  doctrine 
taught  by  Krishna.  So  far  as  I  can  see,  his  notions  about  the 
seven  principles  in  man  so  often  mentioned  in  this  journal 
are  utterly  confused  and  incorrect.  As  the  English  language 
is  deficient  in  the  technical  phraseology  required  for  express- 
ing the  truths  of  Aryan  philosophy  and  science,  I  am  obliged 
to  use  such  English  words  as  can  be  got  to  convey  my 
meaning  more  or  less  approximately.  But  to  preclude  the 
possibility  of  any  misunderstanding  on  the  part  of  my  readers 
I  clearly  intimated  in  the  passage  in  question  that  by  human 
spirit  I  meant  the  7th  principle  in  man.  This  principle,  I  beg 
to  submit,  is  not  derived  from  any  angel  (not  even  from 
Busiris)  in  the  universe.  It  is  unborn  and  eternal  according 
to  the  Buddhist  and  Hindu  philosophers.  The  knowledge  of 
its  own  Sicarupam  is  the  highest  knowledge  of  self:  and 
according  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Adwaica  school  of  Aryan 
philosophy,  to  which  I  have  the  honor  to  belong,  there  is  in 
reality  no  difference  between  this  principle  and  Paramatma. 

Mr.  Oxley  believes  that  the  claims  of  the  Spiritualists  have 
virtually  been  admitted  by  the  Theosophists,  inasmuch  as  in 
the  opinion  of  the  latter  ''communications  may  be  established 
with  other  spirits."  But  the  learned  author  fails  to  percieve 
that  by  the  word  "Spirit"  Theosophists  mean  something  quite 
different  from  the  so-called  "disembodied  spirits"  of  the 
Spiritualists.    The    belief    in    question  does  not    therefore 

69 

amount  to  any  concession  to  the  claim  of  the  Spiritualists  as 
is  supposed  by  him. 

The  esteemed  author  then  proceeds  to  explain  some  of  the 
important  doctrines  of  Hierosophy,  which,  he  takes  particular 
care  to  add,  are  not  to  be  considered  "by  his  readers  as  mere" 
fancies  and  speculations.  Hierosophists  seem  to  believe  that 
the  influx  of  life  flows  from  the  "Infinite  monad"  mentioned 
by  me  in  the  first  part  of  my  review  on  "The  Philosophy  of 
Spirit."  Mr.  Oxley's  conceptian  of  this  monad  is  not,  then, 
quite  consistent  with  the  views  of  Eastern  occultists.  Pro- 
perly speaking,  this  monad  or  centre  is  not  the  source  of 
cosmic  energy  in  any  one  of  its  form,  but  it  is  the  embodi- 
ment of  the  great  Law  which  nature  follows  in  her  opera- 
tions. 

The  learned  author  then  asserts  that  "Esoteric  Theoso- 
phists"  and  their  great  leaders  have  admitted  that  there  is  an 
"influx"  of  energy  from  the  planetary  spirits  to  the  manad 
abovementioned.  Here,  again,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  Mr.  Oxley 
is  misrepresenting  the  views  of  Theosophists  according  to  his 
own  imagination.  And  the  statement  itself  is  thoroughly 
unphilosophical.  This  transmission  of  energy  from  the 
planetary  spirits  to  the  Great  Law  that  governs  the  Universe, 
is  inconcievable  to  every  ordinary  mortal.  It  does  not  appear 
that  the  monad  referred  to  by  Mr.  Oxley  is  a  different  entity 
from  the  monad  alluded  to  in  my  article.  He  himself  says 
that  it  is  not  so.  Then  the  only  conclusion  to  which  I  can 
come  under  the  circumstances  of  the  case  is,  that  Mr.  Oxley  has 
put  forward  these  strange  and  groundless  statements  about 
the  action  and  reaction  of  cosmic  energy  between  the  Infinite 
Monad  and  the  planetary  spirits  without  having  any  clear  and 
definite  ideas  about  these  entities.  The  truth  of  this  state- 
ment will  be  confirmed  on  examining  his  views  about  the 
nature  of  the  work  done  by  the  planetary  spirits.  These 
spirits,  it  would  appear,  "detain  myriads  of  elementals  in  the 
spheres  of  interior  Nature,  i,  «.,  the  next  plane  of  life  immedi- 
ately   contiguous  to  this  ;  and  compel  them  in  the  most 

70^ 

tyrannical  manner  to  obey  their  commands  and  produce 
efifects  which  are  calculated  to  perpetuate  their  own  peculiar 
qualities  in  the  plane  of  material  existence.  I  confess  I  do 
not  know  anything  about  the  beings  who  exercise  such  des- 
potical  functions.  They  are  not  the  planetary  spirits  of  the 
Theosophists ;  and  if  they  have  any  existence  outside  the 
region  of  Mr.  Oxley's  fancy,  I  beg  to  request  he  will  be  kind 
enough  to  enlighten  the  public  about  the  nature  of  these 
mysterious  and  dreadful  tyrants.  I  can  assure  him  that  the 
orthodox  Brahmins,  whom  he  is  so  very  unwilling  to  patro- 
nize, have  nothing  to  do  with  such  planetary  spirits  ;  nor  do 
they  know  anything  of  them.  I  am  really  delighted  to  hear 
from  my  learned  opponent  that  the  Solar  Angels  are  fully 
prepared  to  fight  for  the  liberty  of  our  unfortunate  elementale 
and  put  an  end  to  this  abominable  tyranny  within  a  very  short 
time  ;  and  if,  among  other  beautiful  and  useful  occupations, 
arts,  and  sciences  that  exist  in  the  world  inhabited  by  these 
angels,  (since  we  are  told  that,  the  artist,  musician,  mechanic, 
minister,  scientist,  philosopher  will  "still  continue  their  occu- 
pations" in  this  world  of  spirit) — a  Society  for  the  Prevention 
of  Cruelty  to  Animals  will  have  its  place  along  with  other  as- 
sociations, than  the  Solar  Angels  would  surely  deserve  to  be 
nominated  as  its  most  honorary  and  honoured  members. 

The  learned  author  concludes  his  interesting  exposition  of 
the  principles  of  flierosophy  by  proclaiming  to  the  world  at 
large  that  "under  the  sway  of  Solar  Angels,  neither  asceticism, 
abstinence,  nor  celibacy,  as  such,  will  find  place,  but  the  per- 
fection of  life's  enjoyment  will  be  found  in  the  well  regulated 
use  of  all  the  faculties  to  which  humanity  is  heir". 

Whether  this  novel  system  of  philosophy  and  ethics  is  really 
''rhapsodical  and  Utopian,"  or  not,  the  public — especially  the 
Indian—  will  have  to  decide.  But  I  can  affirm  without  any  fear 
of  contradiction  that  this  system  has  not  the  slightest  found- 
ation in  anything  that  is  contained  in  the  Bhagavat-Gita  or  in 
any  other  religious  or  philosophical  book  of  the  Hindus.  It  is 
simply  the  result  of  the  author's  independent  speculations  and 

71 

must  rest  npon  its  own  strength.    In  my  hanible  opinion  it  is 
clearly  erroneoas  and  unphilosophical. 

1  shall  now  take  leave  of  Mr.  Oxley  and  request  him  to 
kindly  excuse  me  for  the  adverse  criticism  contained  in  my 
artictes,  I  shall  be  very  glad  if  my  strictures  can  Induce  him 
to  re-examine  carefully  the  philosophy  of  spirit  contained  in 
Bhagavat-Gita  and  scrutinize  the  reasons  for  the  conclusions 
arrived  at  by  him  in  his  book  on  the  fundamental  questions 
of  occult  philosophy  and  ethics.  With  his  intuition  and  intel- 
ligence, he  will  no  doubt  be  in  a  position  to  open  out  for  him- 
self a  way  to  understand  the  mysteries  of  the  Eastern  arcane 
sciences, — if  he  only  avoids  the  temptation  to  leap  to  general 
conclusions  from  insufficient  data,  and  draw  inferences  prema- 
turely before  the  whole  range  of  our  ancient  science  and  phi- 
losophy is  carefully  explored  by  him. 

I  am  very  happy  to  hear  that  my  learned  antagonist  has 
joined  our  Theosophical  association,  and  I  hope  he  will  hence- 
forth work  in  fraternal  concord  with  his  Eastern  brothers  for 
recovering  the  grand  truths  taught  by  the  ancient  Hierophants 
and  promoting  the  cause  of  Universal  Brotherhood. 

RETROGRESSION  IN  RE-BIRTH. 

In  his  able  review  of  Mr.  Oxley*s  "Philosophy  of  Spirit," 
Mr.  Subba  How,  oritioising  the  author's  views  of  the  hierosophic 
doctrine,  remarks  : — 

**  The  second  propoaition  (there  is  no  re-birth  in  the  materail 
"  human  form,  thei^e  is  no  retrogression  at  any  time)  is  opposed 
"  to  all  the  ancient  traditions  of  Eastern  nations  and  the  teach' 
*^  ing  of  all  the  Eastern  adept, ^^ 

The  italics  are  mine.  The  proposition  is  certainly  not  in 
union  with  "all  the  ancient  traditions  of  Eastern  nations,"  but 
is  the  portion  of  it  which  I  have  italicised  (there  is  no  retro- 
gression at  any  time),  though  certainly  opposed  to  ancient 
Hindu  traditions,  really  at  variance  with  the  "teaching  of  all 
the  Eastern  adepts*'?    Unless  I  am  mistaken,  you  haveall 

72 

along  strennonsly  maintained  it  as  one  of  the  truths  of  occnlt 
philosophy  that  re-birth  in  a  lower  state  is  impossible,  that 
there  is  no  going  back  in  the  scale  of  existence,  that  "nature 
invariably  shuts  the  door  behind  her  :"  in  other  words,  that 
there  is  no  retrogression.  Exactly  the  proposition  advanced 
by  Mr.  0.  and  objected  to  by  Mr.  S.  R.  1 

Will  you  or  the  learned  reviewer  kindly  explain  this  ? 

H. 
Bombay,  2nd  December  1883. 

Editor's  Nots. — We  have  "strenuously  maintained/'  and|still  maintain, 
that  there  is  no  "retrorgression"  in  the  dead-letter  sense  as  taught  by  exo- 
teric Hinduism— t.  e.,  that  the  re-birth  |of  a  man  in  the  physical  form  of 
an  animal  was  impossible  on  this  earth.  But,  we  never  afBrmed  that  there 
was  no  moral  retrogression,— especially  in  the  interplanetary  spheres  ;  and 
that  is  what  is  combated  by  Mr.  T.  Subba  Bow,  for  Mt.  Oxley  means 
"retrogression"  in  that  very  sense,  we  believe. 

ESOTERIC  SPIRITUALISM. 

THE  LAW  OF  "INFLUX"  AND  "EFFLUX". 

By  William  Yeates, 

ratew  of  "the  British  Theosophical  Society'*, 

[In  giving  room  to  the  following  clever  paper,  it  is  but  just  that  its 
several  points  should  be  answered  by  Mr.  T.  Subba  Row,  against  whom 
it  is  directed,  now  and  here,  and  without  having  to  postpone  the  reply  for 
another  month.    Most  of  the  foot-notes,  therefore,  are  his.— Sd.] 

The  October  number  of  the  Theosophist  iox  1882  contains 
strictures  on  Mr.  William  Oxley's  article  (in  the  September 
number)  by  a  respected  Eastern  Brother,  Mr.  T.  Subba  Row. 
In  the  latter,  quoting  from  the  former's  words  to  the  effect 
*'that  there  cannot  be  any  difficulty  or  objection  'to  accept- 
ing as  a  'possibility^  that  the  actual  author  of  the  Mahabharata 
should  put  in,  not  an  objective  but  a  subjective  appearance 
in  London,  or  elsewhere,  if  he  chest  so  to  do".  Mr.  Subba  Row 
remarks  : — "Quite  true  ;  but  he  will  never  choose  to  do  so." 

73 

After  making  the  admission  of  the  possibility  is  there  not 
an  inconsistency  in  adding  the  latter  clanse,  coming  as  it 
does  from  a  defender  of  the  true  faith  in  Orthodox  Brahman- 
ism  ?*  It  sounds  like  a  claim  on  Mr.  Row's  part  to  a  per- 
fect knowledge  of  the  motives  which  actuate  the  exalted  one. 
On  what  grounds  does  Mr.  Row  claim  his  right  to  the  know- 
ledge as  to  what  the  real  author  of  the  Mahabharata  '*  chooses 
to  do  "  ?t 

From  the  Bhagavatgita,  I  learn  that  the  one  who  (in  a 
certain  state)  is  described  as  the  *'  Lord  of  all  created  beings," 
used  this  language,  '*  Having  command  over  my  nature,  I 
am  made  manifest  by  my  own  power  :  and  as  often  as  there 
is  a  decline  ot  virtue,  and  an  insurrection  of  vice  and  injus- 
tice in  the  world,  I  make  myself  manifest :  and  thus  I  ap- 
pear from  age  to  age".  Through  thus  taking  command  over 
his  own  nature,  and  all  men,  I  hold  that  for  all  practical 
purposes,  he  does  choose  "  a  chela  in  human  form ;"  i.  e.,  one 
who  takes  on  the  clothing  of  The  Sun^  by  means  of  the  divine 
ray  in  which  he  makes  Himself  evident :  and  more,  that  there 
are  chelaa  in  hum/in  form^  through  whom  the  powers  of  The 
Grand  Spirits  Identity  will  be  unfolded  in  due  order  ;  even 
as  it  has  been  in  past  ages.  What  is  true  in  regard  to  the 
Great  one,  is  true  in  regard  to  spirits  of  lesser  degree  ;  who 
also  can  have  chelas  of  a  degree  corresponding  with  them. 

According  to  The  Theosophist^  a  Raja  Yogee  Brother  has 
the  power  to  assume  whatever  form  he  pleases,  and  to  com- 
municate with  spirits  either  in,  or  the  body.   Why  then  should 

*  Our  esteemed  correspondent  and  brother  is  wrong  here.  We  lay 
again — Mr.  T.  Subba  Row  is  no  "defender  of  the  true  faith  in  orthodox 
Brahmanism,"  for  the  present  *'  orthodox  Brahmanism  "  is  rather 
heterodox  than  orthodox.  Our  brother  Mr.  T.  Sabba  Row  is  a  true  Vedan- 
tic  Adwaitee  of  the  esoteric,  hence  genuine  Brahman  iaith  and — an 
occaltist — Ed. 

t  On  the  grounds  of  the    genuine  and  authentic  teachings  of  the  tme 
"exalted    one"  himself  as    correctly    understood,    on  the  grounds  of  the 
esoteric   teaching  of  the  "real  author  of  the  Mahabharata,"  rightly  com-  . 
prehended  by  the  initiated  Brahmins  alone.— T.  S.  B. 

10 

74 

it  be  deemed  incredible  that  one,  such  as  undoubtedly  was 
Vyasa,  can  take  command  of  his  own  life  and  nature  in  the 
forms  beneath  him,  and  assume  the  name  of  "  Busiris,"  in 
order  to  make  himself  manifest  through  a  medium  ?*  Does 
not  the  greater  include  the  less  ? 

"If  I  pass  entirely  under  the  dominion  of  my  highest,  or 
seventh  principle/'  1  can,  while  in  that  state,  receive  a  com- 
munication from  spirits  of  that  degree,  and  translate  the  sub- 
stances to  other  ;  just  as  a  chela  in  human  form  would  do  with 
a  message,  or  communication  received  from  the  Brothers.  The 
modes  of  manifestation  may  be  diverse,  but  the  same  law  is 
operative  in  both  instances  ;  surely,  then,  Mr,  Subba  Row 
must  be  mistaken  in  his  assertion  that  "Busiris  has  no  chela 
in  human  form".  For  most  certainly,  He,  who  has  seconded 
to  such  an  altitude,  has  command  over  his  own  nature  in  all 
those  who  subsist  in  the  atomic  life  of  his  Spiritual  Body;  for 
it  is  only  such  that  he  can  command,  or  "control".  Likewise 
the  Brothers  themselves,  they  are  able  to  command  the  unseen 
atoms  who  subsist  within,  or  beneath,  their  own  order;  but 
can  they  so  command  the  interior  lives  of  life  atoms  which 
form  the  Spiritual  Body  of  another  of  different  order,  and  it 
may  be  suprrior  to  their  own  ?  Herein  lies  the  difficulty  of 
any  attempt  to  mould  the  new  order  of  the  modern  Spiritu- 
alistic movement,  according  to  the  genius  of  the  order 
of  Eastern  Occultism.  Before  this  can  be  accomplished, 
command  over  the  invisible  heads  of  the  Spirit  Bands  must 
first  be  obtained. 

The  inner  Voice  of  the  Angel  of  God  speaks  through  the  in- 
tuitions to  all  men  and  women  who  belong  to  this  order  of  life, 
and  who  form  the  body,  Church,  or  system,  telling  each  one  in 
their  own  order,  the  way  to  the  Resurrection  of  the  life;  (some 

•  For  the  simple  reason  that  the  alleged  teachings  and  esoteric  inter- 
pretations of  "Busiris"  clash  entirely  with  the  teachinga  and  inter- 
pretations of  both  Vyasa  and  the  initiates  ol  the  esoteric  school.  The 
"Spirit"  of  Vyasa  cannot  well  contradict,  and  without  giving  any  reasons 
for  it,  the  teachings  of  the  latter  when  alive.— T.  S,  B. 

75 

partake  of  the  life  of  more  than  one  order)  and  everyone  who 
perceives  a  ray  of  light,  should  follow  it,  for  it  will  lead  them 
to  the  summit  of  the  Mount  to  which  they  are  called  whether 
it  be  that  of  a  Planetary  or  Solar  order  Adeptship.  * 

As  matter  is  within  matter;  spirit  within  spirit;  atom  with- 
in atom:  and  as  Influx  is  within  Efflux;  even  so  there  are 
orders  within  orders  of  Intelligences,  both  of  a  Planetary  and 
Solar  nature.  From  these  we  derive  our  life,  and  from  them 
(mediately,)  we  receive  that  which  form  the  higher  qualities  of 
our  life.  It  matters  little  how  the  life  quality  is  divided  in  itg 
descent  or  ascent  to  the  atom  from  whence  it  came  and  returns; 
the  line  may  be  extended  until  the  atom  becomes  invisible  to 
the  external  mau;  but  invisibility  becomes  visible  in  the  lives 
of  the  whole  body  of  atom  who  came  out  from  that  one 
which  can  never  be  divided  into  less  than  one.  Even  so,  it 
is  possible  for  us  to  be  inducted  into  a  perceptive  knowledge 
of  the  direct  presence  of  the  Angelic  parents  who  gave  us  birth 
into  the  inmost  quality  of  their  life,  and  in  which  we  live,  and 
move,  and  have  our  being.  By  means  of  such  putbirths,  we 
partake  of  the  diflferentiations  of  every  Father  and  Mother 
through  whom  we  came  besides  that  of  our  own,  and  these 
augmented  qualities  will  take  eternity  to  unfold  themselves; 
and  in  view  of  such  a  truth,  there  can  be  no  place  found 
for  annihilation;  inasmuch  as  the  annihilation  of  one 
atomic  quality  in  the  child's  life  would  be  the  the  annihila- 
tion of  him   who    gave  it  birth.f    Can  a  part    of  God  be 

'  1  confess  to  my  inability  to  distingnish  between  the  two  kinds  of 
adeptship,  called  "Solar"  and  "Planetary"  since  the  terminology  is  not  in 
vagne  among  Asiatic  Occultists,  bnt  belongs,  most  likely,  to  the  new 
Western  •'hierosophy."— T.  S.  B. 

I  Eastern  esoteric  philosophy  denies  the  (heistic  idea  that  "the  whole 
body  of  atoms"  came  out  from  some  "OKB  atom,"  and  teaches  that  there 
is  no  difference  between  the  7th  principle  of  man  and  that  of  universal 
natare.  "Hence  a  child  may  be  annihilated  as  a  perionality,  whereas  his 
6th  and  7th  principles,  the  one  divine  monad,  remain  unaffected  by  this 
disintegration  of  freed  atoms  of  still  partided  matter  known  M  8or1.*J— i 
T.  8.  B. 

76 

destroyed  ?♦    In  the  universal  life,    I  maintain,  that  not  one 
single  atom  can  be  lost.f 

Creation  is  infinite,  with  an  endless  capacity  for  growth  and 
development.  Bat  if  only  the  law  of  Efflux  were  operative 
there  could  be  no  improvement.  Like  produces  Like,  and 
although  there  might  be  an  endless  procession  of  variations— 
they  would  be  but  a  mere  repetition  of  the  series  of  like  to 
like  again,  and  no  improvement  in  the  forms  evolved  from  the 
parent  stock.l  Bat  with  the  Law  of  Influx  in  operation,  the 
forms  are  respective  of  new  and  higher  qualities,  which  when 
evolved  produce  new  and  living  forms  of  a  higher  and  more 
interior  order.  It  is  only  the  recognition  of  this  that  can 
account  for  the  development  and  manifestation  of  new  forms 
of  life  of  all  kinds.  To  produce  these,  it  must  be  evident  that 
the  germs  of  this  new  order  of  life  were  begotten  from  above 

*  "A  part  of  God!"  Before  vfe  venture  to  talk  of  a  part  f  we  ought  to 
make  sure  of  |tbe  existence  of  the  whole;  or  at  least  learn  to  know  some- 
thing more  than  we  do  of  the  Essence  of  that  "God"  people  are  so  freely 
discuBsing  aboat<  The  Adwaita  philosophy  teaches  to  believe  in  one 
nnivarsal  Principle  it  calls  Parabrabm  and  to  eschew  idols.  Hence  it 
rejects  the  idea  of  a  personal  God,  whether  called  by  the  latter  name  or 
that  of  ONE  ATOM  the  Father  and  Creator  of  all  other  atoms.— T.  S.  R. 

I  "Atom  lost?"  No  atom  is  ever  lost  but  atoms  combine  in  transitory 
groups  which  are  entities,  which  are  atomic  congeries.  Bo  that  if  one  per- 
sonality is  "annihilated,"  this  is  but  a  breaking  up  of  an  atomic  group, 
and  the  freed  atoms  are  drawn  into  new  combinations— the  6th  and  the 
7th  principles  being  of  course  excluded — T.  S,  R. 

J  **Creation  infinite."  For  "creation"  read  universe,  and  then  the 
"endless  capacity ,for  growth  and  development"  would  fit  in  better,  and 
there  would  be  no  contradiction  to  comment  upon.  A^  here  written  it  reads 
like  a  theological  paradox.  For  if  the  whole  creation  is  "infinite"  and 
there  is  still  in  it  **an  endless  capacity  for  growth  and  development,"  then 
it  becomes  the  antithesis  of  "creation".  And  if  the  writer  means  that 
cosmic  mattef  was  created  and  infused  with  a  law  of  "growth  and  develop- 
ment," then  cosmic  matter  must  have  been  created  out  of  nothing  which 
is  scientifically  absurd.  "Efflux"  and  "Influx"  sound  here  like  words 
without  meaning.  It  is  Influx  that  brings  into  being  everything,  and  it  is 
BJiux  that  changes  conditions  and  obliterates  all  temporary  forms,  to  evolve 
out  of  them  the  one  Fternal  Iieality,—T,  S.  B. 

77 

within  the  transformed  soal ;  and  in  no  case  is  it  a  repetition 
firom  the  ''old  seed  after  its  kind".  Hence  it  is,  that  the  new 
order  of  spiritual  life  appearing  in  the  West  so  diverse  in  its 
manifestation  to  that  of  the  East,  is  scarcely  comprehended  by 
the  latter,  in  the  light  as  I  have  shown  it.  In  the  Hebrew 
Record  we  read  that  the  young  Sampson  "as  yet,  knew  not  his 
strength".  Neither,  as  yet,  is  the  spiritual  power  of  the  child 
of  the  Occident  known  or  comprehended  by  his  elder  Brother 
of  the  Orient.  Will  the  Brothers  of  the  Orient  take  to  the 
stripling  by  recognising  him  as  the  "Heir  of  the  In- 
heritance," and  send  down  a  little  of  the  hoarded  stores  to 
nature  the  new-born  life  in  the  valley  below  ? 

The  Theosopkist  admits  that  notwithstanding  the  vantage 
ground  of  the  possession  of  ancient  stores  of  occult  knowledge 
the  Oriental  system  has,  from  time  to  time>  declined  :  and  in 
spite  of  repeated  revivals  at  different  epochs,  every  effort  to 
restore  it  to  the  traditional  pristine  glory  of  the  Golden  Age 
has  failed.* 

Now  assuming  that  one  section  of  the  Brothers  succeed  in 
resuscitating  their  order  on  the  old  lines,  what  security  can  we 
have  that,  at  best,  it  would  be  but  a  sprouting  out  from  the 
decaying  trunk  of  the  old  tree  of  knowledge  :  as  is  proved  by 
the  history  of  the  past. 

The  ancient  Hindu,  Brahminical,  Buddhistic,  Egyptain, 
Hebrew  or  Arabic,  Christian  and  Mahomedan  systems  are 
mere  variations  from  the  same  stock,  and  all  of  which  were 
best  at  their  beginnings.  How  comes  it,  that  notwithstanding 
the  more  immediate  presence,  influence,    and  tutelage  of  the 

*  We  beg  to  be  permitted  to  emphatically  deny  the  statement.  Neither 
the  Theooophisl — i..e.,  ita  editor  nor  any  one  of  the  Founders,  has  ever 
admitted  anything  of  the  sort  about  the  "Oriental  System,"  whatever  some 
of  its  contribators  may  have  remarked  apon  the  sabject.  If  it  has 
degenerated  among  its  votaries  in  India  (a  fact  due  entirely  to  the  cunning 
of  its  dead  letter  interpretation  by  the  modern  orthadox  Brahmin  who  has 
lost  the  key  to  it)  it  flourishes  as  high  as  ever  in  the  Himalayan  retreats, 
in  the  ashrum  of  the  initiated  Brahmin,  and  in  all  the  "pristine  glory  of 
the  Golden  Age."— Ed. 

78 

Brothers  to  the  Indian  popnlatious,  that  these  confessedly  have 
become  degraded,  and  have  lost  their  own  spiritaality  and 
power.* 

What  other  fate  can  befall  us,  as  a  Theosophical  Society, 
if  the  very  roots  of  onr  life,  as  snch,  draw  their  vitality  from 
a  decaying  Tree,  whose  fraits,  leaves,  and  branches  are  of 
"efflax"  growth,  and  that  of  a  descending  order;  inasmuch  as 
it  ignores  the  inmost  "Law  of  Influx"  from  the  Tree  of  Life 
of  an  inner  causation  ?  All  outgrowth  in  that  direction  must, 
of  necessity,  sooner  or  later  exhaust  their  vitality. 

It  is  the  new  influx  from  the  Grand  Central  Sun  of  all 
existences,  that  causes  of  the  soul  to  rise  to  higher  states  and 
forms  of  consciousness;  and  by  means  of  this,  the  newly 
evolved  states  therefrom,  form  a  new  series  of  a  system — on  an 
ascending  scale  which  will  never  retrograde,  as  have  done  and 
do,  the  grades  of  a  purely  Planetary  Cycle  of  incarnations, 
whose  occultations  shut  out  the  direct  light  of  Grand  Eternal 
Sun. 

The  teachings  of  'Theosophy'  appear  to  imply  that  there  is 
latent  power  possessed  of  self-sufficient  energy,  sufficient  in 
itself  for  the  evolvement  of  a  new  species,  without  the  inter- 
vention of  a  still  higher  power. 

For  instance,  can  this  alleged  self-sufficient  energy  from  an 
object  without  existing  materials  ?    Can  it  create  a  thought 

*  The  "tutelage  of  the  Brothers  to  the  Indian  popnlations"  is  a  fancy 
based  on  a  misconception.  Ever  since  Buddhism  with  its  esoteric  in- 
terpretations of  the  Vedas  and  other  sacred  books  was  driven  out  of  the 
country  by  the  ambition  and  jealousy  of  the  Brahmins,  the  trutht  of  eso- 
tericism  began  to  fade  out!of  the  memory  of  those  populations  until  there 
now  remains  hardly  one  Brahmin  in  ten  thousand  who  understands  the 
Shastras  at  all.  Hindus  were  degraded  for  the  same  reason  that  life 
and  spirit  have  gone  out  of  Christianity.  The  increase  of  wealth-bred 
sensuality,  quenched  spiritual  tispiration  and  intuition,  plugged  the  ears 
that  once  listened  and  shut  the  eyes  that  once  saw  the  teachers.  And  at 
last  by  gradual  deterioration  of  species,  multiplications  of  war,  and 
increased  scarcity  of  food  supply,  the  prime  question  became  that  of  a 
struggle  for  life  to  the  obliteration  of  spiritual  yearnings. — T.  S.  R. 

7d 

or  an  idea  of  a  new  form,  absolutely  independent  of  that  which 
comes  into  the  mind  from  the  ideal  realm  of  being  from 
whence  all  germs  are  derived  ?* 

It  it  were  possible  to  sever  the  lines  of  the  snbtile — but  ex- 
ternally invisible — thread  of  life  which  extends  from  the 
Parent  Tree  of  life  in  the  midst  of  the  universal  Garden  to 
the  external  circumference  of  its  physical  manifestation  ;  and 
to  maintain  such  severed  lives  vitality  ;  then,  I  admit,  the 
Law  of  Efflux  would  be  an  all-sufficient  cause  for  the  appear- 
ance and  perpetuation  of  those  new  and  higher  forms  of  life 
which  have  been  evolved  and  manifested  at  different  epochs. 

If  any  order, — dependent  solely  on  the  traditional  obser- 
vances of  those  who  ages  ago  derived  their  light  at  first  and 
second  hand  from  the  fountain  of  all  light, — should  deny  us 
the  privilege  of  using  their  stores  of  ancient  experimental 
knowledge  by  interposing  impractical  barriers  ;  yet  jao  order 
can  prevent  our  access  to  the  Grand  Fountain  of  Light  and 
Love,  where  we  may  drink  freely  of  the  waters  of  Life.t 
Is  not  this  better  than  being  confined  to  partake  of  a  descend- 
ing stream  of  wisdom  which  silts  up  its  outlets  with  the 
stands  of  ages, — leaving  a  portion  of  its  strength  and  power  at 
every  stage  of  its  descent,  until,  at  length,  it  is  lost  in  the  desert 
waste,  where  so  many  famish;  and  who  cannot  reach  the 
purer  water  higher  up  the  stream  ?  Nor  is  it  so  with  those 
systems  which  are  on  the  ascending  plane  and  order.  By 
virtue  of  their  being  ever  subject  to  the  direct   energy  of  the 

*  Most  assuredly  not.  Both  this  neither  proves  existence  of  the  one 
Atom,  separated  from  and  differentiated  by,  its  unity  from  all  other  atoms, 
nor  does  it  point  to  the  necessity  of  one.  At  any  rate,  even  our  English 
Brother's  '*  one  atom  "  or  God  can  hardly  create  *'  an  object  "  without 
existent  materials  or  matter, — T.  S.  R. 

■j-  The  "Grand  Fountain  of  Light  and  Love"  is  a  very  poetical  meta- 
phor— and  uo  more,  when  applied  to  an  unproved  abstraction,  Wc  admit 
of  such  a  fountain  but  not  outside  of,  independent  from,  past,  present 
and  future  humanity,  (the  crown  of  the  evolution  on  our  globe)  every 
individual  atom  of  which  is  a  drop  of  thar.  "Water  of  Life"  the  agglomera- 
tion of  the  drops  of  which  forms  that  **one  Fountain."— T.  8.  B. 

^0 

Divine  Solar  ray,  they    have  power  to  do  that  which  other 
systems  never  coald  accomplish. 

How  can  a  system  impart  that  which  it  admits  it  does  not 
possess,  viz.,  the  dual  states  of  adeptship  ?  Where  there  are 
no  feminine  adepts  in  the  order,  it  mast  ultimately  yield  to 
that  dual  power  which  is  able  to  polarise  and  prepare  both 
male  and  female  atoms  for  the  state  in  which  they  are  fitted  to 
be  drawn  up  into  the  'Celestial  Marriage*.  When  intromitted 
into  this  state  these  wedded  atoms  act  and  re-act  until  every 
quality  of  their  united  being  rotates  and  vibrates  up  and  down 
the  semn  sides  of  the  ray  until  becoming  all  radiant  with  light 
and  heat  in  themselves,  they  are  able  to  project  the  new  born 
germs  of  a  higher  and  purer  life  into  the  souls  of  those  beneath 
them,  who  are  drawn  into  the  same  state,  and  who,  in  their 
turn,  may  give  out  their  several  degrees  of  light  and  heat,  and 
life  to  all  around;  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.* 

By  these  intermediates  the  mass  of  mankind  receive  the 
new  order  of  life  unconsciously  according  to  their  respective 
deeds,  but  the  dual  adepts  will  receive  it  consciously  by  direct 
influx.  In  order  that  new  life-forms  may  be  generated,  the 
new  life-force  of  a  higher  and  purer  order,  must  inflow  into 
prepared  atoms  to  receive  the  same  both  on  this  and  other 
earths. 

*  Again  an  unwarranted  assertion  whichever  way  we  see  it.  There  are 
* 'female"  adepts  in  the  Brotherhood,  and  of  a  rery  high  order.  There- 
fore, there  being  such,  in  fact,  the  deductions  drawn  from  a  mistaken 
premise  fall.  And  if  onr  opponent  had  in  mind  in  writing  the  above 
sentence,  something  more  abstract  and  vague  than  a  more  physical  differ- 
ence of  aexes,  then  he  will  allow  me  perhaps,  to  tell  him  that  oar  esoteric 
philosophy  jprov^  that  outside  of  the  world  of  gross  matter  there  is  no 
snch  difference,  the  latter  itself  occurring  (even  on  our  earth)  as  an  acci- 
dent dne  to  gestation  and  not  as  a  result  of  snch  or  another  male  or  female 
germ.  Even  the  Christian  Bible,  the  youngest  of  the  many  attempts  to 
religions  philosophy,  teaches  him  that  in  the  resurrection  the  people 
"neither  marry  not  are  given  in  marriages".  So  that  "Celestial  marriage, 
whatever  this  may  mean  in  modern  Esotericism,  appears  to  be  but  a  figure 
of  speech.  Oar  readers  might  also  be  benefited  were  they  explained  what 
it  meant  by  a  ♦•Dual  Adept."— T.  S.  K. 

81 

How,  except  throngh  the  Diviae  Solar  state  of  a  wedded 
pair,  can  this  higher  and  purer  life  be  generated  ?  With  this 
in  view,  it  can  be  seen  that  the  'Brothers' — with  their  celi- 
bate conditions  of  adeptship — cannot  possibly  beget  a  higher, 
or  pnrer,  order  of  life  than  their  own;hecce  it  follows  that 
a  system,  based  on  snch  a  principle,  cannot  perpetnate  itself.* 

It  is  at  the  cnlmination  of  a  seventh  cycle — a  symbol  of 
the  Celestial  Snn-day— that  another  Ray  is  shot  forth  across 
the  universal  Earth,  and  those  who  are  prepared  to  receive  its 
inflaeuce,  and  give  birth,  or  nltimation,  to  higher  forms  of 
life,  upon  the  respective  earths  they  inhabit,  according  to  its 
degree  of  development  in  the  series;  for  as  so  ably  shown  by 
the  writer  of  "Fragments  of  Occnlt  Truth,"  the  varied  earths 
of  a  system,  all  differ  as  to  states  of  mental  and  spiritual  deve- 
lopment; and  yet  not  one  could  suffer  deprivation  of  this  Cyclic 
action  from  the  'Grand  Sun,'  without  all  the  rest  suffering  from 
such  loss  to  any  specific  member  of  the  Solar  family.  Here 
comes  in  the  distinction  and  ditierence  between  the  guidance 
and  teaching  of  the  Planetary  and  Solar  Guru.  The  one  is  the 
Forerunner,  and  prepares  the  way  for  the  other;  and  it  is  the 
later  one  who  leads  his  Chelas — both  masculine  and  feminine — 
beyond  the  Tree  of  Knowledge,  even  to  the  Tree  of  Life  itself.f 

♦  Not  necessarily.  One  critic  seems  to  forget, — or  perchance  never 
know — that  an  adept  has  means  of  inbreathing,  into  his  chosen  '•  chela  " 
besides  his  own  "high  order  of  life,"  to  nse  his  own  expression,  that  of 
one  still  higher  than  himself,  t.  e.,  of  the  highest  Bhodisatra  living  or 
dead,  provided  the  parity  of  his  own  life  permits  to  him  the  performance 
of  the  mysterioQS  assimilation.  But  we  can  assure  onr  Brother,  that 
without  that  "celibate"  mode  of  life,  against  which  he  seems  to  protest 
80  strongly,  no  adept  could  ever  reach  such  a  degree  of  power.  Souls  as 
well  as  spirits  are  sexless,  and  it  is  a  great  mistake  to  say  that  no  "male 
monad"  (?)  can  incarnate  in  a  female  body  or  vice  versa.  Mental  and 
moral  characteristics  or  idiosyncracies  as  met  daily  in  life  contradict  the 
statement.  It  is  owing  to  previous  Karma  that  we  discover  so  often 
masculine  traits  in  weak  female  bodies  and  feminine  tenderness  and 
nervousness  in  strongmen. — T.  S.  B. 

■j"  Does  our  Brother,  who  speaks  so  often  of  the  "Tree  of  Life,"  know 
itt  real  esoteric  significance  ?    Let  him   prove  it,   by  hinting  at  the  grand 
mystery,  and  if  he  does  show  his  knowledge — then  verily   will  our   Mabat> 
m»B  he  at  his  orders  ! — T.  8.  R. 
11 

82 

It  is  the  leaves  of  this  Tree — the  life-giving  power  which 
are  to  be  given  for  the  "healing  of  the  nations/'  and  by  this 
means  the  long-lost,  and  neglected  ones,  which  the  Occnlt 
system  woald  hopelessly  consign  to  annihilation,  are  to  be 
gathered  up  and  nntilted  by  the  great  Economiser;  so  that 
there  shall  be  nothing  lost;  and  thas  the  fragments  of  the 
(apparently)  long-lost  Orb  shall  be  collected  and  form  a  shin- 
ing San  to  enlighten  the  still  denser  darkness  of  the  neither 
realms. 

In  the  above  few  hints,  (for  yonr  space  wonld  not  permit 
of  more)  1  have  shown  a  use  for  the  elementals,  reliquce,  etc., 
etc.,  which  Occult  science  does  appear  to  recognise;  and  did 
your  space  permit  I  should  be  glad  to  show  the  necessity  for 
these  in  the  formation  of  earths,  and  sustenance  of  life-forms 
thereon,  and  the  position  they  occupy  in  the  Cosmos;  but  I 
content  myself  with  this  bare  outline. 

Modern  spiritualism,  when  viewed  as  an  entirely  new  and 
diverse  (from  all  that  preceded)  order  of  life, — which,  instead 
of  being  the  best  at  its  beginning,  commences  at  Zero, — is  a 
factor  which  is  overlooked  in  this  respect  by  the  Tlieosophist 
in  its  response  to  Mr.  Terry,  of  Australia — (who  is  a  personal 
.acquaintance  of  my  own)  and  is  hardly  satisfactory  to  those 
who  accept  the  higher  aspects  of  a  more  advanced  spiritualism. 
•Qccultists  say  that  the  only  safe  and  right  way  in  dealing 
with  unseen  forces,  entities,  intelligences,  or  whatever  else,  is 
according  to  their  method:  and  that  to  seek  for  or  allow  'Con- 
trols' to  use  the  human  organism,  is  wrong,  if  not  positively 
dangerous  to  the  morals  of  those  who  permit  it;  but  to  my 
•view,  thexightor  wrong  of  this  depends  upon  the  use  we 
make  of  it,  and  we  must  not  be  forgetful,  that  this  "Control- 
ling power  and  influence"  sometimes  comes  with  a  resistless 
force  and  the  sensitives  are  completely  helpless  to  withstand.* 

*  Exactly; «nd  since  la  this  mad  inrash  of  eoDtrols  the  poor  sensitive 
may  at  any  time  be  knocked  off  his  moral  feet  down  the  precipice  of 
epiritaal  degradation,  why  tamper  with  so  dangerous  a  gift  ?  Adepts 
never  encounter  a  "reeistlesa  force,"  since  adeptship  means  «ci/-control 
first  and  then  coutrol  Qver  all  forues  of  nature  «zteraal  to  himself,— 
I.  S.  B. 

83 

Even  the  'invocation'  of  spiritnal  being?,  if  the  modern 
practice  of  Seance-holding  can  be  so  called,  which  affords 
conditions  for  spiritual  manifestations — is  quite  in  conform- 
ity with  the  rituals  and  ceremonials  of  the  ancient  Indian 
system;  as,  for  instance,  the  S'lma  Veda  says,  *'Come,  0 
Father,  along  with  the  spirits  of  our  Father s^*  If  this  practice 
was  observed,  and  formed  an  integral  part  of  religious  wor- 
ship,— and  if  this  was  done  under  thegegis  of  the  Church  itself 
in  far  back  ages;  surely  with  oar  increase  of  knowledge,  and, 
we  may  hope,  with  improved  morals,  we  may  now  safely  engage 
in  it  with  safety  to  both  sides,  provided  the  motives  are  pure 
and  worthy.  Are  there  not  any  adept  "Brothers"  of  British 
or  European  extraction  in  sufficient  sympathy  with  the  efforts 
of  their  own  countrymen  to  open  up  a  direct  correspondence 
with  those  who  are  striving  to  attain  to  a  higher  order  of  Life?t 
[A  full  reply  is  left  over  for  a  future  article.] 

A  PERSONAL  AND  AJf  IMPERSONAL  GOD. 

Vabious  remarks  that  I  have  noticed  in  the  Ari/a  lead  me  to  believe 
that,  as  is  so  commonly  the  case,  differences  in  interpretations  of  terms, 
are  leading  to  apparent  antogonisma  between  persons  whose  views  are 
in  reality  identical. 

Attacks  are  made  on  those  who  deny  the  existence  of  a  personal 
God,  and  we  are  told  that  such  persons^  even  the  believing  in  an 
Impersonal  God,  are  in  reality  Atheists. 

'  We  invita  our  brother's  attention,  in  reference  to  this  (jactation,  to 
what  Manu  sayB  (IV.  123,  &;c.,)  of  this  practice.  The  Santa  Veda  dealing 
with  the  Spirits  of  the  dead,  he  saya  that  *'eveu  the  sonnd  of  it  (the  Sama 
Veda)  is  impure."— T.S.  R. 

I  This  seems  hardly  a  fair  question.  Our  correspondent  first  assumes 
that  our  adepts  are  of  an  inferior  order,  and  neither  living  nor  capable  ol 
showing  a  way  to  "a  higher  order  of  life,"  and  then  despairingly  asks  if 
there  are  no  adepts  to  teach  him.  What  talented  beings  there  may  be  in. 
the  "Solar"  and  "Planetary"  orders — we  cannot  say,  our  experience 
having  been  confined  to  human  adepts.  But  among  these,  we  should 
certainly  say  that  on  the  terms  stated  there  is  not  one  among  our 
Brothers,  whether  of  British  or  Asiatic  extraction,  who  would  volunteer 
fnr  the  service. ~T.  S.  R. 

84 

Now  tliiB  is  simply,  in  my  hamble  opinion,  a  mistake,  reanlting  from 
differences  in  the  significations  attached  by  different  persons  to  the 
terms  Personal  and  Impersonal  God. 

Let  me  at  the  ontset,  however,  explain,  that  I  am  not  here  seeking 
to  defend  the  Thkosophist  or  yourself,  you  are  quite  able  to  defend 
yourself,  and  I  am  in  no  way  empowdered  or  competent  to  express 
your  views  or  those  of  the  Himalayan  Brotherhood  whose  representative 
you  are,  as  to  the  nature  of  the  First  Cause — nor  do  I  desire  to  enter 
into  any  controversy  with  any  man;  I  desire  to  live  in  peace  and 
brotherly  love  with  all  men;  I  have  my  own  views,  which  satisfy  my 
head  and  heart,  in  which  I  firmly  believe,  and  which  I  hope  all  other 
men  will  respect  in  me;  and  I  do  not  doubt  that  others  who  differ  from 
me  have  equally  seized  the  views  that  satisfy  their  heads  and  hearts,  are 
equally  justified  in  holding  these  and  have  an  equal  claim  on  me  to 
respect  these  their  views. 

Looking  round  the  universe  nothing  so  strongly  impressed  me,  as 
the  system  of  division  of  labour  which  pervades  it.  Practical  results 
never  spring  from  solitary  causes;  they  are  ever  the  resultants  of  the 
more  or  less  divergent  eSects  of  an  inextricable  plexus  of  diverse 
causes.  It  is  from  contrasts,  that  all  the  joys  and  beauties  of  the  world 
arise;  it  is  from  the  equilibrium  of  antagonistic  forces  that  the  Universe 
subsists.  All  progress  springs  from  difference  ;  all  evolution  is  the 
result  of  differentiation;  as  in  the  great,  so  in  the  spiritual;  as  in  the 
visible  so  in  the  unseen  universe. 

How,  then,  can  men  fail  to  see  that  differences  of  opinion  on  matters 
spiritual  are  parts  of  the  necessary  mechanism  of  the  spiritual  organism 
that  everywhere  underlies  (as  the  bones  underlie  the  flesh  and  skin) 
the  physical  or  visible  world  ?  How  can  they  find  fault  with  others 
for  holding  views  different  from  their  own?  How  fail  to  realise  that 
those  others  are  as  truly  working  iu  harmony  with  the  pervading 
design  or  law  of  the  All  as  themselves  ?  Night  is  as  needful  to  oar 
mundane  economy  as  dayj  shall  the  night  revile  the  day,  for  its  glare, 
its  noise,  its  heat,  or  the  day  reproach  the  night  for  its  dusky  stillness  ? 

So  then  it  is  no  spirit  of  finding  fault  with  those  who  differ  from 
me,  but  only  in  the  hope  of  clearing  away  imaginary  differences 
which  being   unreal   work   harm,    not    good  as   real   differences    do), 

85 

that  I  desire  to  say  a  tew  words  as  to  belief  in  a   Personal   Grod,  in  an 
Impersonal  God  and  in  No-God. 

Tne  three  beliefs  are  very  different  and  pace  our  brethren  of  the 
Arya,  who  seem  to  think  differently,  the  believer  in  an  Impersonal 
God  is  not  only  no  Atheist,  but  actually  in  many  cases  holds  the  exact 
tenets  of  the  Upanishads. 

It  is  in  the  meaning  of  the  word  Person  that  the  misconception 
originates. 

The  Arya  says,  "By  personal  we  understand  the  attribute  of 
being  an  individual— the  essence  of  personality  is  consciousness — the 
knowledge  of  the  fact  that  I  am."  But  this,  if  the  writer  will 
pardon  my  so  saying,  is  really  not  a  tenable  position.  Persona,  or 
a  mask,  refers  only  to  the  mask  of  flesh  and  blood  and  bones  and 
the  associated  powers  that  conceal,  the  spirit,  soul  or  whatever  it 
please?  men  to  call  that  portion  of  the  human  entity  which  survives  the 
dissolutions  of  the  physical  body.  For  materialists,  who  believe  that 
with  this  latter  the  entire  man  perishes,  it  may  be  correct  to  say  that 
the  essence  of  personality  is  consciousness,  but  certainly,  no  Vedantist 
could  ever  say  this  if  he  really  understood  what  personality  signified. 
The  essence  of  individuality  is  consciousness;  it  is  the  individuality 
which  feels  '•  I  am."  not  the  personality^  which  no  more  feels, 
of  itselft  I  AM,  than  does  the  suit  of  clothes  in  which  it  is  arrayed. 

Now  there  are  many  good  men  who  believe  in  a  Personal  God,  a 
radiant,  glorified  man,  with  bead  and  body  and  limbs;  and  they  draw 
pictures  of  him  (those  who  have  haunted  the  galleries  of  Europe  only 
know  what  glorious  idealizations  of  the  ''human  form  divine'*  this  belief 
has  inspired),  and  they  attribute  to  hira  human  feelings,  anger^  repent- 
ance and  the  like,  and  they  picture  him  to  themselves,  and  love  him  as 
a  veritable  "Father  who  is  in  Heaven."  But  there  are  others  (who  can- 
not accept  these  conceptions  which  to  them  seem  derogatory  to  the  In- 
finite and  absolute)  who  believe  in  an  Impersonal  God.  They  hold  that 
God  IS  not  a  mere  magnified  man;  that  he  has  no  form  or  persona,  at 
any  rate  that  we  can  conceive,  that  he  is  a  spirit,  all  pervading,  all  sus- 
taining, neither  liable  to  anger,  repentance  or  change,  and  hence  panic 
(having  always  known  from  all  eternity  what  was  right  and  therefore 
what  he  willed),  always  working  through  immutable  laws.  Many  of 
these  (but  by  no   means  all)   hold   further   that  he  is  not   conscious   or 

86 

intelUgeiit,  in  oua  sense  of  the  word,  because  both  these  terms  imply 
duality,  an  entity  to  cognize  and  a  thing  to  be  cognized,  whereas  He  is 
All  in  All  and  in  Him,  we  and  all  things,  move  and  live  and  have  our 
being,  bat  still  that  He  is  All  conscionsness  and  all  intelligence.  The 
believers  therefore  in  an  Impersonal  God  are  some  of  them  Theists, 
some  Fanthesists,  but  can  by  no  means  tral/  be  designated  Atheists. 

Lastly  there  are  the  so-called  Atheists,  who  say  they  believe  in  no 
God,  Personal  or  Impersonal,  who  affirm  that  the  universe  is  an  infinite 
aggregation  of  substance,  its  undiCfereatiated  condition,  neither  conscions 
nor  intelligent,  expanding  and  contracting  by  the  inherent  laws  of 
its  own  being,  and  subject  in  accordance  with  these  to  alternate 
periods  of  day  and  night,  activity  and  rest,  who  maintain  that  during 
such  periods  of  activity  in  accordance  still  with  these  inherent  laws,  aH 
things  human  and  divine  differentiate  out  of,  and  are  evolved  from,  this 
primal  all-pervading  substance,  to  disintegrate,  once  more,  into  it  as  the 
night  of  rest  supervenes. 

These  call  themselves  Atheists;  and  if  there  be  such,  they  probably 
have  the  best  right  to  assume  the  title,  but  I  confess  that  I  doubt 
whether  even  these  are  really  Atheists. 

In  t'ae  first  place,  when  they  talk  of  laws,  they  overlook,  it  seems  to  me 
the  fact,  that  a  law  postulates  a  law-giver — a  will  at  any  rate  that  has 
impressed  a  course  of  action — and  so  it  seems  to  me  that,  admitting  an 
inherent  law,  they  cannot  logically  escape  a  will  that  orginated  that  law, 
and  such  a  will  in  such  a  case  must  be  what  mankind  understands  as  God. 

But  in  the  second  place,  though  they  deny  this  primary  will,  they 
do  not  really  deny  all  Gods.  For  thej  say  that  in  accordance  witht  the 
inherent  laws,  develop,  not  only  all  we  see  and  know,  but  incredibly 
and  iDConceiveably  higher  spiritual  beings,  who  guide  and  direct  all 
things  in  the  visible  universe,  and  to  whose  power  and  love  are  doe 
all  the  beauties  and  wonders  of  the  world  that  so  impress  us  with  a  sense 
of  design.* 

So  then,  though  they  may  call  these,  Dhyan  Chohans  or  Elohim, 
these  exalted  spiritual   beings   are   really   their    Gods,    and   they   are 

*  Reference  is  here  made  to  the  Tibetan  Arhats— our  Masters. — Ed. 

87 

Poljtbeists  ratlier  than  Atheists.  Only  it  must  be  remembered  that  tbesef 
their  Gods,  are  neither  infinite  nor  absolnte.  They  are  finite;  billions  on 
billion  of  years  as  they  subsist,  they  pass  into  non-txi stence  (bat  whether 
into  non-being  or  not  the  holders  of  these  tenets  are  not  agreed)  with  the 
close  of  the  great  day,  and  they  are  conditioned  by  the  eternal  inherent 
law  of  the  infinite  substance  one  of  whose  deTelopments  they  are. 

Whi/,  they  have  preferred  finite  and  conditioned  Gods  to  one  Infinite 
and  Absolute  God  is  clear.  On  the  former  hypothesis,  the  origin  of  evil, 
the  existence  of  sin  and  suffering  offer  no  difficulty;  the  Gods  do  their 
best;  but  there  are  laws  cf  opposite  polarity,  of  antagonistic,  opposites, 
to  which  the  universe  owes  its  origin,  and  with  it  they  themselves, 
which  are  above  them  and  which  they  are  powerless  to  control,  although 
they  can  largely  modify  their  results.  They  do  their  best,  if  there  still 
remain  misery  and  evil,  it  is  becaase  not  being  omnipotent,  they  cannot 
cnre  without  medicine,  cannot  make  light  apparent  without  darkness. 

Why,  tooj  they  deny  the  primal  Will  as  giving  with  to  the  so-called 
inherent  laws  is  also  clear.  So  bng  as  these  are  blind  laws,  self-existing, 
no  one  is  responsible  for  all  the  sin  and  sorrow  and  suffering  that  these 
laws  entail.  But  admit  the  will,  then  this  as  (exhypothese)  Omnipo- 
tent becomes  responsible  for  all  the  evil  that  evolves  from  its  behests  and 
could  not  therefore  apparently  be  perfectly  beneficent.  Whichever  way 
we  turn,  then  there  are  difficulties.  No  solution  of  the  fundament  pro- 
blem of  the  universe  that  in  all  these  thousands  of  thousands  years  the 
mind  of  man  has  been  able  evolve  is  altogether  unimpeachable. 

Let  us  then  each  take  the  solution  that  best  suits  our  mental  and 
spiritual  constitution,  and  let  us  leave  our  neighbours  an  equal  freedom 
of  choice ;  let  us  never  hesitate  to  state  and  defend  our  own  views  and 
oppose  those  other  views  that  we  think  wrong,  but  let  us  do  all  this  as 
we  would  defend  our  own  and  oppose  our  opponent's  game  at  chess, 
with  no  more  feeling  against  our  opponents  than  we  have  agaiust  an 
adversary  at  the  noble  game. 

Above  all  let  us  remember  that  in  this  present  life,  the  high  theoreti- 
cal questions  of  Personal,  Impersonal,  and  No-God,  are  of  less  concern 
to  us  than  our  own  everyday  life  about  the  right  conduct  of  which  no 
similar  difficulties  exist. 

88 

.    That  we  shoald  all  try  to  love  onr  neighbours  as   oureelven,  that  we 

should   forgive  our  eaemiea,  that  we  sh'juld  do  good  to  those  who  do  evil 

to  08,  that  we  should  value  purity  of  life,  truth  and  gooduess  far   above 

wealth   or   place   or   personal  eujoyruent, — these   are    truths   admitted 

ubiquft  semper  et  ab  omnibus,  aud  surely  these  furoiah   a    wide   enough 

platform  on  which  we  can  all,  whether  Brarahins,    Christians,   Theoso- 

phists,  Aryans  or  what  not,  meet    aal  labour   in   one   uuiverial  being 

Brotherhood. 

H.  X, 

I. 

Replied  byT.  Sobba  Rao,  b.a.,  b.l.,  f.t.  s. 

A  LETTER  sisfned  by  "  H.  X."  has  appeared  ia  the  Decetnber 
issue  of  the  Tkeosophist  uader  the  headiug  aboveraentioned 
coataioiag  some  observations  on  "the  Theoretical  Questions  of 
Personal,  Irnpersooal,  and  No-God."  Anything  like  an 
intelligent  discossion  of  these  questions  i^  beset  with  almost 
insarmoantable  difficulties;  and  it  is  not  likely  that  any  one, 
who  has  not  exactly  defined  to  himself  what  is  knowable  to 
man  and  what  io  unknowable,  by  a  careful  examination  oi  the 
nature  of  man  and  his  latent  powers,  will  ever  be  profited  by 
devoting  any  portion  of  his  time  to  speculations  concerning 
these  subjects.  Jesus  declared  that  nobody  had  ever  seen  the 
Father;  Buddha  was  silent  when  he  was  questioned  about 
the  nature  of  the  Absolute  and  the  Infinite,  and  our  Sankira- 
chariar  said  that  all  that  was  written  on  these  questions  only 
revealed  the  depth  of  human  ignorance.  But  mankind  have 
never  ceased  to  speculate  on  these  questions.  Thousands  of 
conflicting  hypotheses  have  come  into  existence  by  reason  of 
these  speculations:  disputants  have  never  ceased  quarrelling 
about  them  and  the  human  race  has  divided  itself  into 
hundreds  of  warring  sects  on  account  of  their  differences  of 
opinion  in  theoretical  Metaphysics.  If,  as  is  stated  by"H.X.," 
(Jifferences  of  opinion  on  matters  "Spiritual"  are  inevitable, 
there  must  be  an  irrepressible  desire  in  the  human  being  to 
grapple  desperately  with  the  unknowable  and  unknown  without 
knowing  anything  about  the  real  capabilities  of  his  own  powers. 

89 

The  generality  of  the  public   (at   least   in   this  conntry)   are 
accustomed  to  associate  every  religions  and   social   moveraeat 
with    some  particular    belief   regarding   the   subject   under 
consideration.     In  their  opinion   every   system  of  philosophy, 
science,  or  ethics   which   does  not  inculcate    some   particular 
doctrine  with  respect  to  the  problems  in  question  is  necessarily 
imperfect.     The  importance  of  every  religious  movement,  the 
usefulness   of    every    association    and    the    value    of    every 
philosophical     system,    is    always    estimated    by    them    ia 
connection  with  such   belief  or  doctrine.     An  association,  like 
the  Theosophical  Society,  composed  of  various  religionists  and 
established  for  the  purposes  of  religious  and  scientific  enquiry, 
is  a  novelty  to  them.     Consequently,  enquiries  are  constantly 
being  made  regarding  the  views  of  the  founders  of  the  Theoso- 
phical Society  and  our  great  Teachers  of  the  Himavat  about 
the  questions  under  consideration.    It  is  represented  to   them 
by  some  people   that   they   are   Nastikas.     When   the  great 
mass  of  the  people  are  unaccustomed  to  philosophical  enquiry 
and   precise   mode«   of  thinking,  the  charge  of  Atheism    is 
sufficient   to   lower  in   their  estimation  any   particular    in- 
dividual or  association.     When  any   man's   Atheism   is   con- 
demned almost  without   hearing,  no   particular   connotation 
hardly  ever  attached  to  the  word;   but   it  is   associated    with 
a  large  cluster  of  vices  and  deformities.     It  is  highly  desirable 
therefore  to  state  to  the  public  in  clear  language  the  doctrine 
of  the  Arhat  philosophy   regarding   the  problem   in   question 
and   point   out   such   misconceptions   as    are   likely   to  arise 
from   a  perusal  of  the  letter  under  review.     Before  proceeding 
further,  I  beg  to  inform  my  readers  that  in  his  letter  "H-  X.'* 
speaks  of  the  Adwaita  doctrine  under  the  heading  of  impersonal 
God  and  introduces  the  Arhat  doctrine  under  that  of  Atheism- 
It  would  have  been  better  if  he  had  referred  to  these  two  sys- 
tems of  philosophy    under   their   proper  designations.     The 
general  public  have  not  yet   accepted   any  one   difinitiou  of 
the   so-called   impersonal    God,   and   the   word   atheism,  as 
above    stated,     conveys   but   a   very   vague  idea.     Without 
attempting,  therefore,  to  ascertain  the  significance  of  the 
12  -,. 

90 

same,  I  shall  state  the  general  principles  of  the  Adwaita  and 
the  Arhat  doctrines  on  the  subject  under  consideratioo,  and 
leave  it  to  my  readers  to  decide  whether  they  indicate  a 
belief  in  a  personal  or  an  imperaoncU  God,  or  whether  they 
amount  to  Atheism. 

I  shall  here  request  my  readers  (such  of  them  at  least  as 
are  not  acquainted  with  the  Cosmological  theories  of  the 
Idealistic  thinkers  of  Europe)  to  examine  John  Stuart  Mill's 
Cosmological  theory  as  explained  in  his  examination  of  Sir 
William  Hamilton's  philosophy,  before  attempting  to  under- 
stand the  Adwaita  doctrine;  and  I  beg  to  inform  them  before- 
hand that  in  explaining  the  main  principles  of  the  said  doctrioe 
I  am  going  to  use,  as  far  as  it  is  convenient  to  do  so,  the 
phraseology  adopted  by  English  psychologists  of  the  Idealistic 
School  of  thought  In  dealing  with  the  phenomena  of  our 
present  plane  of  existence  Jehu  Stuart  Mill  ultimately  came  to 
the  conclusion  that  matter  or  the  so-called  external  phenomena 
are  but  the  creation  of  our  mind;  they  are  the  mere  appear- 
ances of  a  particular  phase  of  our  subjective  self,  and  of  our 
thouo'hts,  volitions,  sensations  and  emotions  which  in  their 
totality  constitute  the  basis  of  that  Ego.  Matter,  then,  is  the 
permanent  possibility  of  sensations;  and  the  so-called  Laws  of 
matter  are,  properly  speaking,  the  Laws  which  govern  the 
succession  and  co-existence  of  our  states  of  consciousness.  Mill 
further  holds  that  properly  speaking  there  is  no  noumenal  Ego. 
The  very  idea  of  a  mind  existing  separately  as  an  entity  distinct 
from  the  states  of  consciousness  which  are  supposed  to  inhere 
in  it  is  in  his  opinion  illusory,  as  the  idea  of  an  external  object 
which  is  supposed  to  be  perceived  by  our  senses. 

Thns  the  ideas  of  mind  and  matter,  of  subject  and  object,  of 
the  E<'0  and  external  world  are  really  evolved  from  the 
acroregation  of  our  mental  state  which  are  the  only  realities  so 
far  as  we  are  concerned. 

The  chain  of  our  mental  states  of  consiousnesa  is  "a 
double-headed  monster"  according  to  Professor  Bain,  which 
has  two  distinct  aspects,  one  objetive  and  the  other  subjective. 

91 

Mr.  Mill  baa  paused  here  confessing  that  psychological 
analysis  did  not  go  any  further,  the  mysterioas  link  which 
connects  together  the  train  of  our  states  of  conscionsness  and 
gives  rise  to  oor  Ahankaram  in  this  condition  of  existence, 
still  remains  an  incomprehensible  mystery  to  Western 
psychologists,  though  its  existence  is  bnt  dimly  perceived  in 
the  subjective  phenomena  of  memory  and  expectation. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  great  physicists  of  Europe  are 
gradually  coming  to  the  conclusion*  that  mind  is  the  product 
of  matter,  or  that  it  is  one  of  the  attributes  of  matter  in  some 
of  its  conditions.  It  would  appear,  therefore,  from  the  specu- 
lations of  Western  psychologists  that  matter  is  evolved  from 
mind  and  that  mind  is  evolved  from  matter.  These  two 
propositions  are  apparently  irreconcilable.  Mill  and  Tyndal 
have  admitted  that  Western  science  is  yet  unaWe  to  go  deeper 
into  the  question.  Nor  it  is  likely  to  solve  the  mystery  here- 
after, unless  it  calls  Eastern  occult  science  to  its  aid  and  takes 
a  more  comprehensive  view  of  the  capabilities  of  the  real 
subjective  self  of  man  and  the  various  aspects  of  the  great 
objective  universe.  The  great  Adwaitee  philosophers  of  ancient 
Aryavarta  have  examined  the  relationship  between  subject 
and  object  in  every  condition  of  existence  in  this  solar  system 
in  which  this  differentiation  is  presented.  Just  as  a  haman:being 
is  composed  of  7  principles,  differentiated  matter  in  the  solar 
system  exists  in  7  different  conditions.  These  different  states 
of  matter  do  not  all  come  within  the  range  of  our  present  ob- 
jective conscionsness.  But  they  can  be  objectively  perceived 
by  the  spiritual  Ego  in  man.  To  the  liberated  spiritual  monad 
of  man,  or  to  the  Dhyan  Chohans,  every  thing  that  is  material 
in  every  condition  of  matter  is  an  object  of  perception.  Further 
pragna,  or  the  capacity  of  perception,  exists  in  7  different 
aspects  corresponding  to  the  7  conditions  of  matter.  Strictly 
speaking,  there  are  bnt  6  states  of  matter,  the  so-called  7th 
state  being  the  aspect  of  Cosmic  matter  in  its  original  nn- 
differentiated     condition.     Similarly    there  are   6   states    of 

*  See  Tyndall's  Belfast  Address.— S.  B. 

92 

differentiated  Pragna,  the  seventh  state  being  a  condition   of 
perfect  oaconscionsDess.     By  differentiated   Pragna,   I    mean 
the  condition  in  which  Pragna  is  split  np  into  various   states 
of  consciousness.     Thus   we   have  6   states  of  consciousness, 
either  objective  or  subjective,  for  the  time  being  as   the   case 
may  be,  and  a  state  of  perfect  unconsciousness  which   is   the 
beginning  and  the  end  of  all  conceivable  states  of  consciousness, 
corresponding  to  the  states  of  differentiated  matter   and   its 
original  undifferentiated  basis  which  is  the  beginning  and  the 
end  of  all  Cosmic  evolutions.    It  will  be  easily  seen   that  the 
existence  of  consciousness  is  necessary  for   the   differentiation 
between  subject  and   object.    Hence   these  two  phases   are 
presented  in  6  different  conditions,  and  in  the  last  state  there 
being  no  consciousness   as   above  stated,   the   diffarentiatioa 
in  question  ceases  to  exist.     The  number  of  these  various  con- 
ditions is  different    in   some    systems    of   philosophy.     But 
whatever  may  be  the  number  of  divisions,  they  all  lie   between 
perfect  unconsciousness  at  one  end  of  the  line  and  our  present 
state  of  consciousness  or  Bakipragna   at   the    other  end.     To 
understand  the  real  nature  of  these  different  states  of  consci- 
ousness, I  shall  request  my  readers  to  compare  the  conscious- 
ness of  the  ordinary  man  with  the  consciousness  of  the   astral 
man,  and  again  compare  the  latter   with   the  consciousness  of 
the  spiritual   Ego  in   man.    In   these   three   conditions  the 
objective   Universe  is   not   the   same.     But     the  difference 
between  the  Ego  and  the  non-Ego  is  common  to  all  these  condi- 
tions.    Consequently,  admitting    the    correctness    of    Mill's 
reasoning  as  regards  the  subject  and  object  of  our  present  plane 
of  consciousness,  the  great  Adwaitee  thinkers   of  India   have 
extended  the  same  reasoning  to  other  states  of  consciousness, 
and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  various  conditions  of  the 
Ego  and  the  non-Ego  were  but  the  appearances  of  one  and  the 
same  entity — the   ultimate  state    of  unconsciousness.     This 
entity  is  neither  matter  nor  spirit;  it  is  neither  Ego   nor   non- 
Ego;  and  it  is  neither  object  nor  subject.     In  the  language  of 
Hindn  philosophers  it  is  the  original  and  eternal  combination 
of  Purusha  and  Prakriti.     As  the   Adwaitees    hold  that  an 

ii 

98 

external  object  ia  merely  the  prodnct  of  onr  mental  state, 
Prakriti  is  nothing  more  than  illusion,  and  Pnrash  ia  the  only 
reality;  it  is  the  one  existence  which  remains  eternal  in  this 
aaiverse  of  Ideals.  This  entity  then  is  the  Parabrahmam  of 
the  Adwaitees.  Even  if  there  were  to  be  a  personal  God  with 
any  thing  like  a  material  upadhi  (physical  basis  of  whatever 
form),  from  the  stand-point  of  an  Ad waitee  there  will  be  as 
mach  reason  to  doubt  his  nominal  existence  as  there  would 
be  in  the  case  of  any  other  object.  In  their  opinion  conscious 
god  cannot  be  the  origin  of  the  universe,  as  his  Ego  would  be 
the  effect  of  a  previous  cause,  if  the  word  coascious  conveys 
but  its  ordinary  meaning.  They  cannot  admit  that  the  grand 
total  of  all  the  states  of  consciousness  in  the  universe  is  their 
deity,  as  these  states  are  constantly  changing  and  as  Cosmic 
idealism  ceases  during  Pralaya.  There  is  only  one  permanent 
condition  in  the  universe  which  is  the  state  of  perfect  Uncon- 
sciousness, bare  chidakasam  in  fact. 

When  my  readers  once  realize  the  fact  that  this  grand  uni- 
verse is  in  reality  but  a  huge  aggregation  of  various  states  of 
consciousness,  they  will  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the 
ultimate  states  of  unconsciousness  is  considered  as  Parabrah- 
mam by  the  Adwaitees. 

The  idea  of  a  God,  Deity,  Iswar,  or  an  impersonal  God  [if 
consciousness  is  one  of  his  attributes]  involves  the  idea  of  Ego 
in  some  shape  or  other,  and  as  every  conceivable  Ego  or  non- 
Ego  is  evolved  from  this  primitive  element  [I  use  this  word 
for  want  of  better  one]  the  existence  of  an  extra-cosmic  god 
possessing  such  attributes  prior  to  this  condition  is  absolutely 
inconceivable.  Though  I  have  been  speaking  of  this  ele- 
ment as  the  condition  of  unconsciousness,  it  is,  properly  speak- 
ing, the  chidakas%m  or  chinmatra  of  the  Hindu  philosophers 
which  contains  within  itself  the  potentiality  of  every  condi- 
tion of  "Pragna,"  and  which  results  as  consciousness  on  the 
one  hand  and  the  objective  universe  on  the  other,  by  the 
operation  of  its  latent  chichakti  (the  power  which  generates 
thought). 

94 

Before  proceeding  to  explain  the  definition  of  Pambrak- 
mam  with  which  my  last  article  closes,  I  beg  to  inform  my 
readers  that  iu  the  opinion  of  AdwaiteeSy  the  Upanishads  and 
the  Brahmasutras  fully  snpport  their  views  an  the  snbject. 
It  is  distinctly  affirmed  in  the  (Jpanishads  that  Parabrainarn 
which  is  bat  the  bare  potentiality  oi  pragna,'*  is  not  an  aspect 
of  pragna  or  ego  in  any  shape  and  that  it  has  neither  life  nor 
consciousness.  "H.  X."  will  be  able  to  ascertain  that  such  is 
really  the  case  on  examining  the  Micndakct  and  Mundiikya 
JJpaitishads.  The  Ifinguage  used  here  and  there  in  the  Upa- 
nishads  is  apt  to  mislead  one  into  the  belief  that  such  langu- 
age points  to  the  existence  of  a  conscious  Iswar.  But  the 
necessity  for  such  language  will  be  perceived  on  examining 
the  following  remarks. 

From  a  close  examination  of  Mill's  Cosmologrcal  theory  as 
explained  in  my  last  article,  it  will  be  clearly  seen  that  it  will 
be  extremely  difficult  to  account  satisfactorily  for  the  genera- 
tion of  conscious  states  in  any  human  being  from  the  stand- 
point of  the  said  theory.  It  is  generally  stated  that  sensations 
arise  in  us  from  the  action  of  the  external  objects  around  us  : 
they  are  the  effects  of  impressions  made  on  our  senses  by  the 
objective  world  in  which  we  exist.  This  is  simple  enough  to 
an  ordinary  mind,  however  diffiuulfc  it  may  be  to  account  for 
the  transformation  of  a  cerebral  nerve-current  into- a  state  of 
consciousness. 

But  from  the  stand-point  of  Mill's  theory  we  have  no  proof 
of  the  existence  of  any  external  object  ;  even  the  objective 
existence  of  our  own  senses  is  not  a  matter  of  certainty  to  us. 
How,  then,  are  we  to  account  for  and  explain  the  origin  of  out 
mental  states,  if  they  are  the  only  entities  existing  in  this 
world  ?  No  explanation  is  really  given  by  saying  that  one 
mental  state  gives  rise  to  another  mental  state  as  may  be 
shown  to  a  certain  extent  by  the  operation  of  the  so-called 
psychological  "Laws  of  Association."  Western  psychology 
honestly  admits  that  its  analysis   has  not   gone   any  further. 

♦  The  power  or  the  capacity  that  gives  rise  to  perception. 

95 

It  may  be  inferred,  however,  from  the  said  theory  that  there 
would  be  no  reason  for  saying  that  a  material  Upadhi 
(basis)  is  necessary  for  the  existence  of  mind  or  states  of 
■consciousness. 

As  is  already  indicated  in  my  last  article,  the  Aryan 
psychologists  have  traced  this  current  of  mental  states  to  its 
source — the  eternal  Chinmatra  existing  everywhere.  When 
the  time  for  evolution  comes  this  germ  of  Pragna  unfolds 
itself  and  results  ultimately  as  Cosmic  ideatisn.  Cosmic  i<leas 
are  the  conceptions  of  all  the  conditions  of  existence  in  the 
Cosmos  existing  in  what  may  be  called  the  universal  mind 
(the  demiurgic  mind  of  the  Western  Kabalists). 

This  Chinmatra  exists  as  it  were  at  every  geometrical  point 
of  the  infinite  Chidakasam,  This  principle  then  has  two 
general  aspects.  Considered  as  something  objective  it  is  the 
eternal  Asatk — Mulprakriti  or  Undiferentiated  Cosmic  matter. 
From  a  subjective  point  of  view  it  may  be  looked  upon  in  two 
ways.  It  is  Chidakasam  when  considered  as  the  field  of 
Cosmic  ideation;  and  it  is  Chinmatra  when  considered  as  the 
germ  of  Cosmic  ideation.  These  three  aspects  constitute  the 
highest  Trinity  of  the  A.ryau  Adwaitee  philosophers.  It  will 
be  readily  seen  that  the  last  mentioned  aspect  of  the  principle 
in  question  is  far  more  important  to  us  than  the  other  two 
aspects;  for,  when  looked  upon  in  this  aspect  the  principle 
nnder  consideration  seems  to  embody  within  itself  the  great 
Law  of  Cosmic  evolution.  And  therefore  the  Adwaitee  philo- 
sophers have  chiefly  considered  it  in  this  light,  and  explained 
their  cosmogony  from  a  subjective  point  of  view.  In  doing  so, 
however,  they  cannot  avoid  the  necessity  of  speaking  of  a 
universal  mind  (and  this  is  Brahma,  the  Creator)  and  its 
ideation.  But,  it  ought  not  to  be  inferred  therefore  that  this 
universal  mind  necessarily  belongs  to  an  Omnipresent  living 
conscious  Creator,  simply  because  in  ordinary  parlance  a  mind 
is  always  spoken  of  in  connection  with  a  particular  living 
being.  It  cannot  be  contended  that  a  material  Upadhi  is 
indispensable  for  the  existence  of  mind  or  mental  states  when 

96 

the  objective  universe  itself  is,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  the 
result  of  our  states  of  consciousness.  Expressions  implying 
the  existence  of  a  conscious  Iswar  which  are  to  be  found  here 
and  there  in  the  Upanishads  should  not  therefore  be  literally 
construed. 

It  now  remains  to  be  seen  how  Adwaitees  account  for  the 
origin  of  mental  states  in  a  particular  individual.  Apparently 
the  mind  of  a  particular  human  being  is  not  the  Universal 
mind.  Nevertheless  Cosmic  ideation  is  the  real  source  of  the 
states  of  consciousness  in  every  individuals.  Oosmic  ideation 
exists  everywhere;  but  when  placed  under  restrictions  by  a 
material  Upadhi  it  results  as  the  consciousness  of  the  indivi- 
dual inhering  in  such  Upadhi.  Strictly  speaking,  an  Adwiitee 
will  not  admit  the  objective  existence  of  this  material  Upadhi. 
From  his  stand-point  it  is  Maj/a  or  illusion  which  exists  as  a 
necessary  condition  ofpragna.  But  to  avoid  confusion,  I  shall 
use  the  ordinary  language;  and  to  enable  my  readers  to  grasp 
my  meaning  clearly  the  following  simile  may  be  adopted. 
Suppose  a  bright  light  is  placed  in  the  centre  with  a  curtain 
around  it.  The  nature  of  the  light  that  penetrates  through 
the  curtain  and  becomes  visible  to  a  person  standing  outside 
depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  curtain.  If  several  such 
curtains  are  thus  successively  placed  around  the  light,  it  will 
have  to  penetrate  through  all  of  them:  and  a  person  standing 
outside  will  only  perceive  as  much  light  as  is  not  intercepted 
by  all  the  curtains.  The  central  light  becomes  dimmer  and 
dimmer  as  curtain  after  curtain  is  removed  the  light  becomes 
brighter  and  brighter  until  it  reaches  its  natural  brilliancy. 
Similarly  Universal  mind  or  Cosmic  ideation  becomes  more 
and  more  limited  and  modified  by  the  various  Upadhis  of 
which  a  human  being  is  composed;  and  when  the  action  or 
influence  of  these  various  Upadhis  is  successively  controlled, 
the  mind  of  the  individual  human  being  is  placed  en  rapport 
with  the  Universal  mind  and  his  ideation  is  lost  in  Cosmic 
ideation. 

97 

As  I  have  already  said  these  Upadhis  are  strictly  speating" 
the  conditions  of  the  gradual  development  or  erolution  of 
Bakipragna — or  consciousness  in  the  present  plane  of  oar 
existence — from  the  original  and  eternal  Ckinmatra  which  is 
tlie  7th  principle  in  man  and  the  Parabrahmam  oi  the 
Adwaitees, 

This,  then,  is  the  purport  of  the  Adwcdta  philosophy  on  the 
subject  under   consideration  and  it  is,  iu  my  humble  opinion, 
in    harmony    with  the    Arhat   doctrine   relating  to  the  same 
subject.     The  latter  doctrine  postulates-  the  existence  of  Cosmic 
matter  in  an  undifferentiated  condition  throughout,  the  infinite 
expanse  of  space.     Space  and  time  are  but  its  aspects,   and 
Furushy  the  7th  principle  of  the    Universe,   has.  its  latent  life 
iu  this   Ocean  of  Cosmic   matter.     The   doctrine  in  q^uestioa 
explains  Cosmogony   from  an  objective  point  of  view.    When 
the  period  of  activity   arrives,  portions  of  the    whole   different 
tiate  according  to  the  latent  Law.     When  this  differentiation 
has  commenced,    the   concealed    Wisdom  or  latent    Chich'akti 
act  in  the  Universal  mind  and  Coamic  energy  or  Fa/mt  forms 
the  manifested   universe  in   accordance   with  the   conceptions 
generated  in  the  Universal  mind  out  oTthe  differentiated  prin- 
ciples of  Coamic  matter.     This  manifested  universe  constitutes 
a  solar   system.     When  the    period   of  pralaya.   comes,   the 
process  of  differentiation  stops   and  cosmic   ideation  ceases  to 
exist  ;  and  at  the   time  of  Brahmapralaya  or  Mahapralaya 
the  particles  of  matter  lose  all  differentiation  and  the  matter 
that  exists  in  the  solar  system  returns  to  its  original  undiffer- 
entiated condition.     The  latent  design  exists  in  the  one  unborn 
eternal  atom,    the  centre  which  exists   everywhere   and  no- 
where;   and    this    is   the  one  Life    that    exists    everywhere. 
Now,  it  will    be  easily  seen    that  the  undifferentiated  Cosmic 
matter,  Punish  and  the  onb  life  of  the  Arhat   philosophers 
are   the  Mulaprakriti,    Chidakasam  and    Cfnnmatra   of    the 
Adwaitee  philosophers.     As  regards   Cosmogony,   the   Arhat 
stand-poiuc    is  objective,    and    the  Adicaitee   stand-point   is 
subjective.    The  Arhat  Cosmogony  accounts  for  the  evolution 
of  manifested   solar    system   from     uudiffercntiated  Cosmic 
13 

9« 

loatter,  and  Adwaitee  Cosmogony  accounts  for  the  evolntion 
of  J3ahipragna  from  the  original  Ckinmatra.  As  the  different 
conditions  of  differentiated  Cosmic  matter  are  bat  the  different 
aspects  of  the  various  conditions  of  pragna^  the  Adwaitee 
Cosmogony  is  but  the  complement  of  the  Arkat  Cosmogony. 
The  eternal  Principle  is  precisely  the  same  in  both  the  systema 
and  they  agree  iu  denying  the  existence  of  an  extra-Cosmic 
God. 

"H.  X."  is  pleased  to  inform  his  readers  that  the  Arhats  call 
themselves  Atheists.  They  will  be  justified  in  doing  so  if 
theism  inculcates  the  existence  of  a  conscious  God  governing 
the  Universe  by  his  will-power.  Under  such  circumstance 
the  Adtoaitees  will  come  under  the  same  denomination. 
Atheism  and  theism  are  words  of  doubtful  import  and  until 
their  meaning  is  definitely  ascertained,  it  would  be  better  not  to 
use  them  in  connection  with  any  system  of  philosophy. 

WILL. 

**Sors  de  Vinfance  ami,  reveUleg  toi," 
^(Schopenhauer' t  motto.)  Roussbait. 

It  is  with  the  greatest  interest  that  I  read  the  profound 
article  by  T.  Subba  Row,  "A  Personal  and  an  Impersonal 
God," — logically  arriving  at  a  condition  of  unconsciousness, 
though  containing  the  potentiality  of  every  condition  of 
*'Pragna,"  the  only  permanent  state  in  the  universe. 

The  theory  of  the  Idealistic  thinker  John  Stuart  Mill  is 
metnioned  in  connection,  who  is  certainly  the  type  of  Western 
Idealistic   philosophy. 

But  there  is  another  Idealist,  another  Western  thinker^ 
who  has  expressed  the  same  long  before  J.  S.  Mill  in  other 
words,  but  with  a  candid  reference  to  Asiatic  philosophy,  und 
given  these  ideas  at  the  same  time  a  far  more  palpable  objec- 
tivity, as  far  as  regards  our  conscious  world. 

J 

99 

Perhaps  for  the  latter  reason  yonr  readers  may  find  an 
interest  in  his  thoughts,  which  I  allow  myself  to  render  as 
follows  : — 

"  The  world  is  my  mental  perception," — this  is  a  self- 
evident  troth  for  every  living  and  discerning  being,  although 
man  alone  can  bring  it  into  a  reflecting  abstract  conscioasness, 
and  when  he  does  do  so,  in  fact,  then  philosophical  reflection 
has  begun  in  him.  Then  also  it  becomes  a  clear  certainty  to 
bim,  that  what  he  knows  is  no  Sun,  no  Earth,  bat  only  an 
eye  that  sees  a  Snn,  a  hand  that  touches  an  Earth,  that  the 
snrronnding  world  is  there  only  as  a  mental  representation, 
i.e.y  absolutely  in  relation  to  something  else,  which  some- 
thing else  is  himself.  If  any  truth  can  be  pronounced  a 
priori,  then  it  is  this  one,  the  statement  of  that  form  of  all 
possible  and  thinkable  experiences,  more  universal  than  all 
others,  more  so  than  time,  space  and  causality.  All  these,  in 
fact,  presuppose  already  the  former  ;  it  is  only  the  division  in 
object  and  subject  that  makes  possible  and  imaginable 
phenomena  of  whatsoever  kind,  abstract  or  intuitive,  pure  or 
empirical.  Therefore,  no  truth  is  more  certain,  more  indepen- 
dent of  all  others,  or  requiring  less  proof  than  that  everything 
that  exists  in  our  perception  is  only  Object  in  relation  to 
Subject,  the  perception  of  that  which  perceives;  in  a  word,-«- 
our  own  mental  representation. 

*'  And  this  applies  as  much  to  all  Past  as  to  the  Present, 
and  all  Future;  to  what  is  most  distant,  and  to  what  is  most 
near,  because  it  applies  to  time  and  space  themselves,  in 
which  alone  the  relations  can  exist. 

*'This  is  by  no  means  a  new  truth.  It  was  already  con- 
tained in  the  sceptical  premises  from  which  Descartes  pro- 
ceeded. Berkeley,  however,  was  the  first  to  give  it  an  abso- 
lute form,  and  has  thereby  deserved  much  of  philosophy, 
though  his  other  doctrines  cannot  bear  criticism.  The 
principal  mistake  of  Kant  was  his  neglect  of  this  axiom. 

*^How  long  ago,  however  this  'fandamental  truth  has  been 
acknowledged  bij  the  Sages  of  India^  appearing  as  the  fiuida- 

100 

•mftntttt  principle  of  the  Vedanta.  philofiophy,  ascribed  to  Vyasa, 
is  demonstrated  by  Sir  W.  Jones,  in  his  work  "On  the  Philo- 
sophy of  the  Asiatics/' — {Asiatic  Researches,  Vol.  IV,  p.  164). 
Th-e  fandamiental  tenet  of  the  Yedanta  school  consists  not  in 
denying  the  existence  of  matter,  that  is  of  soliditj',  impene- 
trability, and  figure  (to  deny  which  wonld  be  lauacy),  but  in 
•correcting  the  popular  notion  of  it,  aad  in  contending  that 
it  has  no  essence  independent  of  mental  perception  :  that 
existence  and  perceptibility  are  convertible  terms." 

"  These  words  express  sufficiently  the  co-existence  of  empi- 
rical reality  with  transcendental  Idealism. 

*'  Thus  only  and  from  this  aspect  of  the  world  as  mental 
perception,  can  we  begin  to  contemplate  it.  That  such  a 
contemplation,  however,  without  any  detriment  to  its  truth, 
is  one-sided,  and  therefore,  the  result  of  some  arbitrary  ab- 
fltraction,  is  nevertheless  felt  by  everybody  and  proved  by  that 
internal  revolt,  with  which  one  accepts  the  world  as  one's 
mere  mental  perception,  and  of  which,  on  the  other  hand, 
one  can  yet  never  entirely  rid  himself.  Later  on,  however, 
we  will  make  up  for  the  one-sideduess  of  this  consideration, 
by  the  enunciation  of  a  truth,  not  so  directly  certain  as  that 
one  from  which  we  now  proceed,  but  the  only  one  to  which 
a  profonnder  injury  can  lead;  still  more  difficult  as  an 
abstraction,  the  division  of  what  is  different,  and  union  of 
that  which  is  identical ;  a  most  important  truth,  which,  if  not 
dismaying,  yet  must  appear  critical  to  everyone,  the  follow- 
ing one  in  fact;  that  we  can  as  well  say,  and  must  say — 

*Thb  World  is  my  will.'"* 

We  must  begin  to  consider  not  only  the  world,  but  even  onr 
own  body  as  mere  perception.  That  from  which  we  are  now 
abstracting  shall  presently  clearly  show  itself  as  Will,  of 
which  alone  the  world  in  its  other   aspect   consists,  for   that 

*  See  Schopeahaar'd  chief  work  DUi  *oelt  alg  Wille  und  Verstallung . 
Ida  Umeited,  11.  pp.  159  and  2GI .— L.  A,  S. 

101 

B,spepi.  is  in  one  respect  exdnsively  mental  perception,   hn% 
ca  the  otlier  ubsolately  will!* 

L.  A,  Sanders,  F,  T.  S. 
Borneo,  18^;^  Marck  1883. 

Eottor's  Notb. — For  the  benefit  of  those  of  our  readers  in  India,  who, 
•although  excellent  Vedantic  scholars,  may  have  never   heard   of  Arthur 
Schopenhauer  and  his  philosophy,  it  will  be  useful  to  say  a  few    word's 
regarding  this  German  Metaphysician,  who   is  raniied  by   many    among 
the  world's  great  philosophers.    Otherwise,    the  above    translated    frag- 
ineut,  picked  oat  by  our  brother,  Mr.  Sanders,   for   the  soul  purpose  of 
■showing  the  great  identity  of  view,  betwween  the  Vedaata   system— the 
<irdiaic  philosophy   (we   beg    Professor  Max   Miiller's  pardon)   and    the 
■comparatively  modern  school  of   thought  founded  by  Schopenhauer, — 
m4y   appear   unintelli<{ible    in    its    isolated     form.     A  student  of   the 
Goktingen  and  Berlin  Universities,  a  friend   of  Ooethe   and   his  disciple 
initiated  by  hiui  into  the   mysteries  of   colour  (See   A.   Schopenhauer's 
Essay  Ueber  Sehcn  und  Farhen,   1816,)    he   evoluted,  so   to   say,   into   a 
profoundly  original    thinker    without    any     seeming     transaction,     and 
brought  his  philosophical  views  into  a  full  system  before  he  was   thirty. 
Possessed  of  a  large  priv-ate  fortune,  which  enabled  him   to   pursue  and 
develops  his  ideas  uninterruptedly,  he  remained  an  independent   thinker 
and  soon  won  for  himself,  on  account  of  his  strangely    pessitimistic  view 
of  the  world,  the  name  of  the  *'  misanthropic  sage."     The  idea    that    the 
present  world  is  radically  evil,  is  the  only  impurtaat  point  in  his  system 
that  differs  froui  the  teachings  of  the  Yedanta.     According  to  his  philo- 
«ophical  doctrines,  the  only  thing  truly  real,  original,    nietriphysical  and 
absolute,  is  will.     The  world  of  objects  consists  siuiply  of  appearances; 
of  Maya  or  illusion  — as  the   Vedantins  have  it.     It  lies   entirely  in,    and 
■depends  on,  our  representation.      Will  is    the   "thing  in  itself"  of   the 
Xaqitian  puilosophy,  "  the  substrataui  of  all  appearances  and  of   nature 
herself.     It  is   totally  different  from,  and  wholly  independent  of,  cogni- 
i^ion,  can  exist  and  manifuat  itself  without  it,  and  actually  does  so    in  all 
nature  from  animal  beings  downward."     Not  only  the   voluntary  actions 
of  animated  beings,  but  also  the  organic  frame  of  their    bodies,  its  form 

*  A>i  entity,  however  that  would  be  ncnie  of  either,  but  an  Object /or  itself  ^ 
to  which  Kant's  "  i?ir!^  an  sicA "  degenerated  under  his  treatment,  is  a 
jahanta«7n^  and  lis  recoj/nition  a  will-o'-the-w'/iisp  in  "philosopiy,"  Arthur 
Schopenhauer  (Vol.  I,  p.  35,)  edited  in  1818,  at  a  perioi  when  the 
km*wledge  of  Sanskrit  in  Europe  was  very  meagre.  Schopenhauer's 
**Objecttvation  of  Will  "  throws  light  upon  the  other  side  of  the  uaiverde. 
— L.  A,  S. 

102 

,«D(I  4[va1ity,  the  vegetation  of  plants,  and  in   the  inorganic  kingdom   of 
nature,  cryataliizutioa  and  every  other    original  power    which   uiauifeats 
itself  in  physical  and  chemical  phenomena,  %a  well  as  gravity,  are  some, 
tintig  •outside  of  appearance  and  identical  with  what  we  find  in   ourselves 
and  call — wiLiL.     An  intuitive  recognition  of  the  identity  cf   will  in  «I1 
the  phenomena  separated  by  individuation  is  the  source  of  justice,   bene- 
volence, and  love ;  while  from  a   non-recognition    of   its   identity    spring 
egotism,  malice,  evil  and  ignorance.     This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Vedantic 
«etdi/a  (ignoranoe)  that  makes  of  Self  an  object  distinct  from  Parabrahna, 
■of  Universal  Will.     Individual  soul,  physical  self,  are  only  imagined    by 
ignorance  and  have  no  more  reality  and  existence  than   the  objects   seea 
iu   a  dream.     With   Schopenhauer   it   also  results   from    this    original 
identity  of  will  in  all  its  phenomena,  that   the  reward    of   the   good  and 
the  punishment  of  the   bad  are   not   reserved   to  a   future  heaven  or  a 
futur«  hell,  but  are  ever    present  (the  doctrine  of  Karma,  when  philoso- 
phically cotisidered  and  from  its  esoteric  aspect).     Of   course  the  philoso- 
phy  of   Schopenhauer    was   radically    at    variauce   with    the   systems   of 
SchoUing,  Hegel,  Uerbart  and  other   contemporaries,  and  even   with  that 
of  Fichte,  for  a  time  his  master,  and   whose  philosophical  system   while 
studying  uader  him,  he  openly  treated  with  the  greatest  contempt.     But 
this  detracts  iu  nothing  from  his  own   original   and     profoundly    philoso- 
phical  though  often   too   pessimistic   views.     His  doctrines  are    mostly 
interesting    when    compared    with    those   of   the   Vedanta  of   ^'Sunkar- 
«h&<ry«'s "  school,  inasmuch  they   show    the   great   identity    of   tho'ight 
arriving  at  tAe  same   conclusions   between    men   of    two  quite   different 
epochs,  and  with  over  two  milleHiums    between   them.     When   some  of 
the  tnightidatand  most  puzzling  problems  of  being  are  thus  approximate- 
ly eolvbd   at   dili'tireot  ages  and    by    men  entirely   independent   of   one 
aaother,  and  that  the   moat  philosophically    profound    propositions,    pre- 
Uiises  and  conclusions  arrived  at  by  our  best    modern  thinkers   are    found 
on  comparison  nearly,  and  very   often   entirely,  identical    with   those   of 
older  philosophers  as  enunciated  by  them  thousands  of  years   back,    we 
msy  bo  justified  in  regarding  <*  the  heathen"  systems  as  the   primal   and 
ffitost  pure  suuriiee  of   every  aubaequenb  philosophical   development  of 
thought. 

ADWAITA  PHILOSOPHY, 

[As  tbe  subjoined  letter  comes  from  sncb  a  learned  sonrce,  we  do  not 
feel  justified  in  comnaenting  upon  it  editorially,  our  personal  knowledge 
of  the  Adwaita  doctorine  being  unquestionably  very  meagre  when  con- 
trasted with  that  of  a  Paramahamsa.  Yet  we  felt  a  strong  suspicioa 
that,  whether  owing  to  a  mistranslation  or  an  "original  misconception" 
there  waa  an  error  with  regard  to  Tadpada,  called  heieiD  the  8th  princi* 
pie.  Hence — the  foot-notes  by  onr  learned  brother  T.  Subba  Row,  to 
whom  we  turned  over  the  MS.  for  reply.  "We  know  of  no  bettex  autho- 
rity in  India  in  anything  conoerning  tbe  esoteneismi  of  the  Adwaita 
philosophy, — Ed.\ 

The  follovying  few  lines  are  from  aa  lodian  Rerooit  in  the 
Himalayas — and  these  convey  a  mere  hint  which  may  help  to 
eradicate  by  means  of  yonr  valuable  jonrnal  a  very  serions 
error  which  has  been  misleading  the  Western  Philosopivers 
for  the  past  (nearly)  nineteen  hundred  years — we  mean  the 
historical  sense  in  which  the  Bible  has  been  accepted  by  the 
Orthodox  Christians  of  the  day.  We  are  surprised  to  find 
that  the  modern  spiritualists  in  the  VVe&t  have  ignored  thi» 
"very  important  subject  and  are  sitting  quite  apathetic — while 
they  profess  to  have  pledged  themselves  to  the  establishment 
of  truth, 

"We  see  that  the  British  GovernmeDk  makes  now  and  thea 
a  sudden  and  spasmodic  effort  to  have  tbe  English  version  of 
the  Bible  revised  and  corrected;  and  still  tbe  good  people  of 
Christendom — (we  mean  that  portion  which  is  seeking  after 
truth — and  not  the  selfish  and  handsomely  paid  missionaries) 
— (ail  to  reap  the  fruit  they  so  long  for.  Now  and  again  we 
find  some  correspondence  on  this  subject  iu  the  Theosophist, 
but  it  does  not  seem  to  end  in  any  tangible  result.  Up  to 
this  time  we  have  been  reading  and  hearing  of  only  the  literal 
Bible,  but  not  a  single  word  of  the  esoteric  spirit  to  enlivea 
it  do  we  find  therein.  If  the  Bible,  as  interpreted  by  the 
bigoted  missionaries,  is  really  a  book  of  history,  or  even  of 
morality,  then,  it  cannot  be  a  book  of  divine  inspiration  ; 
hence  but  little  fit  to  form  the  foundation  of  State-religions. 
Unless  a  full  view  be  taken  of  the  Bible  from  diUerent  stand- 

104 

poiots,  it  cannot  be  decided  whether  it  be  true  or  not.  We 
will  try  to  pnt  its  credibility  to  a  test  by  a  few  points  c[QOted 
from  the  New  Testament,  and  see  : — 

1. — Whether  the  Bible  speaks  symbolically  or  literally,  i.e.^ 
whether  the  Bible  is  Tbeosophy  or  History  ? 

2. — Whether  the  guiding  star  which  appeared  to  the  wise 
men  from  the  East  was  really  a  star  or  only  a  metaphor  for 
something  higher  and  nobler  ? 

:3. — Whether  the  powers  ascribed  to  Christ  in  the  Bible 
were  physical,  metaphysical,  (supersensaous  ?)  or  spiritnal  ? 

4. — Whether  &  gijnasu  (seeker  after  truth  and  salvation) 
can  derive  the  smallest  benefit  from  ths  said  Biblical  history 
of  the  physical  and  incarnate  (Uirist  ? 

5. — What  is  the    proper  time  to   practise   the   teachings  of 

tlie  Bible?  And  who  are  the  persons  most  fit  to  study  the 
New  Testament  ? 

These  are  the  few  points  in  which  the  Bible  oagUt  to  be 
examined. 

On  behalf  of  onr  sister  Tbeosophy,  we  give  our  personal 
solutions  upon  the  questions  as  above  raised.  We  call  npon 
all  the  spiritually  inclined,  right-thinking,  pious  and  impartial 
men  and  Theosophists  throughout  the  four  quarters  of  the 
Globe  to  judge  of,  and  to  criticise,  our  answers,  and  to  give 
their  verdict  in  the  matter.  The  snbject  is  one  of  the 
greatest  importance,  and  if  need  be,  will  be  decided  by  ap- 
pealing even  to  the  verdict  of  the  Spirit  itself. 

1. — As  a  book  of  Revelation  the  Bible  cannot  and  onght 
not  to  be  a  book  of  history. 

2. — Its  utterances  are  almost  entirely  allegorical  ;  and  a 
spiritual  commentary  is  urgently  needed  to  make  thena 
acceptable  to  the  students  of  Tbeosophy.  Vedanta  and  the 
New  Testament,  it  properly  understood,  mean  the  same  thing 
in  the  abstract. 

3. — The  guiding  star  does  by  no  means  mean  a  real  objec- 
tive star  ;  such  a  version  is  quite  against  the  laws  of  Nature, 
Reason  and  Tbeosophy.  Vedantists  regard  this  star  a,^ 
Pranava,  or  Jimtma^  the  witness  soul  or  Salcs/ci    Chxitanya, 

105 

It  is  i.he  seventh  principle  of  the  Theosophists,*  Yoga-Achar-.- 
yas,  Tantrikas  and  Shivas,  called  in  Brahmavidya  or  Maba- 
vidya.t  The  Mahomedan  Theosophists  belieye  and  teach  of 
the  existence  of  this  star  before  Creation,  or  before  Tdus 
(peacock)  was  prodnced.  Temples  dedicated  to  this  allegorical 
Star  are  yet  to  be  foand  among  several  nations  of  Asia;  and 
some  great  Theologians  speak  of  this  star  as  ''Spirit."  We 
hermits — if  any  valae  be  attached  to  our  words — regard  it  as 
kiUastha  and  liable  to  be  merged  into  the  eighth  principle 
or  TatpadaX  as   snch.     We   do   not   understand,   how  it  can 

*  Strictly  speaking  Pranaca  is  not  Jivatma  or  the  7th  principle  in  man. 
It  represents  the  coadition  or  the  aspect  of  the  7th  principle  ia  the 
highest  state  of  Nirvana— T.  SuBBA  Bow. 

t  The  7th  principle  itself  can  never  be  called  by  either  of  tbose  names, 
though  it  may  be  the  subject  of  BKAHMAVIDrA  OB  MahavidYa. — T.  8.  B. 

X  The  statement  is  not  quite  in  accordance  with  the  doctrines  of 
Adwaita  philosophy.  If  the  star  in  qnestion  is  taken  to  indicate  the  7th 
principle  in  man  as  above  stated, — it  is  not  Kutastha  from  the  stand* 
point  of  a  real  Adwaitee.  As  is  well-known  to  learned  Adwaitee  a  clear 
line  of  diBtinction  is  drawn  between  Kuta»tha  and  Uttamapurusha  (other- 
wise called  Paramatma)  in  a  well-known  Sloka  of  Bhagavat-Gita: — 

Now  if  Xu^ost/Ya  means  the  7th  principle  in  man,  the  distinction  thus 
drawn  will  really  be  a  distinction  between  Paramatma  and  Jeevatma. 
This  distinction  or  separation  is  denied  by  real  Adwaitees.  Hence,  as  ia 
clearly  pointed  out  by  Sankaracharia  in  his  able  Commentary  on  the 
above-mentioned  Sloka,  as  well  as  in  the  othtr  portions  of  his  "Bhashyam," 
Kvtaiitha  is  not  the  7th  principle  in  man.  It  is  merely  called  Vignanatma 
by  Sankarachariar  and  corresponds  with  the  7th  spiritual  Ego  or  the  6th 
principle  of  the  Theosophists. 

It  is  absurd  to  say  that  the  "  Tatpada "  is  the  8th  principle.  Now, 
this  Tatpada  is  either  identical  with  the  7fch  principle  or  it  is  not.  If  it 
ia  really  identical  with  the  Tawampada  of  the  Mahavakya  it  is  impossible 
to  understand  why  it  should  be  describe(.l  as  the  8th  principle.  If  it  is  not, 
the  views  of  the  learned  Hermit  are  opposed  to  the  fundamental  doctrine 
of  the  Adwaita  philosophy  and  the  grand  truth  indicated  by  the  Samaveda 
Mahavakyam  alluded  to.  I  invite  the  great  Paramahamsa  Swami  of  AI- 
mora  to  explain  what  he  really  means. 

T.  SUBBA  ROW, 

14 

106 

ftppear  as  a  material  substance  to  some  particular  persons 
(wise  men)  when  it  has  existed  from  the  unknown  and  un- 
knowable time  1  How  can  it  be  possible  that  a  material 
thing,  unless  compelled  and  then  drawn  back  by  some  living* 
force,  should  stop  of  itself  as  described  in  the  Bible  ?  We  are 
of  opinion  that  the  star  in  question  is  nothing  but  spirit  and 
is  identical  with  the  entity  meant  in  the  Revelation.  It  is 
as  if  it  were  a  condensed  spirit  (vtz.  Soul);  and  this  star 
ought  to  be  taken  as  the  real  Christ,  the  Saviour  and  the  guide. 

4. — To  call  the  powers  ascribed  to  Christ,  physical  or  meta- 
physical, is  sheer  ignorance  and  an  insult  to  Spirit  Hitherto 
many  adepts  have  been  seen  and  heard  of,  to  possess  extra- 
ordinary powers  of  various  kinds,  more  marvellous  than 
those  described  in  the  Bible;  and  these  were  all  spiritual.  The 
Tantras,  Yoga  and  other  Aryan  occult  works  will  tell  how 
they  can  be  acquired.  We  have  already  stated  that,  unless  a 
spiritual  commentary  is  added  to  the  Bible,  it  is  worse  than 
useless  to  a  follower  of  Theosophy;  and  no  spiritual  benefit 
whatever  can  ensure  from  it,  except  perhaps  the  idea  of  an 
imaginary  and  external  "Heaven  and  Hell." 

5. — The  Old  Testament  is  the  Karma  Kanda;  and  the  New 
Testament,  the  Gyana  Kanda  of  Theosophy.  Those  only  who 
have  prepared  themselves  after  going  through  the  routine  of 
the  Old  Testament  are  entitled  to  practise  the  teachings  of 
the  New  Testament;  and  not  the  schoolboys  or  the  low 
castemen  to  whom  it  is  now-a-days  oflfered  by  the  mis- 
sionaries. The  former,  i.  «.,  boys  and  low  castes,  are  not  fit 
persons  for  it. 

In  conclusion,  we  earnestly  request  Mr.  Oxley,  who  have 
been  so  good  as  to  take  such  a  kind  notice  of  the  Bhaganat-Gita, 
and  who  is  so  eminently  qualified  for  the  task;  and  also  ap- 
peal to  the  fellows  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  who  have 
spiritual  Gurus  to  consult,  and  with  whom  they  ought  to 
communicate  on  the  subject,  to  take  in  hand  this  arduous 
task  of  in,terpreting  the  Bible  esoterically.  For,  nothing  will 
better  help  the  growth  of  Theosophy  in  both  East  and  West. 

107 

Firstly,  we  make  an  appeal  to  the  "Comforter"  (the  Holy 
Ghost  of  the  Bible)  itself,  to  decide  whether  the  Bible  has  aa 
allegorical,  spiritaal  or  a  literal  dead-letter  meaning.  We 
may  also  remark  here  that  some  of  the  Brothers  whom  we 
find  occasionally  mentioned  in  the  Theosopliist,  and  whom 
we  have  the  pleasure  of  knowing  by  another  name,*  would 
approve  of  oar  plan  if  asked.  Bnt  the  star  itself — onr  every- 
day guide — has  directed  us  to  write  this.  All  the  seekers  of 
truth  ought  to  enquire  into  this  solemn  subject,  without  the 
least  prejudice  or  bias.  Millions  of  generations  are  interested 
in  this  question;  and  to  solve  it  for  the  good  of  humanity 
should  be  the  aim  of  every  true  Theosophist.f 

Almora,  Pataldevi, 

1} 

12th  JJecember  1882.    /         PARAMAHAMSA  SWAMI. 

^*H.  X"  AND  GOD  PERSONAL  AND  IMPERSONAL^ 

"H.  X."  in  the  above  named  article  writes  about  the  so-cal- 
led Atheists:  "In  the  first  place  while  they  talk  of  laws,  they 
overlook,  it  seems  to  me,  the  fact  that  a  law  postulates  a  law- 
giver— a  will  at  any  rate  that  has  impressed  a  course  of  action 
— and  so  it  seems  to  me  that  admitting  an  inherent  law,  they 
cannot  logically  escape  a  will  that  originated  that  law,  and 
such  a  will  in  such  a  case  must  be  what  mankind  understands 
as  God." 

*  Not  that  of  "  refined  Tantrikas  " — we  hope,  as  they  were  once 
called  ?—  T.  S.  R. 

t  Those  who  have  any  kno-wledge  of  the  '♦  Brothers  "  are  well  aware 
that  they  have  ever  and  most  emphatically  insisted  upon  the  esoteric 
interpretation  of  the  ancient  Scriptures  of  every  great  religion.  "  Isis 
Unveiled,"  by  H.  P.  Blavatsky,  is  fall  of  the  real  meaning— as  inter- 
preted by  the  Kabalists — of  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Bible.  And  now, 
there  has  just  been  published  that  wonderfully  clever  book  written  by 
two  English  seers — *'The  Perfect  Way,"  a  work  of  which  it  can  be  truly 
said  that  it  is  more  inspired  than  the  book  it  interprets.  But,  why 
should  the  learned  Swami  of  Almora  insist  upon  the  esoteric  interpreta- 
tion of  the  Bible  alone  without  any  concern  for  the  Vedas,  the  Tripitakat 
and  the  Upanishads,  all  three  far  more  important,  is  something  we  fail  to 
comprehend.— T.  S.  R. 

108 

If  I  am  allowed  to  paraphrase  this  freely,  it  can  be  rendered 
thus : — 

One  of  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  Universe  is  that  there 
can  be  no  law  without  a  law-giver. 

Now,  I  find  this  assumption  in  Mill,  if  I  am  not  mistaken, 
in  what  is  appropriately  called  his  *  Carpenter's  theory  of  the 
Universe.'  Mr.  Joseph  Cook  in  his  Boston  lectures,  and  sub- 
sequently at  Bombay,  uses  the  same  argument;  and  doubtless 
many  men  take  this  for  an  axiom,  as  1  did  only  a  little  while 
ago.  But  on  investigation  1  find  it  not  true  in  all  cases. 
Their  deduction  from  this  is  inconsistent  with  the  axiom  ; 
and  this  delusion  arises  from  the  fact  that  human  laws  created 
by  human  beings  are  confounded  with  universal  laws;  and  by 
analogy  it  is  inferred,  that  those  latter  also  must  have  been 
created  by  a  law-giver,  I  proceed  to  show  what,  I  believe,  is 
an  inconsistency  in  those  who  argue  in  this  fashion.  Just  on 
account  of  its  inconsistency  with  itseif,  the  argument  will  not 
Be  clear,  but  may  be  intelligible  on  reflection. 

If,  then,  '  That  there  can  be  no  law  without  a  law-giver'  is 
a  universal  law,  then,  by  this  very  law,  which,  to  avoid  con- 
fusion of  ideas,  I  shall  call  the  Law  oi  laws,  it  must  itself 
have  a  law-gicer.  This  very  giving  of  law  implies  that  there 
was  a  time  when  the  law  did  not  exist, — i.  «.,  before  the  will 
of  the  Giver  'impressed  the  course  of  action.'  If  this  is  ad- 
mitted, then,  there  was  a  time  when  laws  did  not  require  a 
law-giver;  is  it  not  possible  to  conceive  they  may  have  existed 
then  ?  They  may  have,  or  they  may  not,  but  it  is,  at  least,  a 
possible  conception.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  anybody  would 
say  that  this  'giving'  does  not  imply  any  limit  oi  time  (which 
is  a  very  audacious  suggestion,  to  say  the  least,)  even  then  he 
does  not  gain  much  by  it.  For,  if  the  law  were  eternal,  it 
was  co-eternal  with  the  giver,  it  had  no  birth  ;  in  fact,  it  was 
not  given  and  there  was  no  giver. 

Having  shown  this  difficulty  in  the  way  of  accepting 
"H.  X.'s"  hypothesis,  I  have  only  to  remark  that  his  idea 
of  ^personal'  God  is  not  without  difficulties  to  me. 

B.  J.  P, 

IN  BE  AD  WAIT  A  PHILOSOPHY, 

Will  the  Editor  satisfy  us  by  moving  the  assertion  that 
"matter  is  as  eternal  and  indestructible  as  spirit  ?"  The 
assertion  was  made  io  the  Editor's  note  to  a  correspondent's 
letter  on  'Karraa'  {vide  page  89  of  the  Tkeosophist  for  Janu- 
ary 1S83).  You  should  bear  in  mind  that  we  are  speaking  of 
matter  and  spirit  beyond  the  present  developed  form,  or  in 
the  stage  of  perfect  Laya*  according  to  Patanjali's  second 
and  third  Sutras,  or,  from  the  stand-point  of  the  Esoteric 
Theosophy.  Could  you  kindly  explain  what  is  meant  by 
Satta  Samanya  ( ^^riwmi'^  )  and  Parampidam  (  ^<^^l^^^  )  of 
the  Aryan  adepts,  Nirvana  of  the  Buddhas,  and  the  Philoso- 
pher's stone  of  the  votaries  of  other  occult  philosophies  ?  As 
far  as  we  understand  the  Aryan  Theosophy,  when  the  JiaAa- 
pralaya  takes  place,  matter  is  absorbed  by,  or  dissolved  into, 
Mnhattittwam  (  x{^ rf?^  )  and  the  same  again  into  Prakriti^ 
and  the  Prakiti  finally  into   Purusha  or  Parampadam. 

In  the  same  way  of  the  components  of  the  mysterious  letter 
Om  (^t)  a  (3t)  is  dissolved  into  U  (5)  and  the  raja  part 
of  U  (  j)  into  M  C^i;)  You  will  thus  see  that  matter  and 
force  can  both  be  layed  (or  dissolved)  ultimately  into  the 
Spirit  which  alone  remains  as  "  True,"  and  should  be  called 
Eternal — which  term  neither  matter  nor  force  deserve^ 
being  liable  to  evolution  from,  and  dissolution  into.  Spirit — or 
the  Absolute.  As  yon  are  well  acquainted  with  the  doctrines 
of  the  Adwaita  Vedanta,  it  is  needless  to  write  more  on  this 
subject. 

We  would,  however,  call  your  attention  to  page  99  of  the 
same  number  of  the  Theosophisty  and  entreat  yon  to  remove 
our  doubt  by  establishing  scientifically  a  certain  point.  Who 
was  it  that  died  as  stated  in  the  article  "Can  the  Double 
murder  ?"  According  to  our  belief  man  exists  in  a  three-fold 
way  ;  1st,  externally  ;   2nd,  internally  ;  and  3rd,  spiritually, 

*  Laya,  or  a  state  of  abaolate  disaolution,    annihilation  of  all  aub- 
st&nce.— Ed, 

no 

(1)  By  externally  we  mean  in  gross  body  (  ^e^t^^ttTTT  )  or 
Anaamaya(  3?flriPT )•  (2)  The  internal  fold  is  the  astral  body 
formed  of  the  three  koshas  or  cases,  viz.  : — Pranamaya 
<!Tr»nR  ),  Manaraaya  (iR^PT  ),  and  Vignyanmaya  (  f^iTRJR  )• 
<3)  The  spiritual  fold  is  the  Pragna  state  or  Anandmaya 
(  arpT^^TT  )•  ^'oa  say  "  •  ♦  ♦  that  a  mortal  wound  may 
be  inflicted  upon  the  inner  man,  &c.,  &c."  Now  what  do  you 
mean  by  the  inner  man  here  ?  The  qnestion  to  be  settled  is 
whether  the  doable  murdered  the  double  or  treble.  In  our 
opinion  the  double  murdered  the  treble  and  not  the  doable — 
and  in  no  case  the  spiritual — one.  Our  object  in  writing  this 
is  to  ask  yon  to  kindly  ascertain  what  is  the  extent  of  a 
human  will's  influence,  or  in  other  words.  Can  the  Mayavi 
Rupa  be  also  annihilated  by  mesmeric  force  or  the  material 
body  only  ? 

mk}aIZT°^^.     }  SWAMI  OF  ALMORA. 

Editor's  Note:— To  our  ntter  amazement,  we  are  called  upon  to  prove 
that  matter  is  indestructible;  at  any  rate,  that  ''matter  is  as  eternal  and 
indestructible  as  spirit  ! "  Though  the  question  and  proofs  as  to  the 
eternity  and  indestructibility  of  matter  alone,  might  be  safely  left  to  the 
Boyal  Society  to  answer,  yet  we  are  fnlly  prepared  to  satisfy  our  learned 
correspondent,  and,  with  his  permission,  will  answer  all  his  queries. 

We  are  asked  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  entities  in  qnestion  are  "matter 
and  spirit  beyond  the  present  developed  form,   or   in   the  stage  of  perfect 

"We  are  unable  to  understand  what  is  really  meant  by  "spirit  beyond  the 
present  developed  form."  The  sentence  presents  no  sense  to  onr  mind, 
trained  as  it  has  been  bv  our  great  Masters  to  think  of  "Spirit"  ag  of 
something  formless  and  entirely  beyond  the  ken  of  our  sensual  percep- 
tions, and,  therefore,  not  to  be  considered  apart  from,  or  independently 
of,  corporeal  existence.  Ukivkrsal  Inielligence  and  the  One  Life, 
as  we  call  it,  conceiveti  of,  apart  from  any  physical  organization,  becomes 
Tital  essence,  an  energy  of  force ;  and  none  of  these  we  believe  can  be 
considered  as  a  distinct  entity,  a  substance,  or,  as  having  a  being  or  even 
a  form  separate  from  matter.  Locke's  definition,  that  "Spirit  is  a  sub- 
ttanee,  in  which  thinking;  knowing,  doubting  and  a  power  of  moving  do 
Bubaiat"— would  hardly  be  accepted  by  the  average  Vedantee,   and   would 

Ill 

find  itself  absolutely  rejected  by  every  true  Adwaitee  and  Eastern  OcculHst* 
The  latter  would  answer  that  "matter  alone  is  a  substauce,  in  which  think* 
ing,  knowing,  doubting,  and  a  power  of  moving,  are  inherent f  whether  as  a 
latent  or  active  potentiality — and  whether  that  matter  la  in  a  diflerentiat' 
ed,  or  an  undifferentiated  state. 

Thus,  in  our  humble  opinion,  the  something,  or  rather  the  no-thing, 
called  Spiiit,  has  by  itself,  no  form  or  forms  in  either  progressive  or 
stationary  "  states  of  development ;  "  and  we  say  again  that  the  expres- 
sion is  perfectly  unintelligible  to  every  real  Adwaitee.  Even  supposing 
that  the  qualifying  clause  refers  only  to  matter,  the  meaning  conveyed  by 
the  expression  "matter  and  spirit  beyond  the  present  developed  form" 
is  the  same  as  conveyed  by  that  of — "matter  and  spirit  in  the  stage  of 
perfect  Zaya"?  We  fail  to  see  the  point  made,  or  even  any  sense  in  such 
a  sentence  as  "matter  and  spirit  in  the  stage  of  perfect  Laya,"  implying 
as  it  does  the  possibility  of  spirit,  a  pare  abstraction,  being  dissolved  and 
annihilated — we  will  not  say — as  matter —  since  the  latter  in  its  primordial^ 
cosmic  state  can  be  no  more  annihilated  or  even  dissolved  than  spirit- 
but  as  a  thing  of  matter  having  substance  and  form.  Can  a  toul  be  anni' 
hilated  ?  And  what  is  pure,  absolute  spirit  but  the  "  void"  of  the  ancient 
Greek  philosophers  ?  Well,  says  Lucretius,  "there  can  be  no  third  thing 
besides  body  and  void;  for  if  it  be  to  the  smallest  extent  tangible — it  ii 
body,  if  not, — it  is  void."  And  let  it  not  be  urged,  on  the  strength  of 
this  quotation,  that  because  we  quote  the  words  of  a  great  "Atheist,"  a 
materialist,  aa  an  authority,  we  are  therefore  a  materialist  and  an  atheist 
(in  the  usual  sense  of  both  terms)  ourself.  We  object  to  the  very  term 
**  materialism  "  if  it  is  to  be  made  indentical  with,  or  a  synonym  of  "corpo- 
realism,"  that  is  to  say,  an  antithesis  of,  "Spiritualism.''  In  the  light 
we,  Occultists,  regard  matter,  we  are  all  materialists.  But  it  does  not  at 
all  stand  to  reason  that  because  of  that,  We  should  be,  at  the  same  time, 
••corporealists,"  denying  in  any  sense  or  way  the  reality  of  the  so-called 
spiritual  existence,  or  of  any  being  or  beings,  living  on  another  plane  of 
life,  in  higher  and  far  more  perfect  worlds  than  ours,  having  their 
being  in  states  of  which  no  untrained  mind  can  have  the  smallest  concept 
tion.  Hence  our  objection  to  the  idea  and  possibility  of  "matter  and 
spirit,  in  the  stage  of  perfect  Laya*'  unless  it  can  be  shown  that  we  have 
misunderstood  the  latter  word.  According  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Arhafe 
philosophy  there  are  secen  states  of  matter,  the  7th  state  being  the  sum 
total,  the  condition  or  aspect  of  Mulaprakrili.* 

Consequently   the  state  of  Cosmic  matter  beyond  its  "  present   developed 
form  "  may   mean  any  of  the    other  six  states  in   which  it   exists;    and 

*  Undifferentiated  cosmic  matter. 

112 

benoe  it  cannot  necessarily  mean  ^'matter  in  a  stage  of  perfect  Laya.'*^ 
In  what  sense,  then,  does  the  learned  qnerist  want  ns  to  interpret  the 
words  "matter"  and  "spirit"?  For,  though  we  are  aware  that  there 
exist,  even  in  the  present  age  of  science  and  enlightenment,  persons  who, 
tinder  the  pretext  of  religion,  teach  the  ignorant  masses  that  there  wm 
a  time  when  matter  did  not  exist  (since  it  was  created}  implying  thas  that 
there  will  come  a  moment  when  it  will  be  annihilated,  we  have  never  yet 
met  any  one,  whether  atheist  or  deist,  materialist  or  spiritualist,  who 
would  presume  to  say  that  spirit — whether  we  call  it  "void"  or  "divine, 
breath" — can  ever  be  annihilated;  and  if  the  word  Laya  means  annihila- 
tion, the  very  expression  used  by  the  respected  Swami  involves  an  assnmp* 
tion  that  "spirit"  can  be  destroyed  in  course  of  time.  -In  such  a  case, 
we  are  evidently  called  upon  to  demonstrate  that  matter  and  spirit  are 
eternal  on  the  supposition  that  both  have  a  period  of  Laya."  If  we 
are  to  avoid  this  extremely  awkward  conclusion,  what  is  the  purport  of 
the  Swami's  question  ?  Verily,  it  would  have  been  better  if  he  had 
allowed  ns  the  privilege  of  interpreting  our  own  statements.  Moreover, 
Onr  learned  opponent  is  not  satisfied  with  merely  giving  us  his  own — 
begging  his  pardon — incomprehensible  definition  of  matter  and  spirit,  to 
enable  ns  to  prove  oar  "assertion,"  bat  we  are  asked  to  answer  the  ques- 
tion "according  to  Patanjali's  second  and  third  Sutras,  or,  from  the  stand- 
point of  esoteric  theosophy."  How  or  why  should  the  SWami  think  or  know, 
that  wc  made  the  statement  in  question  on  the  authority  of  Fatanjali's 
treatise  ?  Or  is  Patanjali's  philosophy  identical  with  esoteric  theosophy 
in  bis  opinion  ?  If  not,  why  should  our  statement  be  sine  qua  non  proved 
only  "according"  to  that  philosopher's  second  and  third  Sutras  2  It  would 
be  just  as  reasonable  to  call  upon  us  to  prove  the  proposition  under 
consideration  from  the  stand-point  of  the  Salvationist?.  As  it  is  almost 
bopeless  for  us  to  nnderstand  his  definition,  or  satisfy  his  cariosity  under 
the  extraordinary  restrictions  imposed,  we  shall,  with  the  venerable 
Swami's  permission,  interpret  our  "assertion"  in  our  own  way  and  prove 
it  agreeably  to  esoteric  theosophy,  and  we  hope,  in  accordance  with  the 
Adwaita  philosophy,  that  our  corrrespondent  knows  so  well. 

Our  "assertion''  then  means  the  following  Undifferentiated  cosmic 
matter  or  MtUaprakriti,  as  it  is  called  in  Hindu  books,  is  uncreated  and 
eternal.  It  would  be  impoHsible  to  prove  this  assertion  from  a  priori 
reasons,  bat  its  truth  can  be  tested  by  the  ordinary  inductive  method.  In 
every  objective  phenomenon  perceived,  either  in  the  present  plane  of 
consciousness  or  in  any  other  plane  requiring  the  exercise  of  spiritual 
faculties,  there  is  but  change  of  cosmic  matter  from  one  form  to  another. 
There  is  not  a  single  instance,  or  the  remotest  suspicion  of  the  annihila- 
tion of  an  atom  of  matter  ever  brought  to  light  either  by  Eastern  Adepts 
or  Western  scieutiets.     When  the     common    experience   of  generations  of 

■  Adepts  ill  their  own  spiritaal  or  psychic  field  of  observation,  and  of  the 
ordinary  people  in  theirs— (t.  e.,  in  the  domain  of  physical  science)  points 
to  the  conclusion  that  there  never  has  been  utter  annihilation  of  a  single 
material  particle,  we  are  jnstiiled  we  believe,  in  saying  that  matter  is  in 
destructible  though  it  may  change  its  forms  and  properties  and  appear 
in  various  degrees  of  diffarentiation.  Hindu  and  Buddhist  philosophers 
have  ages  ago  recognised  the  fact  that  Piirush  and  Prakriti  are  eternal, 
co-existent,  and  not  only  correlative  and  interdependent,  bnt  positively 
one  and  the  same  thing  for  him  who  can  read  between  the  lines.  Every 
system  of  evolntiou  commences  with  postulating  the  existence  of  Mulc^ 
prakriti  or  Tamas  (primeval  darkness).  Leaving  aside  the  great  authority 
of  Kapila  on  the  sabject,  we  may  refer  to  the  celebrated  Rik  of  Bigveda 
describing  this  Primeval  Chaos,  and  using  such  expression  as  : —        ;  : } 

"  Tama  eva  purasthath  abhavath   viswarupam'*  and  "Asthwa  ithamagr<n 
AiUk,"*  etc.— 

scattered  throughout  the  Veda  and  the  TTpanishads  in  support  of  orir 
assertion.  All  those  Great  philosophers  of  India  who  have  added  the 
ancient  wisdom-religion  of  Agasthya,  Taoorwsisa  and  other  Kishis  to  the 
pure  Adwaita  philosophy  of  Vasishta,  Vyasa  and  Suka,  have  recogitized 
this  fact.  Gaudapatha  and  Sankaracharya  have  given  expression  to  their 
views  on  the  subject  in  their  works,  and  those  views  are  in  perfeqfc 
accordance  with  their  doctrines  of  the  Arhat  philosophy.  The  authority  of 
the  latter  two  great  philosophers  will,  we  believe,  be  sufficient  to  show  to 
the  learned  Swami,  since  he  is  an  Adwaitee,  that  our  statement  is  correct. 
And  primeval  Cosmic  matter,  whether  called  Asath  or  Tamas,  or  Prakriti 
or  Sakti,  is  ever  the  same,  and  held  to  be  eternal  by  both  Hindn  and 
Arhat  philosophers,  while  Purusha  is  inconceivable,  hence  non-existent, 
save  when  manifesting  through  Prakriti.  In  its  undifferentiated  condi- 
tion, some  Adwaitees  refuse  to  recognize  it  as  matter,  properly  so  called. 
Nevertheless  this  entity  is  their  PaRabbahmam,  with  its  dual  aspect  of 
Porush  and  Prakriti.  In  their  opinion  it  can  be  called  neither ;  hence  in 
some  passages  of  the  Upanishads  we  find  the  expression  ^'PRAKRin-layam** 
mentioned;  but  in  all  such  passages  the  word  •'Prakriti"  means,  as  we 
can  prove — matter  in.  a  state  of  differentiation,  while  undifferentiated 
Cosmic  matter  in  conjunction  with,  or  rather  in  its  aspect  of  latent  spirit 
is  always  referred  to  as  *'  Mah-Iswaba,"  "  Pnrusha  "  and  "  Parampada." 
The  description  given  by  our  learned  correspondent  and  the  very  words 
used  by  him  when  he  says,  "when  the  Mahapralaya  takes  place,  matter  is 
absorbed  by,  or  dissolved  into,  Mahat-tatwa,  and  the  same  again  into 
Prakbiti,  and  the  Prakriti  finally  into  Purusha  or  Parampadam*'— 
show  that  he  is  either  waging  a  war  of  words,  or  seeking  to  draw  us  out 

*  "Primeval  darkness  resulted  as  the  manifested  universe"  and  "Asath 
oi   Trakriti  existed  first."— A'd. 

15  r 

114 

'  (whether  for  friendlj  purpo«eg,  or  otherwiBe,  he  knows  himself  besti) 
for  neither  the  words  *'abtorbed  by,"  or  *'dissolved  into,"  can  mean  oH«t- 
kiated.  Why  should  he  then  use  against  bis  own  argument  the  term 
**Laya,"  since  if  he  once  calls  himself  an  Adwaitee,  he  mutt  know  the 
doctrine,  atid  therefore  nnder«tand  the  rarious  senses  in  which  such 
•peoific  terms  are  used.  Thus,  we  shall  feel  grateful  to  our  learned 
correspondent  if  be  can  quote  to  us  a  few  authorities  in  support  of  hi$ 
statement  abont  the  dissolution  of  Mahat'tatwa*  and  Prakriti  at  the 
time  of  Mahapralata.  "We  shall  then  be  able  to  see  what  the  Aryan 
philosophers  really  meant  by  sucli  an  assertion. 

In  ireferenice  to  the  real  meaning  of  Satta  Samanya  and  Partmpadat 
of  the  Aryan  Adepts,  Itfirvans  of  the  Buddhas  and  the  "Phiiobopber's 
stone,"  their  meanings  are  identical  in  both  the  Aryan  and  Arhat  secret 
doctrines.  Satta  Samanya  sometimes  means  latent  spirit.  It  also  taeans 
'•Guna  Samyapadhi,^'  or  the  undifferentiated  condition  of  SatwagUNA, 
BajaGUNA  and  TamaGO>'aJ.  As  to  tarampada  and  Nirvana,  both  mean 
the  same  thing.  From  an  objective  point  of  view  it  is  the  condition  of 
Pnrusba-Prakriti  as  above  described;  from  the  subjective — it  is  a  state 
of  parfect  uuconscioasness  resulting  as  bare  Chidakasam. 

If  the  Swami  is  desirotts  to  learn  more  about  the  "Philosopher's  stone** 
of  "the  votaries  Of  other  Occult  Philosophies,"  then  wd  may  refer  him  to 
our  foot-notes  to  the  articles  "QleanihgB  from  Bliphas  Levi,"  published 
in  the  Jannary  number  of  the  Theo»ophist,  and  other  sundry  articles^  If 
the  "  other  Occult  Philosophies  "  are  worthy  of  their  name,  then  the 
doctrines  taught  in  them  must  not  differ  save  in  the  names  given  to 
identical  things.  Truth  is  but  one,  and  of  two  different  versions  one 
must  be  necessarily  false.  We  are  not  prepared  to  accept  the  interpreta- 
tion given  of  the  world  Aum^  since  the  above  interpretation  is  not  quite 
consistent  with  the  doctrines  of  the  Adwaitee  Vedanta  philosophy.  We 
shall  feel  grateful,  nevertheless,  if  the  learned  Swami  can  refer  us  to  any 
great  Adwaitee  philosopher  as  an  authority  in  support  of  his  explanation^ 

No  less  puzzling  are  his  curious  ideas  about   our  supposed    meaning  and 
views  about  the  potentialities  and  nature  of  the  human  double. 

*  MahaJt-tntwa  corresponds  to  the  spiritual  Light,  or  the  Sephira  of  the 
Jewish  Kabalists. — Ed, 

t  Literally — t}i»  moit  tacred  pUcei,  mexa*  Nirvana  or  the  condition  of 
Molcsha — Ed. 

\  Satwaynna— the  quality  of  passivity,  or  absence  of  any  cause  of  disttirb- 
ance;  Rajagitna — the  quality  of  a9t;ivity,  or  that  which  induces  to  action; 
Tamguna  —  tha  quality  of  ignorance,  inactivity  of  mental  and  spiritual 
faculties  atisiug  from  that  ignorance—  K<i» 

115 

The  question  is  not  "whether  the  double  murdered  the  doable  or  tb«, 
treble,"  for  neither  the  "donble "  nor  the  higher  '*  treble  "  (if,  as  we 
suppose  the  6th,  6th  and  7th  principles  are  meant)  can  be  murdered  by 
living  man  or  ghost.  The  fact  we  Euppose  to  be  that  by  the  concentrated, 
energy  of  implacable  hate  [of  Prince  Obrenovitch's  foster-mother  againit 
his  assassin],  and  through  the  agency  of  the  clairvoyant's  double,  **tlie 
silver  cord  "  of  life  was  snapped  and  the  inner-man  driven  out  of  ita 
physical  covering.  The  wound  which  de&troyed  life,  t.  «.  broke  n  j  the 
relationship  between  the  Sthoolsariram,  with  its  informing  Jiva,  and  those 
other  component  parts  of  the  entire  personality,  was  inflicted  upon  the 
lower  <*  treble"-"if  the  Swan;i  of  Almora  must  use  the  clumsy  term,  even 
in  sarcasm — without  first  transpiercing  the  physical  body.  In  a  case  of 
natural  death  the  citadel  of  life  is  captured,  so  to  speak,  only  by  gradual 
approaches;  in  deaths  of  violence  it  is  taken  with  a  rush.  If  fright,  or 
joy,  or  the  lethal  current  of  hatred  be  the  cause,  the  body  will  show  no 
woand  yet  life  be  extinguished  all  the  same.  Sorcerers'  victima  usually 
appear  as  though  killed  by  heart  disease  or  apoplexy;  chemical  analysil 
will  afford  no  clue  to  the  assassin's  method,  nor  the  surgeon  be  able  to  find 
a  suspicious  mark  upon  the  surface  of  the  cadaver. 

THE  ALMORA  SWAMI, 

UPON  PHILOSOPHY  IN  GENERAL  AND  OUR 
FAILINGS  IN  PARTICULAR, 

In  onr  Febraary  nnmber  (see  page  118)  prefacing  the  valu- 
able though  somewhat  hazy  contribution  by  the  venerable 
Swami  of  Almora  on  "  Adwaita  Philosophy,"  we  wrote  the 
following  editorial  lines  : — 

*'A8the  subjoinei  letter  comes  from  guch  a  learned  source,  we  do  not  feel 
justified  in  commenting  upon  it  editorially.  Onr  personal  knowledge  of 
the  Adwaita  doctrine  being  unquestionably  mea?re  when  contrastel  with 
that  of  a  Paramahansa—Aenrc  THE  FOOT  NOTES  by  Oua  lkvhrD  bROTH£& 
T.  SUBBl  Row,  TO  WHOM  WB  TURNED  OVBB  THJC  MS.   FOE  REPLY." 

This  notice,  we  believe,  was  plain  enough  to  screen  us 
thereafter  from  any  such  personal  remarks  as  are  now  flung 
at  onr  head  by  the  holy  ascetic  of  Almora  in  the  paper  that 
follows.  Some  of  those  rhetorical  blossoms  having  been  left 
by  us  for  the  purpose  of  enlivening  the  otherwise  too  mono- 
tonous field  of  his  philosophical  subject,  the  reader  may 
judge  for  himself.    We  say  "  some,"  for,  having  to  satisfy  all 

116 

onr  contributors,  and  our  space  being  limited,  we  cannot 
consent  to  crowd  oat  more  iuterestiag  matter  to  make  room  for 
JQst  15^  colnmns  of  quotations  profusely  mixed  with  repri- 
mands and  flings  of  any  correspondent,  even  though  the  latter 
be  as,  we  learu  from  his  own  words,  "  a  modest  hermit  of  the 
jungle,"  Therefore,  with  all  our  profound  respect  for  our 
opponent,  we  had  to  curtail  his  too  long  paper  considerably. 
We  propose,  however,  to  show  him  his  chief  mistake,  and 
thus  to  blunt  a  few  of  the  most  pointed  shafts  intended  to 
pierce  through  the  points  of  the  editorial  harness. 

If,  after   the   humble   confession   quoted   above    from    our 
February   number,   the   editorial    reply  that  followed  another 
paper  from  the  same  ascetic,    namely,   the    In   re   "  Adwaita 
Philosophy,"   in    the    March    number — was    still    taken    as 
emanating  from  one  who  had  just  confessed  her  incompetency 
to  hold  a  disputation  with  the  learned  Swami  upon   Adwaita 
tenets — the  fault  is  not  burs.     This  error  is  the  more  strange 
since,  the  Swami    had    been    clearly    warned    that   his    points 
would  be  disputed  and  questions  an s wared  in  future  by  our 
brother  Mr.  T.  Subba  Row,  as  learned  in  Adwaita   philosophy 
as  in  the  esotericism  of  the  sacred  books  of  the  East.     There- 
fore we  had  a  right  to  expect  that    the    Paramahansa    would 
have  remembered  that  he  was  ventilating   his    not   over-kind 
remarks  upon  the  wrong  person,  since  we  had  nothing  to  dn  per- 
sonally with  the  replies.     Thus  the  disagreement  upon  various 
topics  in  general,  and  the  abstruse  tenets  ot  esoteric   Adwaita 
Philosophy   especially,    between    the   "  Almora   Swami "  and 
Mr.  T.  Subba  Row,  can,  in    no    way,  or   with   any   degree   of 
justice,  be  laid  by  the  former  at  the  door  of  either  the  "  for- 
eigners  who   have   come   to    India   for    knowledge,'*    nor   of 
"  Western  Theosophy;"  for,   in   this   particular  case    he   has 
found  an  opponent  (quite  as  learned,  we  love  to  think  as  him- 
self) in  one  of  his  own    race   and  cotmtry— a   real    Adwaitee 
Brahmin.     To   take   therefore  to  task  theosophy  for  it  or  the 
conductor  of  this  magazine,  expressing  dissatisfaction  in  such 
v^y   strong  terms,   does  not  show  either   that  philosophical 

117 

€^inanimity,  or  tact  and  discrimination  that  might  be  expecteif 
frona  one  who  has  devoted  his  life  exclnsively  to  meditation 
and  the  Yoga  Philosophy.  If  pardooable  in  a  person  who 
has  to  lead  that  sort  of  life  which  in  the  word  of  Mr.  Max 
Miiller,  qaoted  by  the  "Almora  Swarai  " — (as  an  additional 
hint  and  a  hit  we  suppose) — a  life  "  with  telegrams,  letters, 
newspapers,  reviews,  pamphlets  and  books  " — it  is  quite  un- 
pardonable in  a  holy  ascetic,  who  is  never  troubled  with  any- 
thing of  the  sort,  and  gets,  as  we  suspect,  even  his  appropriate 
quotations  from  European  authors  ready-made  for  him  by  his 
amanuenses  and  friends.  But,  since  the  article  is  addressed 
in  the  form  of  a  letter  to  the  editor,  the  humble  individual 
who  holds  this  office  hastens  to  assure  the  venerable  Swami 
that  beyond  their  appalling  length,  his  letters  have  never 
given  the  said  editor  one  moment  of"  annoyance  and  trouble,'* 
as  he  seems  to  imagine. 

In  reference  to  another  personal  taunt,  we  agree  with  him. 
It  is  more  than  likely  that  some  (not  all  by  any  means) 
Vedantists,  such  as  the  modern  "  Aryas  "  and  some  Dwaitees 
and  Visishtadwaitees — aftar  '*  hailing  Western  Theosophy 
with  joy,"  have  ended  by  comparing  it  "  to  the  mountain  that 
gave  birth  to  a  mouse" — the  disenchantment  being  due 
to  many  and  various  reasons  upon  which  it  is  needless  to 
enter  at  present.  We  can  only  hope  and  trust  that  the  lofty 
Almorian  mountain,  chosen  by  our  venerable  friend  as  the 
seat  of  his  contemplation,  may  not  bring  forth  some  day,  for 
India,  any  worse  animal  than  the  humble  "  black  mouse." 
True  we  have  come  to  lemrn  in  this  country,  and  we  have 
learned  a  good  deal  already.  One  fact,  among  several  others, 
namely,  that  the  learned  ascetics  of  modern  India  have  widely 
shot  off  from  the  original  mark  when  compared  with  the 
Kishis  of  old.  Spinoza  is  quoted  against  us  in  this  definition 
of  methods  of  investigation.  Our  saintly  critic  fears  that  his 
venerable  friends  have  followed  the  first  (or  vulgar)  method. 
The  proof  which  with  him  goes  far  to  justify  his  "  fear,"  rests 
chiefly  upon  vt,  fallacy  and  mistake  of  ours — (one  happily  held 

118 

by  as  in  common  with  nearly  all  the  great  men  of  science  in 
Earope,  ct.?.,  onr  ignorant  claim — the  matter  is  imdestructi- 
BLB,  HENCE  ETERNAL.  We  Will  DOt  nnderstand  his  ideas,  he 
eays,  because  being  fond  of  absnrdities,  "  our  own  absurdity 
would  be  exposed."  If  so,  we  prefer  indeed  our  absurd 
belief  in  the  itdeBtructibllity  of  matter  to  any  scientific 
opinion  upholding  the  contrary  sabmitting  cheerfully,  in  this 
case,  *'  the  weakness  of  our  understanding  to  be  laughed  at  "— 
even  by  an  ascetic  in  *'  the  state  of  Nirvikalpa." 

We  feel  very  grateful  to  the  good  Swami  for  his  explana- 
tion of  *' Pranava  "  and  other  kindred  words.  Mr.  Snbba 
Row  will  no  doubt  profit  by,  and  answer  them.  Personally, 
however,  we  respectfully  decline  to  be  taught  the  noble  science 
by  any  other  man,  however  learned  he  may  be,  thjin  him  who 
has  originally  undertaken  the  task — namely,  our  own  Master: 
yet,  as  many  of  our  readers  may  well  beuefit  by  the  contro- 
versy, we  will,  with  his  permission,  leave  the  arena  for  the 
present  to  Mr.  Subba  Bow,  a  far  abler  controversialist  than 
we  can  ever  hope  to  become. 

THE  SWAMI  OF  ALMORA  TO  HIS    OPPONENTS. 

"WE   DO   NOT   WAGE    WAR   OF    WORDS,    BUT   SIMPLY   SPEAK 
AND   SEEK    TliUTH." 

Wk  are  sorry  to  see  that  we  have  been  the  cause  of  some- 
thing like  irritation  to  you  by  our  last  letter,  which  perhaps 
was  not  suitable  to  the  modesty  of  a  hermit.  Therefore,  we 
beg  your  pardon,  if  there  was  in  it  anything  oftensive  to  you, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  beg  liberty  to  speak  the  truth.  We 
are  always  friendly  to  every  one,  but  particularly  to  the  fore- 
igners, who  have  come  to  India  for  knowledge.  We  are 
friendly  in  the  spiritual  sense  of  the  word,  therefore,  we  must 
be  taken  as  a  real  friend  and  not  a  flatterer,  even  if  we  say 
iomething  disagreeable  now  and  then.   .    .   ,  Those  who  seek 

IV9 

'to  find  fanlt  with  ns  and  become  hostile  to  ns  are,  we  tbiok^ 
prejudiced  and  stubborn,  and  we  desire  tbem  to  acqnire 
simplicity  of  heart  and  an  unbiassed  mind  to  enable  them  to 
onderRtand  us  thoroughly,*  We  hermits  are  a  nomadic  class 
of  people  and  generally  pass  our  time  in  places  far  away  from 
habitation,  and  do  not  much  cultivate  the  language  and 
idioms  of  the  world,  nor  do  we  care  much  for  these.  To 
attack  us  about  modes  of  our  expressing  our  ideas  is,  therefore, 
only  childish.  Our  readers  are  to  take  our  idea  only  and  not 
our  style*  Because,--- we  are  neither  an  M.A.,  Dor  a  B.A.; 
neither  an  Addison,  nor  a  Johnson,  nor  a  Macanlay,  hot 
simply  a  hermit  of  the  jungle. 

Let  us  now  see  what  was  the  purport  of  our  letter.  Onr 
words  were,  "yon  should  bear  in  mind  that,  tve  are  speaking 
of  matter  and  spirit  beyond  the  present  developed  form  or 
in  the  state  of  perfect  laya^  according  to  Patanjali's  2nd 
and  3rd  Sutras,  or  from  the  stand-point  of  the  Esoteric 
TheosophVk"  How  can  this  mean  that  we  are  asking  yon 
to  answer  the  questions  according  to  Patanjali's  2nd  and 
3rd  Sutras,  we  fail  to  understand.  By  the  above  sentences, 
we  simply  meant  to  show  our  own  stand'point  whence 
onr  enquiry  commences.  "We  referred  to  Patanjali's  Sutras, 
because  we  intended  to  show  that  our  starting  point 
was  in  perfect  accord  with  the  true  yoga  state,  nirvikalpa, 
ecstasy,  i.  e.,  the  Turya  state,  and  not  with  ordinary  Jagrata, 
JSwapna  and  ISushnpta  (  for  the  former,  i.  e.,  Turya,  state 
of  man  is  of  real  awaking  and  the  latter  illusory ),  while 
you  have  been  pleased  to  understand  ns  as  speaking  of 
ordinary  human  states.  Moreover,  by  /aya,  we  never  meant 
annihilation,  as  is  assumed  by  you.  It  is  your  own  version 
that  the  word  laya  means  "a  state  of  absolute  dissolution, 
annihilation  of  all  substance,  differentiated,  &c."  In  some 
of  the  former  numbers  of  the  Theosophist  the  word  laya 
was  explained  by  you  as    merging,   and  in    this  number  yoa 

•  <^uite  80  ;  and   therefore,  this  kind  desire  Is  fully  reciprocated.— £d. 

120 

,give  another  meaning  of  it,*  Why,  merely  because  yoa 
-require  a  handle  to  ridicule  ns.  However,  we  forget  all  this, 
and  beg  to  say,  that  according  to  Aryan  adepts,  by  laya  is 
meant  and  understood  "absorption  or  transformation  of  one 
thing  into  another,"  such  as  the  river  is  absorbed  or  trans- 
formed, when  it  loses  itself,  in  the  sea.  It  is  a  process  among 
the  Aryan  occultists,  by  which  they  can  (like  the  modern 
scientific  Realists  and  Chemists  as  yon  understand  them), 
analyse  the  different  component  parts  of  a  compound  body, 
and  reduce  them  to  their  primary  or  original  condition — and 
by  which  they  are  not  only  able  to  ascertain  what  the  sub*- 
stance  really  is,  but  they  can  also  penetrate  into  the  mystery 
of  its  past  and  future,  to  make  themselves  certain  about  the 
cause  of  the  origin  and  termination  of  the  phenomenon,  known 
as  creation  or  dwaita  in  its  present  manifested  form.  It  is 
odd  that  our  phrase  "present  developed  form"  has  cost  you 
more  than  a  column  to  comment  on  it.f  We  might  here 
explain  our  meaning.  By  this  we  simply  meant  soul  in  its 
Viswa,  Taijasha,  and  Pragna,  states,  or,  the  spirit  in  its  im- 
pure condition  by  contact  with  matter  and  force,  i.  e.^  in  a 
state  of  duality.  But,  perhaps,  nominal  yogees,  who  are 
disturbed  in  head  and  heart,  cannot  tranquillize  and  compose 

•  No  "merging"  or  absorption  can  take  place  without  dissolution,  and 
an  absolute  annihilation  of  the  previous  form.  The  lamp  of  sngar 
thrown  into  a  cnp  of  liquid  must  be  dissolved  and  its  form  annihilated 
before  it  can  be  said  to  have  been  absorbed  by,  and  in,  the  litjaid.  It  is 
a  correlation  like  any  other  in  chemistry.  Yet  indestructible  matter  can 
as  in  the  case  of  sugar,  or  any  other  chemical  element,  be  recalled  to  life 
and  even  to  its  previous  form.  The  molecule  that  cannot  be  divided  by 
any  physical  means  is  divided  by  the  universal  solvent  and  resolved  into 
something  else.  Hence — it  is,  for  the  time  being,  at  least,  annihilated  iu 
its  form.     This  is  simply  a  war  on  words. — Ed. 

I  It  is  still  older  that  a  few  foot-notes  should  have  cost  the  venerable 
Paramahansa  over  15  columns  of  ill  disguised  abuse,  out  of  which  number 
three  or  four  columns  are  g'^cu.  That  which  was  suppressed  may  be 
judged  by  what  remains. — Ed, 

121 

themselves  for  Nirvikalpa*  ecstasy,  will  not  be  able  to  coni'^ 
prehend  ns,  nor  also  those  who  confound  Prakriti  with  Purosha, 
or  matter  with  spirit.f  If  by  "scientitically"  be  meant 
curiosity,  then  not  only  we,  but  the  whole  class  of  philoso- 
phers from  Thales  to  Auguste  Comte  are  only  hunters  of 
curiosity,  and  our  respected  friends  more  so,  as  for  this  pur- 
pose only  they  have  come  from  the  other  part  of  the  world 
and  pledged  their  lives  and  fortune  on  this.  But  to  come  to 
the  point,  we  are  not  attracted  by  curiosity.  Our  motives 
are  not  shallow.  Whatever  we  ask,  we  ask  for  scientific 
purposes,  and  for  that  only  we  entreated  you  to  kindly  ascer- 
tain the  extent  of  mesmeric  force,  whether  it  influences  the 
outer  man  only,  or  the  inner  one  too — you  said  «  *  *  •  that  a 
mortal  wound  may  be  inflicted  upon  the  inner  man,  &c.,  «fec." 
Now,  according  to  our  knowledge  the  inner  man  means  the 
double,  i.  e.,  the  Taijasha,  f)ragna  being  the  original  or  first,  and 
the  Anna-maya  or  the  Viswa,  the  third.l     To   this   third,  we 

•  Surely  our  respected  correspondent  cannot  mean  to  convey  the  idea 
that  in  penning  this  answer  he  had  "  composed"  himself  into  the  state  of 
Nirvikalpa  :  unless  we  take  Monier  "Williams'  definition  of  the  term  and 
bear  in  mind  that  it  is  a  state  "destitute  of  all  reflection."  (jSee  Indian 
WUdon,  page  122,  foot-note  2.)— Ed, 

t  To  this  kind  thrust  we  answer  that  we  have  never  confounded  Pra- 
kriti with  Purusha  any  more  than  we  have  confused  the  north  with  the 
south  Pole.  As  both  Poles  belong  to  the  same  and  one  earth,  so  spirit 
and  matter,  or  Purusha  and  Prakriti,  are  the  two  ends  that  lose  them- 
selves, in  the  eternity  of  unmanifested  and  the  cycles  of  manifested  matter. 
Bat  like  some  of  our  distingui.shed  Western  metaphysicians,  our  opponent 
seems  to  regard  matter  and  energy  as  two  distiuct  things,  whereas  the 
Esoteric  doctrine  recognizes  but  one  substratum  for  everything  visible  as 
invisible—*'  Purush-Prakriti  "  and  vice  versa.  Moreover,  wo  may  remind 
the  good  Swami,  that  one  need  not  be  a  yogee  to  be  a  good  occultist,  nor 
are  there  many  yogees  in  India  who  know  anything  of  real  occult 
■ciences. — Ed, 

X  In  such  case,  our  respected  critic  ought  to  criticise  and  correct  Pro- 
fessor Monier  Williams  and  other  Sanskritists,  who  regard  Anna-Hfaya  aa 
*'  the  covering  supported  by  food,  t.  e.,  the  corporeal  or  gross  body," 
calling  it  the  fourth,  while  we  name  it  as  the  first  sheath  or  Kdsa.  (See 
p.  123  of  Indian  Wisdom.)— M. 

16 

122 

applied  the  term  treble,  and  we  are  jnatified  in  doing  so,  in 
the  same  way  as  yon  apply  donble  to  the  Taijasha, — and  we 
do  not  see  any  harm  in  taking  the  gross  one  as  third  ;  but 
those  who  are  fond  of  absurdities  will  not  understand  oar 
ideas.*  Why,  because  their  own  absurdity  will  be  exposed. 
We  beg  your  pardon  for  this  outspokenness. f  How  can  yon, 
being  a  practical  theosophist,  say  carelessly  that  a  mortal 
wound  may  be  inflicted  upon  the  inner  man,  &c.,  &c.,  when  in 
reality  the  outer  one  was  the  victim.  You  evade  our  question 
ia  an  off-hand  manner  by  saying  that  the  qnestion  is  not 
whether  the  double  murdered  the  double  treble.  Now  we 
particularly  begged  you  to  remove  our  doubts  by  establishing 
this  fact   scientifically.^     Instead   of    complying    with    our 

•  We  leave  it  to  our  readers  to  judge  which  is  the  most  absurd — to 
<oonsider  onr  physical  body  as  the  ^rs^  or  to  call  it,  as  the  Swami  does — 
the  i?reble  or  the  third;  thongh  of  coarse  there  is  *'no  harm"  in  either.— £d. 

•  t  We  willingly  forgive  the  impolite  remark  under  its  garb  of  •*  ont- 
spokenuess."  We  beg  our  respected  correspondent  to  bear  in  mind  though 
that  it  ia  one  thing  to  be  "outspoken,"  and  quite  another  one  to  be  rude.— Ed, 

X  It  is  precisely  because  -we  claim  to  know  something  of  "practical" 
Occultism  in  addition  to  being  a  Theosophist  that  wa  answer  without  in 
the  least  *•  evading  the  question  "  that  a  mortal  wound  may  be  inflicted 
*•  not  only  upon,  but  also  by  one  "  inner  man  npon  another.  This  is  the 
A  B  C  of  esoteric  mesmerism.  The  wound  is  inflicted  by  neither  a 
real  dagger  or  a  band  of  flesh,  bones  and  blood,  but  simply  by — Will. 
It  is  the  intense  will  of  the  "  Qospoja  "  that  guided  the  astral  or  inner 
body,  the  Mayavi-rupa  of  Frozya.  It  is  the  passively  obedient  action  of 
the  latter's  "  double  "  that  scanning  space  and  material  obstacles,  followed 
the "  trial  "  of,  and  found  the  real  murderers.  It  is  again  that  WiLti 
shaped  by  the  incessant  thought  of  the  revenger,  that  inflicted  the  internal 
wounds  which,  though  unable  to  kill  or  even  to  hurt  the  inner  man,  yet  by 
reaction  of  the  interior  physical  body  proved  mortal  to  the  latter.  If  the 
fluid  of  the  mesmerizer  can  cure,  it  can  also  kill.  And  now  we  have 
**■  established  the  fact  as  scientifically " — as  science  which  generally  dis- 
believes in  and  rejects  such  mesmeric  phenomena  will  permit  it.  For 
those  who  believe  in,  and  know  something  of,  mesmerism,  this  will  be 
plain.  As  to  those  who  deny  it  the  explanation  will  appear  to  them  as 
absurd  as  any  other  psychological  claim :  as  much  so  as  the  claims  of 
Yogism  with  its  beatitudes  of  Samadki  and  other  states,  for  the  matter 
of  ihat.— Ed, 

123 

teqnest,  yon  have  been  gracious  enough  to  make  that  a  matter 
of  humoroQS  jokes,  and  try  to  make  us  ashamed  of  our 
question.  When  we  say  «  *  ♦  ♦  the  double  murdered,  the 
treble,  not  the  double,  and  in  no  case  the  spiritual  one,'*  then 
in  the  sense,  by  treble  yon  should  have  understood  the  Anna- 
maya,  but  instead  of  so  doing  you  are  disgusted  with  the  sen- 
tence, not  only  this  sentence  but  also  another  one,  in  regard  to 
which  you  say,  "  why  should  he  then  use  against  his  own 
argument  the  term  laya  ?  "  How  can  we  erase  the  word  out  of 
Kosha  (dictionary)  ?  It  would  be  better  to  understand  us  by 
our  own  idea  and  not  through  your  own  interpretations. 

"  There  are  two  methods  of  investigation,"  says  Spinoza, 
*'  the  vulgar  and  the  scientific.  The  one  starts  from  principles 
which  have  been  accepted  without  examination,  which  are  not, 
therefore,  clearly  understood.  The  other  starts  from  principles 
clearly  defined  and  accurately  known.  It  is  the  latter  only 
which  can  lead  to  true  knovfledge."  We  fear,  our  venerable 
friends  have  followed  the  first  method,  which  we  shall  try  to 
prove  by  and  by.      »     •     * 

Before  doing  this,  however,  may  we  be  permitted  to  ask  an 
answer  ta  our  (question — Is  spirit  and  matter  the  same  thing  ? 
Or  whether  Prakriti,  Shakti,  and  Spirit  are  the  same  things  ? 
Unless  Prakriti  be  the  same  with  spirit,  how  can  the  former 
be  eternal,  since  two  eternals  cannot  exist  at  the  same  time, 
and  the  belief  in  two  eternals  isagainst  the  fundamental  truths 
of  the  Adwaita  Philosophy,*  as  embodied  in  the  aphorism  ek 
meva  dwitiyata.  And  matter  has  attributes,  such  as  color, 
form,  sound,  touch,  sight,  taste  and  smell  ;  but  the  spirit  has 
none.  Matter  is  dead  (jad),  Spirit  is  living  (chaitanya)  ; 
matter  is  temporary  and  subject  to  change,  and  spirit  is  eter- 
nal ;  matter  is  partial,  and   spirit  is   universal. f     But  what  is 

*  Thia  is  precisely  the  question  we  have  beea  asking ;  and  also  the 
reason  why,  knowing  that  matter  is  indestructible,  as  also  spirit  or  rather 
energy— we  say  with  all  the  esoteric  Adwaitees  that  matter  and  spirit  are 
ONE— -Ei. 

t  See  Mr.  Subba  Row's  reply.  While  we  mean  Cosmic,  indestructible 
matter,  the  Swami  speaks  of  oijective  and  differentiated  matter  l—£d. 

124 

temporary  ?  That  which  appears  and  exists  for  a  certain  period 
of  time,  or  that  which  has  beginning  and  end.  And  what  is 
eternal  ?  Eternal  means  that  which  exists  thronghont  pre- 
€ent,  past,  and  fatare,  and  also  in  Jagrita,  Swapna,  and 
Snshnpta.  Owing  to  these  and  varions  other  canses  matter 
cannot  he  sipirit  noT  vice  versa.  If  you  say  like  Vashishtha 
that  the  sleeping  particles  of  Chid  (spirit)  are  ignorantly 
called  matter,  then  we  agree  with  yon  to  a  certain  extent ; 
but  still  how  can  they,  for  that  reason,  be  called  by  the  erro- 
neous and  misleading  term  matter  which  is  inert  and  spirit- 
ually non-exitent.  Why  do  you  not  call  a  piece  of  wood  or 
stone  spirit  ?*  Can  you  prove  the  existence  of  matter  in 
sound  sleep  ?t  Perhaps  you  will  reply  like  the  Nayayiks 
that  matter  exists  with  Karana  in  sleep,  if  so,  where  does  it 
exist  in  Tnrya  ?  You  cannot  prove  that  either  matter  or 
Prakriti  exists  in  Tnrya.  How  then  can  matter  or  Prakriti  be 
called  eternal?  If  matter  is  merely  a  manifestation  of  spirit, 
why  call  it  by  the  false  name  of  matter  instead  of  its  own 
name  spirit  ?t  Now  having  done  with  the  effect,  matter,  we 
come  to  its  cause,  the  Mula-Prakriti,  which  is  also  called 
Avidya  or  ignorance,  the  mother  of  Karma  and  the  cause  of 
Bundha.  So  long  as  this  Prakriti  is  not  layed  into  spirit  by 
dissolving  it  into  Satvaguna,  there  is  no  emancipation,  Mnkti 
with  Prakriti  is  no  Mukti  at  all.  Beyond  Prakriti  is  emanci- 
pation. This  is  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  of  our  Aryan 
Occultism.  Let  us  now  see  what  the  Mimansa  says.  We 
make  a  few  quotations  from  the  "  Saddarshana-Chintanika,  or 
Studies  in  Indian  Philosophy,"  Vol.  V.  of  1881.  No.  11,  page 
347§  edited  at  Bombay.     ♦     *     • 

*  Because  it  is  not  usaal  to  call  them  by  sach  a  name.  Nevertheless, 
we  maintain  that  there  is  in  a  piece  of  wood  or  a  stone  as  much  of  latent 
spirit  or  life  as  there  is  in  a   weak — old  human  foetus. — £d. 

t  Bee  Mr.  T.  Snbba   Bow's  reply.— JCtf, 

J  For  the  game  good  reason  that  we  call  a  chair  by  its  "  false  "  name 
of  chair  instead  of  calling  it  by  that  of  the  ♦'  oak  "  or  any  other  wood  of 
which  it  was  made. — JEd. 

§  "We  refer  the  reader  to  the  pages  of  the  abovenamed  excellent 
monthly  magazine.— iS, 

125 

It  is  not  oar  object,  even  if  we  conld,  to  cite  all  the  Aryan 
books,  bat  we  would  desire  yoa  and  your  readers  to  read  in 
continuation  of  onr  quotations  all  the  nnrabers  of  the  sixth 
Volume  of  1882  of  the  "  SaddarshanaChintanika  '*  which  will 
shew  that  not  only  Shankaracharya,  but  also  almost  all  the 
commentators  and  reformers  and  other  great  Rishis,  not  to 
speak  of  the  Upanishads,  have  rejected  the  theory  of  the  matter 
being  as  eternal  as  sp'irit,  by  which  yon  are  misled.*  We 
will  now  see  what  other  schools  of  philosophy  say  abont 
the  Prakriti.  By  other  schools  we  mean  the  systems  of 
Patanjali.  Buddha  and  Jaina.  Let  onr  readers  remember 
that  we  are  speaking  of  the  first  class  Boudhas,  who  agreed 
with  Aryans  in  many  essential  points,  and,  particularly,  as 
regards  Nirvana,  though  they  disagree  in  regard  to  Kriya- 
kanda.  The  esteemed  Editor  of  the  Tkeosophist  seems  to 
follow  the  doctrine  of  Madhyamica,  i,  e.,  middle  class 
Buddhists,  or  those  who  are  followers  of  Sugata's  doctrines  of 
whom  we  shall  speak  afterwards. f  We  call  our  reader's 
attention  to  the  summary,  Vol.  VI  (1882),  No.  2,  page  106,  of 
the  Studies  in  Indian  Philosophy^  •  •  *  ^^Q  cite  a 
few  lines  from  Sutras  24  and  25.  *  *  *  The  Jainas  do 
not  believe  in  the  independent  power  known  as  delusion  to  the 
Vedantists.  The  spirit  is  naturally  knowing.  It  is  omniscient. 
Its  knowledge  is  covered  over  and  obscured  by  an  activity  or 
karma.  The  perception  of  the  spirit  is  also  obscured  by 
karma,  &c.,  <fec.  The  Boudhas  believe  that  pure  Nirvana  alone 

*  We  thank  the  gootl  Swami  for  his  advice.  We  hare  read  all  the 
monthly  numbers  of  the  Saddarshaiia  Chinlanika  with  great  attention 
until  lately,  and  advocated  it  zealously  both  in  America  and  upon  our 
arrival  here.  Notwithstanding  all  that  Shankaracharya  may  be  niade  to  tay 
in  the  abovenamed  ttudies,  we  claim  to  know  that  he  said  nothing  of  the 
kind,  not  at  any  rate  in  the  sense  conveyed  by  our  opponent.  We  leave 
the  question  to  be  settled  between  him  and  Mr.  Subba  Row. — Ed. 

t  The  "  esteemed  Editor  "  follows  but  the  doctrines  of  Esoteric 
Buddhism,  which  are  nearly  identical  with  those  of  the  eaotoric 
Adwaitees — the  true  followers  of  Shankaracharya. — Ed. 

X  We  refei  the  rea<ler  to  the  abovenamed  volume  of  the  "  Studies  in 
Indian  Philosophy." — Ed. 

126 

exists.  Nirvana  is  a  transcendental  condition.  It  is  infinitnde. 
It  is  not  snbject  to  being  acted  upon.  Nothing  excels  it. 
Tlie  great  Rishis  who  are  free  from  all  desire,  describe  it  to 
be  so.  Besides  the  Nirvana,  karma  or  activity  is  also  eternal.* 
Aided  by  ignorance,  activity  produces  five  elements  and 
developes  worldliness.  These  five  elements  are  form  or  Rupa, 
sensation  or  Vedaoa,  perception  or  Sangna,  discrimination  or 
Samascar,  and  consciousness  or  Vijnana.  Virtue  and  contem- 
plation destroy  the  power  of  ignorauce.  Activity  thus  be- 
comes impotent  and  Nirvana  is  next  attained  to.t  All  these 
schools  are  described  together  in  this  place,  because  they 
represent  Indian  pessimism,  and  that  the  reader  may  know 
their  points  of  resemblance  and  difference. 

We  now  come  to  your  foot-note.  "Asat  or  Prakriti  existed 
first,  &c."  A  brief  reply  to  this  is  given  somewhere  in  the 
History  of  Philosophy.  *'  The  pagans  said  ex-nikilo  nihil. 
The  Christian  father  altered  it  to  ex-nihilo-omniay  Still  let 
ns  see  what  our  Aryan  Rishis  say.  We  call  your  attention  to 
the  verses  from  the  second  book  called  Panch  Mahabhuta 
Viveka  of  Panckadasi,  which  speaks  in  accordance  with 
UpanishadsJ  ♦  »  *  You  will  please  understand  the  verses 
according  to  their  commentary,  now  very  ably  translated 
into  Hindi. 

•  And  if  "activity  is  idso  eternal,"  then  how  can  onr  philosophical  anta- 
gonist maintain  that  matter  is  not  so  ?  Can  activity  (in  the  usual  sense  of 
the  word),  whether  physical  or  mental,  manifest  itself  or  exist  without, 
or  outside  of,  maiter,  or  to  be  plainer — outside  of  any  one  of  its  seven 
states  ?  And  how  about  his  contradicting  himself  ?  **  Activity  also  eter- 
nal." Then  there  are  after  all  two  eternals,  how  ?  And  he  just  saying 
that  **  two  eternals  cannot  exist  at  the  same  time."  (See  above). — Ed. 

■j"  We  beg  to  draw  onr  correspondent's  attention  to  the  fact  that  he  ia 
again  contradicting  himself.  Or  is  it  the  "Boudhas''?  But  a  few  lines 
above  he  declares  "activity  .  .  .  eierjiaV  and  now  he  makes  it  •'  im- 
potent"— in  other  words,  kills  and  annihilates  that  which  is  eternal  1—Ed. 

t  The  reader  i»  invited  to  turn  to  the  Sanskrit  vefses  of  the  dbovenamed 
work,  at  the  additional  quotations  would  again  require  at  least  two  columns. 
Our  magazine  avoids  as  much  at  potiiblt  the  pubhoation  of  anything  that  is 
not  orii/inal  matter.— Ed, 

127 

Mandnkya  Upanishad  says,  Prakritis  are  of  two  kinds,  Apam 
and  Para  ;  the  former  produces  Karma  and  the  latter  Mukti. 
The  one  is  Jad,  the  other  Chaitanya.  This  is  also  the  opinion 
of  Bhagvat  Gita,  seventh  chapter.  Mandnkya  Karika,  third 
chapter,  and  Prasna  Upanishad  also  speak  of  Maya  and 
Prakriti — please  see  the  Upanishads  with  ciankara's  commen- 
tary. Vasishta,  Vyasa,  Ashtavakra  and  all  great  sages  re- 
commend the  divorcement  of  this  illusive  Prakriti,  and  no- 
where in  their  works  do  we  find  any  sentence  which  says  that 
this  illusive  Prakriti  is  to  be  known  with  God.  If  Brahma 
can,  in  your  opinion,  be  knwon  through  Prakriti^  then  why 
not  with  all  others  but  Tamasa  only  ?  According  to  Indian 
philosophy  and  the  practical  experience  of  hermits,  this  Mula- 
Sakti  or  Avidya,  as  you  understand  it,  ia  not  to  be  known  in 
Brahman.  Because  it  is  illusive  and  false,  moreover,  it  can  be 
dissolved  and  made  inactive.  It  loses  itself  in  Turya  when 
layaed^  as  the  river  into  the  ocean.  But  as  long  as  you  will 
be  ignorant  of  this  process,  so  long  you  have  liberty  to  call  it 
a  protest  of  religion  ;  but  the  thinking  class,  who  understand 
this  mysterious  process,  will  laugh  at  your  weakness  of  under- 
standing. As  you  have  purposely  come  to  India  for  true 
esoteric  knowledge,  we  always  pray  for  your  success,  and 
entreat  you  to  understand  us  a  little  hermitically .*  We  ex- 
plained to  you  Pranava  according  to  the  interpretation  of 
Rama  Gita,  a  chapter  of  esoteric  Ramayana,  but  as  you  are 
not  well  acquainted  with  the  laija  theory,  yon  could  not 
accept  it.  It  does  not,  however,  matter  much  ;  practical 
Vedantists  have  accepted  it  before.  We  very  gladly  and  with- 
out any  apology  quote  a  few  lines  from  Max  Muller's  very 
able  preface  to  "  The  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,"  as  it  bears 
on  our  subject.  "  This  concentration  of  thought,  Chagrata 
or  one  pointedness  as  the  Hindus  called  it,  is  something  to  na 

*  See  Mr.  T.  Sabba  Row's  reply.  We  thank  again  our  kind  adviser  for 
tbe  Interest  he  displays  in  oar  spiritual  welfare,  and  refer  him,  if  he 
desires  to  learn  the  cause  of  oar  refusal,  to  our  note  at  the  end  of  his 
letter.  We  can  also  assure  him  that  we  have  never  and  nowhere  called 
hayo,  "a  protest  of  religion." — Ed% 

12S 

filmost  nnknown, — onr  minds  are  like  kaleidoscopes  of  thoaghta 
in  constant  motion  :  and  to  shut  oar  mental  eyes  to  every- 
thing else,  while  dwelling  on  one  thought  only,  has  become  ta 
most  of  us  almost  as  impossible  as  to  apprehend  one  musical, 
note  without  harmonies.  With  the  life  we  are  leading  now^ 
■with  telegrams,  letters,  newspapers,  reviews,  pamphlets  and 
books  even  breaking  in  upon  us,  it  has  become  impossible,  or 
almost  impossible,  ever  to  arrive  at  that  intensity  of  thought 
which  the  Hindus  meant  by  Chagrata^  and  the  attainment  of 
which  was  to  them  the  indispensable  condition  of  all  philoso- 
phical and  religious  speculation.  The  loss  may  not  be  al- 
together on  our  side,  yet  our  loss  it  is,  and  if  we  see  the 
Hindus,  even  in  their  comparatively  monotonous  life,  adopt- 
ing all  kinds  of  contrivances  in  order  to  assist  them  in 
drawing  away  their  thoughts  from  all  disturbing  impressions 
and  to  fix  them  on  one  subject  only,  we  must  not  be  satisfied 
with  smiling  at  their  simplicity,  bub  try  to  appreciate  the  ob- 
ject they  had  in  view. 

Below  are  the  few  verses  on  Laya  Prakarana  from  Siva 
Sanhita,  which  it  is  hoped  will  show  you  how  you  mistake  onr 
meaning.* 

Nowhere  throughout  Yoga  Vasisht  and  Bhagvat  do  we  find 
any  statement  which  recommends  this  Prakriti  to  be  known. 
On  the  contrary,  every  Aryan  occultist,  particularly  Kapila 
in  his  lectures  to  Devhutee  speaks  against  it.  Will  yon  be 
so  kind  as  to  point  out  to  us  the  places  where  Vasishta,  Vyasa, 
Suka  and  Shankaracharya  have  given  expression  to  their 
views  which  agree  with  your  doctrines  of  the  Arhat  philoso- 
phy, otherwise,  we  might  or  might  not,  believe  in  your 
explanation. 

Parusha,  according  to  Upanishads,  is  Swayam  Prakasha, 
i.  e.,  self-manifesting  ;  therefore  cannot  be  dependant  on 
Prakriti  only,  for  its  manifestation.  No  Adwaitee  will  take 
Brahmam  with  Prakriti  or  gun  or  duality.     Their  Brahmam 

*  Header  referred  to  the  aboremontioned  work.— ^Bd. 

129 

is  Parasha  beyond  the  Prakriti,  or  in  other  words,  Akshara, 
Latent  spirit  is  never  referred  to  as  Maha,  Isicara.  Please 
read  the  verse  qaoted  below,  which  distinctly  states  that 
Maha  Iswara  is  the  spirit  beyond  Prakriti  when  the  latter  is 
laijed* 

Void  Is  a  flctitions  name  to  the  Aryan  Rishis,  who  knew 
the  omnipresence  of  the  soul,  and  that  void  they  destroyed  by 
filling  it  up.  Moreover,  there  is  do  void  in  nature,  vide 
tho  maxim  "Nature  hates  vacuum."  At  present  we  desist 
to  answer  your  other  points,  till  we  have  your  reply  to  this. 
As  the  subject  is  very  serious  and  important,  we  entreat  you 
to  discuss  the  points  calmly  and  dispassionately  ;  without  this 
mood  of  mind,  one  cannot  penetrate  into  the  esoteric  philoso- 
phy of  India.  Your  present  opinions  are  not  esoteric,  they 
are  rather  exoteric. 

SWAMI  OF  ALMORA. 
Almoba,  22nd  April  1883, 

Editok's  Note.— We  sincerely  regret  that  such  should  be  the  opinion 
of  the  Swami  of  Altnora.  Bat  since  we  know  neither  himself,  nor  the 
religion  or  school  of  philosophy  he  belongs  to,  we  may  perhaps  repeat 
with  him,  "  It  does  not,  however,  matter  much"  whether  he  agrees  with  ns 
or  not,  for  practical  (esoteric  and  initiated)  Vedantista  hate  foand  onr 
opinions  correct  and  in  perfect  harmony  with  their  own.  There  are  nearly 
as  tnany  interpretations  of  the  esoteric  meaning  of  certain  words  we  have 

*  We  beg  to  be  explained  the  hidden  meaning  of  this  really  incom- 
prehensibl*  sentence.  "  Latent  spirit  ia  never  referred  to  as  itaha  Isicara^' 
(a  term  we,  at  any  rate,  never  used,)  while  the  Sanskrit  verse  "states 
that  Maha  Iswara  is  the  spirit  beyond  Prakriti,  when  the  latter  is  layed." 
Now  does  the  learned  S-«^ami  mean  to  say  that  the  spirit  beyond  differ- 
entiated matter  is  active  ?  It  cannot  mean  anything  else,  for  otherwise 
the  two  assumptions  would  contradict  each  other  most  absurdly  and  would 
be  suicidal  ;  and  if  he  does  mean  that  which  he  says — viz.,  that  Maha 
Iswara  (if  the  latter  is  identified  here  with  Parabrahma),  the  spirit  beyond'* 
Prakriti  becomes  active  since  it  is  called  Maha  Iswara.  which  it  would  not 
be  were  it  latent — then,  we  are  sorry  to  say  to  the  learned  Paramabansa 
that  he  does  not  know  what  he  is  talking  about.  He  is  »w  Esoteria 
Adwaitee  and — we  close  the  discussion  as  beootuing  quite  useless. — Ed, 

ir 

130 

to  use  as  there  are  yogeas  and  sannyasis  of  various  sects  in  India.  A 
Visishtadwaita  yi>gi  -will  contend  the  correctness  of  the  meaDlng  as  girea 
by  an  Adnaitee>ahcetlc,  and  a  devotee  of  Gbaitanya  or  a  Bbakti-yogee 
will  never  accept  the  interpretation  of  the  Yedas  or  Bhagavadgita  made 
by  a  Brahmo  or  an  Arya.  Thus  truth  is  everywhere  and  may  be  said  to 
be  nowhere.  For  us  it  is  absolutely  and  solely  in  the  Arhat  esoteria 
doctrines ;  and  we  remain  firm  in  our  convictions,  all  our  opponents  be- 
ing quite  as  free  as  ourselves  to  adhere  by  their  own  views.  We  have 
met  in  the  N.  W.  P.  with  an  erudite  Pundit,  a  renowned  Banskritist,  the 
most  learned  authority  with,  and  at  the  head  of  the  Vaishnavas,  and  re« 
fcogaized  as  snch  by  many  others  ;  and  he  wanted  us  to  believe  that  the 
oalmination  of  "rJaj-yoga"  was  the  practical  and  absolute  powers  it  con- 
ferred upon  the  Baj-yogee  over  all  the  female  sex  in  creation  1  1  Shall  we 
believe  every  exponent  of  the  Vedas,  the  Shastree  of  every  sect,  only 
because  he  may  be  an  authority  to  those  who  belong  to  the  same  deno- 
mination with  him,  or  shall  we  make  a  judicious  selection,  following  out 
the  dictates  of  our  reason,  which  tells  us  that  he  is  most  right  and  nearer 
to  truth,  who  diverges  the  less  from  logic  and — Science  ?  The  occult  pbilo- 
Bopby  we  study,  uses  precisely  that  method  of  investigation  which  is 
termed  by  Spinoza  the  "scientific  method."  It  starts  from,  and  proceeds 
only  on  **principles  clearly  defined  and  accurately  known,"  end  is  therefore 
"the  only  one  "  which  can  lead  to  true  knowledge.  Therefore,  be  thia 
philosophy,  and  no  other  shall  we  abide.  And  now  we  mufct  leave  the 
venerable  Swami  and  his  views  to  the  dissecting  knife  of  Mr.  T.  Snbba 
Row, 

PRAKRiri  AND  PURUSHA. 

The  editorial  at  the  head  of  the  article  that  precedes  will 
explain  to  the  learned  Hermit  of  Almora  and  the  readers  of 
the  Theomphist  the  reason  for  ray  having  undertaken  to  write 
the  following  lines  in  connection  with  the  controversy  raised 
by  the  Swami  as  regards  Prakriti  lay  am  (dissolution  of 
Prakriti). 

I  am  really  qnite  delighted  to  be  informed  by  the  respected 
ascetic  that  his  ''motives  are  not  shallow,"  and  that  he  has 
raised  the  present  controversy  "for  scientific  purpose."  But  it 
is  certainly  a  very  dangerous  task  to  enter  into  controversy 
with  a  disputant  who,  according  to  his  own  candid  confession, 
is  unable  to  give  a  clear  expression  to  his  thoughts,   but   who, 

I  131 

nevertheless,  is  prepared  to  declare  that  ''those  who  seelf 
to  fiud  fault  with"  him  "and  become  hostile  to"  him  "are 
prejudiced  and  stubboru/'  Probably  if  nnderstood  "hermiti- 
cally"  and  (we  are  called  upon  to  construe  the  Swami's  article  ia 
this  manner)  they  may  disclose  some  other  meaning,  and  I 
sincerely  hope  they  will.  Meanwhile  I  trust  he  will  not  be 
pleased  to  consider  me  as  either  "prejudiced**  or  "stubborn" 
if  I  venture  to  defend  the  position  taken  up  by  the  editor  of 
this  journal  (who  belongs  to  the  same  school  as  I  do)  as  re- 
gards the  subject  in  disputes. 

I  will  begin  by  respectfully  informing  the  learned  hermit 
that  it  is  not  childish  "to  scrutinize  and  try  to  understand 
the  wording  of  a  question  before  attempting  to  answer  it." 
Nobody  has  found  fault  with  his  style,  nor  has  any  one 
thought  of  ''attacking"  him.  On  the  other  hand,  every 
attempt  was  made  to  weed  oat  the  grammatical  errors  in  his 
article  (the  foot-notes  to  which  have  provoked  his  anger) 
before  it  was  printed.  But  controversies  like  the  present  one 
can  never  come  to  any  satisfactory  conclusion  unless  the 
disputants  clearly  understand  each  other.  I  claim  the  right 
to  remark  that  in  the  shape  his  articles  generally  reached  the 
Theosophist  Office,  it  became  next  to  impossible  to  correctly 
ascertain  the  real  meaning  of  the  "idea"  he  tried  to  convey, 
80  long  as  the  latter  found  itself  successfully  concealed  under 
what  he  terms  his  "  style."  Philosophical  disputations 
apparently  formidable  in  their  appearance  have  often  been 
found  to  have  their  origin  in  the  various  meanings  attached 
to  a  single  word;  and  it  will  be  no  exaggeration  to  say  that 
innumerable  creeds  and  sects  have  arisen  from  disputes  about 
mere  words.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  may  be  humbly 
submitted  that  it  is  extremely  improper  on  the  Swami's  part 
to  lose  his  temper  in  spite  of  his  Nirvikcdpa  Samadki  as  soon 
as  an  attempt  is  made  to  analyse  his  question  and  ascertain 
its  real  meaning.  Even  now,  after  so  much  discussion,  it  is 
not  easy  to  see  what  the  editor  is  called  upon  to  prove  ?  If 
the  Swami  had  merely  asked  the  editor  to  explain  more  fully 
the  assertion  contained  in  one  of  the  issues  of  this  journal  to 

i_ 

132  i 

Ihe  effect  that  Prakrifci  co-exists  eternally  with  Pnrnsha,  therd 
would  be  no  confusion  whatever.  From  the  explanations 
given  in  his  article,  it  would  however  appear  that  the  learned 
hermit  requires  the  editor  to  prove  that  Prakriti  exists  iil 
Tureeya  Aeastka.*  Even  then  the  question  still  remains 
Vague  and  uncertain.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  point  oat  clearly 
the  difficulty  involved  in  the  question  and  explain  the  doc- 
trines of  esoteric  theosophy  on  the  subject  under  considera- 
tion, in  order  to  enable  the  Swami  to  see  that  the  difficulty  is 
not  merely  an  imaginary  one  created  by  the  editor  for  the 
purpose  of  giving  "evasive  replies"  to  his  questions  and 
ridiculing  him  for  his  bad  English;  but  that  the  teachings  of 
esoteric  science  being,  I  can  assure  him,  neither  absurd  and 
illogical  nor  as  "unscientific"  as  he  has  imagined, — one  has 
to  thoroughly  understand  and  assimilate  before  criticising 
them.  Let  us  trust  this  may  not  become  a  hopeless  task 
with  regard  to  our  learned  critic  I 

For  the  purposes  of  this  contoversy  it  mast  be  explained  that 
Prakriti  may  be  looked  npon  from  two  distinct  stand-points. 
It  may  be  looked  upon  either  as  Maya  when  considered  as  the 
Vpadhi  of  Parabrahmam  or  as  A  vidga  when  considered  as  the 
JJpadhi  of  Jioatma  (7th  principle  in  man).t  Avidya  is  igno- 
rance or  illusion  arising  from  Maya,  The  term  Maya,  though 
sometimes  used  as  a  synonym  for  Avidya,  is,  properly  speaking, 
applicable  to  Prakriti  only.  There  is  no  difference  betweea 
Prakriti,  Maya  and  Sakti;  and  the  ancient  Hindu  philosophers 
made  no  distinction  whatsoever  between  Matter  and  Force. 
In  support  of  this  assertion  I  may  refer  the  learned  hermit 
to  •'  Swetaswatara  Upanishad "  and  its  commentary  by 
Shankaracharya.  In  case  we]  adopt  the  four-fold  division  of 
the  adwaitee  philosophers,  it  will  be  clealy  seen  that  Jagrata,^ 

•  Condition  of  the  highest  Samadhi  (.or  trance),   or  as  expressed   by  the 
6wami,  "  in  sleep." 

t  Upadhi — vehicle. 

^  Jagvdta — waking  state,  or  a  condition  of  external  perception. 

133 

Svrapna*  and  Sasbnpti  Avasthasf  are  the  results  of  Avidya, 
and  that  Vyswanara,^  Hiranyagarbha§  and  Sutratma|l  are 
manifestations  of  Parabrahmam  in  Maya  or  Prakriti.  Now  I 
beg  to  inform  the  learned  hermit  that  the  statement  made  in 
the  Theosopkist  regarding  Prakriti  has  no  connection  whatever 
with  Avidya.  Undifferentiated  cosmic  matter  or  Mulaprakriti 
eternally  co-exists  with  Pnrusha,  bat  there  is  Avidya  Layam 
in  Tareeya  Avastha.  The  Editor  of  the  Theosopkist  has  never 
maintained  that  Avidya,  illusion  or  ignorance,  is  eternal. 
Why  shonld,  then,  the  learned  hermit  require  the  Editor  to 
prove  that  which  has  never  been  claimed  ?  I  cannot  help 
suspecting  that  the  erudite  Sv^ami  is  confounding  Avidya  with 
Prakriti,  the  effect  with  its  cause-  In  drawing  a  distinction 
between  Avidya  and  Prakriti,  1  am  merely  following  the 
authority  of  all  the  great  Adwaitee  philosophers  of  Aryavarta. 
It  will  be  sufficient  for  me  to  refer  the  Swami  to  his  favourite 
book  of  reference,  the  first  chapter  of  Panchadasi.  If,  how- 
ever, the  learned  Swami  is  prepared  to  say  that  Mula- 
prakriti  itself  is  not  eternal,  I  beg  to  inform  him  that  his 
views  are  clearly  wrong  and  that  his  arguments  and  his 
Layaprakarna,  of  which  he  is  very  proud,  do  not  prove 
the  Layam  of  "Mulaprakriti,"  whatever  meaning  he  may 
attach  to  the  word  *'  Laya."  Before  proceeding  to  notice 
his  argunaents,  I  shall  say  a  few  words  about  the  "  murder  by 
the  double  '*  which  appears  so  very  ridiculous  to  this,  our 
**  practical"  Yogi.    The   hermit  is  probably  aware  of  the  fact 

•  Swapna — dreamy  state,  or  a  coadition  of  dairvuyanee  in  the  astral 
plane. 

-j-  Siuhupti—a,  state  ofj  ecstasis  ;  and  AvagtOs — states  or  conditions  of 
I*rag>ta. 

J  Vystvanara— the  magnetic  fire  that  perTadea  the  manifested  solar 
system — the  most  objective  aspects  of  the  One  Like. 

§  Hirnyagariha — the  One  Life  as  manifested  in  the  plane  of  astral 
Light. 

II  Sutratma—th&  Eternal  germ  of  the  manifested  nni verse  existing 
In  the  field  of  Mulapraliriti, 

134 

tkat,  scJmetimeS,  a  severe  mental  shock  can  canse  death  when 
the  physical  body  itself  remains  apparently  unhurt.  And 
every  practical  occultist  knows  that  in  several  iostances  when 
death  is  caused  by  recourse  to  "black  magic,"  the  victim's 
physical  body  bears  no  sign  of  injury.  In  these  cases  the 
blow  given,  as  it  were,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  4th  and  5th 
principles  of  man  which  constitute  his  astral  body,  is  imme- 
diately communicated  to  his  Sthoola-sariram.  And  hence 
there  is  no  absurdity  in  saying  that  a  wound  which  proves 
mortal  to  the  victim's  Sthoolasariram  can  be  inflicted  on  his 
bstral  body.  The  Swami,  however,  seems  to  think  that  the 
astral  body  itself  is  the  victim  in  the  Editor's  opinion.  There 
is  no  room  whatever  for  any  snch  misapprehension  in  the  article 
regarding  the  subject  in  question;  and  1  am  very  sorry  that 
the  hermit  has  thought  it  fit  to  abuse  the  Editor  under  the 
plea  of  oatspokenness,  having  himself  carelessly  misunder- 
stood the  correct  meaning.  The  Swami  is  at  full  liberty  to 
call  Sthoolasariram  the  treble  if  he  is  pleased  to  do  so  ;  but 
as  the  Upadhis  are  generally  name  I  Samharakrama,*  the 
treble  would  ordinarily  be  taken  to  mean  Karanasariramf 
and  when  the  Swami  was  pleased  to  name  them  in  a  different 
order,  he  ought  to  have  expressed  himself  in  less'  ambiguous 
manner.  Our  correspondent  seems  to  be  very  fond  of  stale 
remarks.  There  seems  hardly  any  necessity  for  all  his  wise 
flings  about  modes  of  investigation  in  general,  when  he  is  not 
fully  prepared  to  show  that  our  method  of  investigation  is 
anscientific. 

The  Swami  now  comes  forward  with  another  question  : 
Whether  matter  is  indentical  with  spirit  ?  Our  learned  hermit 
is  always  ready  to  raise  fresh  issues  witliout  any  cause  for  it. 
The  real  question  is,  whether  Mulaprakriti  is  eternal,  and  I 
fail  to  see  the  necessity  for  examining  the  nature  of  its  relation- 
ship to  what  is  ordinarily  called   spirit  in  deciding  whether  it 

*  Samharakrama— order  of  invulution  or  evolution  reversed. 
,    t  Karanatariram — the  germ  of  Avidya  (ignorance)  which  is  the  cause  of 
rebirth,  .    - 

135 

Is  eternal  or  not.    But  if  the  Swami  insists  npon   my   giving 
him  a  definite  answer  to  his  qnestion,  I  beg  to  refer   him   to 
roy  article  on  "Personal  and  Impersonal   God,"   published  in 
the  Theosopkist,  and  to  Shankaracharya's  commentary  on  the 
4th  para,  of  the  first  chapter  of  Brahma  Sutras.    In  troth, 
Prakriti   and   Purusha  are  but  the  two  aspects  of  the  same 
One  Reality.     As  our  great  Shankaracharya  truly  observes 
at  the  close  of  his  commentary  on  the  23rd  Sutra  of  the  above- 
mentioned  Pada,  "Parabrahmam  is  Karta  (Purusha),  as  there 
is   no   other  Adhishtatha*   and    Parabrahmam   is   Prakriti 
there   being  no  other   Upadanam."     This  sentence   clearl}', 
indicates  the  relation  between  "the  One   Life"  and   "the   One 
Element"  of  the  Arhat  philosophers.     After  asking   us   this 
qnestion,  and  quoting  the  doctrines  of  the  Adwaita  philosophy 
against  the  assumption  that  matter  is  not  spirit,   the  learned 
Swami  proceeds  to  show  on  his  own  authority  that   matter  is 
woi  Spirit,  in  fact.     If  so,  is  the  Swami's   doctrine  consistent 
with   the   doctrines   of  the   Adwaitee     philosophers?      Our 
hermit  probably  thinks  that  the  quotation  will  not  affect  his 
own  statement,    inasmuch   as   he   holds    that  matter   is   net 
enternal.    What  then  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement  soof  ten 
quoted  by  Adwaitees — ''Sarvan   khalvilham   Brahma"  ?t  and 
what  is  meant  by  saying  that  Brahmam  is  the  Upadanakamam 
of  the  Universe  ?    It  seems  to  me  that  the  Swami  has  entirely 
misunderstood  the  Adwaitee  doctrine  regarding   the   relation 
between  Prakriti  and  Purusha.     If  confusion  is  to  be  avoided, 
it   is   highly   desirable    that   our   critic     should    inform   us 
distinctly  what  he  means  by  "matter."     I  shall  now  examine 
his  arguments  or  rather  his  assumptions  to  show  that  Prakriti, 
is  not  eternal  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  stated. 

I.    For  certain    reasons   matter  is  not  Spirit;   Spirit   is 
enternal  and  therefore  matter  is  not  eternal. 

♦  Adldthtailia—Tlhxi    which    inheres  in  another  priaoiple— the  »ctiT« 
agent  working  in  Prakriti, 

f  Byerything  in  the  uniyerse  is  Brahma, 

186 

In  reply  to  thia  argument  I  beg  to  state  that  the  major 
premise  is  wrong  in  itself,  and  does  not  affect  undifferentiated 
Prakriti,  as  the  grounds  on  which  it  is  based  are  not  appli- 
cable to  it  for  the  following  reasons  : — 

(a)  Mulaprakriti  has  not  the  attributes  enumerated,  as 
the  said  attributes  imply  differentiation  and  Mulaprakriti  is 
undifferentiated  according  to  our  doctrines. 

(b)  Mulaprakriti  is  not  dead  or  jadam^  as  Purusha — the 
one  life— always  exists  in  it.  It  is  in  fact  Chitanya  deepta 
(shining  with  life)  as  stated  in  Uttaratapani  (see  also 
Ooudapatha  KdrikcC). 

{c)     Mulaprakriti  is  not  temporary  but  eternal. 

{d) '  When  subjected  to  change  it  always  loses  its  name, 
reassumiag  it  after  returning  to  its  original /^undifferentiated 
condition. 

(e)    It  is  not  partial  but  co-extensive  with  space. 

(/)  It  eternally  exists  in  the  universe  in  whatever  Avastha 
(state  or  condition)  a  particular  human  being  may  be. 

And,  moreover,  I  deny  the  validity  of  the  inference  drawn 
even  if,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  the  truth  of  the  premises 
be  granted. 

Our  Swami's  second  argument  is  extremely  ridiculous. 
When  stated  briefly  it  stands  thus  : — 

II.  The  existence  of  matter  is  not  known  either  in  Sushuptl 
6t  Tureeya*  Avastha,  and  therefore  matter  is  not  eternal. 

,  This  is  enough  to  convince  me  that  the  Swami  of  Almora 
knows  as  much  about  Tareeya  Avastha  as  of  the  features  of 
the  man  in  the  moon.  The  learned  gentleman  is  in  fact  con- 
foonding  Avidya,  with  Maya.  Indeed,  he  says  that  Mulapra- 
kriti is  Avidya,  I  shall  be  very  happy  if  he  can  quote  any 
authority  in  support  of  his  proposition.     I  beg  to  inform  him 

*  Dreamless  sleep,  and  Tareeya  Avastha,  or  the  conditioa  of  intimate 
naiou  with  Parabrabm — a  stage  higher  than  ecstasis. 

137 

'  again  that  Avidrja  layam  is  not  neceisarily  followed  by 
Prakriti  hxyam.  It  is  the  difFereotiation  of  Mnlaprakriti  that 
is  the  caase  of  Amdi^a  or  ignorant  delusion,  and  when  the 
differentiated  Cosmic  matter  returns  to  its  original  undifferen- 
tiated condition  at  the  time  of  Mahapralaya,  Avidya  is 
completely  got  rid  of.  Conseqnently,  Mnlaprakriti,  instead  of 
being  identical  with  Avidya,  implies  the  absence  of  Avidya. 
It  is  the  highest  state  of  non-being — the  condition  of  Nirvana. 
Mukfci,  therefore,  is  beyond  differentiated  Prakriti  and  beyond 
Avidya,  bnt  it  expresses  the  condition  of  undifferentiated 
Mulaprakriti.  On  referring  to  Uttaratapani  and  its  com- 
mentary, the  learned  hermit  will  be  able  to  see  that  even  the 
Mahachitanayam  at  the  end  of  Shodasanthum  indicated  by 
Avikalpapranava  is  spoken  of  as  existing  in  what  is  described 
as  ''''Guru,  beejopadhi  Sakti  mandalum,*^*  This  is  the  nearest 
approach  to  the  one  undifferentiated  element  called  Mula- 
prakriti. It  will  also  be  seen  from  the  passage  above  referred 
to  that  Jilalaprakriti  exists  even  in  the  highest  stage  of 
Tureeya  Avastha.  The  Swami  is  pleased  to  ask  us  why  we 
should  call  this  element  matter  if  it  is  but  an  aspect  of  Purusha. 
We  are  obliged  to  use  the  word  matter  as  we  have  no  other 
word  in  English  to  indicate  it;  but  if  the  Swami  means  to 
object  to  the  word  Prakriti  being  applied  to  it,  it  will  be 
equally  reasonable  on  my  part  to  object  to  its  being  called 
either  God,  Spirit  or  Purusha. 

Onr  Swami's  lengthy  quotations  from  "Saddarshana  Chin- 
tanika*'  happily  eliminated  by  the  Editor  do  not  help  him  much. 
If  the  term  Avyakta  f  is  applied  to  Brahman  instead  of  being 
applied  to  "  the  Parkriti  of  the  Sankhyas,"  how  does  it  prove 
that  undifferentiated  Parkriti  is  not  eternal  ?  Shankaracharya 
merely  says  that  Avidya  or  ignorance  can  be  exterminated  ; 
but   he  says  nothing  about  the   laya  of  Mulaprakriti.     It  is 

*  A   oonditioa  of  Prakriti    vrhen   it  has    bat    the   gorms    of    the    three 
ganas,  viz. .  Satwa,  Rajas,  and  Tatnas. 

t  Avyakta — The  uarevealed  Cause. 

lb 

13& 

nnnecessary  for  me  to  say  anything  about  the  Swami's  views 
regarding  other  systems  of  philosophy.  I  am  only  concerned 
with  the  esoteric  Arhat  philosophy  and  the  Advaita  philosophy 
as  tanght  by  Shankaracharya.  The  remaining  quotations 
from  the  works  of  various  authors,  contained  in  the  Swami's 
article  are,  in  my  humble  opinion,  irrelevant.  The  chapter  on 
Pancha  Mahabhutaviveka  in  Panchadasi  does  not  show 
that  Asat  has  not  existed  with  Sat  from  all  eternity.  This 
is  the  first  time  1  hear  that  the  Paravidya  mentioned  in 
Mandnka  Upanishad  is  a  kind  of  Prakriti  as  stated  by  our 
learned  hermit.  I  have  reason  to  think  that  the  entity  indicat- 
ed by  the  said  Paravidya  is  Parabrahmam.  In  conjunction 
with  the  said  entity  Shankaracharya  speaks  of  undifferentitated 
Parkriti  as  "Akasakhyamaksharam"  pervading  it  everywhere. 
Our  opponent  seems  to  think  that  as  every  Yogi  isjasked  to 
rise  above  the  influence  of  Avidya,  it  must  necessarily  be 
assumed  that  Prakriti  is  not  eternal  in  its  undifferentiated 
condition.  This  is  as  illogical  as  his  other  arguments.  Illu- 
sion arises  from  differentiation  or,  Dwaitabhavam  as  it  is 
technically  called;  and  absence  of  differentiation,  whether 
subjective  or  objective,  is  the  Nirvana  of  Adwaita.  If  the 
Swami  only  pauses  to  consider  the  nature  of  "  this  one 
element"  in  its  dual  aspect,  he  will  be  able  to  see  that  it  is 
but  an  aspect  of  Parabrahmam.  All  the  arguments  advanced 
by  him  seem  to  show  that  he  is  labouring  under  the  impres- 
sion that  we  are  contending  for  the  permanancy  of  this 
illusive  manifested  world.  If  this  Mnlaprakriti  that  I  have 
attempted  to  describe  is  not  noticed  in  Brahmam  according  to 
the  "practical  experience  of  hermits,"  all  that  I  can  say  is 
that  their  experience  is  different  from  the  experience  of 
Shankaracharya,  Vyasa,  Goudapada  and  several  other  Rishis, 
The  hermit  is  welcome  to  "  laugh  at  our  weakness  of  under- 
standing "  if  it  can  in  the  least  comfort  him;  but  mere 
vituperation  will  bring  him  very  little  benefit  if  he  rushes 
into  controversy  without  clearly  understanding  the  subject 
under  disputation  and  with  worthless  arguments  and  irrelevant 
quotations  as  his  weapons. 

139 

The  Editor  of  this  journal  is,  I  think,  perfectly  justified  ia 
rejecting  oar  hermit's  interpretation  of  Pranava,  as  it  is  not 
quite  consistent  with  what  is  contained  in  Mandnkya,  TJttarata- 
pane  and  Naradaparivrajaka  Upanishads  and  other  anthori- 
tative  treatrises  on  the  subject.  I  do  not  think  that  the  three 
mantras  in  Pranava  mean  matter-,  force  and  spirit  respectively, 
as  stated  by  the  Swami.  I  have  seen  several  interpretations 
of  Pranava  in  various  books;  but  this  explanation  is  entirely 
novel  to  me;  and  I  respectfully  submit  that  it  is  wrong,  in- 
asmuch as  no  clear  distinction  is  ever  drawn  between  matter 
and  force  in  our  ancient  philosophical  works.  If  our  Swami 
is  satisfied  that  Ramagita  is  a  great  authority  on  Esoteric 
science,  I  shall  not  attempt  to  deprive  him  of  his  satisfaction; 
and  as  the  Esoteric  doctrine  taught  by  Shaukaracharya  and 
other  great  Vedantic  writers  is  almost  identical  with  the 
Esoteric  Arhat  doctrine  as  far  as  it  goes,  it  is  impossible  for 
me  to  enumerate  all  the  similarities  between  the  two  systems 
for  our  hermit's  delectation;  but  I  shall  be  very  glad  if  he  can 
kindly  point  out  where  and  in  what  they  differ. 

I  beg  also  to  inform  him  that  it  is  impossible  to  think  of 
Purnsha  except  in  conjunction  with  Mulaprakriti,  since 
Purnsha  can  act  only  through  Prakriti.  In  support  of  these 
views  I  may  refer  him  to  Shankaracharya's  Soundarya  lakari 
and  his  commentary  on  Namakam  and  SwetaswataraUpanishad. 
It  is  quite  clear  that  an  Adkishtatha  can  never  exist  without 
Upadanam.  If,  as  is  stated  by  Shankaracharya,  Purnsha  is 
Adishtatha  or  Karta,  and  if  Prakriti  is  Upadanam,  the 
necessary  co-existence  of  these  two  aspects  become  inevitable. 
As  regards  the  passage  quoted  from  Taittiriya  Upanishad,  I 
have  to  inform  the  hermit  that  the  word  Prakriti  therein 
mentioned  means  differentiated  Prakriti.  Not  satisfied  with 
the  abusive  language  contained  in  the  body  of  his  article  and 
his  allusion  to  the  "black  mouse,"  (a  passage  omitted  there- 
from for  decency's  sake,)  our  learned  opponent  has  thonght  it 
proper  to  record  an  emphatic  declaration  at  the  termination 
of  his  article  that  the  IQditor's  views  are  Exoteric  and  not 
Esoteric,    Undoubtedly,  as  far  as  they   are  communicated  to 

140 

him  throngh  the  medium  ot  this  joornal,  they  are  exoteric, 
for  if  really  esoteric  they  would  not  be  thus  made  public. 
But  it  is  a  matter  of  very  little  consequence  to  the  progress 
of  theosophy  whether  the  Swami  of  Almora  considers  them 
esoteric  or  exoteric,  provided  they  are  reasonable,  and  in  har- 
mony with  the  doctrines  of  the  great  teachers  of  ancient 
Aryavarta. 

SRI  SHANKARACHARYA'S  DATE  AND  DOCTRINE, 

It  is  always  difficult  to  determine  with  precision  the  date  of 
any  particular  event  in  the  ancient  history  ot  India;  and  this 
difficulty  is  considerably  enhanced  by  the  speculations  of 
European  Orientalists  whose  labours  in  this  direction  have  but 
tended  to  thicken  the  confusion  already  existing  in  popular 
legends  and  traditions  which  were  often  altered  or  modified  to 
suit  the  necessities  of  sectarian  controversy.  The  causes  that 
have  produced  this  result  will  be  fully  ascertained  on  exa- 
mining the  assumptions  on  which  these  speculations  are  based. 
The  writings  of  many  of  these  Orientalists  are  often  charac- 
terized by  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  Indian  literature,  philo- 
sophy and  religion  and  of  Hindu  traditions,  and  a  contemptu- 
ous disregard  for  the  opinions  of  Hindu  writers  and  pundits. 
Very  often,  facts  and  dates  are  taken  by  these  writers  from  the 
writings  of  their  predecessors  or  contemporaries  on  the  assump- 
tions that  they  are  correct  without  any  further  investigation 
by  themselves.  Even  when  a  writer  gives  a  date  with  an  ex- 
pression of  doubt  as  to  its  accuracy,  his  follower  frequently 
quotes  the  same  date  as  if  it  were  absolutely  correct.  One 
wrong  date  is  made  to  depend  upon  another  wrong  date,  and 
one  bad  influence  is  often  deduced  from  another  inference 
equally  unwarranted  and  illogical.  And  consequently  if  the 
correctness  of  any  particular  date  given  by  these  writers  is  to 
be  ascertained  the  whole  structure  of  Indian  Chronology 
constructed  by  them  will  have  to  be  carefully   examined.     It 

141 

will  be  convenient  to  enumerate  some  of  the  aBsnmptions  above 
referred  to  before  proceeding  to  examine  their  opinions  con- 
cerning the  date  of  Sbankaracharya. 

I.  Many  of  these  writers  are  not  altogether  free  from  the 
prejudices  engendered  by  the  pernicious  doctrine,  deduced 
from  the  Bible,  whether  rightly  or  wrongly,  that  this  world  is 
only  six  thousand  years  old.  We  do  not  mean  to  say  that 
any  one  of  these  writers  would  now  seriously  think  of  defending 
the  said  doctrine.  Nevertheless  it  had  exercised  a  consi- 
derable influence  on  the  minds  of  Christian  writers  when  they 
began  to  investigate  the  claims  of  Asiatic  Chronology.  If  an 
antiquity  of  5  or  6  thousand  years  are  assigued  to  any  parti- 
cular event  connected  with  the  Ancient  history  ot  Egypt, 
India  or  Ciiina,  it  is  certain  to  be  rejected  at  once  by  these 
writers  without  any  inquiry  whatever  regarding  the  truth  of 
the  statement. 

II.  They  are  extremely  unwilling  to  admit  that  any  por- 
tion of  the  Veda  can  be  traced  to  a  period  anterior  to  the  date 
of  the  Pentateuch,  even  when  the  arguments  brought  forward 
to  establish  the  priority  of  the  Vedas  are  such  as  would  be 
convincing  to  the  mind  of  an  impartial  investigator  untainted 
by  Christian  prejudices.  The  maximum  limit  of  Indian  an- 
tiquity is,  therefore,  fixed  for  them  by  the  Old  Testament,  and 
it  is  virtually  assumed  by  them  that  a  period  between  the  date 
of  the  Old  Testament  on  the  one  side  and  the  present  time  on 
the  other,  should  necessarily  be  assigued  to  every  book  in  the 
whole  range  of  Vedic  and  Sanskrit  literature,  and  to  almost 
every  event  of  Indian  History. 

III.  It  is  often  assumed  without  reason  that  every  passage 
in  the  Vedas  containing  philosophical  or  metaphysical  ideas 
must  be  looked  upon  as  a  subsequent  interpolation  and  that 
every  book  treating  of  a  philosophical  subject  must  be  consi- 
dered as  having  been  written  after  the  time  of  Buddha  or 
after  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  Era,  Civilization, 
philosophy  and  scientific  investigation  had  their  origin,  in  the 
opinion  of  these   writers,  within  the  six  or  seven   centuries 

142 

preceding  the  Christian  era,  and  mankind  slowly  emerged,  for 
the  first  time,  from  "  the  depths  o(  animal  bratality"  within 
the  last  four  or  five  thousand  years. 

IV.  It  is  also  assumed  that  Buddhism  was  brought  into 
existence  by  Gautama  Buddha.  The  previous  existence  of 
Buddhism,  Jainism  and  Arhat  philosophy  is  rejected  as  an 
absurd  and  ridiculous  invention  of  the  Buddhists  who  attempted 
thereby  to  assign  a  very  high  antiquity  to  their  own  religion. 
In  consequence  of  this  erroneous  impression  on  their  part  every 
Hindu  book  referring  to  the  doctrines  of  Buddhists  is  declared 
to  have  been  written  subsequent  to  the  time  of  Gautama 
Buddha.  For  instiince,  Mr.  Weber  is  of  opinion  that  Vyasa, 
the  author  of  Brahma  Sutras,  wrote  them  in  the  5th  century 
after  Christ.  This  is  indeed  a  startling  revelation  to  the 
majority  of  Hindus. 

V.  Whenever  several  works  treating  of  various  subjects  are 
attributed  to  one  and  the  same  author  by  Hindu  writings  or 
traditions,  it  is  often  assumed,  and  apparently  without  any 
reason  whatever  in  the  majority  of  cases,  that  the  said  works 
should  be  considered  as  the  production  of  difi'erent  writers. 
By  this  process  of  reasoning  they  have  discovered  two  Badara- 
yanas  (Vyasas),  two  Pantanjalis,  and  three  Vararnchis.  We  do 
not  mean  to  say  that  in  every  cawe  identity  of  names  is  equi- 
valent to  identity  of  persons.  But  we  cannot  but  protest 
against  such  assumptions  when  they  are  made  without  any 
evidence  to  support  them,  merely  for  the  purpose  of  supporting 
a  foregone  conclusion  or  establishing  a  favourite  hypothesis. 

VI.  An  attempt  is  often  made  by  these  writers  to  establish 
the  chronological  order  of  the  events  of  ancient  Indian  history 
by  means  of  the  various  stages  in  the  growth  or  development 
of  the  Sanskrit  language  and  Indian  literature.  The  time 
required  for  this  growth  is  often  estimated  in  the  same  manner 
in  which  a  geologist  endeavours  to  fix  the  time  required  for 
the  gradual  development  of  the  various  strata  composing  the 
earth's  crust.  But  we  fail  to  perceive  anything  like  a  proper 
method  in  making  these  calculations.    It  will  be   wrong  to 

143 

assume  that  the  growth  of  one  lanojnage  will  require  the  same 
time  as  that  of  another  within  the  same  limits.  The  pecnliar 
characteris.tics  of  the  nation  to  whom  the  langaage  belongs 
must  be  carefully  taken  into  consideration  in  attempting  to 
make  any  such  calculation.  The  history  of  the  said  nation  is 
equally  important.  Any  one  who  examines  Max  Miiller's 
estimation  of  the  so-called  Sutra,  Brahmana,  Mantra  and 
Khanda  periods,  will  be  able  to  perceive  that  no  attention  has 
been  paid  to  these  considerations.  The  time  allotted  to  the 
growth  of  these  four  "  Srata  "  of  Vedic  literature  is  purely 
arbitrary. 

We  have  enumerated  these  defects  in  the  writings  of 
European  Orientalists  for  the  purpose  of  showing  'to  our 
readers  that  it  is  not  always  safe  to  rely  upon  the  conclusions 
arrived  at  by  these  writers  regarding  the  dates  of  ancient 
Indian  history. 

In  examining  the  various  quotations  and  traditions  selected 
by  European  Orientalists  for  the  purpose  of  fixing  Shankara- 
charya's  date,  special  care  must  be  taken  to  see  whether  the 
person  referred  to  was  the  very  first  Shankaracharya  who 
established  the  Adwaitee  doctrine  or  one  of  his  followers  who 
became  the  Adhipotis  of  the  various  Mathams  eatablished  by 
him  and  his  successors.  Many  of  tbe  Adwaitee  Mathadhipatis 
who  succeeded  him  (especially  at  the  Sringeri  Matham)  were 
men  of  considerable  renown  and  were  well-known  throughout 
India  during  their  time.  They  are  often  referred  to  under 
the  general  name  of  Shankaracharya.  Consequently  any 
reference  made  to  any  one  of  these  Mathadhipatis  is  apt  to  be 
mistaken  for  a  reference  to  the  first  Shakaracharya  himself. 

Mr.  Barth,  whose  opinion  regarding  Sankara's  date  is 
quoted  by  the  London  The.osopkiat  against^the  date  assigned 
to  that  teacher  in  Mr.  Sinuett's  book  on  Esoteric  Buddhism, 
does  not  appear  to  have  carefully  examined  the  subject  him- 
self. He  assigns  no  reason  for  the  date  given  and  does  not 
even  allude  to  the  existence  of  other  authorities  and  tradi- 
tions which  conflict  with  the  date  adopted  by  him.  The  date 

144 

whi^h  he  assigns  to  Sankara  appears  in  an  nnimportant  foot- 
note appearing  on  page  89  of  his  book  on  "The  Religions 
of  India,''  which  reads  thus:  "  Shankaracharya  is  generally 
placed  in  the  8th  century;  perhaps  we  must  accept  the  9th 
rather.  The  best  accredited  tradition  represents  him  as  born 
on  the  10th  of  the  month  'Madhava'  in  788  A.  D.  Other 
traditions,  it  is  true,  place  him  in  the  2nd  and  5th  centuries. 
The  author  of  the  Dabistan,  on  the  other  hand,  brings  him 
as  far  down  as  the  commencement  of  the  14th/*  Mr.  Barth 
is  clearly  wrong  in  saying  that  Sankara  is  generally  placed  in 
the  8th  century.  There  are  as  many  traditions  for  placing 
him  in  some  century  before  the  Christian  Era  as  for  placing 
him  in  some  century  after  the  said  era,  and  it  will  also  be 
seen  from  what  follows  that  in  fact  evidence  preponderates  in 
&voar  of  the  former  statement.  It  cannot  be  contended  that 
the  generality  of  Orientalists  have  any  definite  opinions  of 
their  own  on  the  subject  under  consideration.  Max  Miiller 
does  not  appear  to  have  ever  directed  his  attention  to  this 
sabject.  Monier  Williams  merely  copies  the  date  given  by 
Mr.  Wilson,  and  Mr.  Weber  seems  to  rely  upon  the  same  autho- 
rity without  troubling  himself  with  any  further  enquiry  about 
the  matter.  Mr.  Wilson  is  probably  the  only  Orientalist  who 
investigated  the  subject  with  some  care  and  atteniion;  and  he 
frankly  confesses  that  the  exact  period  at  which  "he  (Sankara) 
flourished  can  by  no  means  be  determined"  (page  201  of  Vol. 
I  of  his  Essays  on  the  religion  of  the  Hindus).  Under  such 
circumstances  the  foot-note  above-quoted  is  certainly  very 
misleading.  Mr.  Barth  does  not  inform  his  readers  wherefrom  he 
obtained  the  tradition  referred  to  and  what  reasons  he  has  for 
supposing  that  it  refers  to  the  first  Shankaracharya  and  that  it 
is  "the  best  accredited  tradition."  When  the  matter  is  still 
open  to  discussion,  Mr.  Barth  should  not  have  adopted  any 
particular  date  if  he  is  not  prepared  to  support  it  and  establish 
it  by  proper  arguments.  The  other  traditions  alluded  to  are 
not  intended,  of  course,  to  strengthen  the  authority  of  the 
tradition  relied  upon.  But  the  wording  of  the  foot-note  in 
question  seems  to  show  that  all  the  authorities  and  traditions 

145 

relating  to  the  sabject  are  comprised  therein,  when,  in  fact, 
the  most  important  of  them  are  left  oat  of  consideration,  as 
will  be  shown  hereafter.  No  arguments  are  to  be  foand  ia 
Bopport  of  the  date  assigned  to  Sankara  in  the  other  portions  of 
Mr.  Earth's  book,  bat  there  are  few  isolated  passages  which 
niay  be  taken  either  as  inferences  from  the  statement  in 
qaestioa  or  argaments  in  its  sapport,  which  it  will  be 
necessary  to  examine  in  this  connection. 

Mr.  Earth  has  discovered  some  connection  between  the 
appearance  of  Sankara  in  India  and  the  commencement  of 
the  persecution  of  the  Buddhists  which  he  seems  to  place 
in  the  7th  and  8th  centnries.  In  page  89  of  his  book  he 
speaks  of  *'  the  great  reaction  on  the  offensive  against  Bnd- 
dhism  which  was  begun  in  the  Deccan  in  the  7th  and  8th 
centuries  by  the  schools  of  Kumarila  and  Sankara";  and  in 
page  135,  he  states  that  the  **  disciples  of  Kumarila  and 
Sankara  organized  into  military  bands,  constituted  themselves 
the  rabid  defenders  of  orthodoxy  ".  The  force  of  these  state- 
ments is,  however,  considerably  weakened  by  the  author's 
observations  on  pages  89  and  134  regarding  the  absence 
of  any  traces  of  Buddhist  persecution  by  Sankara  in  the 
authentic  documents  hitherto  examined  and  the  absurdity  of 
legends  which  represent  him  as  exterminating  Buddhists 
from  the  Himalaya  to  Cape  Comorin. 

The  association  of  Sankara  with  Kumarila  in  the  passages 
above  cited  is  ridiculous.  It  is  well-known  to  almost  every 
Hindu  that  the  followers  of  Purva  Mimamsa  (Kumarila 
commented  on  the  Sutras)  were  the  greatest  and  the  bitterest 
opponents  of  Sankara  and  his  doctrine,  and  Mr.  Earth  seems 
to  be  altogether  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  Kumarila's  views 
and  Purva  Mimamsa  and  the  scope  and  aim  of  Sankara's 
Vedantic  philosophy.  It  is  impossible  to  say  what  evidence 
the  another  has  for  asserting  that  Lhe  great  reaction  against 
the  Buddhists  commenced  in  the  7th  and  8th  centuries  and 
that  the  Sankara  was  instrumental  in  originating  it.  There 
ftre  some  passages  in  his  book  which  tend  to  show  that  this 
19 

146 

date  cannot  be  considered  as  qnite  correct.  In  page  153  he 
gays  that  Buddhism  began  persecution  even  in  the  time  of 
Asoka. 

Such  being  the  case,  it  is  indeed  very  snrprising  that  the 
Orthodox  Hindus  should  have  kept  quiet  for  nearly  ten  cen- 
turies without  retaliating  on  their  enemies.  The  political 
ascendency  gained  by  the  Buddhists  during  the  reign  of  Asoka 
did  not  last  very  long  ;  and  the  Hindus  had  the  support  of 
every  powerful  king  before  and  after  the  commencement  of  the 
Christian  era.  Moreover  the  author  says  in  p.  132  of  his  book, 
that  Buddhism  was  in  a  state  of  decay  in  the  seventh  century. 
It  is  hardly  to  be  expected  that  the  reaction  against  the 
Buddhists  would  commence  when  their  religion  was  already 
in  a  state  of  decay.  No  great  religious  teacher  or  reformer 
would  waste  his  time  and  energy  in  demolishing  a  religion 
already  in  ruins.  But,  what  evidence  is  there  to  show  that 
Sankara  was  ever  engaged  at  his  task  ?  If  the  main  object 
of  his  preaching  was  to  evoke  a  reaction  against  Buddhism, 
he  would  no  doubt  have  left  us  some  writings  specially  in- 
tended to  criticize  its  doctrines  and  expose  its  defects.  On 
the  other  hand,  he  does  not  even  allude  to  Buddhism  in  his 
independent  works.  Though  he  was  a  voluminous  writers 
with  the  exception  of  a  few  remarks  on  the  theory  advocated 
by  some  Buddhists  regarding  the  nature  of  perception  con- 
tained in  his  commentary  on  the  Brahma-Sutras,  there  is  not 
a  single  passage  in  the  whole  range  of  his  writings  regarding 
the  Buddhists  or  their  doctrines  ;  and  the  insertion  of  even 
these  few  remarks  in  his  commentary  was  rendered  necessary 
by  the  allusions  contained  in  the  Sutras  which  he  was  interpret- 
ing. As,  in  our  humble  opinion  these  Bramha  Sutras  were 
composed  by  Vyasa  himself  (and  not  by  an  imaginary  Vyasaof 
the  6th  century  after  Christ  evolved  by  Mr.  Weber's  fancy) 
the  allusions  therein  contained  relate  to  the  Buddhism  which 
existed  previous  to  the  date  of  Gautama  Buddha.  From  these 
few  remarks  it  will  be  clear  to  our  readers  that  Shankaracharya 
had  nothing  to  do  with  Buddhist  persecution.  We  may  here 
quote  a  few  passages  from  Mr.  Wilson's  Preface  to  the  first 

147 

edition  of  his  Sanskrit  Dictionary  in  support  of  otir  reraftrks. 
He  writes  as  follows  regarding  Saukara's  connection  with  the 
persecution  of  the  Buddhists:  — "Although  the  popular  belief 
attributes  the  origin  of  the  Bauddha  persecution  to  Sankara- 
charya,  yet  in  this  case  we  have  some  reason  to  distrust  its 
accuracy.  Opposed  to  it  we  have  the  mild  character  of  the  re- 
former, who  is  described  as  uniformly  gentle  and  tolerant,  and 
speaking  from  my  own  limited  reading  in  Vedanta  works,  and 
the  more  satisfactory  testimony  of  Ram  Mohun  Roy,  which 
he  permits  me  to  adduce,  it  does  not  appear  that  any  traces 
of  his  being  instrumental  to  any  persecution  are  to  be  found 
in  his  own  writings,  all  which  are  extant,  and  the  object  of 
which  is  by  no  means  the  correction  of  the  Bauddha  or  any 
other  schism,  but  the  refutation  of  all  other  doctrines  besides 
his  own,  and  the  reformation  or  re-establishment  of  the  4th 
religious  order."  Further  on  he  observes  that  "  it  is  a  popu- 
lar error  to  ascribe  to  him  the  work  of  persecution;  he  does 
not  appear  at  all  occupied  in  that  odious  task,  nor  is  he  engag- 
ed in  particular  controversy  with  any  of  the  Bauddhas." 

From  the  foregoing  observations  it  will  be  seen  that 
Sankara's  date  connot  be  determined  by  the  time  of  the  com- 
mencement o/  the  Buddhist  persecution,  even  if  it  were  possi- 
ble to  ascertain  the  said  period.  * 

Mr.  Earth  seems  to  have  discovered  some  connection 
between  the  philosophical  systems  of  Sankara,  Ramanuja  and 
Anandatirtha,  and  the  Arabian  merchants  who  came  to 
India  in  the  first  century  of  the  Hejira,  and  he  is  no  doubt 
fully  entitled  to  any  credit  that  may  be  given  him  for  the 
originality  of  his  discovery.  The  mysterious  and  occult  con- 
nection between  Adwaita  philosophy  and  Arabian  commerce 
is  pointed  out  in  p.  212  of  his  booK,  and  it  may  have  some 
bearing  on  the  present  question,  if  it  is  anything  more  than  a 
figment  of  his  fancy.  The  only  reason  given  by  him  in  sup- 
port of  his  theory  is,  however,  in  my  humble  opinion,  worth- 
less. The  Hindus  had  prominent  example  of  a  grand  reli- 
gions movement  under  the  guidance  of  a  single  teacher,  in  the 

14^ 

life  of  Bnddfaa,  and  it  was  not  necessary  for  them  to  imitate 
the  adventures  of  the  Arabian  prophet.  There  is  bat  one  other 
passage  in  Mr.  Barth*s  book  which  has  some  refereoee  to 
Sankara's  date.  In  p.207  he  writes  as  follows:-  "The  Siva, 
for  instance,  who  is  invoked  at  the  commencement  of  the 
drama  of  Shakantala,  who  is  at  once  God,  priest  and  offering, 
and  whose  body  is  the  universe,  is  a  Vedantic  Idea.  This 
testimony  apppears  to  be  forgotten  when  it  is  maintained,  as  is 
sometimes  done,  that  the  whole  sectarian  Vedantism  commen- 
ces with  Sankara."  But  this  testimony  appears  to  be  equally 
forgotten  when  it  is  maintained,  as  is  sometimes  done  by 
Orientalists  like  Mr.  Barth,  that  Sankara  lived  in  some  century 
after  the  author  of  Shakuntala. 

From  the  foregoing  remarks  it  will  be  apparent  that 
Mr.  Barth's  opinion  regarding  Sankara's  date  is  very  unsatisfac- 
tory. As  Mr.  Wilson  seems  to  have  examined  the  subject  with 
some  care  and  attention,  we  must  now  advert  to  his  opinion  and 
see  how  far  it  is  based  on  proper  evidence.  In  attempiug  to 
fix  Amara  Sinha's  date  (which  attempt  ultimatley  ended  in  a 
miserable  failure),  he  had  to  ascertain  the  period  when  Sankara 
lived.  Consequently  his  remarks  concerning  the  said  period 
appear  in  his  preface  to  the  first  edition  of  his  Sanskrit 
dictionary.  We  shall  now  reproduce  here  such  passages  from 
this  preface  as  are  connected  with  the  subject  under  consi- 
deration and  comment  upon  them.  Mr.  Wilson  writes  as 
follows : — 

"  The  birth  of  Sankara  presents  the  same  discordance  as 
every  other  remarkable  incident  amongst  the  Hindus.  The 
Kadali  (it  ought  to  be  Koodali)  Brahmins,  who  form  an 
establishment  following  aiid  teaching  his  system,  assert  his 
appearance  about  2,000  years  since ;  some  accounts  place  him 
about  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  Era,  others  in  the  3rd  or 
4th  century  after;  a  manuscript  history  of  the  kings  of 
Konga,  in  Colonel  Mackenzie's  Collection,  makes  him  contem- 
porary with  Tiru  Vikrama  Deva  Cliakravarti,  sovereign  of 
Skandapnra  in  the  Dekkan,   A,   D.  178;   at  Sringeri,  on  the 

149 

edge  of  tbefWestern  Ghauts,  and  now  in  the  Mysore  Territory, 
at  which  place  he  is  said  to  have  founded  a  College  that  still 
exists,  and  assumes  the  supreme  control  of  the  Smarta  Brah- 
mins of  the  Peninsula,  an  antiquity  of  1,600  years  is  attri- 
buted to  him,  and  common  tradition  makes  him  about  1,200 
years  old.  The  Bhoja  Prabandha  enumerates  Sankara  among 
its  worthies,  and  as  contemporary  with  that  prince;  his 
antiquity  will  then  be  between  8  and  9  centuries.  The 
followers  of  Madhwactarya  in  Tnluva  seem  to  have  attempted 
to  reconcile  these  contradictory  accounts  by  supposing  him  to 
have  been  born  three  times;  first  at  Sivnli  in  Tnluva  about 
1,500  years  ago,  again  in  Malabar  some  centuries  later,  and 
finally  at  Padnkachaytra  in  Tuluva  no  more  than  600  years 
since;  the  latter  asscertion  being  intended  evidently  to  do 
honor  to  their  own  founder,  whose  date  that  was,  by  enabling 
him  triumph  over  Sankara  in  supposititious  controversy.  The 
Vaishnava  Brahmins  of  Madura  say  that  Sankara  appeared  in 
the  ninth  century  of  Salivahana  or  tenth  of  our  era.  Dr.  Taylor 
thinks  that,  if  we  allow  him  about  900  years,  we  shall  not 
be  far  from  the  truth,  and  Mr.  Colebrooke  is  inclined  to 
give  him  as  antiquity  of  about  1,000  years.  This  last  is  the 
age  which  my  friend  Ram  Mohun  Roy,  a  diligent  student  of 
Sankara's  works,  and  philosophical  teacher  of  his  doctrines, 
is  disposed  to  concur  in,  and  he  infers  that  *from  a  calculation 
of  the  spiritual  generations  of  the  followers  of  Sankara  Swami 
from  his  time  up  to  this  date,  he  seems  to  have  lived  between 
the  7th  and  8th  centuries  of  the  Christian  Era,'  a  distance  of 
time  agreeing  with  the  statements  made  to  Dr.  Enchanan  in 
his  journey  through  Sankara's  native  conntry,  Malabar,  and  in 
union  with  the  assertion  of  the  Kerala  Utpatti,  a  work  giving 
an  historical  and  statistical  account  of  the  same  province, 
and  which,  according  to  Mr.  Duncan's  citation  of  it,  mentions 
the  regulations  of  the  castes  of  Malabar  by  this  philosopher 
to  have  been  effected  about  1,000  years  before  1798.  At  the 
same  time,  it  must  be  observed,  that  a  manuscript  translation 
of  the  same  work  in  Colonel  Mackenzie's  possession,  states 
Shankaracharya  to  have  been  born  about  the  middle  of  the  5th 

}50 

centary,  or  between  13  and  14  hundred  years  ago,  differing  in 
this  respect  from  Mr.  Duncan's  statement — a  difference  of  the 
less  importance,  as  the  manuscript  in  question,  either  from 
defects  in  the  original  or  translation,  presents  many  palpable 
errors  and  cannot  consequently  be  depended  upon.  The 
weight  of  authority  therefore  is  altogether  in  favour  of  anti- 
quity of  about  ten  centuries,  and  I  am  disposed  to  adopt 
this  estimate  of  Sankara's  date,  p.nd  to  place  him  in  the  end 
of  the  8th  and  beginning  of  the  9th  centuries  of^the  Christian 
era. 

We  will  add  a  few  more  authorities  to  Mr.  Wilson's  list 
before  proceeding  to  comment  on  the  foregoing  passage. 

In  a  work  called  "The  Biographical  Sketches  of  Eminent 
Hindu  Authors,**  published  at  Bombay  in  1860  by  Janardan 
Ramchanderjee,  it  is  stated  that  Sankara  lived  2,500  years 
ago,  and  that,  in  the  opinion  of  some  people,  2,200  years  ago. 
The  records  of  the  Combaconum  Matham  give  a  list  of  nearly 
66  Mathadhipatis  from  Sankara  down  to  the  present  time,  and 
show  that  he  lived  more  than  2,000  years  ago. 

The  Kudali  Matham  referred  to  by  Mr.  Wilson  which  is  a 
branch  of  the  Sringeri  Matham,  gives  the  same  date  as  the 
latter  Matham,  their  traditions  being  identical.  Their  cal- 
culation can  safely  be  relied  upon  as  far  as  it  is  supported  by 
the  dates  given  on  the  places  of  Samadhi  (something  like  a 
tomb)  of  the  successive  Gums  of  the  Sringeri  Matham;  and  it 
leads  us  to  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  Era. 

No  definite  information  is  given  by  Mr,  Wilson  regarding 
the  nature,  origin  or  reliability  of  the  accounts  which  place 
Sankara  in  the  3rd  or  4th  century  of  the  Christian  era  or  at 
its  commencement;  nor  does  it  clearly  appear  that  the 
history  of  the  kings  of  Konga  referred  to  unmistakably  alludes 
to  the  very  first  Shankaracharya.  These  traditions  are  evident- 
ly opposed  to  the  conclusion  arrived  at  by  Mr.  Wilson,  and 
it  does  not  appear  on  what  grounds  their  testimony  is  dis- 
credited by  him.     Mr.  Wilson  is  clearly  wrong  in  stating  that 

i5i 

an  antiqaity  of  1,600  years  is  attribated  to  Sankara  by  the 
Sringeri  Matham.  We  have  already  referred  to  the  acconot 
of  the  Sringeri  Matham,  and  it  is  precisely  similar  to  the 
account  given  by  the  Kndali  Brahmins.  We  have  ascertain- 
ed that  it  in  so  from  the  agent  of  the  Sringeri  Matham  at 
Madras,  who  has  published  only  a  few  days  ago  the  list  of 
teachers  preserved  at  the  said  Matham  with  the  dates  as- 
signed to  them.  And  further  we  are  unable  to  see  which 
"common  tradition"  make  Sankara  "  abont  1,200  years  old." 
As  far  as  onr  knowledge  goes  there  is  no  such  commoQ 
tradition  in  India.  The  majofity  of  people  in  Southern  India 
have,  up  to  this  time,  been  relying  on  the  Sringeri  account, 
and  in  Northern  India  there  seems  to  be  no  common  tradition. 
We  have  bnt  a  mass  of  contradictory  accounts. 

It  is  indeed  surprising  that  an  Orientalist  of  Mr.  Wilson's 
pretensions  should  confound  the  poet  named  Sankara  and 
mentioned  in  Bhoja  Prabandha  with  the  great  Adwaitee 
Teacher.  No  Hindu  would  ever  commit  such  a  ridiculous 
mistake.  We  are  astonished  to  find  some  of  these  European 
Orientalists  quoting  now  and  then  some  of  the  statements 
contained  in  such  books  as  Bhoja  Prabandha,  Katli^  Sarit 
Sagara,  Raja-tarangini  and  Panchatantra  as  if  they  were 
historical  works.  In  some  other  part  of  his  preface  Mr,  Wilson 
himself  says  that  this  Bhoja  Prabandha  is  altogether  untrust- 
worthy, as  some  of  the  statements  contained  therein  did  not 
harmonize  with  his  theory  about  Amarasimha's  date;  but 
now  he  misquotes  its  statements  for  the  purpose  of  supporting 
his  conclusion  regarding  Saukara's  date.  Surely,  consistency 
is  not  one  of  the  prominent  characteristics  of  the  writings  ^ 
the  majority  of  European  Orientalists.  The  person  mentioned 
in  Bhoja  Prabandha  is  always  spoken  of  under  the  name  of 
Sankara  ATav?,  and  he  is  nowhere  called  Shan kara-c^arya,  and 
the  Adwaitee  Teacher  is  never  mentioned  in  any  Hindu  work 
under  the  appellation  of  Sankara  Kavi. 

It  is  necessary  -for  us  to  say  anything  about  the  Madhwa 
traditions  or    the    opinion    of  the    Vaishuava   Brahmins  of 

153 

Madnra  regarding  Saukara's  date.  It  is,  in  onr  hnmble 
opinion,  hopeless  to  expect  anything  but  falsehood  regarding 
Sankara's  history  and  philosophy  from  the  Madhwas  and  the 
Vaishnavas.  They  are  always  very  anxious  to  show  to  the 
world  at  large  that  their  doctrines  existed  before  the  time  of 
Sankara,  and  that  the  Adwaitee  doctrine  was  a  deviation  from 
their  pre-existing  orthodox  Hinduism.  And  consequently  they 
have  assigned  to  him  an  antiquity  of  less  than  1,500  years. 

It  does  not  appear  why  Dr.  Taylor  thinks  that  he  can 
allow  Sankara  about  900  years,  or  on  what  grounds  Mr.  Cole- 
brooke  is  inclined  to  give  him  an  antiquity  of  about  1.000  years. 
No  reliance  can  be  placed  on  such  statements  before  the 
reason  assigned  therefor  are  thoroughly  sifted. 

Fortunately,  Mr.  Wilson  gives  ns  the  reason  for  Ram 
Mohnn  Roy's  opinion.  We  are  inclined  to  believe  that  Ram 
Mohnu  Roy's  calculation  was  made  with  reference  to  the 
Sringeri  list  of  teachers  or  Gurus,  as  that  was  the  only  list 
published  up  to  this  time,  and  as  no  other  Matham,  except 
perhaps  the  Cumbaconum  Matham,  has  a  list  of  Gurus  coming 
np  to  the  present  time  in  uninterrupted  succession.  There  is  no 
necessity  for  depending  upon  his  calculation  (which  from  its 
very  nature  cannot  be  anything  more  than  mere  guess-work) 
when  the  old  list  preserved  at  Sringeri  contains  the  date 
assigned  to  the  varions  teachers.  As  these  dates  have  not  been 
published  up  to  the  present  time,  and  as  Ram  Mohun  Roy 
had  merely  a  string  of  names  before  him,  he  was  obliged  to 
ascertain  Sankara's  date  by  assigning  a  certain  number  of  years 
on  the  average  to  every  teacher.  Consequently,  his  opinion 
is  of  no  importance  whatever  when  we  have  the  statement  of 
the  Sringeri  Matham  which,  as  we  have  already  said,  places 
Sankara  in  some  century  before  the  Christian  Era.  The  same 
remarks  will  apply  to  the  calculation  in  question  even  if  it 
were  made  on  the  basis  of  the  number  of  teachers  contained 
in  the  list  preserved  in  the  Cumbaconum  Matham. 

Every  little  importance  can  be  attached  to  the  oral  evidence 
adduced  by  some  unknown  persons  before  Dr.  Buchanan  in  his 

153 

travels  tliroagb  Malabar;  and  we  have  only  to  consider  the 
inferences  that  may  be  drawn  from  the  accounts  contained  in 
Kerala  Utpatti.  The  various  manascript  copies  of  this  work 
seem  to  differ  in  the  date  they  assign  to  Shankaracharya;  even 
if  the  case  were  otherwise,  we  cannot  place  any  reliance  upon 
this  work  for  the  following  among  other  reasons:— 

I.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  customs  of  Malabar 
are  very  peculiar.  Their  defenders  have  been,  consequently, 
pointing  to  some  great  Rishi  or  some  great  philosopher  of 
ancient  India  as  their  originator.  Some  of  them  affirm  (pro- 
bably the  majority)  that  Parasnrama  brought  into  existence 
some  of  these  customs  and  left  a  special  Smriti  for  the  guid- 
ance of  the  people  of  Malabar;  others  say  that  it  was  Shankara- 
charya who  sanctioned  these  peculiar  customs.  It  is  not  very 
difficult  to  perceive  why  these  two  persons  were  selected  by 
them.  According  to  the  Hindu  Furanas,  Parasnrama  lived  in 
Malabar  for  some  time,  and  according  to  Hindu  tradition 
Sankara  was  born  in  that  country.  But  it  is  extremely  doubt- 
ful whether  either  of  them  had  anything  to  do  with  the 
peculiar  customs  of  the  said  country.  There  is  no  allusion 
whatever  to  any  of  these  customs  in  Sankara's  work.  He 
seems  to  have  devoted  his  whole  attention  to  religions  reform 
and  it  is  very  improbable  that  he  should  have  ever  directed 
his  attention  to  the  local  customs  of  Malabar.  While  attempt- 
ing to  revive  the  philosophy  of  the  ancient  Rishis,  it  is  not 
likely  that  he  should  have  sanctioned  the  customs  of  Malabar 
which  are  at  variance  with  the  rules  laid  down  in  the  Smritis 
of  those  very  Rishis;  and  as  far  as  our  knowledge  goes  he 
left  no  written  regulations  regarding  the  castes  of  Malabar. 

II.  The  statements  contained  in  Kerala  Utpatti  are 
opposed  to  the  account  of  Sankara's  life  given  in  almost  all 
the  Sankara  Vijiams  (Biographies  of  Sankara)  examined  up 
to  this  time  viz.^  Vidyaranya's  Sankara  Vijiam,  Chitsukha- 
chary's  Sankara  Vijayavilasam,  Baihat  Sankara  Vijiam,  &c. 
According  to  the  account  contained  in  these  works  Sankara 
left  Malabar  in  his  eighth  year  and  returned   to  his   native 

20 

154 

village  when  his  mother  was  on  her  death-bed  when  he  re- 
mained there  only  for  a  few  days.  It  is  difficult  to  see  at 
what  period  of  his  life-time  he  was  engaged  in  making  re- 
gnlations  for  the  castes  of  Malabar. 

III.  The  work  nnder  consiperation  represents  Malabar  as 
the  seat  of  Bhattapada's  trinmphs  over  the  Buddhists,  and 
says  that  this  teacher  established  himself  in  Malabar  and  ex- 
pelled the  Buddhists  from  that  country.  This  statement 
alone  will  be  sufficient  to  show  to  onr  readers  the  fictitious 
character  of  the  account  contained  in  this  book.  According 
to  every  other  Hindu  work,  this  great  teacher  of  Purva 
Mimansa  was  born  in  Northern  India;  almost  all  his  famous 
disciples  and  followers  were  living  in  that  part  of  the  country, 
and  according  to  Yidyaranya's  account  he  died  at  Allahabad. 

For  the  foregoing  reasons  we  cannot  place  any  reliance  npon 
this  account  of  Malabar. 

From  the  traditions  and  other  accounts  which  we  have 
hitherto  examined,  Mr.  Wilson  comes  to  the  conclusion  that 
Shankaracharya  lived  in  the  end  of  the  8th  and  the  beginning 
of  the  9th  centuries  of  the  Christian  Era.  The  accounts  of  the 
Sringeri,  Kuduli  and  Cumbaconum  Mathams,  and  the  tradi- 
tions current  in  the  Bombay  Presidency,  as  shown  in  the 
biographical  sketches  published  at  Bombay,  place  Sankara  in 
some  century  before  the  Christian  Era.  On  the  other  hand, 
Kerala  Utpatti,  the  information  obtained  by  Dr.  Buchanan  in 
his  travels  through  Malabar,  an^  the  opinions  expressed  by 
Dr.  Taylor  and  Mr,  Colebrooke,  concur  in  assigning  to  him  an 
antiquity  of  about  1,000  years.  The  remaining  traditions 
referred  to  by  Mr.  Wilson  are  as  much  opposed  to  his  opinion 
as  to  the  conclusion  that  Sankara  lived  before  Christ.  We 
shall  now  leave  it  to  our  readers  to  say  whether,  under  such 
■circumstances,  Mr.  Wilson  is  justified  in  asserting  that  "the 
.weight  of  authority  is  altogether  in  favour"  of  his  theory. 

We  have  already  referred  to  the  writings  of  almost  all  the 
European  Orientalists  who  expressed  an  opinion  upon    the 

155 

subject   nnder  discussion;  and  we  need  hardly  say  that  San* 
kara's  date  is  yet  to  be  ascertained. 

We  are   obliged  to  comment  at  length  on  the  opinions  of 
European  Orientalists  regarding  Sankara's  date,  as  there  will 
be  no  probability  of  any  attention  being  paid  to  the  opinion  of 
Indian  and  Tibetian  Initiates  when  it  is  generally  believed  that 
the  question  has  been  finally  settled  by  their  writings.    The 
Adepts  referred  to   by  the  London  Theosophist  are  certainly 
in  a   position   to   clear  up   some  of  the  problems  in  Indian 
religious   history.    But  there  is   very  little  chance  of  their 
opinions  being  accepted  by   the  general  public  under  present 
circumstances,  unless  they  are  supported  by  such  evidence  as 
is  within  the  reach  of  the  outside  world.     As  it  is   not  always 
possible  to  procure   such  evidence,  there  is  very  little  use  in 
publishing  the  information  which  is  in  their  possession  until 
the  public  are   willing  to  recognize  and  admit  the  antiquity 
and  trustworthiness  of  their  traditions,  the  extent  of  their 
powers  and  the  vastness  of  their  knowledge.     In  the  absence 
of  such  proof  as  is  above  indicated,  there  is  every  likelihood  of 
their  opinions  being  rejected  as  absurd  and  untenable;   their 
motives,  will  no  doubt,  be  questioned  and  some  people  may  be 
tempted  to  deny  even  the  fact  of  their  existence.     It  is  often 
asked  by  Hindus  as  well  as  by  Englishmen  why  these  Adepts 
are  so  very  unwilling  to  publish  some  portion   at  least  of  the 
information   they  possess  regarding   the   truths  of  physical 
science.     But  in  doing  so,  they  do  not  seem  to  perceive  the 
difference   between   the   method   by  which  they  obtain  their 
knowledge  and  the  process  of  modern  scientific  investigation 
by  which  the  facts  of  nature  are  ascertained  and  its  laws  are 
discovered.    Unless  an  Adept  can  prove  his  conclusions  by  the 
same  kind  of  reasoning  as  is  adopted  by  the  modern  scientist, 
they  remain   undemonstrated  to  the  outside  world.    It  is   of 
course  impossible  for  him  to  develope  in  a  considerable  number 
of  human  being  such  faculties  as  would  enable  them  to  per- 
ceive their  truth ;  and  it  is  not  always  practicable  to  establish 
them  by  the  ordinary  scientific  method  unless  all  the  facts  aqd 
laws  on  which  his  demonstration  is  to  be  based  have  already 

15^ 

been  ascertained  by  modern  science.  No  Adept  can  be  ex- 
.pected  to  anticipate  the  discoveries  of  the  next  foar  or  five 
conturies  and  prove  some  grand  scientific  truth  to  the  entire 
satisfaction  of  the  educated  public  after  having  discovered 
every  fact  and  law  of  nature  required  for  the  said  purpose  by 
such  process  of  reasoning  as  would  be  accepted  by  them.  They 
have  to  encounter  similar  difficulties  in  giving  any  information 
regarding  the  events  of  the  ancient  history  of  India. 

However,  before  giving  the  exact  date  assigned  to  Shankara- 
charya  by  the  Indian  and  Tibetan  Initiates,  we  shall  indicate 
a  few  circumstances  by  which  his  date  may  be  approximately 
determined.  It  is  our  humble  opinion  that  the  Sankara  Vijiams 
hitherto  published  can  be  relied  upon  as  far  as  they  are  consist- 
ent with  each  other  regarding  the  general  outlines  of 
Sankara's  life.  We  cannot,  however,  place  any  reliance  what- 
ever upon  Anandagiri's  Sankara  Vijia  published  at  Calcutta* 
The  Calcutta  edition  not  only  differs  in  some  very  material 
points  from  the  manuscript  copies  of  the  same  work  found  in 
Southern  India,  but  is  opposed  to  every  other  Sankara  Vijiam 
hitherto  examined.  It  is  quite  clear  from  its  style  and  some 
of  the  statements  contained  therein  that  it  was  not  the  produc- 
tion of  Anandagiri,  one  of  the  four  chief  disciples  of  Sankara 
and  the  commentator  on  his  Upanishad  Bhashyam.  For 
instance,  it  represents  Sankara  as  tbe  author  of  a  certain 
verse  which  is  to  be  found  in  Vidyaranya's  Adhikaranaratna- 
mala  written  in  the  fourteenth  century.  It  represents  Sankara 
as  giving  orders  to  two  of  his  disciples  to  preach  the  Visishta- 
dwaitee  and  the  Dwaitee  doctrines  which  are  directly  opposed 
to  his  own  doctrine.  The  book  under  consideration  says  that 
Sankara  went  to  conquer  Mandanamisra  in  a  debate  followed 
bySureshwaracharya,  though  Mandanamisra  assumed  the  latter 
name  at  the  time  of  initiation.  It  is  unnecessary  for  us  here 
to  point  out  all  the  blunders  and  absurdities  of  this  book.  It 
will  be  sufficient  to  say  that  in  our  opinion  it  was  not  written 
by  Anandagiri,  and  that  it  was  the  production  of  an  unkaowng 
author,  whc  does  not  appear  to  have  been  even  tolerably 
well  acquainted   with  the  history  of  the   Adwaitee  doctrine. 

157 

Vidyaranya's  (or  of  Sayanachary,  the  great  commentator  of  the 
Vedas,)  Sankara  Vijia  is  decidedly  the  most  reliable  source  of 
information  as  regards  the  main  features  of  Sankara's  bio- 
graphy. Its  authorship  has  been  universally  accepted  and  the 
information  contained  therein  was  derived  by  its  author,  as  may 
be  seen  from  his  own  statements,  from  certain  old  biographies 
of  Sankara  existing  at  the  time  of  its  composition.  Taking  into 
consideration  the  author's  vast  knowledge  and  information, 
and  the  opportunities  he  had  for  collecting  materials  lor  his 
work  when  he  was  the  head  of  the  Sringeri  Matham,  there  ia 
every  reason  to  believe  that  he  had  embodied  in  his  work  the 
most  reliable  information  he  could  obtain.  Mr.  Wilson, 
however,  says  that  the  book  in  question  is  "much  to  poetical 
and  legendary"  to  be  acknowledged  as  a  great  authority.  We 
admit  that  the  style  is  highly  poetical,  but  we  deny  that  the 
work  is  legendary.  Mr.  Wilson  is  not  justified  in  charac- 
terizing it  as  such  on  account  of  its  description  of  some  of  the 
wonderful  phenomena  shown  by  Sankara.  Probably  the  learned 
Orientalists  would  not  be  inclined  to  consider  the  Biblical 
account  of  Christ  in  the  same  light.  It  is  not  the  peculiar 
privilege  of  Christianity  to  have  a  miracle-worker  for  its  first 
propagator.  In  the  following  observation  we  shall  take  such 
facts  as  are  required  from  this  work. 

It  is  generally  believed  that  a  person  named  Govinda.  Yogi 
was  Sankara's  Guru,  but  it  is  not  generally  known  that  this 
Yogi  was  in  fact  Patanjali — the  great  author  of  the  Maha- 
bhashya  and  the  Yoga  Sutras — under  a  new  name.  A  tradition 
current  in  Southern  India  represents  him  as  one  of  the  chelas 
of  Patanjali ;  but  it  is  very  doubtful  if  this  tradition  has  anything 
like  a  proper  foundation.  But  it  is  quite  clear  from  the  94th, 
95th,  96th,  97th  verses  of  the  5th  chapter  of  Vidyaranya's 
Sankara  Vijia  that  Govinda  Yogi  and  Patanjali  were  indentical. 
According  to  the  immemorial  custom  observed  amongst 
Initiates,  Patanjali  assumed  the  name  of  Govinda  Yogi  at 
the  time  of  his  initiation,  by  Goudapada.  It  cannot  be  con- 
tended that  Vidyaranya  represented  Patanjali  as  Sankara's 
Guru  merely  for  the  purpose  of  assigning  some  importance  to 

158 

iSankara  and  his  teaching.  Sankarais  looked  apon  as  a  far 
greater  man  than  Patanjali  by  the  Adwaitees,  and  nothing 
can  be  added  to  Sankara's  reputation  by  Vidyaranya's  asser- 
tion. Moreover  Patanjali's  views  are  not  altogether  iden- 
tical with  Sankara's  views;  it  may  be  seen  from  Sankara's 
writings  that  he  attached  no  importance  whatever  to  the 
practices  of  Hatha  Yoga  regarding  which  Patanjali  composed 
his  Yoga  Sutras.  Under  such  circamstanoes,  if  Vidyaranya  had 
the  option  of  selecting  a  Gam  for  Sankara  he  would  no  doubt 
have  represented  Vyasa  himself  (who  is  supposed  to  be  still 
living)  as  his  Guru.  We  see  no  reason  therefore  to  doubt  the 
correctness  of  the  statement  under  examination.  Therefore, 
as  Sankara  was  Patanjali's  chela  and  as  Goudapada  was  his 
Guru,  his  date  will  enable  us  to  fix  the  dates  of  Sankara  and 
Goudapada.  We  may  here  point  out  to  our  readers  a  mistake 
that  appears  in  p.  14S  of  Mr.  Sinnett's  book  on  Esoteric 
Buddhism  as  regards  the  latter  personage.  He  is  there  repre- 
sented as  Sankara's  Guru;  Mr.  Sinnett  was  informed,  W3 
believe,  that  he  was  Sankara's  Paramaguru,  and  not  having 
properly  understood  the  meaning  of  this  expression,  Mr.  Sinnett 
wrote  that  he  was  Sankara's  Guru, 

It  is  generally  admitted  by  Orientalists  that  Patanjali  lived 
before  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  Era.  Mr.  Barth 
places  him  in  the  second  century  before  the  Christian  Era, 
accepting  Goldstncker's  opinion,  and  Monier  Williams  does 
the  same  thing.  W.  Weber,  who  seems  to  have  carefully 
examined  the  opinions  of  all  the  other  Orientalists  who 
have  written  upon  the  subject,  comes  to  the  conclusion  that 
*'we  must  for  the  present  rest  satisfied  with  placing  the 
date  of  composition  of  the  Bhashya  between  b.  c.  140  and 
A.D.  60,  a  result  which,  considering  the  wretched  state 
of  the  chronology  of  Indian  Literature  generally,  is,  despite 
its  indefiniteness,  of  no  mean  importance.*'  And  yet  even 
this  date  rests  upon  inferences  drawn  from  one  or  two  unim- 
portant expressions  contained  in  Patanjali's  Mahabhashya. 
it  is  always  dangerous  to  draw  such  inferences,  and  especially 
so  when  it  is  known  that,  according  to  the  tradition  current 

159 

ftmongst  Hindo  grammarians,  some  portions  of  Mahabbashya 
were  lost  and  the  gaps  were  snbseqnently  filled  up  by  snbse- 
qnent  writers.  Even  supposing  that  we  shonld  consider  the 
expressions  qooted  as  written  by  Patanjali  himself,  there  is 
nothing  in  those  expressions  which  wonld  enable  ns  to  fix 
the  writer's  date.  For  instance,  the  connection  between  the 
expression  "  Arunad  Yavanah  Sdketam,"  and  the  expedition  of 
Menander  against  Ayodhya  between  b.  c  144  and  120  relied 
npon  by  Goldstncker,  is  merely  imaginary.  There  is  nothing 
in  the  expression  to  show  that  the  allnsion  contained  therein 
points  necessarily  to  Menander's  expedition.  We  beliere 
that  Patanjali  is  referring  to  the  expedition  of  Yavanas 
against  Ayodhya  during  the  lifetime  of  Sagara's  father  de- 
scribed in  Harivamsa.  This  expedition  occnrred  long  before 
Rama's  time  and  there  is  nothing  to  connect  it  with  Menan- 
der. Goldstncker's  inference  is  based  npon  the  assumption 
that  there  was  no  other  Yavana  expedition  against  Ayodhya 
known  to  Patanjali,  and  it  will  be  easily  seen  from  Harivamsa 
(written  by  Vyasa)  that  the  said  assumption  is  unwarranted. 
Consequently  the  whole  theory  constructed  by  Goldstncker  oa 
this  weak  foundation  falls  to  the  ground.  No  valid  inferences 
can  be  drawn  from  the  mere  names  of  kings  contained  in 
Mahabhashya,  even  if  they  are  traced  to  Patanjali  himself,  as 
there  would  be  several  kings  in  the  same  dynasty  bearing  the 
same  name.  From  the  foregoing  remarks  it  will  be  clear  that 
we  cannot  fix,  as  Weber  has  done,  b.  c.  140  as  the  maximum 
limit  of  antiquity  that  can  be  assigned  to  Patanjali.  It  is 
now  necessary  to  see  whether  any  other  such  limit  has  been 
ascertained  by  Orientalists.  As  Panini's  date  still  remains 
undetermined  the  limit  cannot  be  fixed  with  reference  to  his 
date.  But  it  is  assumed  by  some  Orientalists  that  Panini 
must  have  lived  at  sometime  subsequent  to  Alexander's 
invasion,  from  the  fact  that  Panini  explains  in  his  grammar 
the  formation  of  the  word  Yavanani.  We  are  very  sorry 
that  European  Orientalists  have  taken  the  pains  to  construct 
theories  upon  this  basis  without  ascertaining  the  meaning 
assigned  to  the  word  Yavana  and  the  time  when  the  liiudas 

160 

first  became  acquainted  with  the  Greeks.    It  is   nnreasonable 
to  assume  without  proof  that  this  acquaintance  commenced  at 
the  time  of  Alexander's  invasion.    On  the   other   hand   there 
are  very  good   reasons   for   believing   that  the  Greeks   were 
known  to   the  Hindus   long  before   this   event.     Pythagoras 
visited   India  according  to   the   traditions   current  amongst 
Indian  Initiates,  and  he  is  alluded   to  in   Indian  astrological 
works  under  the  name  of  Yavanacharya,     Moreover  it  is   not 
quite  certain  that  the   word  Yavana  was   strictly   confined  to 
the  Greeks  by   the  ancient   Hindu  writers.    Probably  it   was 
first  applied  to  the   Egyptians   and   the    Ethiopians;  it    was 
probably   extended    first  to   the   Alexandrian     Greeks    and 
subsequently  to  the  Greeks,  Persians  and  Arabians.     Besides 
the    Yavana,  invasion  of  Ayodhya  described  in  Haritamsa^ 
there   was  another   subsequent   expedition  to  India  by  Kala 
Yatana   ( Black     Tavana )    during   Krishna's    lifetime    de- 
scribed in  the  same   work.     This   expedition   was   probably 
undertaken    by    the    Ethiopians.      Anyhow,    there    are    no 
reasons  whatever,  as   far  as  we   can   see,  for  asserting   that 
Hindu    writers    began    to    n?e     the     word     Yavana     after 
Alexander's  invasion.     We  can  attach  no  importance  what- 
ever to  any  inferences  that  may  be  drawn  regarding  the  dates 
of  Panin  andKatyayana  (both  of  them  lived  before  Patanjali) 
from  the  statements  contained  in  Katha  Sarit  Sagara,  which 
is  nothing  more  than  a  mere  collection   of  fables.     It  is  now 
seen  by  Orientalists  that  no  proper  conclusions  can  be   drawn 
regarding   the    dates   of  Panini   and    Katyayana    from   the 
statements  made  by  Hiuan   Thsang,   and  "ve  need    not  there- 
fore   say    anything    here    regarding    the    said    statements. 
Consequently  the  dates  of  Panini  and  Katyayana  still  remain 
undetermined  by  European  Orientalists.     Goldstucker   is  pro- 
bably correct  in    his  conclusion   that;  Panini   lived   before 
Buddha  and  the  Buddhists'  accounts  agree  with  the  traditions 
of  the  Initiates  in  asserting  that   Katyayana   was  a  contem- 
porary  of  Buddha.     From    the    fact    that   Patanjali    must 
have  composed  his  Mahabhashyam  after   the   composition   of 
Panini's  Sutras  and  Katyayana's  Vartika  we  can  only  infer 

161 

that  it  was  written  after  Bnddha's  birth.  Bat  there  are  a  few 
considerations  which  may  help  us  in  coming  to  the  conclusion 
that  Fatanjali  must  have  lived  aboot  the  year  500  B.C.  Max 
Miiller  fixed  the  Sutra  period  between  500  b.  c.  and  600  b.  o. 
We  agree  with  him  in  supposing  that  the  period  probably 
ended  with  b.  o.  500,  though  it  is  uncertain  how  far  it  ex- 
tended iuto  the  depths  of  Indian  antiquity.  Patanjali  was  the 
author  of  the  Yoga  Sutras,  and  this  lact  has  not  been  doubted 
by  auy  Hindu  writer  up  to  this  time.  Mr.  Weber  thinks^ 
however,  that  the  author  of  the  Yoga  Sutras,  might  be  a 
different  man  from  the  author  of  the  Mahabhashya,  though 
he  does  not  venture  to  assign  any  reason  for  his  supposition. 
We  very  much  doubt  \(  auy  European  Orientalist  can  ever 
find  out  the  connection  between  the  first  Anhika  of  the  Maha- 
bhashya and  the  real  secrets  of  Hatha  Yoga  coutained  in  the 
Yoga  Sutras.  No  one  but  an  Initiate  can  understand  the  full 
significance  of  the  said  Anhika;  and  the  "eternity  of  the 
Logos"  or  Sabda  is  one  of  the  principal  doctrines  of  the 
ancient  Gymnosophists  of  India  who  were  generally  Hatha 
Yogis.  In  the  opinion  of  Hindu  writers  and  Pundits  Patan- 
jali was  the  author  of  three  works,  viz.^  Mahabhashya,  Yoga 
Sutras,  and  a  book  on  Medicine  and  Anatomy;  and  there  is 
not  the  slightest  reason  for  questioning  correctness  of  this 
opinion.  We  must,  therefore,  place  Patanjali  in  the  Sutra 
period,  and  this  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  the  traditions  of 
the  Indian  Initiates.  As  Shankaracharya  was  a  couterapo- 
rary  of  Patanjali  (being  his  Chela)  he  must  have  lived 
about  the  same  time.  We  have  thus  shown  that  there 
are  no  reasons  for  placing  Sankara  in  8th  or  9th  century 
after  Christ  as  some  of  the  European  Orientalists  have 
done-  We  have  further  shown  that  Sankara  was  Pataojali's 
Chela  and  that  his  date  should  be  ascertained  with  reference 
to  Pataujali's  date.  We  have  also  shown  that  neither  the 
year  b.  c.  140  nor  the  date  of  Alexander's  invasion  can  be 
accepted  as  the  maximum  limit  of  antiquity  that  can  be 
assigned  to  him,  and  we  have  lastly  pointed  out  a  few 
circumstances  which  will  justify  us  in  expressing  an  opinion 
21 

163 

that  Patan  jali  and  his  Chela  Saukara  belonged  to  the  Sntra 
period.  We  may  perhaps  now  venture  to  place  before  the 
public  the  exact  date  assigned  to  Shankaracharya  by  Tibetan 
and  Indian  Initiates.  According  to  the  historical  i:.^.forma- 
f^  tion  in  their  possession  he  was  born  in  the  year  b.  c.  510  (51 
years  and  .2  months  after  the  date  of  Buddha's  nirvana),  and 
we  believe  that  satisfactory  evidence  in  support  of  this  date 
can  be  obtained  in  India  if  the  inscriptions  at  Conjeveram, 
Sringeri,  Jaggurnath,  Benares,  Cashmere  and  various  other 
places  visited  by  Sankara  are  properly  deciphered.  Sankara 
built  Conjeveram,  which  is  considered  as  one  of  the  most 
ancient  towns  in  Soufchren  India;  and  it  may  be  possible  to 
ascertain  the  time  of  its  construction  if  proper  enquiries  are 
made.  But  even  the  evidence  now  brought  before  the  public 
supports  the  opinion  of  the  initiates  above  indicated.  As 
Goudpada  was  Shaukaracharya's  Guru's  Guru  his  date  entirely 
depends  on  Sankara's  date;  and  there  is  every  reason  to 
suppose  that  he  lived  before  Buddha.  As  this  article  has 
already  become  very  legngthy  we  will  now  bring  it  to  a  close. 
Oar  remarks  about  Buddha's  date  and  Shaukaracharya's 
doctrine  will  appear  hereafter. 

AGE  OF  LORD  BUDDHA'S  DEATH. 

INSCRIPTION  DISCOVERED   BY   GENERAL   A.   CUNNINGHAM. 

We  have  carefully  examined  the  new  inscription  discovered 
by  General  A.  Cunningham  on  the  strength  of  which  the 
date  assigned  to  Buddha's  death  by  Buddhist  writers  has  been 
declared  to  be  incorrect;  and  we  are  of  opinion  that  the  said 
inscription  confirms  the  truth  of  the  Buddhist  tradition 
instead  of  proving  them  to  be  erroneous.  The  abovementioned 
arch{©ologist  writes  as  follows  regarding  the  inscription  under 
consideration  in  the  first  volume  of  his  report: — "The  most 
interesting  inscription  (at  Gaya)  is  a  long  and  perfect  one 
dated  in  the  era  of  the   Nirvana  or  death  of  Buddha,     I  read 

163 

the  date  as  follows: — Bkagavati  Parinirorittee  Samtat  18 19^ 
Karttike  badi  1  Buclki — that  is  'in  the  year  1819  of  the 
Emancipation  of  Bhagavata  on  Wednesday,  the  first  day  of 
the  waning  moon  of  Kartik.'  if  the  era  here  used  is  the  same 
as  that  of  the  Baddists  of  Ceylon  and  Bnrmab,  which  began 
in  543  B.  c,  the  date  of  this  inscription  will  be  1819 — 543  = 
A.  D.  1276.  The  style  ot  the  letters  is  in  keeping  with  this 
date,  bnt  is  qaite  incompatible  with  that  derivable  from  the 
Chinese  date  of  the  era.  The  Chinese  place  the  death  of 
Buddha  upwards  of  1000  years  before  Christ,  so  that  accord- 
ing to  them,  the  date  of  this  inscription  would  be  about 
A.  D.  800,  a  period  much  too  early  for  the  style  of  character 
used  in  the  inscription.  But  as  the  day  of  the  week  is  here 
fortunately  added,  the  date  can  be  veritied  by  calculation. 
According  to  my  calculation  the  date  of  the  inscription 
corresponds  with  Wednesday,  the  17th  September  a.  d.  1342. 
This  would  place  the  Nirvana  of  Buddha  in  477  b.  c,  which 
is  the  very  year  that  was  first  proposed  by  myself  as  the  most 
probable  date  of  that  event.  This  corrected  date  has  since 
been  adopted  by  Professor  Max  Miiller." 

The  reasons  assigned  by  some  Orientalists  for  considering 
this  so-called  *'corrected  date"  as  the  real  date  of  Buddha's 
death  have  already  been  noticed  and  criticized  in  the  preceding 
article;*  and  now  we  have  only  to  consider  whether  the  in- 
scription in  question  disproves  the  old  date. 

Major  General  Canninghara  evidently  seems  to  take  it  for 
granted,  as  far  as  his  present  calculation  is  concerned,  that 
the  number  of  days  in  a  year  is  counted  in  the  Magadha 
country  by  Buddhist  writers  in  general  on  the  same  basis 
on  which  the  number  of  days  in  a  current  English  year  is 
counted;  and  this  wrong  assumption  has  vitiated  his  calcula- 
tion and  led  him  to  a  "wrong  conclusion.  Three  different 
methods   of  calculation  were  in  use  in   India  at  the  time  when 

*  See  "Replies  to  Inqniries  saggested  by  Esoteric  Buddhism,*'  TlieotO' 
fhittfiioX.  T.,  pp.  35—43. 

164 

Baddha  lived,  and  they  are  still  in  use  ia  different  parts  of 
the  country.  These  methods  are  known  as  Souramanamy 
Chandramanam  and  Barhaspatyamanam.  According  to  the 
Hindu  works  on  Astronomy  a  Souramanam  year  consists  of 
365  days,  15  ghadias  and  31  vighadias;  a  Chandramanam 
year  has  360  days,  and  a  year  on  the  basis  of  Barhaspaty- 
amanam  has  361  days  and  11  ghadias  nearly-  Such  being 
the  case.  General  Cunningham  ought  to  have  taken  the 
trouble  of  ascertaining  before  he  made  his  calculation  the 
particular  manam  employed  by  the  writers  of  Magadha  and 
Ceylon  in  giving  the  date  of  Buddha's  death  and  the  manam 
used  in  calcnlation  the  years  of  the  Buddhist  era  mentioned 
in  the  inscription  above  quoted.  Instead  of  placing  himself 
in  the  position  of  the  writer  of  the  said  inscription  and 
making  the  required  calcnlation  from  that  standpoint,  he 
made  the  calculation  on  the  same  basis  on  which  an  English 
gentleman  of  the  19th  century  would  calculate  time  accord- 
ing to  his  own  calendar. 

If  the  calcnlation  were  correctly  made,  it  would  have  shown 
him  that  the  inscription  in  question  is  perfectly  consistent  with 
the  statement  that  Buddha  died  in  the  year  543  b.  c.  accord- 
ing to  Barhaspatyamanam  (the  only  manam  used  in  Magadha 
and  by  Pali  writers  in  general).  The  correctness  of  this 
assertion  will  be  clearly  seen  on  examining  the  following 
calculation. 

543  years  according  to  Barhaspatyamanam  are  equivalent 
to  538  years  and  8  months  (nearly)  according  to  Souramanam. 

Similarly  1819  years  according  to  the  former  waTzaw  are 
equivalent  to  1798  years  nearly  according  to  the  latter  manam. 

As  the  Christian  era  commenced  on  the  3102  in  the  year  of 
Kaliynga  (according  to  Souramanam)  Buddha  died  in  the 
year  2565  of  Kalijnga  and  the  inscription  was  written  in  the 
year  4332  of  Kaliyuga  (according  to  Souramanam).  And 
now  the  question  is  whether  according  to  the  Hindu  Almanac, 
the  first  day  of  the  waning  moon  of  Kartik  coincided  with  a 
Wednesday. 

165 

According  to  Snryasiddhanta  the  n amber  of  days  from  the 
begioniog  of  Kaliyuga  up  to  midnight  on  the  I5th  day  of 
increasing  moon  of  Aswina  ia  1,593,072  (  the  number  of 
Adhikamasansas  (extra  months)  during  the  interval  being  1608 
and  the  number  of  Kshayathithis  25,323. 

If  we  divide  this  number  by  T  the  remainder  would  be  5. 
As  Kaliyuga  commenced  with  Friday,  the  period  of  time  above 
defined  closed  with  Tuesday,  as  according  to  Snryasiddhanta 
a  week-day  is  counted  from  midnight  to  midnight. 

It  is  to  be  noticed  that  in  place  where  Barhaspatyamanam 
is  in  use  Krishnapaksham  (or  the  dark  half)  commences  first 
and  is  followed  by  Snklapaksham. 

Consequently  the  next  day  after  the  15th  day  of  the  waning 
moon  of  Aswina  will  be  the  Ist  day  of  the  waning  moon  of 
Kartika  to  those  who  are  guided  by  the  Barhaspatyamanam 
calendar.  And  therefore  the  latter  date,  which  is  the  date 
mentioned  in  the  inscription,  was  Wednesday  in  the  year 
4362  of  Kaliyuga. 

The  geocentric  longitude  of  the  sun  at  the  time  of  his  meri- 
dian passage  on  the  said  date  being  174° — 20' — 16'  and  the 
moon's  longitude  being  7" — 51' — 42'  (according  to  Surya- 
eiddhanta  (in  can  be  easily  seen  that  at  Gaya  there  wns 
Padyamithithi  (Ist  day  of  waning  moon)  for  nearly  7  ghadias 
and  50  vighadias  from  the  time  of  sunrise. 

It  is  clear  from  the  foregoing  calculation  that  "Kartika  1 
Badi"  coincided  with  Wednesday  in  the  year  4362  of  Kali- 
yuga or  the  year  1261  of  the  Christian  era,  and  that  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  person  who  wrote  the  inscription  the  said 
year  was  the  1819th  year  of  the  Buddhist  era.  And  con- 
sequently this  new  inscription  confirms  the  correctness  of  the 
date  assigned  to  Buddha'.s  death  by  Buddhist  writers.  It 
would  have  been  better  if  Major  General  Cunningham  had 
carefully  examined  the  basis  of  his  calculation  before  pro- 
claiming to  the  world  at  large  that  the  Buddhist  accounts 
were  untrustworthy. 

166 

BUDD-HISM  AND  ANCIENT   WISDOM-RELIGION. 

[iVote  added  in  reply  to  a  corres'gondent»'\ 

We  are  in  a  position  to  state  that  Mr.  Sinnett  never  intented  to  main< 
tain  that  Baddhism,  as  popularly  conceived,  is  the  nearest  approach  ever 
made  to  the  ancient  Wisdom-Religion ,  His  assertion  simply  means  that 
the  -Tibetan  from  of  Exoteric  Buddhism  is  in  closer  connection  at  present 
with  the  Esoteric  Doctrine  than  any  other  popular  religion  on  account  of  the- 
presence  of  the  great  Himalayan  Brotherhood  in  Tibet,  and  their  constant 
guidance,  care  and  supervision.  The  name  given  to  Mr.  Sinnett's  book  will 
not  be  misleading  orobjectiouable  when  the  close  identity  between  the  doc- 
trines therein  expounded  and  those  of  the  ancient  Eishis  of  India  is  clearly 
perceived.  As  the  writer  of  the  foregoing  article  seema  to  be  in  a  state 
of  doubt  as  to  the  position  occupied  by  the  septenary  constitution  of  maa 
as  expounded  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  in  the  Aryan  Hindu  Occult  System,  we 
shall  herein  below  state  in  a  tabular  form  corresponding  principles  recog* 
nized  by  the  Vedantic  teachers  : — 

Classification  in  Esoteric 
Buddhism. 

Classification  in 
Vedantic  Classification,   [  Tharaka  Baj^ 

Yoga. 

(1.)  Sthula  sarira    

(2.)  Prana    

(3.)  The  Vehicle  of  Prana 

(4.)  Eamarnpa 

f  (a)  Volutions  and 
(5.)    Hindi  feelings,  &c. 

I    (*)  Vignanam 

(6.)    Spiritual  Soul 

(7.)    Atma « 

Annamaya  kosa 

>  Pranamaya  kosa  

s. Manomaya  kosa    «. 

Vignanamaya  kosa  .m» 

Anandamaya  kosa   

Atma 

"Stholopadhi. 

.Sukshmopadki. 

Karanopadhi. 
Atma, 

Prom  the  foregoing  table  it  will  be  seen  that  the  3rd  principle  in  the 
Buddhist  classification  is  not  seperately  mentioned  in  the  Vendantic  divi- 
sion as  it  is  merely  the  vehicle  of  Prana.  It  will  also  be  seen  that  the 
4th  principle  is  included  in  the  3rd  kosa,  as  the  said  principle  is  but  the 
vehicle  of  will  power  which  is  but  an  energy  of  the  mind.  It  must  also 
be  noticed  that  Vigiianamayakosa  is  consideraJ  to  be  distinct  from  Mano- 

167 

mayakosat  as  a  division  is  made  after  death  between  the  lower  part  of 
the  mind,  as  it  were,  which  has  a  closer  affinity  with  the  4th  principle 
than  with  the  sixth  and  its  higher  part,  which  attaches  itself-  to  the  latter 
and  which  is  in  fact  the  basis  for  the  higher  spiritnal  indiTidaality  of 
man. 

We  may  also  here  point  out  to  our  readers  that  the  classification  men- 
tioned in  the  last  colnmn  is  for  all  practical  purposes  connected  with  Baja 
Yoga,  the  heet  and  simplest.  Though  there  are  7  principles  in  man, 
therearebutS  distinct  Upadhis,  in  each  of  which  his  Atma  may  work 
independently  of  the  rest.  These  3  Upadhis  can  be  separated  by  an  adept 
without  killing  himself.  He  cannot  separate  the  7  principles  from  each 
other  without  destroying  his  constitution. 

THE  '^OCCULT   WORLDS 

HAPPY    MR.     HENRY     KIDDLb's  DISCOVERT. 

1  HAVE  been  watching  with  considerable  interest  the  effect 
produced  on  the  Western  Public  by  Mr.  Sinnett'a  book  on 
"Esoteric  Buddhism;"  and  1  have  not  been  disappointed  in 
my  expectations.  There  is  nothing  surprising  in  the  attitude 
of  the  Spiritualists  towards  Theosophy  and  its  Teachers. 
Startled  by  the  strange  phenomena — erroneously  called  spirit 
manifestations,  which  have  been  witnessed  during  the  last 
few  years,  the  majority  of  the  so-called  Spiritualists  havo 
firmly  persuaded  themselves  into  the  belief  that  those  mani- 
festations indicate  a  turning  point  in  the  history  of  mankind, 
that  they  are  destined  to  introduce  into  the  world  a  sublime 
system  of  religous  philosophy  which  will  supplant  every 
other  existing  system  whether  in  the  East  or  in  the  West,  and 
that  for  the  first  time  in  the  annals  of  this  globe  man  is  being 
permitted  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  manifestations 
to  have  a  glimpse  into  the  mysterious  inner  world.  Thy  are 
not  probably  aware  of  the  fact,  or  they  are  extremely  unwill- 
ing to  believe,  that  these  phenomena  were  known  in  the  East 
for  long  ages  and  that  their  mysterious  causes  were  carefully 
studied  by  esoteric  mystics.  They  are  evidently  offended  at 
being  told  that  these  phenomena  are  rather  stale  to  the 
Eastern   nations;  that  there  is  nothing  very  profound  either 

ICS 

:  >B,  aNB  it  aecHiS 
iliilBnlil 

.-!» 

inXc  S 

•  wii 

ail 

CJlBi 

and  clufifid  «^  sBadriWRm  jeaauKinMmi 
if  w£  warn  ft 

Utemat,  it  Ib 

wiidk  dor 

fc—,  it  M  MipwiiiiBfli  teaqpedtitoaaiPgiwBa 
iwarigiiMrwaa^M  «BttwiM|Bmn5  to  ■tiiiiilaii  the  geHnl  IgW 

ttHglfiHiritiaMi  «f  m  fiMaaBMiB  ljy|wlt&«i»  ii  dT 

l&te  MdadtmBi  iwrae  asm  dedbtsii  gkiit  Ai^  wwmM  ffivtm 

■J  liii  — uttFii    maJL  (nrihamUliim  cxfwiliai 

httcdBf  i^kyttiMyiiribBalBflto  flaDe  MIir  tl»  < 

m  fewr  geaenl  Aim Iiwi  ■  wMA  ij^ht  «i 

iiypoKiiaH  Ivf  wfcidk  ifas  y^fyawm  «€  iiiiiiiii  a^ftiiin  ant 

tike  i»^«llhii  !Sgiiiir»iBMinir  fkeBmena  rfMiiiiiiw  tine  ai^  he 

M>y«Ito»dhwrto«iMPcaatMtttiM^«>flirtoiiftchMa 

lb  cvoj 

dSamstooBaSkf  ^ppesei  to  Khne  iff  adkan 

GBMoae  Gecdkaffi  «atcnBiy«toAe«i.«ffac 

vkaaUmeB^gpMBSfatomamdlfi^s  mt 

itoaibeiwK  wUdT 
23 

170 

■trange  manifestation  taking  place  in  seance-Tooms  are 
rejected  by  the  majority  of  the  men  of  science  as  absard 
superstitions,  while  they  are  regarded  by  the  -Spiritualists  as 
indicative  of  the  existence  of  disembodied  Spirits  I 

Our  Eastern  doctrines  having  been  proclaimed  by  the  general 
body  of  Spiritualists  as  impertinent  intruders,  leaders  of  that 
body  seem  to  have  discovered  at  last  a  very  simple  means  for 
getting  rid  of  them.  Mr.  Henry  Kiddle  has  found  out  that 
the  Mahatma  whose  instructions  are  embodied  in  Mr.  Sinnett's 
publications  haw  committed  an  act  of  plagiarism  in  borrowing 
certain  sentences  from  one  of  his  lectures  without  admitting 
his  obligation.  He  tells  us,  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Sinnett  about 
his  discovery  more  than  a  year  ago;  and  though  Mr.  Sinnett 
distinctly  states  that  he  never  heard  from  him,  this  American 
discoverer  has  been  very  persistently  complaining  to  the 
public  of  the  great  injury  done  to  him.  This  is  considered  as 
a  very  *'grave  charge"  by  the  Spiritualists,  who  suppose  that 
it  "strikes  at  the  very  root  of  the  pretentions  of  the  Adepts." 
But  if  these  Spiritualists,  -'Perplexed  Readers,"  and  "Stu- 
dents" who  are  making  such  a  terrible  fuss  about  the  matter 
were  to  examine  the  passage  in  question  carefully,  they  will, 
perchance,  be  able  to  perceive  that  there  is  evidently  some 
confusion  and  mistake  in  the  whole  matter,  and  that  the  pro- 
babilities of  the  case  are  against  the  truth  of  Mr.  Kiddle's 
complaint.     Upon  a  closer  examination  of  it  I  find  that — 

1.  So  far  as  the  leading  idea  in  the  passage  is  concerned, 
if  any  body  has  committed  literary  theft  it  is  the  complainant 
himself  and  not  the  accused.  I  find  no  reference  to  Plato 
in  the  passages  quoted  from  Mr.  Kiddle's  lecture  in  his  letter 
published  in  Lights*  and  the  complainant  has  very  pru- 
dently omitted  the  reference  to  the  Greek  philosopher  that 
precedes  the  passages  which  he  reproduces  from  the  Mahat- 
ma's  letter. 

*  Nor  is  there  in  his  now  famous  lecture  at  Lake  Pleasant,  for  we  have 
procured  and  carefully  read  it. — Ed„ 

171 

II.  There  seems  to  be  nothing  very  snblime  in  the  language 
used  by  Mr.  Kiddle  in  the  passage  under  consideration; 
and  it  may  be  easily  seen  from  the  other  letters  written 
to  Mr.  Sinnett  by  the  Mahatma  concerned,  that  the  said 
Mahatma's  English  vocabulary  is  not  more  limited  than  hig 
own  and  that  he  is  not  wanting  in  power  of  expression. 
It  is,  therefore,  very  difficnlt  to  see  why  the  Master  should 
have  borrowed  Mr.  Kiddle's  language,  unless  some  good  reason 
can  be  shown  for  it. 

II.    There   are  certain   expressions  and  certain  alterations 
of  Mr.   Kiddle's  language   in  the   passage  in  question  which 
show  that  the  Mahatma  never  intended  to  borrow  Mr.  Kiddle's 
ideas  and   phrases,  but  that   he  rather   intended  to  say  some- 
thing against  them.     "Where  the  Spiritualistic  lecturer  says 
that  "  the   world   advances,"   the   Mahatma   says   that "  the 
world  will  advance "    for   the  purpose   of  showing  that  this 
chauge    in   ideas    must  iuevitably  take  place  by  reason  of  the 
great  cyclic    Law  to  which  the    Universe  is  subject     Where 
the    lecturer   says   that  "the   agency   called   Spiritualism  is 
bringing  a  new  set   of  ideas  into   the  world,"   the  Mahatma 
emphatically  affirms  that  "it  is  not  physical  phenomena"  that 
he  and  his    brother   Occultists    study,   but  "  these  universal 
ideas  "  which  are  as  it  were  the  noumena  underlying  all  phy- 
sical manifestations.     The  contrast    between   the   Mahatma's 
view  of  the  relationship  between  these    ideas    and    physical 
phenomena,   and  Mr.  Kiddle's  view  is  striking.     The  latter 
thinks  that  new  ideas  are  being  introduced  into  the  world  by 
physical  phenomena,  which  the  former  thinks  that  new  phy- 
sical  phenomena   have    begun   to   manifest    themselves    by 
reason  of  a  change  in   these    general  ideas  (noumena)   which 
govern  all  physical  phenomena  in   the  objective  world.     It 
seems   to   me   that  even  the  word  'idea'  has  been  used  in  two 
different  senses  by  the  Mahatma  and  Mr.  Kiddle  respectively. 
The  former  means   by    the   word  *  idea'  the  original  form   or 
type   according  to  which   the   objective  manifestation  takes 
place.     And  this  is  Plato's  meaning  which  the   Spiritualistic 
lecturer  has   not  properly  understood.    Mr.   Kiddle,  on  the 

17i 

other  hand,  nees  the  same  word  in  the  sense  it  is  ordinarily 
used  by  English  writers.  And  again,  where  the  lecturer 
speaks  of  "the  universal  reign  of  law  as  the  expression  of  the 
divine  will,"  the  Mahatma  postulates  the  existence  of  "an 
immutable  Law"  not  depending  on  any  divine  will. 

Bnt  *'A  Perplexed  Reader,"  writing  to  Light,  says  that  the 
Mahatma  "  has  omitted  inconvenient  words  and  has  so  dis- 
torted the  ideas  he  has  borrowed  as  to  divert  them  from  their 
original  intention  to  suit  his  own  very  different  purpose."  If 
there  is  a  difference  of  words  and  ideas,  where  is  the  offence  ? 
Or  is  it  a  law  of  plagiarism  thai  the  person  who  borrows  from 
another's  writings  should  do  so  without  making  the  slightest 
alteration  in  the  passage  extracted  ?  If  this  "Perplexed 
Beader"  were  not  also  a  perplexed  thinker,  he  would  have 
seen  that  these  very  alterations  in  the  passage  in  qnestion  go 
very  far  to  show  that  there  was  no  intention  on  the  Mahatma's 
part  to  borrow  Mr.  Kiddle's  inaccurate  language  and  errone- 
ous ideas,  and  that  there  is  some  misconception — some  mis- 
take in  all  this. 

IV.  It  is  quite  evident  from  the  wording  of  the  passage 
under  examination  that  there  2S  "something  wrong  somewhere.'* 
Plato  is  introduced  into  it  rather  abruptly  and  the  grammatical 
constrnction  of  the  last  sentence  is  by  no  means  clear.  Appa- 
rently there  is  no  predicate  which  refers  to  "ideas  larger,"  &c. 

A  part  of  the  sentence  is  thns  evidently  lost  ....  From 
the  foregoing  consideration  it  will  be  clearly  seen  that  it  could 
Dot  have  been  the  Mahatma's  intention  to  borrotv  anything 
from  Mr.  Kiddle's  lecture.  On  the  other  hand,  thelMahatma's 
emphatic  declaration  immediately  preceding  the  passage  in 
question,  that  Adepts  of  the  "Good  Law"  do  not  believe  in  any 
other  bat  planetary  spirits,  his  remarks  regarding  the  insnf- 
ficiency  and  worthlessness  of  more  physical  phenomena  in 
Bnraveling  the  mysteries  of  the  noumena  world,  and  his 
ennnciatiou  of  the  existence  of  an  immutable  law  in  no  way 
subject  to  the  divine  will,  the  existence  of  which  is  assnmed 
by  the  lecturer — all  tend  to  show  that  the  Mahatma's  real 

173 

intention  was  rather  to  criticise  than  adopt  the  views  of  the 
Spiritaaliste  as  embodied  in  Mr.  Kiddle's  remarks.  Therefore, 
from  a  careful  perusal  of  the  passage  and  its  contents,  any  un- 
biassed reader  will  come  to  the  conclusion  that  somebody  most 
have  greatly  plundered  over  the  said  passage  and  will  not  be 
surprised  to  hear  that  it  was  unconsciously  altered  through 
the  carelessness  and  ignorance  of  the  Chela  by  whose  instru- 
mentality it  was  "precipitated."  Such  alterations,  omissions 
and  mistakes  sometimes  occur  in  the  process  of  precipitation  ; 
and  I  now  assert,  I  know  it  for  certain  from  an  inspection  of 
the  original  precipit'ition  proofs  that  such  was  the  case  with 
regard  to  the  passage  under  discussion,  I  can  assure  the 
"Student"  who  throws  out  a  suggestion  in  his  letter  to  Light 
that  there  might  be  some  deep  psychological  problem  involved 
in  the  matter  in  dispute,  that  there  is  one,  and  that  one  is  no 
other  psychological  mystery  than  the  above  indicated.  The 
Mahatma  against  whom  the  accusation  has  been  brought  will, 
of  course,  think  it  beneath  his  dignity  to  oft'er  any  explana- 
tion in  his  own  defence  to  Mr.  Kiddle  or  his  followers  and 
supporters.  But  I  hope  Mr.  Sinnett  will  be  good  enough  to 
place  before  the  public  as  soon  as  possible  such  explanation 
or  information  as  he  may  be  permitted  by  the  Mahatma 
concerned,  with  regard  to  the  "Mystery"  of  the  passage  in 
question  and  the  manner  in  which  the  letter  which  contains 
the  said  passage   was  received  by  him. 

In  conclusion  I  cannot  but  regret  that  some  writers  in  the 
Spiritualistic  organs  and  other  English  journals  have  thought 
it  fit  to  drag  our  Mahatma's  name  into  public  print  without 
any  necessity  for  doing  so,  using,  moreover,  such  remarks  and 
insinuations  as  are  fully  calculated  to  be  highly  offensive  to 
those  who  have  the  good  fortune  to  be  personally  known  to, 
and  acquainted  with,  the  Mahatma  in  qnestion.  The  reproach 
contained  in  the  Protest  of  500  Hindu  theosophists — ^just 
published  in  Light — may  be  fairly  applied  to  many  a 
Spiritualists  besides  "G.  VY.  M.  D." 

NOTES  ON  OCCULT  PHILOSOPHY. 

prhe  following  notes  are  answers  to  philosophical  questions  raised  by 
some  of  the  Delegates  at  the  Convention  of  the  T.  8.,  "which  were 
taken  up  at  the  time  by  a  member.] 

DEVAOHAN. 

It  has  been  asked  why  the  activity  exhibited  by  a  human 
monad  in  Devachan  should  last  through  a  longer  period  of 
time  than  that  same  monad's  activity  on  the  present  plane 
of  existence  ? 

From  our  present  standpoint  the  difference  is  a  great  one, 
but  this  is  not  so  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Devaohanee, 
When  a  Yogi  is  in  a  state  of  Samadhi,  years  may  pass  and 
«eem  only  months  or  days  to  him.  (Energy  exerted  on  the 
astral  plane  prodaces  effects  which  last  for  a  longer  period 
of  time  than  those  produced  by  an  equal  amount  of  energy 
on  the  material  plane,  for  the  reason  that  less  friction  of 
Opposition  is  encountered  on  the  astral  planel> 

On  the  objective  plane,  the  metallic  sound  produced  by 
the  striking  of  a  bell  will  not  last  more  than  five  or  six 
minutes,  however,  finely  the  bell  be  made;  but  after  the 
sound  seems  dead  to  the  ordinary  man,  the  chela  can  hear  it  on 
the  astral  plane  for  one  or  two  hours  longer.  So  we  say  that 
the  momentum  being  the  same,  the  period  of  time  occupied 
by  effects  differs  on  the  material  and  on  the  astral  plane. 

It  is  not  possible  to  fix  beforehand  the  definite  length  of 
the  time  passed  by  a  human  being  or  even  a  race,  in  Devachan; 
that  depends  a  great  deal  upon  the  nature  and  development 
of  the  spiritual  monad  in  the  man,  and  also  on  the  impulses 
it  has  generated  in  the  world  of  effects  and,  more  or  less,  on 
the  nature  of  the  man's  aspirations.  When  the  element  of 
spirituality  appears  in  the  monad,  its  Devachanic  existence 
will  be  longer.  Perhaps  the  highest  adept,  after  making  a 
careful  psychical  analysis  of  a  man,  would  be  able  to  foretell 
the  length  of  the  latter's  stay  in  Devachan  within  one  or  two 
thousand  years,  but  he  could  not  give  the  exact  duration. 

175 

In  estimating  the  inflaence  on  a  man's  Devachanic  existence 
of  a  particular  thonght  or  train  of  thought,  we  must  enquire 
into  the  utility  of  the  latter  and  its  effect  on  the  world  at 
large,  and  not  imagine  that  everything  depends  upon  whether 
the  thought  is  subjective  or  objective. 

It  is  a  mistake  to  suppsse  that  ideation  which  refers  to 
practical  work  has  less  potentiality  in  this  direction  than 
ideation  which  only  relates  to  the  mental  plane. 

Good  work  on  the  physical  plane  hepls  on  our  spiritual 
development. 

First,  by  its  influence  on  the  formation  of  habits;  a  maa 
constantly  engaged  in  doing  good  works  is  not  likely  to  fall 
into  bad  habits. 

Secondly,  by  its  eiifects  on  both  the  astral  and  the  physical 
plane,  a  good  action  has  the  effect  of  concentrating  good 
influences  on  the  doer.  When  a  man  makes  bad  Karma,  by 
the  very  ideation  he  attracts  to  himself  forces  which  will  lead 
him  from  bad  to  worse,  A  man,  who  has  good  ideas,  attracts 
influences  of  quite  a  different  kind  and  these  will  begin  to 
help  him  on  his  way. 

On  the  other  hand,  actions  must  not  be  judged  of  b}'^-  their 
effects  alone,  because  then  one  element  is  wanting,  the  inward 
impulse  prompting  the  act  must  also  be  taken  into  considera- 
tion. 

The  question  of  our  responsibility  for  the  occurrence  of  a 
bad  thought  must  be  considered  from  a  purely  causal  stand- 
point, so  that  the  introduction  of  anything  like  the  idea  of  a 
judge  may  be  avoided. 

The  fact  that  the  bad  thought  has  occurred  in  yonr  mind^ 
makes  an  impression  on  the  astral  plane,  though,  if  the 
thought  is  driven  away  by  opposition,  the  bad  effects  may  be 
neutralized.  But  if  your  will-power  gives  way  to  the  bad  ideas, 
they  will  produce  evil  effects,  whereas  if  a  determined  will- 
power controls  your  thoughts,  you  will  get  into  the  path  of 
virtue. 

17(5 

Devachanic  existence  does  not  always  begin  immediately 
after  death.  The  period  in  the  case  of  very  good  people 
begins  immediately  and  the  transition  of  Kamaloka  is  not  felt. 

There  are  no  doabt  a  few  other  cases,  such  as  that  of  an 
infant,  whose  monad  has  exhausted  the  results  of  its  Karma, 
or  where  there  is  some  physical  reason  against  existence  in 
a  particular  body,  where  the  reincarnation  may  take  place 
after  a  few  minutes,  or  on  the  other  hand  it  may  not  da 
so  for  a  hundred  years,  during  which  period  the  entity  is  in  a 
profound  sleep  and  there  is  nothing  like  ideation. 

When  an  entity  reincarnates,  the  shell  is  invariably  dis- 
integrated. 

THE     HUMAN  MONAD. 

A  complete  explanation  of  what  is  meant  by  the  term 
"human  monad"  would  include  the  whole  range  of  occult 
science.  It  may  be  said,  however,  that  the  human  monad  is 
not  identical  with  the  seventh  principle,  the  Atma  or  Logos; 
it  is  energy  which  works  through  the  sixth  principle.  It  is 
the  one  energy  diffused  from  the  Logos,  the  one  life  proceeding 
from  the  Logos  as  an  active  entity. 

What  is  meant  will  be  best  explained  in  a  simile. 

Take  the  sun;  according  to  the  occult  theory,  that  which 
emanates  from  it  is  uniformly  spread  throughout  boundless 
space,  the  sun,  is  like  a  focus  in  which  this  matter  is  concen- 
trated and  which  it  is  given  off  as  visible  light  and  heat.  The 
one  element  is  Parabrahm,  and  whenever  the  centre  of  activity 
called  the  Logos  emerges  from  it  as  an  active  force,  this  force 
is  the  one  element  in  its  active  condition,  the  one  life,  and  it  is 
the  very  same  power  which  Hartmann  describes  as  the  one 
unconscious  energy  which  may  be  called  the  will-power  of 
nature,  which  produces  consciousness  and  every  other  physical 
fact  in  the  manifested  universe. 

We  cannot  say  it  comes  into  existence  at  any  particular 
time,  it  seems  lutcut  in   the  one  life  throughout  but  at  its 

177 

appearance  as  an  active  energy,  it  is  the  fi;:stgerm  of  conscioaa- 
ness  in  the  whole  universe.    This  is  Atma. 

This  is  bnt  one  power,  it  begins  to  work  through  all  the 
gradations  of  the  various  kingdoms,  and  on  arriving  at  the 
plane  of  human  volition,  becomes  differentiated  and  acquires  a 
certain  kind  of  individuality  and  this  we  call  the  monad.  If 
this  monad  were  not  interconnected  with  the  Logos,  immorta- 
lity would  be  impossible,  but  as  it  has  been  defused  through 
the  Logos,  there  is  a  change  of  its  passing  back  through  the 
Logos  again  and  so  gaining  immortality. 

The  experiences  of  to-day  are  not  those  of  to-morrow,  each 
day  a  man  may  be  considered  as  a  different  being,  but  there 
seems  to  be  something  within  each  of  us  on  which  all  these 
varied  experiences  are  strung  and  by  which  they  have  something 
like  a  continuity.  The  monad  may  be  considered  as  a  string 
on  which  the  experiences  of  many  births  are  strung.  You  may 
consider  the  Logos  as  the  basis  of  innumerable  monads. 
These  never  die  out  but  start  into  active  existence  again.  All 
the  human  beings  whose  experiences  have  been  brought  to  the 
Logos  by  the  travelling  monad  may  be  said  to  have  gained 
immortality,  but  sometimes  the  monad  becomes  so  opposed 
in  its  magnetic  effect  to  the  Logos  from  which  it  has 
emanated,  that  its  absorption  is  impossible.  This  happens 
only  in  the  case  of  a  very  wicked  man,  and  then  that  monad 
never  gains  immortality;  it  may  live  on  till  the  Pralaya 
arrives;  and  is  then  merged  into  the  ocean  of  cosmic  matter 
without  transferring  its  impressions  to  any  Logos. 

A  monad  may  remain  for  perhaps  millions  of  years,  till  the 
Pralaya  comes,  this  time  can  be  almost  called  infinity,  but  it 
is  as  nothing  in  comparison  to  the  existence  of  the  Logos 
itself. 

Is  the  ego  ever  really  wiped  out  or  effaced  ? 

The  monad  is  never  killed  though  the  man  may  be.   Yon  call 
the  monad  by  a  particular   name    so   long  as   it   retains   the 
owner's  subjective  experiences,  but  when  the  monad  is  made 
23 

178 

-quite  clean,  you  can  say  the  experiences   are   wiped  out. 
A  monad  is  only  a  centre  of  energy. 

Nirvana  means  the  absorption  into  the  Logos,  bnt  for  the 
purpose  of  differentiating,  three  conditions  are  intended  by 
the  one  name.  A  period  of  rest  not  only  from  objective  but 
also  from  subjective  activity  arrives  after  the  completion  of 
■each  round,  but  the  real  Nirvanic  condition  is  only  reached 
when  the  monad  is  transferred  into  the  Logos  and  the  man's 
life  becomes  part  of  the  life  <rf  the  Logos. 

Many  have  asked  whether  after  the  close  of  one  solar  man- 
vantara  when  a  particular  monad  is  absorbed  into  the  Logos 
if  by  the  activity  of  the  same  Logos  that  monad  is  again 
■ejected;  if  so  it  would  be  said  that  even  after  the  absorption 
birth  is  possible,  but  from  the  stand -point  of  the  Logos  there 
is  no  birth.  Just  as  I  may  send  my  aura  to  your  brain,  the 
Logos  emits  a  ray  from  itself  into  matter,  the  Logos  does  not 
suffer,  bnt  the  ray  does.  From  the  stand-point  of  the  Logos 
there  is  no  rebirth. 

The  Logos  has  an  objective  existence.  Beyond  Logos  there 
is  the  unmanifested  Parabrahm. 

Vishnu  is  the  Logos.  Brahma  is  the  universal  mind,  the 
Deminrgos. 

Each  Logos  has  a  consciousness  of  its  own.  Consciousness 
which  is  non-consciousness,  means  a  state  of  consciousness 
onlike  the  state  of  consciousness  with  which  we  are  acq^uainted. 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

The  only  explanation  we  can  give  of  the  phenomena  of 
thought-transference  depends  upon  the  existence  of  the  astral 
fluid, — a  fluid  which  exists  throughout  the  manifested  solar 
system,  but  which  does  not  extend  beyond  it. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  there  is  a  difference  between 
Ak§,sh  and  the  astral  light,  though  the  two  terms  have  often 
been  used  as  being  synonymoas.  Akash  is  a  much  higher  kind 
of  cosmic  ether   which  exists   as   a   link   between   one   solar 

179 

system  and  another,  and  is  as  infinite  as  the  original  coamic 
matter.  It  is  the  result  of  motion  in  that  very  cosmic  matter. 
Astral  light  is  not  akash,  bat  a  different  form  of  cosmic  ether. 
It  is  simply  that  entity  in  the  manifested  solar  systen^whicb 
corresponds  to  what  we  have  called  the  fourth  principle  itt 
man.  It  is  a  manifestation  of  undifferentiated  matter.  It  i» 
a  kind*  of  matter  far  more  ethereal  than  any  with  which  we 
are  acquainted.  Perhaps  matter  m  its  ultra-  gaseous  condi- 
tion— radiant  matter — may  help  os  to  a  conception  of  the 
astral  fluid.  Though  it  exists  uniformly  throughout  space  in 
the  solar  system,  it  is  yet  more  dense  around  certain  objects  by 
reason  of  their  molecular  action,  this  is  especially  the  ease 
around  the  brain  and  spinal  cord  of  human  beings,  where  it 
forms  what  is  called  the  aura.  It  is  this  aura  ronnd  the  nerve 
cells  and  nerve  tuben  which  enables  a  man  to  cateh  the  ina- 
pressions  made  upon  the  astral  light  in  th«  cosmos.  If  we 
divide  mental  phenomena  into  the  three  branches  of  modern 
psychologists  ;  intellectual  images,  emotions  and  volition,  we 
find  that  volition  always  makes  itself  felt  by  an  increase  of 
vibration  in  the  astral  aura.  The  intellectual  image  makes 
itself  felt  by  the  impression  of  the  image  on  the  aura ;  and  in 
other  cases  there  is  a  change  of  colour  which  also  corresponds 
to  change  of  spiritual  feelings. 

It  is  asserted  that  each  colour  corresponds  to  a  certain 
emotion,  but  I  am  not  prepared  to  say  occultists  agree 
with  phrenologists  in  their  arrangement. 

If  I  have  the  idea  of  a  circle,  the  figure  of  a  circle  is  formed 
in  the  sensitive's  odic  aura.  A.11  mental  ideas  have  their  pic- 
tures  in  astral  light  which  are  almost  similar  to  the  images 
that  afterwards  rise  in  the  brain,  but  the  intermediate  link 
between  the  two,  the  nerve  current  in  the  brain,  does  not 
actually  describe  the  picture  in  the  mind.  If  there  were  io 
space  no  medium  to  serve  as  a  means  of  communication  be- 
tween one  human  being  and  another,  all  thought-transference 
would  be  impossible,  it  is  impossible  so  conceive  of  commu- 
nicatiou  without  a  medium, 

180 

'  The  existence  of  this  astral  light  can  be  proved  from  the 
fact  that  certain  phenomena  can  only  be  explained  upon  the 
assumption  of  such  existence,  and  it  is  moreover  an  object  of 
direct  ^rception  to  Adepts.  Once  let  its  existence  be  granted, 
and  also  the  fact  that  it  concentrates  itself  more  thickly 
around  the  brain  and  nervous  system  than  elsewhere,  and  you 
will  see  that  nature  has  made  provision  to  enable  a  person  to 
catch  the  impressions  made  by  others  on  the  astral  light. 

In  thought-reading  experiments  the  best  results  have  gene- 
rally been  obtained  from  children.  The  reason  of  this  is  that 
the  aura  of  a  child  is  passive,  because  it  has  not  generated  any 
active  tendencies  of  its  own.  This  fact  can  be  inferred  from 
the  difference  in  colour  between  the  aura  of  a  child  and  that  of 
an  adult.  The  aura  of  a  child  is  milk-white,  but  in  the  case 
of  a  grown-up  person  there  is  always  upon  this  basic  colour, 
another  colour  as  green,  yellow,  red,  &c.  These  colours  denote 
a  particular  peculiarity  of  mental  or  spiritual  organization. 
"Whenever  one  of  these  colours  is  present  and  shows  an 
absence  of  sympathy  with  the  characteristics  indicated  by  the 
colour  of  the  aura  of  the  operator,  then  a  repulsion  will  be  set 
up;  but  when  there  is  no  such  repulsion — whenever  the  mind 
is  passive,  thought-transference  is  possible. 

Every  thought  is  accompanied  by  another  physical  pheno- 
menon which  may  be  described  as  an  alteration  in  the 
nervous  fluid.  There  is  intimate  connection  between  nerve- 
fluid  properly  so-called  and  the  aura  surrounding  it.  Nerve- 
fluid  has  its  own  aura  like  every  congregation  of  molecules  in 
nature,  even  prime  ether  has  it?  own  aura  which  is  fi-kash. 
Nerve-fluid  has  its  own  aura,  called  the  odic  aura  of  the  man. 
All  auras  have  one  base,  they  are  all  akin  to  the  magnetic 
fluid  in  the  cosmos.  For  every  thought  there  is  an  affection 
of  the  nerve  currents  of  the  brain  or  nerve.  This  implies 
vibration  which  is  caught  up  by  the  astral  aura  which  com- 
municates with  the  astral  fluid  with  which  it  is  in  contact. 

This  vibration  aff"ects  the  odic  aura  round  the  thinker's 
brain,  and  is  immediately  transmitted  to  the  brain  to   which 

181 

the  thought  is  transferred  ;  it  is  converted  into  a  particnlar 
kind  of  motion  in  his  aura  and  then  into  action  in  the  nerve- 
fluid  and  is  thus  immediately  transmitted  to  his  brain. 

If  the  will-power  of  the  operator  is  not  strong  enough  to 
give  a  direction  to  the  vibration  generated  in  the  astral  fluid, 
touch  is  generally  required;  and  where  there  is  magnetic 
sympathy  or  at  least  absence  of  repulsive  tendencies,  the 
vibration  immediately  reaches  its  destination  and  is  trans- 
ferred into  a  thought  in  the  mind  ot  the  sensative,  which  will 
be  the  same  thought  first  generated  in  the  mind-of  the  operator. 
If  a  particular  sort  of  motion  in  nerve-fluid  means  a  certain 
thing  in  the  mind  of  one  man,  it  means  the  same  thing  in  an- 
other man's  mind. 

The  ideas  of  modern  scientists  about  luminiferous  ether  are 
hardly  sufficiently  definite  to  enable  us  to  express  an  opinion 
about  their  resemblance  to  our  views,  but  from  the  manner  in 
which  the  conclusions  have  been  arrived  at,  we  see  certain 
difierences. 

First,  we  see  light  coming  to  us  from  the  fixed  stars,  and 
they  say,  admitting  the  undulatory  theory  of  optics,  there 
must  be  a  medium  through  which  the  vibrations  pass. 

Secondly,  they  have  ascertained  from  minute  mathemati- 
cal calculations  that,  owing  to  friction  in  this  ether,  there  is  a 
certain  amount  of  retardation  in  the  path  of  the  planets- 
Admitting  the  two  premises,  it  will  be  plain  that  the  ether 
exists  throughout  space;  now  the  astral  fluid  does  not  exist 
throughout  space,  but  akash  does,  and  the  latter  is  more  likely 
to  correspond  with  the  ether  of  the  scientists. 

Their  cosmic  ether  is  not  peculiarly  permanent  in  connec- 
tion with  any  particnlar  organism  and  does  not  appear  to  have 
any  special  connection  with  nerve  force,  but  we  hold  that 
whenever  there  is  a  specially  sensitive  organization,  the  astral 
fluid  is  there  concentrated,  and  in  other  places  it  exists  more 
or  less  uniformly  diff'used,  but  its  uniformity  is  never  continu- 
ous like  that  of  the  ether  of  the  scientists. 

182 

The  fact  is  that  the  astral  fluid  only  comes  into  existence 
when  certain  kinds  of  differentiation  take  place  in  the  original 
Mulaprakriti. 

If  the  scientists  recognize  a  distinction  between  "honnd 
€ther"  and  "free  ether,"  it  araonnts  to  the  same  kind  of  dis- 
tinction as  that  between  astral  fluid  and  akash,  bat  even  as  it 
exists  in  point  of  space  without  any  organisms,  it  differs  ia 
its  constitution  from  real  cosmic  ether. 

In  the  course  of  ordinary  thought-transference  there  is  no 
mediation  of  any  elemental  whatever. 

In  certain  cases  we  find  that  a  sense  of  calamity  is  felt  by 
a  person  at  a  distance  when  his  friend  is  dying;  in  such  in- 
stances the  impression  is  actually  a  picture  of  the  person  and 
sometimes  the  image  is  very  distinct.  But  we  believe  that 
somehow  our  mental  ideas  are  connected  with  the  emotions  of 
pleasure  and  pain  ;  therefore,  admitting  that  some  currents 
are  accompanied  by  feelings  without  images,  we  may  conceive 
a  case  in  which  the  image^  being  indistinct,  is  accompanied  by 
a  nerve  current  which  is  only  expressed  by  an  emotion.  Some- 
times there  are  variations.  It  may  be  that  a  portion  of  the 
picture  is  lost,  or  some  new  elements  are  introduced,  but  when 
there  is  no  picture,  but  only  a  kind  of  vibration,  there  will  be 
nothing  but  a  vague  idea  of  grief  or  calamity. 

Again,  we  sometimes  find  that  the  recipient  has  some  token 
transferred  to  him,  such  as,  for  instance,  a  coffin  when  a  per- 
son is  dying, 

I  believe  if  we  take  into  consideration  the  results  likely  to 
be  produced  by  the  laws  of  psychological  association,  the  case 
is  that  particular  groups  of  ideas  are  connected,  as  death  with 
a  coffin  in  the  mind  of  a  Christian,  &c. 

One  idea  has  the  effect  of  recalling  other  ideas  which  are 
associated  with  it.  Any  of  these  ideas  may  be  pictured  in  the 
brain  and  be  followed  by  other  ideas,  and  sometimes  it  hap- 
pens that  the  associations  become  more  prominent  than  the 
main  idea. 

183 

A  case  is  mentioned  in  which  a  soldier's  wife,  travellins 
with  the  regiment,  one  night,  while  her  husband  was  present 
and  seated  on  a  chair,  declared  she  saw  her  mother  appear^ 
that  her  mother  pressed  her  shoulders  and  said  :  "And  I  have 
left  you  the  cream-jug,  mind  you  get  it."  The  husband  heard 
and  saw  nothing.  The  figure  then  vanished,  and  it  was  after- 
wards found  that  the  mother  had  died  and  left  a  cream-jug 
to  her  daughter. 

This  was  a  case  of  thought-transference.  The  woman  must 
have  been  very  anxious  to  give  her  daughter  this  information 
before  her  death,  anxiety  must  have  increased,  when  she  was 
dying  the  thought  connected  itself  with  her  aura,  that  thought 
carried  with  it,  at  the  time  of  dissolution,  the  odic  aura  of  the 
person  herself,  but  it  is  not  a  case  of  the  astral  body  going  to  & 
distance.  In  all  cases  except  those  where  Adepts  are  concerned 
it  is  the  energy  of  thought-transference  which  sometimes 
takes  a  portion  of  a  person's  aura.  Generally  this  takes  place 
in  cases  of  death  ;  in  other  cases,  unless  the  person  is  clair- 
voyant, it  will  not  be  possible  for  the  astral  body  to  be  seen. 

Sometimes  it  happens  that  when  a  portion  of  the  aura  i& 
thus  brought,  it  will  be  visible  only  to  the  man  to  whom  the 
thought  refers. 

When  the  thought  is  transferred,  the  image  is  transferred. 
From  a  more  distinct  mental  subjective  image  an  objective 
figure,  there  may  be  infinite  gradations  of  clearness  and 
visibility. 

Another  case  was  as  follows  :  A  lady  was  going  to  India  ta 
her  brother,  she  died  on  the  voyage,  and  was  seen  clad,  as  at 
the  moment  of  death,  by  the  brother's  i/.^/^  three  hours  alter  the 
death  occurred. 

Here  there  must  either  have  been  strong  sympathy  between 
the  two,  or  else  the  sister  must  have  been  a  seer,  or  there  must 
have  been  some  other  agency,  such  as  an  elemental  at  work. 
It  is  a  case  of  thought-transference,  but  in  the  absence  of 
further  particulars  a  detailed  explanation  cannot  be  given. 

184 

The  impression  could  not  have  been  transferred  from  the 
husband  to  the  wife  if  the  former  did  not  see  the  apparition. 

As  to  the  difference  of  three  hours  between  time  of  death  and 
of  the  appearance,  generally  speaking,  the  shell  may  wander 
about  for  a  time,  unless  it  is  a  case  of  a  death  at  which  all  the 
principles  are  immediately  separated,  if  this  was  so,  if  the 
dead  body  had  these  two  persons  ia  her  mind,  there  is  every 
likelihood  that  the  shell  would  travel  to  the  place,  and  not 
finding  the  person  to  whom  she  wished  to  communicate 
sufficiently  sensitive,  she  communicated  with  the  more  sensi- 
tive person  who  was  present. 

There  cannot  be  any  delay  in  the  mere  transmission  of  the 
image.  The  mind  may  be  sometimes  active  in  cases  of  insen- 
sibility. You  may  have  read  accounts  of  persons  under 
chloroform  where  the  internal  man  was  feeling  pecoliar  sensa- 
tions though  apparently  insensible.  The  delay  might  be  ac- 
counted for  by  supposing  the  person  to  whom  the  image  is 
transmitted  did  receive  the  image  by  means  of  his  odic  aura» 
but  his  brain  being  at  work  at  the  time  did  not  cognize  the 
impression  ;  it  will  be  sometime  before  the  impression  is 
effaced,  so  the  image  may  make  itself  felt  at  some  future 
time. 

The  following  instance  differs  in  many  ways  from  the  pre- 
vious ones.  A  man  willed  his  own  appearance  at  a  distance 
to  two  ladies  on  a  certain  occasion.  He  went  to  bed  and  woke 
np  unconscious  of  anything  having  taken  place,  but  was  after- 
wards told  that  on  a  certain  night  he  had  appeared  to  them 
and  acted  in  accordance  which  details  previously  written  down. 
They  had  seen  him  as  if  in  life. 

This  may  be  accounted  lor  in  various  ways.  He  may  have 
dreamt  though  ignorant  of  having  done  so,  and  again  the 
astral  man  may  have  states  of  consciousness  of  his  own,  of 
which  the  physical  man  is  ignorant  and  which  last  for  some 
time.  Again,  it  may  be  possible  that  this  will-power  that  he 
should  go  at  a  particular  time  had  the  effect  of  producing  a 
particular  nerve  current  in  his  brain,  and  it  might  actually 

185 

have  emanated  from  his  brain  at  the  time  he  liad  willed.  la 
snch  cases  I  do  not  know  of  any  instances  in  which  the  time 
set  has  varied.  There  are  many  cases  to  be  disposed  of  on  that 
snpposition,  the  only  way  in  which  we  can  account  for  it  is, 
that  tlie  astral  man  generated  the  impression  at  a  particnlar 
moment  withont  the  kno,wledge  of  the  physical  brain,  or  else 
it  was  generated  in  the  physical  brain  according  to  the  impres- 
sion left  by  the  first  determination. 

THOUGHTS    ON  KAMA-LOKA. 

Suggested  by  Mr.  Sinnetfs  paper  on  the  same  subject.* 

In  considering  this  subject  we  must,  above  all  things,  take 
care  to  realise  that  the  seven  principles  in  man  are  not  several 
entities  or  substances  that  can  be  separated  and  each  consider- 
ed as  a  distinct  individuality  having  definite  characteristics 
peculiar  to  itself.  In  Sanskrit  the  different  principles  are 
called  JJpadkis,  i.  e.,  the  sheaths  or  seats  of  the  different 
states  of  existence  of  the  One  Life. 

The  seat  of  consciousness  which  gives  rise  to  the  feeling  of 
individuality  and  the  sense  "I  am  I "  is  in  the  fifth  principle. 

If  there  is  no  fifth  principle,  i.  e.,  if  there  is  no  consciousness 
of  individuality,  all  the  other  states  of  existence  are  non- 
existent, for  without  a  percipient  ego  there  can  be  neither 
perception  nor  any  object  of  perception.  Hence  it  is  said, 
that  withont  the  son  (the  germ  of  consciousness  in  the  Logos 
roused  into  activity  at  the  time  of  Cosmic  evolution)  there  is 
DO  Father  or  Mother.  The  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost  come 
into  existence  when  the  Son  is  born,  and  this  is  the  true 
occult  explanation  of  the  Trinity  in  Unity  and  Unity  in 
Trinity.  Perhaps  it  may  be  objected  that  animals  can  take 
cognisance  of  existence  although  they  have  no  fifth  principle; 
bu't  the  reason  of  this  is  that,  although  the  fifth  principle  is  not 
united  to  the   lower  principles   of  the   animals,    it  yet  over- 

*    Vide  the  Theosopkist,  February  188%  page  lOG. 

24 

186 

shadotos  them.  Thus,  properly  speaking,  it  is  the  fifth  princi- 
ple only  which  plays  a  prominent  part  in  the  various  states  of 
man  in  life  and  after  death.  By  its  association  (no  matter 
how,  for  the  present)  with  the  lower  principles,  it  generates 
earthly  and  material  tendencies  which  attract  it  downwards. 
At  the  same  time,  being  overshadowed  by  its  father,  the  sixth 
and  seventh  principles,  it  generates  higher  aspirations  which 
attract  it  upwards.  After  physical  death,  when  the  entity 
passes  into  Kama-Lokuy  the  real  straggle  is  confined  to  the 
fifth  principle  alone,  that  is,  to  the  seat  of  conscionsnees, 
together  with  the  affioitie-^  generated  in  it  daring  its  earthly 
incarnation.  In  Kama-Loka,  therefore,  the  fourth  principle 
or  Kama-Rupa,  which  is  the  Upadhi  or  seat  of  all  earthly 
desires  and  passions,  &c.,  drags  towards  itself  those  affinities 
of  the  fifth  principle  which  are  of  a  material  natare,  while 
the  higher  aspirations  are  attracted  towards  the  sixth  and 
the  seventh  principles.  The  conception  may  be  made  clear  by 
remembering  that  the  seventh  principle  is  the  source  of  energy, 
while  the  sixth  principle  is  merely  the  energy  radiated  by  the 
seventh.  The  states  of  existence  of  man  may  be  divided 
into  three  which  can  be  again  divided  into  seven.  The 
first  three  are  : — physical  life,  astral  life  and  spiritual  life. 
The  seven  states  are: — (1)  Physical  life,  (2)  the  state  between 
physical  and  astral  life,  (3)  the  astral  life,  (4)  the  state  be- 
tween the  astral  life  and  the  spiritual  life,  and  (5,  6,  7,)  the 
three  states  of  spiritual  life.  In  physical  life,  all  the  physical 
activities  are  strong  while  the  astral  life  is  exhibited  in  the 
temporary  cessation  of  the  functions  of  physical  activities,  as 
takes  place  in  sleep,  &c.  Each  life  manifests  itself  only  on 
those  spheres  to  which  its  organisation  is  adapted.  Thus  for 
manifesation  on  this  physical  world  a  physical  organism  is 
essential,  and  without  its  help  no  activity  can  be  manifested 
in  this  sphere.  In  this  life  we  have,  as  it  were,  brought  with 
ns  such  an  accretion  of  principles  as  has  been  produced  by 
the  effects  of  the  causes  generated  in  a  previous  incarnation. 
At  the  same  time  we  have  an  or<'ani«atioa  which  enables  us 
to  generate  new  causes.    When  the  physical  body  is  worn  out 

187 

by  the  activities  manifested  throagh  it,  the  cohesive  force 
which  held  its  particles  together  becomes  weaker  and  weaker 
nntil  physical  death  takes  place.  We  do  not  therefore  die  at 
once  (except  in  cases  of  sadden  death  caused  by  accidents, 
&c.),  but  are  gradually  dying  every  moment  of  our  lives. 
The  vital  principle,  finding  its  present  Sthulasariram  unfit  for 
habitation,  leaves  it,  to  animate  some  other  Sthulasariram. 
The  third  principle,  which  is  the  agglomeration  of  the  magnetic 
emanations  of  the  physical  body,  cannot  but  die  at  the  death 
of  the  latter.  The  fourth  principle,  however,  by  its  contact 
with  the  third  in  physical  life,  has  gathered  round  itself  some 
of  its  essence.  But  this  essence  is  like  the  smell  of  a  rose, 
which  lingers  only  for  a  time  after  the  rose  has  been  destroyed. 
Hence  it  is  that  the  so-called  astral  body  is  seen  at  a  distance 
by  the  friends  or  relatives  of  a  dying  man.  The  concentrated 
thought,  an  intense  desire  to  see  a  friend,  &c.,  clothes  itself  iu 
the  fourth  principle,  which,  by  the  essence  of  the  third 
gathered  around  itself,  makes  itself  objective  to  the  distant 
friend.  And  such  a  manifestation  is  possible,  only  so  long  as 
this  essence  is  still  retained.  This  is  the  reason  for  the  Hinda 
custom  of  burning  the  dead,  for  when  the  body  is  once  burnt, 
no  more  astral  essence  can  be  drawn  out  of  it.  But  a  buried 
body,  although  in  the  process  of  decomposition,  still  furnishes 
the  aura,  however  feeble  it  may  be,  through  which  the  dead 
entity  finds  itself  able  to  manifest  itself.  In  the  dying  maa 
the  struggle  between  the  physical  and  the  astral  man  goes  oa 
till  it  ends  in  physical  death.  This  result  produces  a  shock 
stunning  the  astral  man  who  passes  into  a  state  of  unconscious 
sleep  until  he  re-awakens  into  the  Kama-Loka.  This  sleep  is 
the  second  state  of  existence.  It  will  thus  become  apparent 
why  it  is  that  "  apparitions  "  are  seen  at  the  time  of  death. 
Sometimes  it  so  happens  that  these  "  apparitions  "  are  seen 
some  time  after  the  suppossed  death  of  the  man.  But  on 
careful  examination  it  may  be  found  that  the  man  only  appears 
to  be  dead ;  and  although  the  medical  faculty  may  not  be  able 
to  detect  any  signs  of  life  in  him,  still,  in  reality,  the  struggle 
between  the  physical  and  the  astral  man  is  not  yet  ended. 

18S 

It  is  becanwe  this  straggle  is  sliently  going  on  that  the 
ancients  enjoined  solemn  silence  in  the  awful  presence  of 
death.  When  the  man  awakens  into  the  Kama-Loka^  he 
begins  his  third  state  of  existence.  The  physical  organisation, 
•which  alone  enables  man  to  produce  canses,  is  not  there,  and 
he  is,  as  it  were,  concerned  only  with  those  aflBnities  which  he 
has  already  engendered.  While  this  struggle  in  the  fifth 
principle  is  going  on,  it  is  almost  impossible  for  the  entity  to 
manifest  itself  upon  earth.  And  when  a  dweller  on  this  earth 
tries  to  establish  a  connection  with  that  entity,  he  only 
disturbs  its  peace.  Hence  it  is  that  the  ancients  prohibited 
these  practices,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of  necromancy, 
as  deadly  sin.  The  nature  of  the  struggle  depends  upon  the 
tendencies  engendered  by  the  individual  in  his  physical  life. 
If  he  was  too  material,  too  gross,  too  sensual,  and  if  he  had 
hardly  any  spiritual  aspirations,  then  the  downward  attraction 
of  the  lower  affinities  canses  an  assimilation  of  the  lower 
consciousness  with  the  fourth  principle.  The  man  then 
becomes  a  sort  of  astral  animal,  and  continues  in  that  state 
until,  in  process  of  time,  the  astral  entity  is  disintegrated. 
The  few  spiritual  aspirations  that  he  might  have  had  are 
transferred  to  the  monad;  but  the  separate  coJiscioiisness 
being  dragged  into  the  animal  soul,  dies  with  it  and  his 
persojiality  is  thus  annihilated.  If  a  man,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  tolerably  spiritual,  as  most  of  our  fellowmen  are,  then  the 
struggle  in  Kama-Loka  varies  according  to  the  nature  of 
his  affinities;  until  the  conscious7iess  being  linked  to  the 
higher  ones  is  entirely  separated  from  the  "  astral  shell/* 
and  is  ready  to  go  into  Devachan.  If  a  person  is  highly 
spiritual,  his  Kama-Loka,  is  of  a  very  short  duration,  for  the 
consciousness  is  quickly  assimilated  to  the  higher  principles 
and  passes  into  Devachan,  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  in  any 
case  intercourse  with  the  Kama-Loka  entities  is  detrimental 
to  the  progress  of  those  entities  and  also  injurious  to  the  per- 
sons indulging  in  such  intercourse.  This  interruption  is  just 
as  bad  and  even  far  Worse  than  the  disturbance  in  the  death- 
chamber  on  this  physical  plane.     When  it  is  remembered 

189 

that  the  fourth  principle  by  its  contact  with  the  fifth  has 
assimilated  to  itself  the  essence  of  the  latter,  it  becomes  an 
easy  matter  to  account  for  those  rare  phenomena  in  which  a 
high  degree  of  intelligence  has  been  exhibited  by  the  Kama- 
Loki  entities  dragged  into  raediamistic  seances.  Of  course 
there  are  cases  in  which  an  "  astral  shell "  acts  merely  as  a 
mirror  through  which  the  intelligence  of  the  "  medium  "  is 
reflected,  as  there  are  others  in  which  "  elementals  "  make  use 
of  these  "  astral  shells.'*  But  in  those  cases  where  the  Kama- 
Loka  entities  actually  appear  and  exhibit  a  rare  intelligennce, 
it  is  on  account  of  the  essence  absorbed  by  the  fourth  principle 
during  its  connection  with  the  fifth.  There  are  again  cases 
in  which  the  Kama-Loka  entities  of  "suicides"  and  of 
persons  dying  unnatural  and  accidental  deaths  may  appear 
and  exhibit  rare  intelligence,  because  those  entities  have  to 
live  in  Kama-Loka  the  period  they  would  have  passed  on 
earth  if  those  accidents  had  not  carried  them  away — before 
the  struggle  between  the  astral  and  spiritual  affinities  com- 
mences. The  causes  engendered  by  them  during  earth-life 
are  not  yet  ripe  lor  fruition  and  they  must  wait  their  natural 
time.  But  to  recall  these  into  '*mediumistic  "  circles  is  equally 
dangerous  as  in  the  above-mentioued  cases,  and  for  the 
very  same  reasons.  It  may  not  be  positively  injurious  in  all 
cases,  but  at  any  rate  the  process  is  fraught  with  danger  and 
should  not  be  undertaken  by  inexperienced  persons.  As  re- 
gards those  good  persons,  who,  it  is  apprehended,  may  on  ac- 
count of  some  unsatisfied  desire  linger  on  earth,  the  Hindus 
have  a  peculiar  custom  which  is  generally  relegated  to  the 
limbo  of  exploded  superstitions,  because  its  scientific  rationale 
is  not  properly  understood.  If  the  desire  be  of  a  spiritual 
nature,  then  of  course  it  is  only  concerned  with  the  spiritual 
affinities  set  up  in  the  Manas.  But  if  it  be  of  a  material 
nature,  such  as  some  act  to  be  done  for  the  welfare  of  a  friend 
or  family,  &c.,  &c.,  then  only  need  it  be  taken  into  account. 
In  ancient  times,  an  initiate  or  adept  was  always  present  in  a 
death  chamber,  and  attended  to  the  necessary  conditions  and 
thus  released  the  dying   muu  from  his  earthly  attractions. 

190 

This  is  the  real  origin  of  *'  extreme  unctioa  '*  in  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church  and  the  custom  oi  having  a  priest  near  the 
dying  man  in  other  religions.  Gradually  as  a  meterializing 
tendency  began  to  assert  itself,  the  Hindus  invented  a  cere- 
mony which  is  the  next  best  thing  they  could  do  under  the 
circumstances.  It  is  a  general  belief  among  them  that  after 
physical  death,  the  entity  lingers  on  the  earth  for  a  period  of 
ten  days  before  passing  into  any  other  state  of  existence. 
During  this  period  they  perform  a  regular  daily  ceremony  in 
which  they  prepare  some  rice  balls  and  put  them  before  crows. 
The  belief  is  that  crows  are  so  sensitive  as  to  detect  any  astral 
figure  they  see.  If  the  man  dies,  having  some  unsatisfied 
desire,  then  his  astral  figure  covers  the  rice  balls  which  the 
crows  cannot  touch.  If  the  balls  are  immediately  touched, 
then  it  is  concluded  that  the  man  having  no  unsatisfied  desire 
is  no  longer  earth-bound.  But  if  they  are  not,  then  the 
relatives  of  the  dead  person  go  on  recounting  all  the  wishes 
of  the  latter,  that  they  can  possibly  think  of,  promising  at  the 
same  time  to  fulfil  them.  When  the  right  thing  is  hit  on, 
then  it  is  believed  the  entity  immediately  goes  oflF  to  its  sphere, 
and  the  crows  touch  the  balls.  "Whatever  it  may  be,  the 
Hindus  have  a  horror  of  those  elementaries,  and  instead  of 
dragging  them  into  seances  they  try  by  every  possible  means 
to  release  them  from  the  earth's  atmosphere.  When  the 
struggle  between  the  lower  affinities  and  the  higher  aspira- 
tions of  the  man  is  ended  in  Kama-Loka,  astral  death  takes 
place  in  that  sphere  as  does  physical  death  on  this  earth.  The 
shock  of  death  again  throws  the  entity  into  a  state  of  nncon- 
scioosness  before  its  passage  into  Devachan.  The  "  shell "  left 
behind  may  manifest  itself  until  it  is  disintegrated,  but  it  is 
not  the  real  spiritual  man;  and  the  rare  intelligence  exhibited 
by  it,  occasionally,  is  the  radiation  of  the  aura  caught  by  it 
during  its  connection  with  the  spiritual  individuality.  From 
its  fourth  state  of  existence,  it  re-awakens  in  Devachan,  the 
conditions  of  which,  according  to  Hindu  books  are,  Salokata^ 
Samipata  and  Sayujata,  In  the  lowest  state,  i.e.,  of  Salokata 
the  entity  is  only  under  the  influence  of  the  sixth  and  the 

191 

seveDth  principle,  while  in  the  second  state,  e.  e.,  of  Sa7nipata, 
it  is  fully  overshadowed  by  the  latter.  It  is  in  the  Sayujata 
state  only  that  it  is  fully  merged  into  its  Logos  to  be  throwa 
again  into  re-incarnation  when  it  has  fully  enjoyed  the  effects 
of  the  spiritual  aspirations  created  by  it.  It  is  only  very 
highly  spiritualised  entities  that  reach  this  highest  state  of 
Devackan.  Of  course,  the  cases  of  adepts  are  here  entirely 
left  out  of  consideration,  for  as  the  Bhagavat  Gita  says,  the 
Gnyani  reaches  that  state  from  which  there  is  no  re«birth  and 
which  is  called  Mokska,  or  Mukti.  The  period  of  gestation 
between  the  Devachanic  condition  and  the  physical  re-birth 
may  be  called  the  eighth  state  ;  but  in  the  Hindu  books  the 
physical  life  being  the  basis  of  the  seven  after-states  is  not 
included  in  the  category  of  the  Sapta  higher  lokas,  just  as  in 
the  septenary  principles,  Parabrakma,  is  not  taken  into  account 
for  the  very  same  reason.  From  the  subjective  stand-point,  the 
Parabrahman,  and  from  the  objective  stand-point  the  Sthula- 
sariram,  are  not  included  in  the  septenary  division,  as  the 
former  is  the  basis  upon  which  the  whole  structure  is  built. 

NADIGRANTHAMS  AND  THEIR  INTERPRETERS, 

For  some  time  past  I  have  been  hearing  of  Nadigrauthama 
and  their  predictions.  But  the  reports  that  reached  me  from 
various  quarters  regarding  these  marvellous  books  and  the 
answers  diocovered  therein  to  a  variety  of  questions  put  by 
different  people,  gave  me  little  or  no  information  regarding 
their  real  origin  and  the  plan  on  which  they  were  constructed. 
Some  said  that  they  were  written  by  Brahma  himself,  while 
others  attributed  their  authorship  to  Vyasa  ;  a  third  account 
says  that  they  were  written  by  the  presiding  deities  of  the 
various  planets  by  whose  names  they  are  called,  while  those 
that  have  no  connection  with  Individual  planets  are  supposed 
to  be  the  production  of  a  variety  of  authors,  human  and  divine. 
Putting  together  all  the  various  accounts  received,  it  appears 
there  are  fifteen  different  kinds  of  Nudigranthams  : — viz.  (1) 
Suryauadi,  (2)  Chandranadi,  (3)  Knjanadi,  (4)  Budhanadi,  (5) 

102 

Snkranadi,  (6)  Garnnadi,  (7)  Saminadi,  (8)  Rahnnadi,  (9) 
KetaDadi,(10)  Sarvasangrahauadi,(l  1)  Bhavanadi,  (12)  Dhrnva* 
nadi,  (13)SarvaQadi,  (14;  iSakanadi,  and  (15)  Devinadi.  There 
may  be  perhaps  one  or  two  more  nadis,  bat  all  those  generally 
referred  to  are  included  in  the  foregoing  first.  I  may  mention 
in  this  connection  that  the  books  attribated  to  the  celebrated 
Bheemakavi  of  Vegidesa  (Godavery  District)  may  also  be 
considered  as  another  variety  of  Nadigranthams.  It  is  not 
possible  to  say  how  many  volumes  of  palm-leaf  manuscript 
books  are  included  under  each  heading  as  the  possessors  of 
these  granthams  are  unwilling  to  give  precise  information  on 
this  point,  but  1  have  not  actually  seen  with  them  more  than 
one  book  of  each  class.  It  seems  incredible,  however,  that 
fifteen  palm-leaf  books  of  ordinary  size  should  contain  de- 
tailed information  regarding  the  horoscopes  and  the  lives  of 
every  man  and  woman  on  this  planet  for  any  length  of  time, 
or  give  answers  to  any  question  that  may  be  asked  regarding 
events  past,  present  and  future.  I  attempted  therefore  to 
ascertain  whether  the  contents  of  these  strange  books  have  any- 
thing like  limits  with  reference  to  time  and  space.  Different 
astrologers  have  given  me  different  answers.  Those  who  pro- 
fessed to  find  in  thesebooks  answers  to  any  question  that  might 
be  asked  by  calculation  made  with  reference  to  the  time  of 
questioning,  or  "Arudhalagnam  "  as  it  is  generally  called,  and 
other  circumstances  connected  with  the  question  and  the  in- 
cidents appertaining  to  the  act  of  questioning,  foun'd  it  diffi- 
cnlt  to  assign  any  reasonable  limits  to  the  range  of  informa- 
tion contained  in  their  books.  One  of  them  said  that  the 
books  referred  to  the  occurrences  during  four  yugas  and  that 
there  were  certain  signs  given  therein  to  indicate  the  yuga  in 
which  any  particular  question  was  asked.  Apparently  any 
person  coming  from  any  part  of  the  world  may  have  access  to 
the  astrologer  and  ask  him  any  questions  he  pleases.  The 
authors  of  these  works  could  not  have  written  the  books  for 
the  special  use  and  benefit  of  any  particular  astrologer  and 
confined  their  answers  to  the  questions  which  would  be  put  to 
him  during  his   lifetime.    But   it   is   not   admitted  by  thtse 

193 

astrologers  that  the  whole  history  of  the  human  race  for  a 
period  of  4,320,000  years  is  contained  in  these  volumes. 

We  must  therefore  assume  that  the  authors  foresaw  into 
whose  hands  their  books  would  come  during  the  four  yugas, 
and  knew  perfectly  well  beforehand  the  circumstances  connect- 
ed with  the  persons  who  would  put  questions  to  these  people, 
and  that  they  therefore  give  just  so  much  information  in  their 
books  as  would  be  actually  utilized  by  the  human  race.  Even 
if  any  such  achievement  were  possible,  one  would  naturally 
expect  to  find  millions  of  volumes  in  the  hands  of  these 
astrologers,  as  many  of  them  are  deriving  a  pretty  large  in- 
come every  month  from  the  fees  paid  by  a  large  number  of 
questioners  during  these  few  years  of  Kaliyuga.  Even  if  we 
suppose  that  all  the  books  which  satisfied  the  requirements  of 
past  generations  have  been  destroyed  already,  there  must  be  a 
considerable  number  left  for  the  benefit  of  future  generations 
that  Kaliyuga  has  yet  to  run  on  for  nearly  427,000  years 
more.  But  these  lakhs  of  volumes  are  nowhere  to  be  found 
though  stern  logic  sometimes  compels  these  astrologers  to 
admit  that  they  ought  to  exist.  It  so  happens,  however,  that 
each  of  these  men  has  in  his  possession  just  the  number  of 
volumes  required  to  meet  the  demands  of  enquirers  that  flock 
to  him  and  does  not  trouble  himself  about  the  rest. 

The  astrologers  who  profess  to  find  in  these  Nadigran- 
thams  the  horoscopes  of  any  people  that  choose  to  come  to 
them  and  the  predictions  based  thereupon,  have  now  and  then 
attempted  to  set  a  limit  to  the  pretensions  of  their  granthams, 
especially  when  the  extravagance  of  such  pretensions  appeared 
to  disturb  the  minds  of  enquirers  and  make  them  assume 
a  sceptical  attitude  of  mind.  Some  said  that  the  horoscopes 
of  caste  people  only  would  be  found  in  these  books,  while 
others  asserted  that  only  the  horoscopes  of  distinguished  men 
would  find  a  place  in  their  mysterious  volumes.  One  of  them 
is  of  opinion  that  only  a  pious  orthodox  Hindu  can  expect 
to  find  his  horoscope  in  their  leaves,  while  another  hinted 
that  the  horoscope  defined  in  these  books  related  to  a  period 
25 

194 

of  one  hnndred  years,  of  which  a  considerable  portion  had 
already  elapsed.  Practically,  however,  I  have  ascertained, 
that  every  man  who  can  pay  handsomely  for  the  search  can 
expect  to  find  his  horoscope  or  some  kind  of  description  of 
it,  whether  intelligible  or  otherwise,  in  these  volumes.* 

I  may  farther  state  here  that  the  language  used  in  these 
books  is  Sanskrit  and  that  the  technical  phraseology  of 
Hindu  astrology  is  to  be  found  in  almost  every  Sloka.  They 
are  written  in  every  variety  of  character,  Nagri,  Telugn, 
Grantha,  Kanarese  and  Malyalam  characters  are  employed 
indiscriminately  in  transcribing  these  books.  Judging  from 
appearance  many  of  these  books  seem  to  be  very  old  ;  but 
this  fact  is  of  no  importance  whatsoever.  Even  if  the  book 
is  a  new  one  it  will  always  be  asserted  that  it  was  copied  from 
some  old  manuscript  and  no  importance  whatever  is  attached 
to  any  particular  book. 

From  the  foregoing  description  of  the  Nadigranthams  it  is 
clearly  not  a  very  easy  thing  to  account  for  their  existence  and 
examine  their  foundation  to  see  if  they  have  anything  like  a 
scientific  basis.  A  thorough  knowledge  of  all  the  existing 
systems  of  astrology  does  not  enable  a  person  to  find  out  the 
process  by  which  they  could  have  been  written,  much  less  to 
produce  similar  works  on  any  limited  scale.  It  is  not  alleged 
by  these  astrologers  that  they  have  any  occult  basis  or  that 
any  occult  powers  are  needed  to  interpret  them.  There  is  not 
even  room  for  the  supposition  that  by  some  mysterious  occult 
process,  these  so-called  astrologers  ascertain  the  horoscope  of 
an  enquirer  and  the  past,  present  and  future  incidents  of  hia 
life  and  only  use  these  Nadigranthams  as  a  veil  to  hide  their 
real  secret  and  mystify  the  public.  And  moreover  all  the 
circumstances  connected   with  them  are  calculated  to  create 

*  I  am  told  that  one  trick  of  roguish  astrologers  is  to  insert  in  a  Nadi 
extra  leaves,  specially  prepared  with,  reference  to  the  expected  client; 
such  facts  about  hia  history  as  are  accessible  being  etched  on  the  leares 
and  an  appearance  of  age  given  them  by  steeping  them  in  muddy-water, 

H.  S.  O. 

195 

distrast  in  the  mind  of  an  honest  enquirer.  However,  by 
a  reason  of  a  few  exaggerated  and  incorrect  accounts  of 
Buccessful  predictions  the  belief  in  these  books  is  gradually 
gaining  ground.  In  an  article  v^itten  by  Mr.  Chidambaram 
Iyer,  and  published  in  the  issue  of  the  Tkeosophist  for  June 
1883,  it  was  stated  that  these  Nadigranthams  were  of  con- 
siderable scientific  importance  and  that  it  would  be  possible 
by  their  help,  to  fix  the  first  point  of  Aries  from  which  the 
Aryanamsam  is  calculated.  Nothing  more  has  been  heard 
aince  then  regarding  Mr.  Chidambaram  Iyer's  investiga- 
tions in  this  direction.  These  books  have  again  been  promi- 
nently brought  to  the  notice  of  the  public  by  an  article  on 
"Indian  Sibylline  Books,"  published  in  the  May  issue  of  the 
Tkeosopktst,  and  some  fresh  reports  of  wonderful  predictions 
that  have  been  circulated.  I  therefore  thought  it  necessary  to 
examine  carefully  one  or  two  of  these  astrologers  and  ascer- 
tain the  real  value  of  these  books — a  determination  strength- 
ened by  the  request  of  my  friend,  Col.  Olcott.  The  result  of 
my  inquiries  is  given  for  what  it  is  worth  in  the  following 
paragraphs. 

It  will  be  unnecessary  for  me  to  say  anything  about  astro- 
logy in  general  in  this  connection;  and  I  do  not  intend  to 
advance  now  any  theoretical  considerations  to  show  that  these 
Nadigranthams  cannot  be  genuine  and  that  such  books  can  by 
no  possible  means  be  composed.  No  such  theoretical  reason- 
ing, however  sound  and  convincing  from  a  scientific  point  of 
view,  will  produce  any  impression  on  an  ordinary  mind  which 
believes  the  statements  made  regarding  these  books  on  the 
strength  of  the  marvellous  reports  of  their  predictions.  So 
long  as  such  reports  are  believed  ou  hearsay  evidence,  all  such 
considerations  will  be  set  aside  on  the  ground  that  nothing 
would  be  impossible  for  a  divine  being  or  a  Rishi  like  Vyasa. 
The  following  account  will,  however,  show  that  these  Nadi- 
granthams  are  not  always  trustworthy  and  that  a  strict 
investigation  is  absolutely  necessary  before  they  can  be  relied 
npon  and  recommended  to  the  public  as  authentic  sources  of 
iaformatioii.    if  these  books  are  th*;  spurious  concoctions  of 

196 

men  who  are  trying  to  derive  some  anvantage  from  the  credu- 
lity and  superstition  of  the  uneducated  mass  of  people,  every 
effort  must  be  made  to  disclose  their  real  nature  to  the  public 

Before  proceeding  further  I  may  mention  here  that  the 
Telugu  Brahmin  astrologer  alluded  to  in  the  article  on  "The 
Indian  Sibylline  Books  "  has  not  yet  given  me  an  opportunity 
of  consulting  his  Bheemakavi's  book  or  his  Nadigrauthams 
although  I  have  made  several  attempts  to  obtain  an  interviews 

The  other  astrologer  with  whom  I  had  an  interview  on  the 
16th  day  of  May  is  known  by  the  name  of  Auritavak  Bala- 
krishnagyosuln  and  is  at  present  residing  in  the  Mint  Street 
in  Black  Town.  He  has  been  living  here  for  the  last  four  or 
five  years  deriving  a  very  good  income  by  means  of  his 
Nadigrauthams  and  is  reputed  to  be  one  of  the  most  celebrat- 
ed  and  learned  astrologers  of  Southern  India.  Hearing  of 
some  of  his  predictions  I  expected  to  find  out  the  real  truth 
about  these  Nadigrauthams  by  visiting  him,  and  proposed  to 
a  well-known  and  respectable  native  gentleman  here  that  we 
should  both  go  to  the  astrologer  in  question  on  the  date  above- 
mentioned  to  consult  his  book.  My  friend  sent  an  intimation 
to  the  astrologer  that  he  would  come  and  see  him  on  the  next 
day.  We  accordingly  went  to  the  astrologer's  house  and 
requested  him  to  give  us  an  opportunity  of  puttiug  to  him 
certain  questions  on  payment  of  the  fee  usually  charged. 
Not  expecting  me  there  with  my  friend,  the  astrologer  im- 
mediately made  some  enquiries  about  me  and  made  the  neces- 
sary preparations  for  giving  us  a  sitting.  The  walls  of  the 
room  in  which  we  sat  were  covered  with  pictures  of  gods  and 
goddesses  and  a  box  full  of  Nadigrauthams  was  placed  on  the 
left  side  of  the  astrologer.  He  began  his  discourse  by 
complimenting  us  and  pointing  out  the  importance  of  his 
«acr€d  Nadigrauthams.  He  explained  to  us  that  an  astrologer 
had  to  get  by  heart  and  retain  in  his  memory  thousands  of 
signs  and  symbols  and  several  thonsands  of  Sanskrit  verses 
before  he  could  become  a  competent  interpreter  of  these 
mysterious  books.    After  favouring  us  with  these  remarks  be 

i9r 

proposed  to  send  away  all  his  servants  to  ensure  privacy  ex- 
cept a  boy  who  required  to  take  down  oar  qnestions.  He 
then  enquired  about  the  offerings  brought  by  us  which  con- 
sisted of  betel-leafs,  areca  nuts,  bits  of  saffron  and  plantains. 
After  counting  the  number  of  things  brought,  with  a  great 
show  of  accuracy  and  explaining  to  us  the  method  of  select- 
ing the  nadi  applicable  to  the  enquiry  in  hand,  he  ordered  the 
boy  above  mentioned  to  enter  in  a  book  the  address  of  the 
questioner,  the  number  of  things  brought  by  him  and  the  ques- 
tions proposed,  after  answering  himself,  however,  that  a 
currency  note  of  5  Rupees  was  placed  in  his  hands  which  he 
was  pleased  to  call  an  "Asurapatram"  ( paper  of  the 
Raksham  or  demons  ).  He  appeared  to  be  very  particular 
about  the  point  of  time  when  the  questions  were  declared 
though  it  did  not  appear  what  use  was  made  of  this  fact  in 
finding  out  the  nadi  or  interrupting  the  same.  He  then  asked 
me  if  I  had  any  questions  to  put,  and  when  I  told  him  that  I 
would  propose  my  qnestions  after  seeing  the  result  of  my 
friend's  enquiries  he  appeared  to  be  dissatisfied  and  said  that 
it  would  be  very  convenient  for  him  if  I  were  to  ask  my 
questions  also  immediately  and  pay  down  my  fees.  I  did  so 
and  the  same  process  of  calculation  was  gone  through  in  my 
case.  After  these  preliminary  preparations  were  finisned  two 
books  were  taken  out  of  the  box  and  placed  on  a  stand  called 
Vyasapeetham.  One  of  these  books  which  appeared  to  be  old 
was  then  opened;  afcer  looking  at  it  for  a  while,  the  astroloo-er 
opened  his  box  and  took  out  a  third  book  which  appeared  to 
be  new,  saying  that  the  account  in  the  old  book  bean  with 
the  answers,  but  that  the  preface  required  had  to  be  read  from 
another  book.  My  readers  will  be  pleased  to  notice  here  that 
no  calculation  was  needed  to  select  this  new  book  and  that  in 
all  probability  this  single  book  contains  the  prefatory  remarks 
to  every  answer  given  to  every  enquirer,  as  no  attempt  was 
made  by  the  astrologer  to  select  one  book  from  a  number  of 
Buch  books. 

When  the  astrologer  began  to  read  from  this  new   book  we 
found  that  the  scene  opened  in  Vykuutham   with  Narayana 

1.98 

flitting  there  with  hia  three  wives  and  a  host  of  Rishis.  A 
considerable  portion  of  the  account  was  devoted  to  the  de- 
scription of  the  dancing  of  Apsaras  and  planetary  deities. 
I  ttiay  here  mention  that  in  reply  to  one  of  my  questions,  the 
astrologer  informed  me  that  Yyasa  was  the  author  of  the 
book  from  which  he  was  reading.  But  Vyasa  knew  nothing 
about  the  third  wife  of  Narayana  who  was  introduced,  as  is 
well-known,  into  the  Hindu  Pantheon  by  the  Vaishnavite 
writers  of  Southern  India  in  later  times.  The  dancing  or 
nrityam  of  Grahams  or  Planetary  deities  is  a  new  idea  which 
does  not  appear  in  any  other  Hindu  book. 

The  account  then  proceeded  to  state  that  in  the  present 
year  of  Kaliyuga  on  the  very  date  on  which  my  friend's 
questions  were  asked,  certain  would  be  asked  by  a  Madhava 
Brahmin.  The  astrologer  went  on  giving  lengthy  explanations 
of  the  meaning  of  the  Sanskrit  text  until  he  came  to  the 
description  of  the  questioner  and  the  enumeration  of  the 
questions.  After  arriving  at  this  stage  he  began  to  pro- 
pose explanations  and  tried  to  discuss  the  subject  with  us 
for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  real  meaning  of  his  text. 
My  friend  hastily  produced  his  horoscope  and  placed  it  before 
the  astrologer  for  his  guidance.  Seeing,  however,  the  renl 
difficulties  of  the  astrologer's  situation,  and  estimating  at 
its  true  worth  his  anxiety  to  get  his  interpretation  coufirm- 
ed  and  cleared  of  all  its  ambiguities  by  the  light  of  our  state- 
ments, I  requested  him  to  go  on  reading  the  text  to  its  end 
without  taking  the  trouble  to  explain  its  meaning  to  us  as 
we  could  understand  it  ourselves.  This  proposal  was  not 
quite  agreeable  to  him,  he,  however,  proceeded  to  describe 
my  friend  and  his  antecedents.  The  description  was  extreme- 
ly meagre  and  contained  nothing  more  than  what  was 
known  about  him  to  a  considerable  number  of  people  in 
Madras.  The  description  was  wrong,  however,  in  stating  that 
my  friend  was  a  follower  of  Vysarayamatham,  while  he  was 
a  follower  of  Raghavendaswamy's  matham.  It  was  also 
wrong  in  stating  that  his  father  was  married  thrice.  I  found 
that  in  four  yr  five  distinct  and  unambiguous  stutemeuts  made 

two  were  clearly  wrong,  and  one  of  the  mistakes  committed 
was  jnst  the  sort  of  mistake   which  a   hasty   enqnirer    would 
commit.    As  the  majority  of  Madliavas  are  the  followers   of 
Vysarayamatham,  Vyasa  seems  to  have  made  a  shrewd  gaess 
that  the  questioner  wonld  be  a  follower  of  the  same  niatham. 
When  he  came  to  that  part  of  the   account  which   described 
my  friend's  horoscope,  the  astrologer   had   the   advantage  of 
having  before  hiui  the  diagram  of  the  same  and  squeezed   out 
of  the  senseless  Sanskrit  text  some  statements   applicable   to 
the  horoscope  under  consideration.  But  it  would  be  interesting 
to  notice  in  this   connection  that   nothing  was  stated   which 
was  not  clearly  visible  on  the    very   face  of  the   diagram,  and 
that  whenever  a  word  or  phrase  was  detected  by  me  in  the 
obscure  text  which  indicated  a  reference  to  the  horoscope  in 
question,  1   found  disturbance   of  the  metre  ot  the   Sanskrit 
verse.     I  then  asked  him  in  what  metre  the  text  was  composed ; 
the  reply  given  is  significant.     He   told   me  that   the   verses 
had  no  settled  metre,  but  that   they  were   so   composed  that 
it  wonld  be  impossible  for   even  the  greatest  Pundit  to  sub- 
stitute one  syllable  for  another,  and  that  this  fact  was  proved 
by  him  in  an  Assembly  of  Pundits  at  Sringeri.    I  need  hardly 
say  that  this  explanation  is  more  damaging  to  the  Nadigran- 
thams   than   anything   else    connected   with  this  interview. 
After   thus  defining  the  questioner  in  a  very  unsatisfactory^ 
ambiguous  and  suspicious  manner,   Vyasa  took  the  trouble   to 
point  out  at  great  length  the  articles   brought   by  my  friend 
and   notice  the  additional   articles   which    he  ought  to  have 
brought,  but  which  he  had  omitted  to  bring.  Vyasa  also  stated 
that  my  friend  would  bring  Rakshasapatram  (  the  same  as 
Ausurapatram  ),  thus  showing  that  he  clearly  anticipated,  five 
thousand  years  ago,  the   introduction  of  paper   currency   into 
India  by  the   British   Government,  though  the  name  given  by 
him  to  an  English  currency   note  was   not   quite   appropriate. 
It  was  further  stated  in  this  book  that  a  boy  would  take  down 
the  question   proposed   by   my  friend.     It  is  astonishing  to 
find  that,  while  dealing   with  the   history  of  the   human  race 
for  several  millions  of  years,  the  author  of  these  books  took 

200 

the  trouble  to  record  sach  unnecessary  details  and  trifling 
events. 

When  we  approached  expected  answers,  the  old  book  was 
opened  and  the  verses  therein  found  were  read.  The  first 
question  related  to  the  Theosophical  Society.  Bat  unfortu- 
nately the  astrologer  was  unable  to  understand  the  meaning  of 
the  expression.  As  might  be  expected  under  such  circumstan- 
ces, he  was  not  very  eager  to  give  Incid  explanations  and  com- 
ment upon  the  text  as  he  did  when  dealing  with  the  articles 
brought  and  the  dancing  in  Vykuntham,  in  spite  of  my  request 
that  he  should  proceed  with  text  and  not  waste  his  time 
on  such  trivial  things.  The  text  was  the  most  ridiculous 
rigmarole  that  I  ever  heard.  Each  verse  contained  three  or  four 
contradictory  verbs  of  various  meanings  and  a  number  of  other 
words  which  seemed  to  refer  to  a  puzzling  variety  of  subjects. 
Their  combination  conveyed  no  meaning  whatever  and  might 
be  made  to  mean  anything  and  everything,  provided  the  inter- 
preter was  allowed  to  have  his  own  way  in  the  matter.  But 
how  could  the  astrologer  interpret  it  in  a  manner  that  would 
connect  his  explanation  with  the  qaestion  when  he  was  unable 
to  understand  the  question,  though  we  allowed  him  a  Sanskrit 
dictionary  and  grammar  of  his  own  ohoise  ?  He  tried  his 
best  to  catch  any  remark  that  we  might  make  and  proceeded 
in  a  very  cautions  and  guarded  manner.  I  requested  my 
friend,  therefore,  in  English,  not  to  make  any  remark  which 
would,  in  the  slightest  degree,  help  him.  The  result,  as  might 
be  anticipated  under  such  circumstances,  was  a  ridiculous 
failure.  For  a  few  more  minutes  the  astrologer  went  on 
reading,  now  and  then  catching  a  word  and  looking  at  our 
faces  to  see  if  we  would  be  foolish  enough  to  suggest  a  meaning 
and  soon  dropping  his  eyes  when  his  expectations  were  dis- 
appointed. I  may  notice  in  this  connection  an  interesting 
incident  that  occurred.  In  one  of  the  verses  my  friend  no- 
ticed the  phrase  "  Mayasakti"  and  expecting  to  find  something 
in  it,  asked  the  astrologer  what  it  meant.  He  interpreted  it 
in  the  usual  manner,  but  my  friend  said  that  it  had  no  con- 
nection with  his  question.    The  clever  astrologer  then  said 

201 

that  it  might  have  some  other  meaning  in  his  books;  so  saying 
he  suddenly  opened  his  box,  took  out  another  palm-leaf  book, 
appeared  to  find  the  expression  inquestion  in  the  twinkling  of 
an  eye  and  announced  to  us  that  it  meant  something  else. 
He  then  threw  the  book  aside  and  I  found  that  it  was  neither 
a  dictionary  nor  a  glossary  and  that  the  pretended  search  for 
the  proper  meaning  was  merely  intended  to  have  a  dramatic 
efiect. 

Thoroughly  disappointed  with  the  answers  given,  my  friend 
hoped  that  we  might  be  more  fortunate  in  eliciting  answers  to 
my  questions.  When  it  came  to  my  turn  to  get  my  difficul- 
ties solved,  I  requested  the  astrologer  to  omit  that  portion  of 
the  account  'which  related  to  dancing  in  Vykuntham  or 
Kailyasam  and  forthwith  begin  to  read  the  answers  to  my 
questions-  He,  however,  began  his  account  with  what  appear- 
ed to  be  a  description  of  the  question  and  the  position  of  the 
planets  at  the  time  of  questioning.  The  astrologer  said  thatj 
1  must  first  be  assured  that  the  answers  related  to  the  very 
questioDS  proposed  by  me  by  the  help  of  the  description  given 
of  myself  and  my  circumstances.  1  thanked  him  for  his  kind 
advice  so  frankly  given  and  waited  for  the  preferred  assurance. 
I  was,  however,  dismayed  to  find  that  the  account  related  to 
somebody  else,  as  it  did  not  at  all  harmonize  with  my  environ- 
ment. I  pointed  this  out  to  the  astrologer  and  suggested  that 
he  might  not  have  selected  the  right  portion  of  the  book.  He 
readily  accepted  the  suggestion  and  after  turning  over  a  few- 
more  leaves,  began  to  read  again.  But  it  appeared  to  me 
that  so  far  as  the  astrologer  was  concerned  the  difficulty  of 
getting  at  my  horoscope  remained  as  great  as  ever.  I  was 
asked  whether  1  had  my  horoscope  with  me;  but  I  was  not 
willing  to  repeat  my  friend's  blunder  and  consequently  inform- 
ed him  that  I  had  not  my  horoscope  with  me.  In  sheer  de- 
spair, the  astrologer  wanted  to  get  over  the  difficulty  by  a  bold 
and  fearless  asscertioo.  He  then  began  to  read  a  verse  which 
stated  that  I  was  born  when  Leo  was  ascending,  that  my 
future  career  would  be  prosperous,  and  that  I  would  be  a  very 
shrewd  and  d  « rimiuative  man  or  something  to  that  efiect. 
26 

202 

But  here  again  the  Nadigrautham  was  found  to  be  blundering 
hopelessly.  Leo  was  not  in  my  ascendant  and  consequently 
I  informed  the  astrologer  again  that  he  was  probably  reading 
from  the  wrong  page.  My  suggestion  was  again  accepted  and 
a  few  more  leaves  were  turned  over.  The  time  the  astrologer 
did  not  venture  to  meddle  witch  my  horoscope,  but  read  some- 
thing which  'pretended  to  indicate  the  time  when  I  put  my 
questions,  fle  informed  me  that  the  horoscope  of  the  ques- 
tioner would  not  be  given  in  every  case  and  that,  because  the 
time  of  questioning  was  properly  defined,  I  must  infer  that  the 
answers  which  followed  were  intended  to  be  replies  to  my 
questions.  But  a  fresh  difficulty  presented  itself  to  my  mind. 
In  two  separate  places  in  his  book,  the  astrologer  appeared  to 
have  found  an  indication  of  the  time  when  my  questions  were 
made  known  to  him,  but  it  was  clear  that,  at  that  particular 
instant,  I  was  the  only  person  that  questioned  him.  Why  was 
the  same  moment  noticed,  then,  in  two  different  places  in  the 
Nadigrautham  and  apparently  in  connection  with  two  distinct 
personalities  ?  If  it  should  be  asserted  that  at  that  very 
moment,  some  other  person  might  be  proposing  questions  to 
a  Nadigrautham  astrologer  at  some  other  place,  and  that 
consequently  the  second  account  might  refer  to  him,  then,  it 
would  be  necessary  to  find  a  correct  indication  of  time  as  well 
as  a  proper  description  of  the  questioner  to  assure  one's  self 
that  answers  were  being  searched  for  in  the  right  place.  If 
so,  the  description  of  the  horoscope  would  be  indispensably 
necessary  in  every  case;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  should  be 
admitted  that  there  could  be  but  one  questioner  at  a  time,  the 
discovery  in  two  different  places  of  the  description  of  the  same 
moment  or  Arudhalagnam  would  be  altogether  inexplicable 
and  exceedingly  suspicious.  I  plainly  pointed  out  my  diffi- 
culties to  the  astrologer  and  asked  him  for  a  satisfactory 
explanation.  He  was  mute  for  a  few  seconds,  then  grew  pas- 
sionate and  told  my  friend  that  1  had  spoiled  the  whole  busi- 
ness. I  expected  that  the  affair  would  come  to  a  disagreeable 
close  if  I  should  insist  upon  getting  an  explanation  which, 
from  the  astrologer's  standpoint,   was  clearly  impossible.    I 

203 

therefore  mildly  told  him  that  in  patting  such  qaestiona  to 
him  I  was  acting  in  conformity  with  his  own  advice  and  that 
he  might  proceed  to  read  the  answers  without  troubling  him- 
self aboat  the  matter.  He  then  read  some  gibberish  which 
had  no  meaning  and  which  he  was  nnable  to  explain.  Folly 
convinced  that  we  ought  not  to  waste  any  more  time  with  him 
and  wishing  to  bring  the  matter  to  a  speedy  conclusion,  I 
asked  him  to  explain  the  last  verse  that  he  had  read.  He 
went  on  saying  that  the  word  "  lokadhya  "  meant  the  people 
of  the  world  or  those  who  have  the  world  and  so  forth.  I  was 
again  obliged  to  point  out  to  him  that  the  verse  had  nothing 
to  do  with  my  question.  He  then  looked  at  my  question  and 
found  that  it  had  something  to  do  with  Shankaracharya. 
Turning  round  he  said  that  the  word  in  question  meant 
Shankaracharya;  my  friend  contended  that  it  would  be  absurd  to 
force  such  a  meaning  into  the  context  in  an  arbitrary  manner 
after  looking  at  the  question,  and  suggested  that  in  the  follow- 
ing verses  some  unequivocal  reference  might  probably  be 
found  to  that  great  teacher;  of  course  such  reference  was 
immediately  found  in  the  very  next  verse,  into  which  an 
appropriate  expression  was  introduced  in  defiance  of  grammar, 
logic  and  metre.  When  we  came  to  this  point  even  my  friend 
lost  all  his  confidence  and  was  waiting  for  an  opportunity  to 
bring  the  interview  to  a  decent  close.  For  a  few  more 
seconds  we  had  to  wait  during  which  time  I  could  hardly 
suppress  my  laughter  on  finding  the  astrologer  inform  my 
friend  that  I  knew  "Vatarayana  Yogam"  and  that  I  was  a 
"Sakya"  at  heart,  as  the  second  question  had  something  to  do 
with  Yoga.  These  words  of  course  have  no  sense  whatever. 
We  prepared  finally  to  depart  and  the  astrologer  noticing,  our 
state  of  mind,  ofiered  to  act  according  to  our  wishes.  We  did 
not  however  claim  back  the  fee  paid  by  us,  but  quietly  took 
leave  of  him  with  our  mind  freed  from  all  doubts  regarding 
these  notoriouB  Nadigrantharas. 

204 

PLACES  OF  PILGRIMAGE  IN  INDIA. 

The  following  commnnication  sent  to  me  by  a  Student  of 
Occult  Science  will  throw  some  light  on  the  sigoificance 
attached  to  the  ancient  Hindu  religious  symbology  as  illustrat- 
ed in  the  various  places  of  pilgrimage  abounding  in  India,  and 
account  for  the  high  veneration  in  which  these  places  are 
held  by  the  masses  of  the  Hindu  population.  Speaking  of 
•'  pilgrimage  as  a  means  of  spiritual  education,"  the  said  cor- 
respondent writes  as  follows: — 

"The  insistance  of  the  later  Brahmanical  Scriptures  on 
pilgrimages  as  a  means  of  spiritual  education  is  well  known. 
At  the  present  day  there  is  hardly  a  pious  Hindu,  of  whatever 
sex  and  in  whatever  part  of  India,  who  considers  his  or  her 
religious  duties  performed  without  visiting  the  principal  places 
of  pilgrimage.  In  this  respect  the  modern  Hindu  differs  so 
completely  from  his  Christian  contemporaries,  that  the  latter 
would  hardly  credit  what  a  vast  number  of  pilj^rims  annually 
circulate  over  the  country  to  fulfil  their  religious  obligations 
and  to  what  trouble  and  expense  they  put  themselves  for  the 
purpose.  With  the  social  aspect  of  the  question,  the  present 
paper  is  not  concerned  It  is  proposed  to  examine  what  real 
good  pilgrimage  in  India  does  produce  in  the  spiritual  educa- 
tion of  the  people,  and  what  is  the  rationale  of  the  institution. 
The  places  of  pilgrimage  are  so  numerous  and  their  esoteric 
significance  so  deep,  that  anything  like  completeness  must  be 
disclaimed  by  the  present  writer.  At  the  same  time  the  hope 
is  expressed  that  the  lines  of  inquiry  indicated  herein  may  be 
followed  up  by  competent  scholars  and  mystics,  so  that  the 
highly  beneficial  character  of  pilgrimages  may  be  made 
apparent  to  all  open-minded  people,  and  the  great  wisdom  of 
his  ancestors  shown  to  the  Hindu  of  the  present  day. 

**In  the  first  place  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  sacred  cities 
of  the  Hindus  are  well-organized  and  powerful  spiritual 
centres,  and  from  them  there  radiates  an  elevating  influence 
which  is  not  the  less  active  because  unperceived  by  the  ordinary 
Philistine.    Places  of  pilgrimage  are  truly  spiritual  seminaries 

205 

which,  thongh  completely  closed  to  the  idler  and  the  snper- 
stitiuus  in  selfish  qnest  of  persooal  holiness  and  personal 
salvation,  are  ever  open  to  receive  the  earnest  and  devoted 
searcher  after  trath.  The  statement  may  be  boldly  made  and 
the  support  of  all  true  mystics  confidently  expected  on  its 
behalf,  that  there  is  no  important  place  of  pilgrimage  in  India 
which  does  not  enjoy  the  presence,  in  most  cases  permanent, 
of  some  adept  or  initiate  of  a  high  order,  who  is  ever  ready  to 
point  the  path  to  the  higher  life  into  which  he  himself  has 
entered.  It  is  a  matter  of  common  experience  that  people's 
spiritual  eyes  has  opened  in  these  holy  cities  under  the  benign 
influence  of  some  great  Sadhu  (sinless  man).  But,  for  reasons 
which  will  be  readily  understood,  the  pious  hand  must  not 
seek  to  withdraw  the  veil  of  obscurity  which  shrouds  the  holy 
men  and  their  work.  The  members  of  the  silent  brotherhood 
will  bat  speak  to  those  whose  Karma  deserves  it.  Shankara- 
charya  says  : — 

*'  These  three  are  difficnlt  to  attain  and  are  due  to  the  favonr  of  the 
gods*  (i.  e.  the  good  karma  of  previous  births) : — Ilumanity,  desire  for 
liberation,  and  contact  with  great  spiritaally-minded  men." 

"  The  holy  cities  were  built,  or  at  all  events  completed,  in 
the  later  epochs  of  Brahmanic  history.  When  the  spirituality 
of  mankind  began  to  be  clouded  by  progressive  materiality- 
consequent  upon  the  desire  of  selfish  enjoyment,  the  seclusion 
of  the  adepts  became  greater  and  the  sacred  Sanskrit  langu- 
age became  daily  less  understood.  As  a  remedy  for  this  great 
cyclic  evil,  the  holy  ones  of  the  earth  left  to  the  profane 
vulgar  the  symbolical  architecture  of  the  great  temples,  which 
yet  serve  as  finger-posts  to  the  mystical  student.  Very  few 
persons  are  aware  that  as  the  pilgrim  stands  on  the  bridge  of 
boats  on  the  Ganges  before  Benares  he  is  face  to  face  with  a 
most  sublime  and  awful  mystery,  the  full  import  oi  which 
none  but  the  higher  initiates  comprehend.     This    mystery   is 

•  This  interpretation  of  the  term  *'  gods"  is  accepted  by  all  mystici. 

206 

•represented  by  the  general  aspect  of  the  holy  city,  whose  two 
Sanskrit  names — Kaci  and  Varanaci — will  yield  a  mine  of 
trnth  to  the  earnest  inqnirer.  It  is  not  for  us  to  elucidate  the 
point  ;  for  the  present  it  will  suffice  to  suggest  to  the  reader  a 
fruitful  field  of  inquiry,  where  each  will  be  rewarded  accord- 
ing to  his  earnestness  and  spiritual  penetration. 
"  What  is  Kaci  ? 

"  The  question  has  been  answered  in  a  well-known  treatise 
by  a  celebrated  mystic,  Satya  Gnana  Nanda  Tirtha  Yati.  He 
says  that  Kaci  is  the  supreme  power  of  the  great  God  Siva 
who  is  the  undifierentiated  bliss,  consciousness,  and  being.* 
Siva  or  Peace  here  represents  the  fourth  or  un  manifested  state 
of  the  universe.  He  is  the  Chidakaca,  his  other  name  being 
Vyoma  or  space,  the  small  circle  Or  dot  which  is  placed  on  the 
top  of  the  Sanskrit  mystic,  symbol  Om  (a^i")-  What  releation  it 
lias  to  the  force  located  in  the  human  body  above  the  eye- 
brows, and  represented  by  the  dot  over  the  crescent  moon,  the 
mystic  knows  very  well.  Kaci  is  called  the  goddess  who  em- 
bodies consciousness  and  bliss,  and  is  the  same  as  the  Sakti 
or  power  to  whom  the  sacred  verses  of  Shankar^charya — 
Ananda  lahari — are  addressed.  The  great  teacher  says  that 
if  Siva  is  not  united  to  Sakti  he  cannot  produce  even  a  flatter 
of  well-being.  Sakti  is  adorable  of  Hari,  Hara  and  Viranchi. 
By  once  turning  the  key  of  the  symbology  here  adopted  we 
find  that  Hari  or  Vishnu  is  the  dreaming  state  of  the  universe, 
the  first  diff'erentiated  aspect  of  the  darkness,  the  destroyer 
or  remover  Hara.  Although  Hara  is  usually  taken  as  a  loose 
synonym  for  Siva,  it  is  here  used  with  the  deliberate  object  of 
implying  that  the  transcendental  state  of  the  universe,  emble- 
matized by  Siva,  is  beyond  the  state  of  the  destroyer,  as  the 
turiya  state  is  beyond  the  suskupti.  Siva  is  Para-nirvana,  while 
Hara  is  Nirvana.  It  is  easily  intelligible  how  to  the  popular  mind 
no  distinction  is  observable  between  Nirvana  and  Para-nirvana, 

•  The  word  Sat  has  been  roughly  translated  "  being,  "  as  the  Engish 
language  does  not  afford  a  better  word  ;  Be>ness  if  allowed  in  English 
would  be  a  more  adequate  rendering. 

2or 

Hari,  we  have  said,  is  the  first  differentiated  condition  realised* 
by  the  human  ego.  He  is  therefore  the  son  represented  by  the 
sign  Leo  on  the  Zodiac  (see  Mr.  Sabba  Row's  invaluable  article 
on  the  *  Twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  '  in  the  TkeosophisU  Vol, 
HI).  Viranchi  or  Brahma  the  Creator  is  the  aggregation  of 
the  perceptible  universe.  Sakti  is  therefore  above  these  three, 
and  the  consort  of  Siva.  This,  explains  why  Kaci  is  called 
Tripuraraidhtvi^  the  royal  residence  of  the  destroyer  of  the 
three  cities,  the  undifferentiated  synthetic  condition  of  the 
three  states  mentioned  above.  With  regard  to  the  human 
ego  the  three  cities  are  the  three  bodies,  gross,  subtile  and 
causal,  beyond  which  is  the  spirit.  From  this  it  also  becomes 
clear  that  Kaci  is  the  eternal  Chinmatra  which  has  been  well 
explained  by  Mr.  Subba  Row  in  his  article  on  '  Personal  and 
Impersonal  God.' — {Theosophist,  Yo\.  IV).  It  also  becomes 
manifest  from  this  that  in  one  of  its  aspects  Kaci  is  pragni^ 
in  which  is  realized  the  great  formula  '  Thou  art  It.'  This 
pragna  is  the  mother  of  mukti  or  liberation,  as  all  Vedantins 
know.  The  Trithayati  says  : — '  I  make  salutation  to  that  Kaci 
by  whose  favour  I  am  Siva,*  and  I  know  Siva  to  be  the  spirit 
of  all  that  is.  Kaci  is  pragna,  Buddhi,  Sakti  or  Maya,  the 
different  names  of  the  divine  power  which  dominates  through- 
oat  the  universe  ;  in  fact,  it  is  one  aspect  of  the  One  Soul. 
The  above  quoted  mystic  states  farther  : — '  This  Kaci  is  the 
power  of  Siva,  the  supreme  consciousness,  but  not  different 
from  him.  Know  Kaci  to  be  the  same  as  Siva  and  the 
supreme  bliss.  .  ,  Kaci  is  that  by  which  the  supreme  reality 
of  the  spirit  is  manifested  or  in  which  it  is  so  manifested. 
She  is  also  sung  as  the  Chinmatra  ;  I  make  salutiation  to  her, 
the  supreme  Knowledge.  Elsewhere  the  same  writer  calls 
Kaci  the  darkness  (Syama).'  This  Darkness  is  the  undiffer- 
entiated matter  of  the  Cosmos,  beyond  which  dwelleth  the 
sun-coloured  one,  the  spirit.  In  the  Psalms  this  Asat  or 
Prakriti  is  referred  to  in  the  highly  poetical  passage : — 
'  There  is  darkness  round  his  pavilion.* 

"Krishna,    the  supreme  spirit,  is  dark  in  his  human  form. 
No  human  eye  can  penetrate  beyond  this  divine  darkness. 

208 

In  some  Vaishnava  work  it  is  stated  that  on  one  occasion 
Krishna  transformed  himself  into  Syama  in  Kali  (darkness 
in  its  feminine  aspect),  thus  hinting  at  the  trath  which  reveals 
itself  to  the  spiritual  eye  of  intuition.  Unconsciously  guided 
by  the  higher  light;  the  Christian  church  believes  that  Jesus 
Christ  was  "  black  and  comely,"  although  the  passage  in  the 
Song  of  Solomon  in  which  the  expression  occurs  has  no  rela- 
tion whatsoever  to  Christ. 

"To  return  to  Kaci  in  its  aspect  of  Buddhi.  It  is  to  be  re- 
membered that  Buddhi  is  the  first  differentiation  of  Prakriti. 
According  to  Kapila  Buddhi  is  the  termination  ( ndhyava. 
sdya, )  in  nature  of  Prakriti  to  evolve  egotism.  Buddhi  has* 
three  conditions  or  aspects.  Its  own  essentially  pure  condition 
is  that  in  which  it  is  identical  with  Prakriti,  in  which  the 
three  substantive  qualities  of  goodness  (8ai»a),passional  activity 
(raj'ts)  and  delusion  {tamas),  are  in  a  state  of  equilibrium  and 
in  that  sense  non-existent.  This  Buddhi  is  the  mother  of 
salvation  ;  in  fact  it  is  salvation.  When  under  the  influence 
of  rajas  the  quality  of  satva  predominates,  four  things  are 
generated  : — the  practice  of  virtue  (  dharma  ),  dispassion 
(TDairagya)y  the  spiritual  powers  (aisvarya),  and  finally  salva- 
tion, when  by  the  excess  of  goodness  Buddhi  returns  to  its 
original  state  of  purity  When  under  some  influence  tamas 
predominates,  the  four  opposites  of  what  is  stated  above  are 
produced.  Tamas  by  its  enveloping  power  {dvaran  sakti) 
makes  the  one  reality  in  the  universe  appear  as  the  differen- 
tiated universe  of  matter,  and  then  rajas  by  its  expansive 
power  {vikshepa  saAti)  ^^Todncea  the  ysLSBious  which  are  the 
cause  of  bondage. 

"  These  three  conditions  of  Buddhi  the  Trithayati  gives  as 
aspects  of  Kaci: — Nirvisesha  (undifferentiated),  Suddha  (pure, 
when  the  satvaki  quality  predomiuantes)  and  jada  (when  tamns 
predominates).  One  under  the  domination  of  tamas  looks 
npon  the  geographical  Kaci  as  the  reality: — 

209 

"  The  Suddha  Kaci  is  the  abstract  conscioaaaess  still 
limited  by  forms  : — 

"  One  under  the  domination  oi  the  satva  quality  practises 
virtue,  still  ascribing  good  and  evil  to  nature  around  him. 

"  In  her  Nirvishesha  condition,  Kaci  is  self-existent  in  her 
glory,  and  is  the  supreme  God  of  Siva  and  of  all  liberated 
souls  : — 

"  We  shall  now  understand  why  it  is  generally  believed  that 
residence  in  Kaci  removes  all  sins  committed  elsewhere,  but  a 
sin  committed  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  Kaci  itself,  renders 
one  incapable  of  receiving  grace — the  reference  being  to  the 
spiritual  evil,* the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost — for  which  there 
is  no  remission.  The  wretch  who  knows  the  truth  and  follows 
the  left  hand  path  is  doomed  to  nameless  misery  in  Avitchi 
Nirvana, 

"  The  Tirthayati  says  : — '  Terrible  indeed  is  the  suffering  of 
one  who  commits  a  sin  in  Kaci.  Alas  I  the  state  of  a  Rudra 
pisacha  that  the  sinner  attains  is  more  intolerable  than  the 
suffering  of  all  the  hells/ 

'•  By  bhe  acquisition  of  true  knowledge  all  sins  consumed  by 
the  fire  kindled  in  the  hearth  of  heart  {chidagni  kundam)^  but 
there  is  no  hope  for  the  damned  soul  who  murders  his  spirit, 
as  far  as  that  is  possible,  by  the  practice  of  black  magic. 

"  Without  prolonging  the  present  paper,  the  student  may  be 
recommended  to  the  Skanda  Purana  for  further  information 
on  this  subject  ;  and  in  conclusion,  it  may  be  state  l  that  the 
practical  occultist  will  derive  great  benefit  from  a  proper  study 
of  the  Trithayati's  treatise,  which  has  here  been  so  largely 
quoted." 

I  will  add  a  few  remarks  to  the  foregoing  communication. 
It  will  be  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  secrets  of  the 
27 

210 

ancient  archaic  science,  for  which  an  enqnirer  will  search  in 
vain  the  mystical  books  of  the  East,  are  often  symbolically 
represented  in  some  of  the  most  celebrated  places  of  pilgrim- 
age in  India.  The  mysterious  ideas  generally  associated  with 
the  position  of  Benares  (Kaci),  its  past  history  and  its  in- 
numerable gods  and  goddesses,  contain  clearer  indications  of 
the  secrets  of  final  initiation  than  a  cart-load  of  books  on 
Yoga  philosophy.  Look  again  at  Chidambaram  and  examine 
carefully  the  plan  on  which  its  celebrated  teraple  was  built 
by  Patanjali,  by  the  light  of  the  Kabalistic,  the  Chaldean, 
the  Egyptian  and  the  Hindu  doctrines  relating  to  the  great 
mystery  of  the  Logos.  You  are  far  more  likely  to  penetrate 
this  mystery  by  such  a  course  of  study  than  by  examining  all 
the  obscure  statements  of  the  ancient  initiates  regarding  the 
sacred  voice  of  the  great  deep  and  the  impenetrable  veil  of 
Isis*  Masons  are  searching  in  vain  for  the  lost  golden  delta 
of  Enoch  ;  but  an  earnest  seeker  of  truth  who  has  compre- 
hended the  rules  of  interpretation  which  are  applicable  to  such 
subjects  will  not  find  it  very  difficult  to  discover  this  delta 
in  Chidambaram.  Similarly,  various  occult  secrets  find  their 
true  interpretation  and  explanation  in  Srisylam,  Ramanal, 
Jugganath,  Allahabad  and  other  places,  justly  considered  as 
sacred,  owing  to  their  various  associations,  by  the  followers 
of  the  Hindu  religion.  It  would  require  several  volumes  to 
explain  at  length  the  sacred  symbols  connected  with  these 
places  and  their  mystic  significance,  and  interpret  in  a  proper 
manner  the  Sthalapurannms  relating  thereto.  As  no  writer 
was  permitted  in  ancient  times  to  divulge  in  clear  language 
the  secrets  of  occult  science  to  the  public,  and  as  books  and 
libraries  could  be  easily  destroyed  either  by  the  ravages  of 
time  or  the  vandalism  of  barbarous  invaders,  it  was  thought 
proper  to  preserve,  for  the  benefit  of  posterity,  in  strong  and 
lasting  edifices  of  granite,  some  of  the  greatest  secrets  known 
to  the  designers  of  these  buildings,  in  the  form  of  signs  and 
symbols.  The  very  same  necessity  which  brought  into  ex- 
istence the  Sphinx  and  the  great  pyramid  led  the  ancient 
leaders  of  Hindu  religiouis  thought  to  construct  these  temples. 

211 

and  express  in  stone  and  metal  the  hidden  meaning  of  their 
doctrines.  A  few  explanations  and  suggestions  will  be 
sufficient  to  justify  the  foregoing  statements,  and  indicate  the 
mannner  in  which  these  symbols  should  be  interpreted. 

A  Sanskrit  verse  is  often  repeated  by  Hindus,  which  says 
that  journeys  to  seven  places  of  pilgrimage  will  secure  Moksha 
to  the  devotee.  These  places  are  enumerated  thus;  (1) 
Ayodhya,  (2)  Mathura,  (3)  Maya,  (4)  Ka«?i  (Benares),  (5) 
Kanchi  (Conjiveram),  (6)  Avantika  (Ojeen),  and  (7)  Dwaraka. 
Now,  these  places  are  intended  to  represent  the  seven  centres 
of  ocoult  energy  in  the  human  body,  known  as  (1)  Sahasram, 
(2)  Agnya,  (3)  Visnddhi,  (4)  Anahatam,  (5)  Swadhisthanam,  (6) 
Manipurakam,  and  (7)  Mulatharam  respectively.  The  ideas 
associated  with  these  places  will  become  intelligible  when 
examined  by  the  light  of  the  doctrines  connected  with  these 
force-centres  by  Yogis- 

It  is  generally  believed  by  the  Hindus  that  death  in  Benares 
secures  final  emancipation  from  the  necessity  of  a  rebirth. 
This  belief  is  so  strong  in  the  minds  of  the  ordinary  people  as 
to  lead  a  considerable  number  to  resort  to  this  place  every 
year  for  the  purpose  of  remaining  there  till  they  die. 

This  certainly  appears  to  be  a  ridiculous  superstition.  But 
a  great  spiritual  truth  is  lurking  behind  this  strange  belief. 
This  truth  will  become  apparent  when  we  ascertain  what  death 
at  Benares  is  really  intended  to  mean.  From  the  foregoing 
arrangement  of  the  seven  sacred  places  alladed  to,  it  will  be 
seen  that  Benares  corresponds,  to  the  heart  in  the  human  body, 
in  the  centre  of  which  the  Anakata  chakram  of  the  Yogis  is 
located;  and  the  truth  of  this  inference  is  further  strength- 
ened by  the  manner  in  which  Kagi  is  described  in  the  San/ml- 
pam  (preliminary  recitation  before  bathing  or  commencing 
any  worship).  It  is  therein  said  that  Benares  is  between  Asi 
and  Varuua;  that  it  is  situated  in  Anandavana;  that  it  is  in 
Mahasmasana  (or  the  great  graveyard  or  burial  ground);  that 
it  stands  in  front  of  Gouri;  that  it  is  held  up  by  the  three 
points  of  the  trident  of  Sivaj  that  it  is  in  the  midst  of  Brahma 

212 

Nalam  (the  narrow  passage  of  Brahma),  going  northwards,  and 
that  it  is  at  the  end  of  Mani  CManikarnika  nieaus  Pranavakar- 
nika).  It  may  be  easily  seen  now  how  far  this  is  a  figarat.ive 
representation  of  the  Anahata  chakra  of  the  Yogis.  This 
chakra  is  between  the  two  Nadis.  Ida  and  Pingala  in  the 
human  body,  which  are  represented  by  the  two  small  streams 
Asi  and  V cruna  named  in  the  foregoing  description.  The 
state  of  ecstacy  is  realized  when  consciousness  is  centred  in 
the  germ  of  pragna^  which  is  placed  in  this  chakra,  and  hence 
JBenares  is  an  Anandavan,  which  literally  means  a  pleasure 
garden.  When  this  centralization  of  consciousness  in  the 
germ  of  pragna  is  secured,  the  objective  consciousness  realized 
in  the  physical  body  and  in  the  astral  body  entirely  ceases; 
consequently  before  the  spiritual  consciousness  of  the  regene- 
rated spirit  (the  Cbrist  after  resurrection)  is  awakened,  the 
condition  realized  may  be  compared  to  that  of  sound  sleep  or 
aushupti — the  death  of  the  incarnated  Christ,  the  death  of  the 
individual  man.  This  is  the  time  of  the  great  peace  and 
calmness  after  the  tempest.  Hence  Ka<ji  or  Anahata  chakra, 
wherein  this  condition  is  realized,  is  the  great  burial  ground 
or  burning  ground,  as  every  thing — the  ego  and  the  non-ego 
— seems  to  be  dead  and  buried  for  the  time  being.  Gouri  ia 
the  Sophia  of  the  gnostics  and  the  Isis  of  the  Egyptians. 
When  this  condition — that  ol  pragna — is  reached,  the  spirit  is 
in  front  oi  the  Divine  light  and  wisdom,  and  ready  to  behold 
the  mysterious  Goddess  without  the  veil  as  soon  as  its  spiritual 
eyes  are  opened  on  the  other  side  of  the  Cosmos. 

Hence  Benares  is  in  Gourimukham.  This  condition  again 
marks  the  termination  of  the  three  conditions  of  consciousness 
experienced  by  the  incarnated  spirit,  viz.,  the  ordinary,  the 
clairvoyant  and  the  Devachauic  conditions.  These  three 
states  of  differentiated  pragna  are  the  three  points  of  Siva's 
trident.  Again  Anahata  chakra  is  in  the  Sushumna  nadi — a 
mysterious  and  narrow  passage  running  through  the  spinal 
cord  to  thecrown  of  the  head  through  which  vital  the  electricity 
flows,  and  Benares  is  therefore  said  to  be  in  Brahmanalam, 
which  is   another  name   for   Sushumna   nadi.     Further,  the 

213 

condition  above  allnded  to  is  represented  by  the  dot  over 
Pranava,  as  our  correspondent  says,  and  hence  Benares  is 
described  as  Mani-karuika. 

It  will  thns  be  seen  that  Benares  is  an  external  symbolical 
representation  of  the  Anahata  ch^kra  of  the  Yogis.  Death  in 
Benares  therefore  means  the  concentration  of  pragna  in  the 
original  germ  consciousness,  which  constitutes  the  real  indivi- 
duality of  the  man.  It  must  further  be  noticed  that  SahaS" 
ram  represeats  the  positive  pole  and  mulatharam  the  negative 
pole  in  the  body.  From  the  mysterious  union  of  their  energies 
in  the  heart  the  sacred  and  irrepressible  {Anahata)  voice  is 
generated  in  the  Anahata  ckakru.  This  voice  is  heard  when 
the  tempestuous  activity  of  conscious  existence  terminates  in 
the  death  of  Sushupti,  and  out  of  the  ashes  of  the  individual 
man  the  regenerated  man  springs  into  existence  electrified  by 
this  "song  of  life."  Hence  it  is  stated  that  when  a  man  dies 
at  Benares,  Rudra  (a  form  of  maoifestation  of  Thoth,  the 
initiator),  commanicates  to  him  the  secret  of  the  Logos  and 
secures  moksha  for  him.  It  will  be  clear  now  that  the  popu- 
lar belief  is  full  of  meaning  to  a  student  of  occult  science. 
Similarly  the  traditious  connected  with  every  other  important 
place  of  pilgrimage  will  yield  much  valuable  information 
when  properly  interpreted. 

THE  VIRGIN  OF  THE  WORLD. 

This  is  the  title  of  a  recent  publication  in  Euglish  of  some 
of  the  books  generally  attributed  to  Hermes.  The  first  book, 
however,  is  the  only  part  of  the  publication  to  which  this  head- 
ing is  strictly  appropriate.  Two  philosophical  discourses  named 
"Asclepios  on  Initiation"  and  "Definitions  of  Asclepios  " 
and  a  few  fragments  of  Hermetic  philosophy  are  added  to  it, 
with  two  introductory  Essays  by  Mr.  Maitland  and  Dr.  Kings- 
ford,  which  are  very  interesting  and  instructive. 

It  will  be  a  most  interesting  study  for  every  occultist  to 
compare  the  doctrines  of  the  ancient  Hermetic  philosophy  with 

214 

the  teachings  of  the  Vedantic  and  Eaddhist  system   of  religi- 
ons thought.     The  famous  books  of  Hermes   seem   to  occupy 
with  reference  to  the  Egyptian  religion  the  same  position  which 
the  Upanishads  occupy  in  Aryan  religious  literature.    As  there 
were  forty-two  provinces  in  ancient  Egypt,  and    the  body    of 
Osiris  was  cut  up  into  forty-two  pieces,  so   there    were    forty- 
two  books  of  flermes.     This,  however,    is  not  the  number  of 
the  Vedas  nor  of  their   sub-divisions,  as  Mr.  Maitland  seems 
to  suppose.   This  number  is  oue  of  the  characteristic  features  of 
Egyptian   mysticism,    and   veils   a   profound   truth.     It    has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  number  of  stars  in  any  particular  con- 
stellation, as  some  Egyptologists   have  imagined.    So  long  as 
these  investigators  of  the  Egyptian  religious  doctrines  errone- 
ously believe  that  they  are  based  on  the  signs  of   the  Zodiac, 
the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  or  the  appearance  of  parti- 
cular groups  of  stars,  it  will  be  impossible  for   them  to  pene- 
trate into  the  profound  depth  of  their  meaning.    These  books 
of  Hermes,  if  they  can  be  discovered,  will    no  doubt    but  an 
end  to  all   such  speculations.     But   Hermes  said,  '•  0  Sacred 
Books  of  the  Immortals,  ye  in   whose   pages   my   hand   has 
recorded  the  remedies  by  which  incorruptibility  is   conferred, 
remain  for  ever  beyond  the  reach  of  destruction  and  of  decay, 
invisible  and  concealed  from    all  who  frequent  these   regions, 
until  the  day  shall  come   in  which    the  ancient  heaven   shall 
bring  forth   instruments   worthy  of  you,   whom   the   Creator 
ehall  call  souls." 

This  passage  has  a  double  meaning,  applicable  alike  to  the 
works  of  the  Divine  Hermes  and  the  human  Hermes;  and  the 
time  is  yet  distant  when  the  true  Hermetic  philososhy  and 
the  ancient  civilization  of  Egypt  will  be  revived  in  the  natural 
course  of  evolutionary  progress.  The  works  that  are  now 
being  published  as  Hermetic,  however,  do  net  appear  to  be 
the  real  Hermetic  books  which  were  so  carefully  concealed, 
though  they  contain  fragments  of  true  Hermetic  philosophy 
coloured  by  Grecian  thought  and  mythology,  and  *'  The 
Virgin  of  the  World  *'  was  probably  based  on  some  Egyptian 
compilation  professing  to  be  one  of  the  Hermetic  books.    It  is 

215 

cnrions  to  notice  that  in  it  we  find  Isis  informing  Horns  that 
the  animal  signs  were  placed  in  the  Zodiac  after  those  of 
hnman  form,  which  would  be  the  case  when  the  equinoctial 
point  was  at  the  beginning  of  Gemini.  Moreover,  as  will  be 
shown  further  on,  the  main  doctrines  taught  by  the  discourse 
are  in  harmony  with  the  religious  doctrines  of  Ancient  Egypt. 
But  the  prominent  references  to  Zens,  Kronos,  Ares,  and 
Aphrodite  unmistakably  show  that  it  can  in  no  wise  be  con- 
sidered as  one  of  the  ancient  Hermetic  books.  In  the  context 
in  which  such  names  occur,  Hermes  would  no  doubt  have 
referred  to  the  corresponding  deities  of  Egyptian  mythology. 
By  referring  to  page  9  it  will  be  seen  that  the  writer  identifies 
Hermes  with  Mercury,  which  no  ancient  Egyptian  properly 
acquainted  with  his  ancient  philosophy  would  have  done. 
Hermes  is  '*  cosmic  thought,"  as  is  stated  in  another  part  of 
this  discourse.  Strictly  speaking,  he  is  the  universal  mind  ia 
his  divine  aspect,  and  corresponds  with  Brahma  in  the 
Hindu  religion.  Just  as  the  Vedas  and  the  Upanishads  are 
said  to  have  originated  from  Brahma  before  the  evolution  of 
the  manifested  Cosmos,  the  Egyptians  declared  that  their 
religious  books  originated  from  the  Divine  Hermes.  Hermes, 
like  Brahma,  is  represented  (p.  10)  as  taking  part  in  creation. 
Such  being  the  case,  it  will  be  erroneous  from  the  Egyptian 
standpoint  to  represent  him  as  Mercury.  Hermes  is  further 
spoken  of  as  the  teacher  and  initiator  of  Isis,  though  in  one 
place  the  Great  Master  and  the  Ruler  of  the  Universe  addresses 
the  mysterious  goddess  as  the  soul  of  his  soul  and  the  holy 
thought  of  his  thought.  Isis,  the  great  Cosmic  Virgin,  is  the 
sixth  principle  of  the  Cosmos.  She  is  the  generative  power  of 
the  Universe.-  not  Prakriti,  but  the  productive  energy  of  Pra- 
kriti— and  as  such  she  generates  ideation  in  the  universal  mind. 
Even  in  her  human  incarnation  she  cannot  properly  be  placed  in 
the  position  of  a  pupil  of  Hermes.  The  human  iucaruatian  of 
Isis  is  not  the  descent  of  soul  into  matter,  as  is  the  case  with  the 
rape  of  Persephone.  Curiously  enough  in  referring  to  this 
incarnation  in  her  discourse  to  Horns,  Isis  speaks  thus: — "The 
Supreme  God     ...     at   length   accorded   to   earth  for  a 

216 

season  thy  father  Osiris  and  the  great  goddess  Isis."  Who 
then  is  this  Isis  who  addresses  Horns  ?  Possibly  the  term 
Isis  was  applied  to  every  incarnated  soul,  as  the  term  Osiris 
was  applied  to  every  departed  spirit  in  the  later  times  of 
Egyptian  history;  but  even  this  supposition  will  be  fonnd 
inconsistent  with  some  portions  of  the  dialogue  nnder  con- 
sideration. The  author  of  the  book,  whoever  he  was,  did  not 
comphrehend  in  its  true  light  the  mysterious  connection  be- 
tween Isis  and  Hermes,  and,  trying  to  imitate  the  tone  and 
form  of  the  real  Hermetic  dialogues  (which  were  repeated 
during  the  times  of  initiation  only)  according  to  the  traditions 
current  in  his  time,  wrote  the  dialogue  under  review  in  the 
form  in  which  it  is  now  presented  to  the  public.  Before  pro- 
ceeding to  notice  in  detail  the  doctrines  inculcated  in  this 
book  it  is  necessary  to  point  out  that  Persephone  is  not  the 
Cosmic  Virgin,  and  cannot  be  represented  as  such  from  the 
standpoint  to  Hermetic  philosophy-  This  title  is  only  appli- 
cable to  the  great  Isis,  and  not  to  every  soul  which  is  encased 
in  matter  and  which  ultimately  manifests  itself  as  the  spiritual 
intelligence  of  man.  The  Cosmic  Virgin  is  the  maiden  mother 
of  the  manifested  Universe  and  not  the  Virgin  mother  of  in- 
carnated Chirst  (Spirit). 

Isis  occupies  in  the  cosmos  or  macrocosm  the  same  position 
which  the  soul  that  has  fallen  into  the  clutches  of  matter 
occupies  in  the  microcosm.  Isis  is  the  mothier  of  the  Logos 
manifested  in  the  Cosmos,  as  the  soul  is  the  Virgin  mother  of 
the  regenerated  spirit;  Isis  is  mother  of  Adonais,  while  the 
incarnated  soul  is  the  mother  of  Christ:  but  the  former  alone 
is  entitled  to  be  called  the  Cosmic  Virgin,  and  not  the  latter. 
In  our  humble  opinion  the  Cosmic  Virgin  is  not  the  Virgin 
manifested  in  the  Cosmos,  but  the  Virgin  mother  of  the 
Cosmos.  The  contrast  is  not  between  the  Virgin  of  the 
Cosmos  and  the  "perpetual  maid  of  heaven,"  but  between 
the  macrocosmic  Virgin  and  the  microcosmic  Virgin.  Con- 
eequentiy  in  the  discourse  of  the  Cosmic  Virgin  to  her  divine 
son,  we  find  a  general  account  of  cosmic  evolution,  and  not  a 
mere  description  of  the  descent  of  soul  into  matter.     It  must 

217 

be  remembered  in  this  connection  that  the  haman  incarna- 
tions of  Isis  and  Osiris  should  not  be  taken  as  mere  allegori- 
caI  representations  of  the  incarnations  of  spirit.  They  were 
placed  on  qaite  a  different  footing  by  the  ancient  Egyptian 
writers;  and  in  this  very  discourse  Isis  said  that  she  wonld 
not  and  dared  not  "recount  this  nativity"  and  "declare  the 
origin"  of  the  race  of  Horns.  The  so«called  myth  of  Osiris  is 
the  great  central  mystery  of  Egyptian  occultism,  and  has 
probably  a  closer  relation  with  the  appearance  of  Buddha 
than  has  usually  been  imagined.  It  must  further  be  stated 
here  that  the  Greek  God  Dionysos  has  no  proper  position  to 
occupy  in  the  Egyptian  Pantheon.  Dr.  Kingsford  speaks  of 
the  "  incarnation  martyrdom  and  resuscitation  of  Dionysos 
Zagreus  "  in  the  essay  prefixed  to  this  book.  She  says  that 
Dionysos  was  intended  to  mean  the  spirit,  and  adds  further  on 
that  '*  the  spirit  or  Dionysos  was  regarded  as  of  a  specially 
divine  genesis,  being  the  son  of  Zeus  by  the  immaculate 
Maiden  Kore-Peraephoneia.  .  .  ."  If  so,  Dionysos  is  the 
seventh  principle  in  man,  the  Logos  that  manifests  itself  in 
the  microcosm.  But  we  are  informed  at  the  end  of  the  essay 
that  "Osiris  is  the  microcosmic  sun,  the  counterpart  in  the 
human  system  of  the  microcosmic  Dionysos  or  Son  of  God." 
This  latter  statement  is  clearly  inconsistent  with  what  has 
gone  before,  and  is  evidently  the  result  of  misconception — a 
misconception  generally  prevalent  in  the  minds  ol  the  Western 
Hermetic  students  regarding  the  real  position  of  Osiris — and 
an  attempt  to  interpret  the  higher  mysteries  of  the  Egyptian 
religion  by  the  mythological  fables  of  ancient  Greece,  which, 
thongh  elegant  and  refined  in  form,  bear  no  comparison  what> 
ever  to  the  allegories  of  the  ancient  Egyptian  writers  in  point 
of  occult  significance. 

There  is  a  remarkable  passage  on  p.  34  of  the  book  under 
consideration  which,  if  closely  examined,  may  throw  some 
light  on  the  subject-  Isis  informs  Horns  that  "on  high  dwell 
two  ministers  of  the  Universal  Providence;  one  is  the 
guardian  of  the  Souls,  the  other  is  their  conducter,  who  sends 
them  forth  and  ordains  for  them  bodies-  The  first  minister 
28 

218 

guards  them,  the  second  releases  or  binds  them,  according  to 
the  Will  of  God."  The  real  position  and  duties  of  Osiris 
may  perhaps  be  gathered  from  this  significant  paragraph.  It 
will  not  be  very  difficult  to  ascertain  the  name  of  the  other 
minister,  who  has  a  nearer  relationship  with  the  Macroscosmic 
Sun  than  Dionysos,  from  a  carefnl  examination  of  the  reli- 
gions doctrine  of  Egypt.  Bat  as  it  is  the  business  of  the 
Sphinx  to  propose  riddles,  not  to  solve  difficulties  on  such 
subjects,  nothing  more  can  be  said  in  this  connection.  Buddha 
and  Shankaracharya  may  perhaps  disclose  the  real  mystery  of 
these  two  ministers. 

II 

Most  of  the  important  doctrines  explained  to  Horns  by  his 
divine  mother  are  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  corresponding 
teachings  of  Hinduism  and  Buddhism,  as  will  be  seen  from 
the  following  explanations.  Horns  represents  the  regenerated 
spirit  of  man,  and  it  is  to  him  that  the  Cosmic  Virgin  unveils 
herself  and  reveals  the  mysteries  of  human  existence. 

In  tracing  the  evolution  of  the  physical  man  Isis  commences 
by  giving  an  account  of  the  origin  of  the  spiritual  monad. 
God,  it  would  appear,  took  out  of  himself  such  essence  as  was 
necessary,  and  "mingling  it  with  an  intellectual  flame,  he 
combined  with  these  other  materials  in  unknown  ways;  and 
having,  by  the  use  of  secret  formulae,  brought  about  the 
union  of  these  principles,  he  endowed  the  universal  combina- 
tion with  motion.  Gradually  in  the  midst  of  the  protoplasm 
glittered  a  substance  more  subtle,  purer  and  more  limpid 
than  the  elements  from  which  it  was  generated.  .  ,  .  He 
called  it  self  •consciousness"  The  name  given  to  it  is  very 
appropriate;  it  is  the  germ  of  pragna,  the  point  of  conscious- 
ness, the  monad  which  ultimately  evolutes  the  human  being. 
This  explanation  is  similar  to  that  given  by  alchemists  of  the 
composition  of  the  philosopher's  stone.  Mercury,  described 
as  Sivaviryam  by  the  Hiudu8,.is  considered  by  the  alchemists 
as  the  essence  of  God,  while  the   intellectual    flame  is  repre- 

219 

seated  by  salphnr.    The  mysterious  salt  is  the  other  material 
spoken  of  in  the   above  acconnt,   and  it  is   the  azoth   that 
begins  to  glitter  in   the  composition.    This   has  a   profonnd 
significance,  and  gives  a  cine  to  the  solution  of  that   perplex- 
ing problem — the  nature   and   origin   of  conscioosness.     Isis 
points  oat  that  myriads  of  souls  were  thus   formed,  and   that 
they  were  authorized  to  take   part  in  the  creation  of  the 
material  world  and  the  lower  organisms,  and  were  forbidden 
to  transgress  certain  limits  assigned  to  their  action.  In  course 
of  time,  however,  they  rebelled,  and  with  a  view  of  imprison- 
ing them  in  organisms  and  thereby  curtailing  their  power  and 
freedom,  God  convened  a  meeting  of  the  celestials  and  asked 
them  "  What  they  could  bestow  upon   the  race   about   to   be 
born  ?  "     Sun,  Moon,  Kronos  (Saturn),  Zens   (Jupiter),  Arie» 
(Mars),  Aphrodite  (Venus),  and  Hermes  (Mercury)  responded 
to  this  call  and  promised  to  invest  human  nature  with  various 
qualities,  intellectual  and  emotional,  good  and  bad,  peculiarly 
appertaining  to  the  nature  of  the  donors  ;  and  Hermes   con- 
structed organisms  out  of  the  existing  material  for  the  monads 
to  inhabit.     Thus  was  formed  the  man  before  his  fall.     With 
the  transition  from  simple  self-consciousness  ta  the  plane   of 
mind  and  its  varied  activities  there   came  then   a  change  of 
Upadhi  also,  from  a  mere  centre  of  force  to  an  astral   body. 
While  the  spiritual  monad  is   evolved   by  God   himself,   the 
latter   Upadhi  is   represented  at   the    work   of  subordinate 
powers. 

There  yet  remained  one  more  step  of  descent  into  matter. 
The  souls  perceived  the  change  in  their  condition  and  bewailed 
their  fate  ;  hopes  of  a  better  and  happier  future  were  held  out 
to  them,  and  it  was  further  pointed  out  that  if  any  of  them 
should  merit  reproach  they  would  be  made  to  inhabit  abodes 
destined  to  them  in  mortal  organisms.  In  spite  of  this  warn- 
ing the  necessity  for  a  further  degradation  of  the  spiritual 
monad  soon  arose.  Man  as  an  astral  being  was  in  a  transi- 
tion stage  ;  and  this  condition  was  not  such  as  could  be 
permanently  maintained.  Mental  faculties  acting  without 
any  weight  of  responsibility  to  control  and  restrain  their 

220 

action  were  likely  to  prodnce  evil  resnlts.  The  genius  of  the 
law  of  Karua  ioon  arose  from  the  earth  in  the  form  of  Momos 
and  pointed  oat  to  Hermes  the  evil  results  which  would 
inevitably  follow  if  mankind  were  allowed  to  remain  in  their 
then  condition.  The  wisdom  of  Hermes  soon  designed  "  a 
mysterions  instrument,  a  measure  inflexible  and  inviolable,  to 
which  everything  would  be  subject  from  birth  even  to  final 
destruction,"  and  which  would  be  the  bond  of  created  entities — 
in  short,  the  inexorable  law  of  Karma.  The  instrument  forth- 
with operated,  it  would  seem,  as  Karmic  impulses  were 
already  being  generated  by  man,  owing  to  the  very  mental 
qualities  with  which  he  was  invested,  and  the  consequence  was 
that  souls  were  incorporated.  This  is  the  summary  of  the 
account  given  by  Isis  of  the  gradual  evolution  of  the  Karana 
Sarira,  Snkshma  Sarira,  and  Sthula  Sarira.  The  constitution 
of  these  Upadhis  was  also  to  a  certain  extent  indicated,  as 
well  as  the  nature  of  the  conscious  energy  and  its  functions 
manifested  in  and  through  the  said  Upadhis.  This  three-fold 
.  division  of  a  human  being  is  in  agreement  with  the  Vedantic 
classification  of  the  various  Upadhis. 

Man  thus  left  encased  in  matter,  with  his  internal  light 
altogether  clouded  and  obfcured,  began  to  grope  in  the  dark. 
Without  a  guide,  a  teacher  and  enlightener,  mankind  develop- 
ed tendencies  which  if  left  unchecked  would  lead  to  a  still 
lower  level  of  existence.  Confusion  and  discord  reigned 
supreme.  Even  the  very  elements  could  not  bear  the  presence 
of  man.  Loud  were  the  complaints  made  by  the  whole  of 
nature  against  the  moral  and  spiritual  chaos  that  prevailed. 
It  was  found  that  if  left  to  himself  man  would  be  nnable  to 
liberate  his  soul  from  the  trammels  of  matter  and  attain  to 
salvation.  As  long  as  he  remained  a  trinity  merely  he  would 
remain  an  imperfect  being.  It  was  necessary  to  convert  this 
trinity  into  a  quaternary.  This  condition  of  things  had  to  be 
remedied,  and  "  forthwith  God  filled  the  Universe  with  His 
divine  voice  ;— '  Go,'  said  He,  '  Sacred  offspring,  worthy  of 
your  father's  greatness  ;  seek  not  to  change  anything,  nor 
refuse  to  my  creatures  your  ministry," 

221 

This  divine  Voice  is  the  Logos — the  seventh  principle  in 
man.  He  is  the  real  Eswara  of  the  Vedantins  and  the 
Saviour  of  mankind.  Through  Him  alone  can  salvation  and 
immortality  be  secured  by  man;  and  the  end  and  object  of  all 
initiation  is  to  ascertain  His  attributes  and  connection  with 
humanity,  realize  His  sacred  presence  in  every  hnman  heart, 
and  discover  the  means  of  transferring  man's  higher  indivi- 
duality, purified  and  ennobled  by  the  virtuous  Karma  of  a 
series  of  incarnations,  to  His  feet  as  the  most  sacred  offering 
which  a  human  being  can  bestow. 

God  further  found  necessary  to  send  a  teacher  and  a  ruler  to 
mankind  to  disclose  to  them  the  laws  of  initiation  and  point 
out  the  way  to  reach  their  own  Logos.  In  spite  of  the  presence 
of  Atma  in  his  own  heart,  man  might  remain  ignorant  of 
that  sacred  presence  unless  the  veil  of  ignorance  were  removed 
from  his  eyes  by  a  spiritual  teacher.  To  meet  this  neces- 
sity God  thought  of  sending  down  into  the  world  such  a 
teacher  and  made  the  following  promise  to  the  complaining 
elements : — 

"  I  will  send  yon^n  efflux  of  myself,  a  pure  being  who  shall 
investigate  all  actions,  who  shall  be  the  dreadful  and  incor- 
ruptible judge  of  the  living  :  and  sovereign  justice  shall  extend 
its  reign  even  into  the  shades  beneath  the  earth.  Thus  shall 
every  man  receive  his  merited  deserts." 

This  efflux  manifested  itself  as  Osiris  and  his  female  coanter- 
part  Isis, 

This  nativity,  the  mystery  of  which  Isis  refuses  to  disclose 
even  to  Horus,  does  not  however  correspond  with  the  nativity 
of  Christ. 

Christ  or  Christos  is  the  divine  voice  or  Logos  which  mani- 
fests itself  in  every  man  ;  and  the  biblical  narrative  of  Christ 
is  an  allegorical  account  of  every  regenerated  spirit  generally. 
It  is  not  the  historical  value  of  the  biblical  account  which  is 
of  importance  to  mankind  in  general,  but  its  philosophical 
and  occult  significance,    as   asserted  by  Dr.  Kingsford  and 

222 

Mr.  M&itland.  Bat  it  will  be  erroneous  to  look  open  tlie  iDcama- 
tion  of  Baddha  or  this  nativity  of  Osiris  and  Isis  in  the  same 
light  as  that  of  CSirist.  £?erj  Baddha  is  also  a  Christ  :  bat 
every  Christ  is  not  %  Baddha.  Every  man  may  become  a  Christ 
mnd  identify  himself  with  Christ,  bat  it  is  not  open  to  every 
man  to  develope  into  a  Baddha.  Every  trae  Kabalist  knows 
that  Christ  is  the  son  of  man,  and  not  Eoaoia,  the  primitive 
WMR  ;  ot  to  express  the  same  thing  in  Baddhist  phraseology, 
Christ  is  a  Bodhi  Satwa  and  not  a  Baddha.  It  mast  be 
remembered  that  by  the  term  Christ  I  do  not  refer  to  any 
particalar  individaal,  bat  to  the  spiritaal  entity  with  r^erence 
to  which  the  Bible  account  has  its  philosophical  importance. 
The  gexm  of  a  Bodhi  Satwa  is  in  every  man,  bat  not  the 
germ  of  a  Baddha ;  hence  when  a  Baddha  is  evolved  by 
humanity  in  the  conrse  of  its  progress,  his  appearance  will 
become  a  matter  of  historical  importance.  The  appearance  of 
Osiris  was  placed  on  the  same  footing,  and  was  Jooked  npon 
in  the  same  light  by  Egyptian  initiates.  Osiris  is  not  the 
Logos,  bat  is  something  higher  than  the  Logos.  The  Logos 
itself  has  a  soal  and  a  spirit  as  everything  else  has  which  is 
manifested  ;  and  there  is  nothing  anreasonable  in  supposing 
that  Osiris  or  Baddha  may  represent  the  soal  of  the  Logos. 
The  Sphinx  cannot  and  dare  not  say  anything  more  on  the 
sabject.  The  reader  may  find  a  very  interesting  and  instrac- 
tive  commentary  on  the  foregoing  statements  in  the  second 
Yolmne  of  ^  Isis  UMceiled,** 

We  wiU  now  proceed  with  the  aoconnt  of  Isis.  The  reign 
of  order  and  jastioe  commenced  with  the  appearance  of  Isis 
and  Osiris  ;  who,  amongst  other  things,  tanght  mankind  the 
secrets  of  the  occalt  science  and  the  sacred  mysteries  of 
initiation.  After  finishing  their  work  on  earth  the  divine 
coaple  were  recalled  by  "  the  inhabitants  of  heaven." 

After  having  thas  traced  the  descent  of  spirit  into  matter 
and  indicated  the  provision  made  by  God  for  secaring  salva- 
tion to  mankind,  Isis  proceeds  to  give  replies  to  certain 
questions  put  to  her  by  Horos.    The  first  question  relates  to 

223 

royal  or  kingly  soals.  The  royalty  herein  referred  to  if 
spiritual  royalty.  Now  and  then  men  like.Baddha,  Shunkara- 
charya,  Christ,  Zoroaster  and  others  have  appeared  on  earth 
as  spiritual  leaders  and  rolers  of  mankind.  In  point  of  spiri- 
tual development  and  elevation  of  moral  character  they  stand 
at  such  an  enormous  height  above  the  level  of  ordinary 
humanity  as  to  lead  mankind  into  the  belief  that  they  are 
special  incarnation  of  divinity.  This  popular  belief,  however, 
is  not  endorsed  by  Isis,  whose  way  of  accounting  for  the 
appearance  of  such  men  is  in  harmony  with  the  teachings  of 
occult  science.  She  explains  to  Horns  that  "  souls  destined 
to  reign  upon  the  earth  descend  thither  for  two  causes. 
There  are  those  who  in  former  lives  have  lived  blameless, 
and  who  merit  apotheosis  ;  for  such  as  these  royalty  is  a  pre- 
paration for  the  divine  state.  Again  there  are  holy  souls,  who 
for  some  slight  infringement  of  the  interior  and  divine  Law 
receive  in  royalty  a  penance  whereby  the  suffering  and  shame 
of  incarnation  are  mitigated.  The  condition  of  these  in 
taking  a  body  resembles  not  that  of  others  ;  they  are  as 
blessed  as  when  they  were  free."  If  this  reply  of  Isis  is 
properly  understood  and  accepted  by  the  generality  of  people, 
sectarian  strife,  discord  and  bigotry  will  almost  cease  to  exist. 

There  are  differences,  it  would  appear,  among  these  royal 
souls,  due  to  the  nature  of  the  angels  and  genii  who  assist 
them.  The  reader  must  not  suppose  that  these  powers  are 
elementals  ;  they  are  the  guardians  of  the  souls,  whose  teaching 
and  guidance  the  souls  follow,  as  declared  by  Isis.  It  is  this 
guardian  angel  of  the  soul  which  is  the  Kwan-yin  of  the 
Buddhists  and  the  Chitkala  of  the  Hindus. 

"  How  are  souls  born  male  or  female  ?"  asks  Horns  :  and 
Isis  answers  thus  : — *'  Tuere  are  not  among  them  either  males 
or  females  ;  this  distinction  exists  only  between  bodies,  and 
not  between  incorporeal  beings.  But  some  are  more  energetic, 
some  are  gentler,  aod  this    belongs  to  the  air   in    which   all 

things  are  formed.     For  an  airy  body  envelopes  the  soul ". 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  stale  that  the  air  referred  to  is  the 

224 

anima  mandi — astral  light — and  that  the  airy  body  is  the 
astral  body  of  maa.  The  next  qaestion  answered  by  Isis 
relates  to  the  various  degrees  of  spiritaal  enlightenment  seen 
amongst  men. 

The  real  difference  between  a  man  who  has  spiritaal  vision 
and  discernment,  and  another  who  does  not  possess  these  facul- 
ties, is  not  to  be  foand  in  the  inmost  nature  of  the  soul  ;  just 
as  the  clearness  of  vision  depends,  not  on  the  latent  per- 
ceptive faculty  of  the  soul  or  mind,  but  upon  the  nature  of 
the  organ  of  vision  and  the  tunics  in  which  it  is  enveloped, 
the  clearness  of  spiritual  or  clairvoyant  perception  depends, 
not  on  the  nature  of  the  soul,  but  on  the  condition  and  nature 
of  the  Upadhis  in  which  it  is  placed. 

Consequently  all  progressive  development  consists  in  the 
improvement  of  the  Upadhis  ;  the  soul  is  perfect  from  the 
beginning  and  undergoes  no  alteration  during  the  course  of 
evolution. 

Isis  further  proceeds  to  point  out  differences  in  national 
character,  physical,  intellectual  and  spiritual,  amongst  the 
various  races  iuhabitiug  the  globe,  and  attributes  them  to 
differences  in  climate  and  position  of  their  respective  countries. 
The  reference  to  the  constellation  Ursa  Major  has  a  mystic 
significance.  The  ancient  Hindus  calculated  the  period  of 
one  of  their  secret  cycles  with  reference  to  the  movements  of 
the  stars  composing  this  constellation  ;  and  this  cycle  is  relat- 
ed tu  the  evolution  of  the  various  races  and  sub-races  on  the 
globe. 

Speakiug  of  the  agencies  which  cause  "  in  living  men  daring 
long  maladies  an  alteration  of  discernment 'of  reason'  even 
of  the  soul  itself,"  Isis  points  out  "  that  the  soul  has  affinity 
with  certain  elements  and  aversion  for  others"  and  that  there- 
fore its  functions  are  sometimes  disturbed  and  affected  by 
changes  in  either  the  physical  or  astral  body. 

The  last  chapter  of  the  treatise  under  review  contains  the 
explanations  of  isis  regarding  existence  in  Devachau  or 
Swarga. 

225 

Isis  says  that  there  are  several  regions  between  the  earth 
and  heaven,  adapted  to  varying  degrees  of  spiritual  develop- 
ment, wherein  "  dwell  the  souls  who  are  freed  from  bodies  and 
those  who  have  not  yet  been  incorporated."  These  regions 
correspond  to  the  various  Devalokams  (each  Devagana  has  a 
separate  loka)  spoken  of  in  Hindu  books,  and  the  rupa  and 
arnpa  lokas  of  the  Buddhists.  The  two  mysterious  ministers 
alluded  to  in  the  former  part  of  this  article  exyrcise,  it  would 
seem,  certain  powers  of  supervision  and  control  over  the  con- 
dition of  the  various  Devachanees  in  accordance  with  the  law 
of  Karma.  This  law  is  set  in  motion  by  two  energies  describ- 
ed as  memory  and  experience.  The  former  "  directs  in  nature 
the  preservation  and  maintenance  of  all  the  original  types 
appointed  in  Heaven."  This  refers  to  the  record  of  Karma 
preserved  in  astral  light.  "  The  function  ojf  Experience  is  to 
provide  every  soul  descending  into  generation  with  a  body 
appropriate  thereto,"  It  is  needless  to  state  that  this  is  a 
correct  rationale  of  the  doctrine  of  Karma  from  the  Buddhist 
and  the  Hindu  standpoint. 

There  is  nothing  more  of  importance  to  consider  in  this 
treatise.  The  points  already  referred  to  show  that  the  same 
main  doctrines  of  the  ancient  wisdom  religion  underlie  every 
exoteric  creed  whether  ancient]  or  modern.  It  is  not  true,  as 
Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  says,  that  the  only  statement  with 
reference  to  which  all  the  nations  in  the  world  agree  in  the 
matter  of  religious  belief  is  that  there  is  an  unknown  and 
unknowable  Power  in  the  universe.  The  religious  history  of 
humanity  shows  that  there  are  a  number  of  doctrmes  regarding 
the  origin,  the  nature  and  the  ultimate  destiny  of  the  human 
soul,  highly  philosophical  and  complicated,  which  form  the 
foundation  of  every  exoteric  religion  and  which  have  influenced 
the  religions  sentiments  of  mankind  from  time  immemorial. 
How  are  we  to  account  for  these  beliefs  ?  Have  they  any 
inherent  special  connection  with  human  nature  as  it  is  ?  Or 
are  they  the  outcome  of  a  divine  revelation  during  the  infaocy 
of  the  human  race,  whose  influence  has  survived  the  vicis- 
situdes of  so  many  civilizations  ?  If  neither  of  these  hypothesis 
29 

236 

is  acceptable  to  the  mind  of  a  modern  agnostic,  can  the 
evolatioD  of  these  doctrines  from  a  few  simple  ideas  which  are 
common  to  homanity  in  general  be  explained  by  the  opera- 
tion of  known  psychological  laws  ?  If  the  latter  hypothesis 
is  tenable,  how  is  it  that  these  products  of  haman  experience 
have  not  undergone  any  change  in  spite  of  great  improve- 
meats  in  material  civilization  and  mental  caltare  ? 

It  is  not  my  object  now  to  ondertake  a  discussion  of  the 
above  subject  and  ofier  my  own  solations  of  the  problem;  I 
only  beg  to  call  the  reader's  attention  to  this  important  ques- 
tion, and  request  him  not  to  lose  sight  of  it  in  meditating  on 
the  origin  and  history  of  religious  belief  amongst  maukiud,  and 
the  possibility  of  discovering  a  common  platform  on  which 
the  followers  of  the  various  religions  on  the  globe  may  take 
up  their  stand  with  brotherly  love  and  affection,  forgetting  the 
petty  differences  of  their  exoteric  dogmatic  creeds.  The 
Sphinx  does  not  think  it  necessary  to  say  anything  about  the 
contents  of  the  short  philosphical  dissertations  appended  to 
"The  Virgin  of  the  World"  as  they  seem  to  contain  more  of 
Grecian  speculation  than  of  l!lgyptian  wisdom. 

^THE  VIRGIN  OF  THE   WORLD." 

TO  THE  EDITOB  OP  TBE  THEOSOPHIST, 

In  your  remarks  npoa  my  prefatory  etnj  to  the  "Virgin  of  the 
World,**  joa  anert  that  Persephone  cannot  be  r^arded  as  the  Kosmic 
Yirgin.  She  was,  however,  undoubtedly  so  regarded  by  all  the  neo. 
PUtooic  school,  whose  exponent,  Thomas  Taylor,  in  his  "Diasertalion  of 
the  Eleo^nian  and  fiaodiic  Mysteries,*'  quotes  lately  from  Greek  Hermetic 
aathors  to  prove  this  very  point.  I  wish  thai  my  reriewer,  before  com- 
mitting himself  to  the  statement  he  has  made  on  page  97  of  the  XoTem- 
ber  namber  of  the  Tieoiophitlf  had  made  himself  familiar  with  this  stand- 
ard work,  and  also  with  certain  passages  of  Proclus,  Olympiodoms,  the 
Or^iic  hymns,  dandian,  Apoleias,  ani  other  accredited  and  classic 
avthorities,  from  all  of  which  it  is  abundantly  clear  that  the  mytboe  of 
the  rape  of  Peraephonet  the  theme  of  the  mysteries,  represented  the 
descent   into   Matter,  or  Oeneration,  of  the  Soul,  and  thai  the  title  "Eore 

227 

Kosmou"     was    throughout   the   whole   mythos  attributed   to  Persephone, 
the   daughter  of  Demeter  or  supermundane  Intelligence. 

IsiB  never  represented  the  soul  or  sixth  Principle  (third)  of  the 
universe,  bnt  the  eighth  sphere;  not  properly  a  Principle,  but  an  influence. 
Passages  from  the  best  authors  are  cited  in  myjessay  to  prove  this  fact, 
aiid  many  more  can  be  adduced.  If,  a»  is  certain,  Isis  was  identified  with 
tlie  Moon,  and  wore  as  an  ensign  the  double  horns  of  Selene,  it  is  placed 
beyond  doubt  that  she  symbolised  the  Occult  Power  of  Increase  and 
Decrease,"  Good  and  Evil,  and  cannot  possibly,  therefore,  be  identified 
with  the  Soul  whom  she  rejoices  or  afflicts  according  to  an  inflexible  law. 
I  cannot  in  the  least  understand  your  reviewer's  reference  to  the  Egyptian 
pantheon  in  connection  with  Dionysos-Zagreus.  No  pretence  is  made  in 
my  essay  or  elsewhere  in  the  work,  that  Dionysos  occupied  such  a  place, 
although,  of  course,  he  had  his  correspondence  therein.  But  the  whole  of 
my  exposition  follows  .  the  Greek  mysteries,  and  deals  with  their  presenta- 
tions. That  Dionysos-Zagreus  personified  in  these  mysteries  the  seventh 
Principle  (Hermetically,  the  Fourth)  in  the  universe,— that  is— the  Divine 
and  vitalizing  Spirit,  is  no  surmise  or  assumption  of  mine,  but  an 
undoubted  fact,  placed  beyond  controversy  by  the  authorities  already 
mentioned.  This  Dionysos-Zagreus,  (Bionusos  Chthonios)  the  Mystic  Dion- 
ysos, must  not  be  confounded  with  the  later  god,  identical  with  Bacchus, 
the  son  of  Semele.  I  will  only  add  that  there  is  no  such  inconsistency  in 
my  essay  as  your  reviewer  charges  on  me.  Dionysos  represents  the 
Spirit  or  Seventh  Principle  (Fourth)  whether  macrocosmically  or  micro- 
cosmically,  and,  as  such,  has  been  identified  with  Osiris,  the  Egyptian  pre- 
sentation of  the  same  Principle.  And  Persephone  is  alike,  in  both  aspects, 
greater  and  lesser,  the  Soul.  But  the  Greek  Mysteries  dealt  ostensibly 
with  the  macrocoimic  presentation  of  the  divine  drama,  and  with  its  in- 
dividual meaning  by  implication  only.  Hence  Persephone  is  generally 
taken  to  signify  the  Soul  in  her  larger  acceptation,  as  "Kore  Kosmou," 
and  hence  also,  her  son  Dionysos,  represents  rather  the  son  of  God  in  the 
World  than  the  son  of  God  in  Man. 

And,  'in  this  connexion,  in  order  further  to  elucidate  the  function  and 
position  of  Isis  in  the  macrocosm  as  it  is  expounded  by  Hermetists  and 
neo-Platonists,  I  may  add  that  her  connter-partal  analogy  in  the  microcosm, 
or  individual,  is  found  in  the  Genius;— the  gurdain  angel  of  Christian 
theosophy.  This  Genus  is  good  or  bad,  helpful  or  hindering,  bright  or 
dark,  favorable  or  hostile,  according  to  the  state  of  grace  (Earma)  which 
the  Soul  has  acquired.  The  Genius  sheds  upon  the  Soul  the  light  derived 
from  her  own  celestial  Sun.     (see  pp.  88  and  89  of  the  "Perfect  Way,") 

In  the  Discourse  accompanying  the  allegory  of  the  "Virgin  of  tha 
World,"  I  understand  Isis  to  represent  the  Illuminatrix  or  Revealer; 
Osiris,  the   Saviour  or  Redeeming  Principle ;  and   Horos,   the  Initiate,— 

228 

offspring  of  a  good  "Karma"  or  state  of  Gracei  and  Divine  Influx,  by 
which  parentage  Is  exactly  described  the  generation  of  every  true 
"Jesus." 

I  mu3t  content  myself  with  a  simple  expression  of  dissent  from  your 
reviewer's  appreciation  of  the  relation  existing  between  the  mysteries  of 
Egyptian  and  of  Grecian  origin.  No  doubt  I  feel  somewhat  strongly  on 
this  point,  because  my  own  instruction  and  illumination  in  mystic  doctrine 
have  been  obtained  e'aielly  through  the  splendid  arcana  which  1  cannot, 
without  regret,  find  characterise!  by  your  reviewer  in  a  sentence  evidently 
intended  to  disparge  them,  as  "  mythological  fables." 

Christmas,  1885.  ANX.^  Kikgspohd,  M.  D.,  F.  T.  S. 

Sib,— In  thanking  you  for  the  notice  of  this  book  in  the  November 
Tkeogophisl,  I  wish  to  correct  a  misapprehension  caused  by  your  review- 
er's statement  that  the  books  now  being  published  do  not  appear  to  be 
the  real  Hermetic  books.  The  misapprehension  in  question  consists  in 
the  impression  that  this  statement  is  made  in  contratliction  of  the  posi- 
tion taken  up  by  me.  Whereas,  the  fact  is  it  correctly  dessribes  that 
position  the  only  conclusion  to  which  1  have  committed  myself  in  the 
point  being  *'  that  the  doctrine  contained  in  the  Hermetic  books  is  in 
part,  at  least,  a  survival  from  the  times  of  ancient  Egypt,  and  therein 
really  Hermetic."  I  have  not  said  a  word  to  imply  that  I  considered 
them  the  work  of  Tri&megistus  himself,  or  that  the  term  Hermetic 
meant  other  than  a  certain  school  or  system  of  doctrine,  originating,  so 
far  as  the  Western  World  is  concerned,  in  Egypt,  and  bearing  tho 
name  of  Hermes  Trismegistus,  a  name  which  has  long  been,  for  the 
Western  World,  a  synonym  for  the  intellectual  principle. 

Your  reviewer's  expression  "^misconception  generally  prevalent  in 
the  minds  of  the  Western  Hermetists  "  seems  to  me  unfortunate  as 
constituting  an  affirmation  that  the  ''Western  Hermetists  "  are  not 
rightly  instructed  concerning  their  own  doctrine.  Whereas  all  that 
your  reviewer  can  possibly  be  in  a  position  to  affirm  is  that  there  is  a 
divergency  of  view  between  his  system  and  that  of  the  West,  That 
there  may  be  and  probably  is  such  a  divergency  we  ''Western  Herme- 
tists "  are  quite  ready  to  admit.  But  we  are  not  ready  to  admit  that  the 
error,  if  any,  lies  with  us.  Bather  do  we  hold,  and  believe,  that  the 
revival  of  occult  knowledge  now  in  progress  will  some  day  demonstrate, 
that  the  Western  system  represents  ranges  of  preception,  which  the 
Eastern — at  least  as  expounded  in  the  pages  of  the  Theosophist — has 
yet  to  attain. 

EpWABD  MAITLAND, 

p.  S. — Allow  me  to  state,  in  jastice  to  my  fellow-editor  and  myself, 
tliat  the  responsibility  for  the  defective  title-page  and  table  of  contents 
does  not  rest  with  as,  these  aot  baring  been  sabmitted  to  ns  prior  to 
puolioation. 

Sib, — Kindly  permit  me  to  say  a  few  words  with  reference  to  the  two 
letters  seat  by  Dr.  Kingsford  and  Mr,  Maitland  in  connection  with  my 
review  of  the  "  Virgin  of  the  World." 

If  my  critics  had  borne  in  mind  that  the  subject-matter  of  my  review 
was  the  "  Virgin  of  the  World  "  and  not  their  introductory  essays  or  Hel- 
lenic mysteries,  they  would  no  doubt  have  refrained  from  making  all  the 
irrelevant  statements  which  their  letters  contain.  There  were  but  two 
specific  references  to  these  introductory  essays  in  my  article.  One  of  my 
objections  remains  altogether  unanswered,  and  the  expkination  given  with 
reference  to  the  other  throws  no  additional  light  on  the  real  question  at 
issue  as  the  following  remarks  will  show. 

"  The  Virgin  of  the  World"  was  published  though  not  as  a  genuine 
work  of  Hei^es  himself,  yet  as  a  treatise  on  Egyptian  mysteries.  In 
reviewing  it,  therefore,  I  found  it  necessary  to  examine  it  by  the  light  of  the 
Hermetic  science  and  not  by  that  of  Grecian  philosophy.  With  reference 
to  the  title  of  the   Hermetic  Fragment    under  consideration,   I  made  the 

following  statement   in    my    article — " it    is    necessary    to    point  out 

that  Persephone  is  not  the  Cosmic  Virgin  and  cannot  be 'rep  resented  as  sijch 
from  th^  itand'point  of  Hermetic  philosophy."  Dr.  Kingsford  objects  to  this 
statement  on  the  authority  of  various  writers  on  Grecian  philosophy.  If 
Grecian  writers  have  bestowed  this  title  on  Persephone,  it  is  no  proof 
whatever  that  Egyptian  writers  did  the  same  thing.  Persephone  might 
be  the  Kore  Kosmou  of  the  Hellenic  mysteries,  but  she  was  not  the  cosmic 
Virgin  of  the  Egyptians,  It  will  even  be  difficult  to  find  the  corresponding 
goddess  of  the  Egyptian  Pantheon.  It  cannot  even  be  contended  that 
the  ' '  Virgin  of  the  World"  not  being  a  genuine  Egyptian  book,  but  a  work 
written  by  some  Grecian  author,  to  some  extent  according  to  Egyptian 
models,  the  title  in  question  might  have  been  used  according  to  the  con- 
ception of  Grecian  writers  in  general .  For,  under  such  a  supposition,  there 
would  be  no  connection  whatever  between  the  contents  of  the  book  and 
the  title  is  chosen  for  it.  There  is  no  special  reference  whatsoever  to 
Persephone  or  any  corresponding  goddess  in  the  treatise  as  we  find  it  at 
present.  The  only  female  deity  who  figures  prominently  in  it  is  Isis. 
Under  these  circumstances  it  would  have  been  extremely  absurd  on  my 
part  if  I  had  put  on  the  title  in  question  the  construction  now  contended 
for  by  my  critic  and  tried  to  force  into  the  teachings  of  Isis  by  means  of 
strained  interpretations  and  far-fetched  analogies  any  ideas  relating  to  the 

230 

position  of  Persephoneia  in  Grecian  mysteries.  I  beg  to  state  further  that 
the  description,  when  judged  by  itself  and  not  in  connection  with  the 
usage  of  any  particular  class  of  writers,  is  more  appropriate  to  the  Egyp' 
tian  Isis  than  to  the  Grecian  Persephone. 

It  is  my  humble  opinion  that  my  critic  has  misconceived  the  position 
ol  the  Egyptian  Isis.  What  is  really  meant  by  saying  that  Isis  repre- 
sented "  the  Eighth  sphere"  it  is  not  easy  to  understand.  She  further 
says  that  Isis  is  not  a  principle  but  an  influence.  In  spite  of  my  critic's 
assurance  to  the  contrary,  1  um  unable  to  find  any  authority  for  these 
assertions  in  her  introductory  essay.  Though  the  word  principle  is  now 
rejected  as  inapplicable,  yet  I  find  in  p.  27  of  the  said  essay  that  Isis  is 
"a  2'»*i»cii'^e"  represented  by  the  Elabbalists  under  the  figure  of  Malcuth 
or  the  Moon.  The  reason  assigned  for  disproving  my  statement  that 
Isis  represented  the  6th  principle  of  the  Cosmos  is  stated  as  follows:  — 
*'  If,  as  is  certain,  Isis  was  identified  with  the  moon,  and  wore  as  an 
ensign  the  double  horns  of  Selene,  it  is  placed  beyond  doubt  that  she 
symbolized  the  occult  power  of  Increase  and  Decrease,  Good  and  Evil,  and 
cannot  possibly  therefore  be  identified  with  the  soul  whom  she  rejoices 
and  afflicts  according  to  an  infl.exible  Law."  To  begin  with,  what  proof 
is  there  that  Isis  was  identified  with  the  moon  by  Egyptian  writers? 
There  is  no  use  in  saying  that  Grecian  writers  identified  her  with 
Diana  or  Artemis.  When  the  question  whether  Grecian  writers  rightly 
or  wrongly  interpreted  the  Hermetic  doctrines  of  ancient  Egypt  is  under 
discussion,  it  is  improper  solely  to  rely  on  their  statements.  The  sign 
of  the  Crescent  is  no  proof  that  Isis  represents  the  moon.  This  symbol, 
which  has  a  profoitnd  significance  to  every  true  occultist,  is  associated 
with  a  very  large  number  of  male  and  female  deities  in  the  Hindu  religions 
philosophy ;  but  not  one  of  them  is  on  that  account  ever  confounded 
with  the  moon.  Isis  has  not  got  all  the  attributes  of  Diana  or 
Artemis.  She  was  never  represented  as  a  huntress,  for  instance  with 
a  bow  and  arrows  in  her  hands.  Another  Egyptian  goddess— the 
Divine  Neith — had  these  attributes.  But  Neith  was  clearly  a  Solar 
Deity  in  the  Egyptian  doctrine.  It  would  be  extremely  unsafe  for 
a  student  of  comparative  mythology  to  infer  the  identity  of  two 
deities  belonging  to  the  mystical  conceptions  of  two  very  different  nation- 
alities from  the  mere  fact  that  they  have  some  similar  attributes.  Even 
admitting  that  the  moon  was  a  symbol  of  Isis,  how  does  it  follow  from  it 
that  Isis  was  considered  by  the  Egyptian  as  ♦'  the  occult  power  of  increase 
and  decrease,  good  and  evil?",  The  description  itself  conveys  no  definite 
idea,  and  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  Egyptians  attached  any  such 
significance  to  the  moon  in  their  writings.  Even  supposing  that  the  chain 
of  inference  is  so  far  sound  and  that  this  influence  calkd  Isis  rejoices  and 
afflicts  the  soul,  how  is  it  shown  thereby  that  Isis  is  not  the   Cosmic  soul 

or  the  6th  principle  of  the  Universe  ?  Does  Isis  or  the  law  of  Karma 
afllict  and  rejoice  the  6th  principle  or  the  spiritual  intelligence  of  the 
Cosoms.  If  it  does,  it  requiries  no  doubt  a  "range  of  perception"  which 
the  Eaetern  system  "has  yet  to  attain"  to  comprehend  the  meaning  of 
this  statement.  If  it  does  not,  the  whole  arguement  is  simply  worthless. 
Tlie  law  of  Karma  and  its  influence  is  as  much  a  manifestation  of  the 
energies  of  the  Cosmic  6th  principle  of  every  other  all  in  the  Universe; 
and  the  rejoicings  and  sufferings  of  the  sonl  encased  in  matter  do  not 
disprove  the  real  genuine  claims  of  Isis  to  be  rgarded  as  the  spiritual 
sonl  of  the  Cosmos. 

I  did  not  say  and  did  not  mean  to  insinuate  in  my  articles  that  Dr. 
Kingsford  made  any  incorrect  statements  as  regards  Dionysos  Zagreus  as 
is  now  alleged.  I  simply  pointed  out  in  my  article  that  Dionysos  as  con- 
trasted with  Osiris  had  no  place  in  the  Egyptian  Pantheon  to  preclude 
the  possibility  of  any  misconception  that  might  otherwise  arise  regarding 
the  real  position  of  Osiris  from  certain  passages  in  the  introductory  essay: 
and  I  must  further  state  now  that  if  Osirig  is  to  be  left  out  of  account 
Dionysos  has  no  correspondence  in  the  Egyptian  Pantheon. 

The  inconsistency  pointed  out  in  my  article  is  in  no  way  removed  by 
the  explanation  now  given.  I  beg  to  call  the  readers's  attention  to  the 
following  passages  in  the  introductory  essay  in  this  connection. 

1.  "...  The  incarnation,  martyrdom  and  resuscitation  of  Dionysos 
Zagreus." 

2.  "For,  Osiris  is  the  mierocosmic  sun,  the  counter-part  in  the  human 
system  of  the  tnacrocosmic  Dionysos  or  Son  of  God.  So  that  these  authors 
who  confound  Isis  with  Demeter,  equally  and  quite  comprehensibly 
confound  Osiris  with  Dionysos ..." 

'*  The  Hermetic  books  admit  three  expressions  of  Deity;  first,  the 
supreme,  abstract,  and  infinite  God,  eternally  self-subsistent  and  unmani- 
test;  secondly,  the  only  Begotten,  the  manifestation  of  Deity  in  the  uni- 
verse; thirdly,  God  in  man,  the  redeemer,  or  Osiris." 

Comparing  these  various  statements  with  each  other  we  find  Dionysos, 
described  as  the  maorooosmic  sun  or  the  only  Begotten  Son  of  God 
manifested  in  the  Universe,  undergoing  incarnation,  martyrdom  and 
resuscitation  as  if  he  were  the  incarnated  spirit.  It  is  now  asserted 
that  Dionysos  represents  the  spirit  or  7th  principle,  whether  tnaero- 
cogmicalli/  or  microiosmically ,  If  so,  he  is  identical  with  Osiris  as  is 
virtually  admitted.  Why  then  was  it  stated  in  the  introductory  essay 
that  some  authors  confounded  Dionysos  with  Osiris  and  Isis  with  Demeter? 
If  one  and  the  same  principle  is  alike  the  Logos  manifested  in  the 
Cosmos  and  the  Logos  manifested  in  man,  what  foundation  is  there  for 
Wicthret   expressions  of  Deity  above  described  ?    If  the   Greek  mysteries 

232 

dealt  ostensibly  with  the  macrocosmic  presentation  of  the  DiTiue  Drama, 
and  with  its  individual  meaning  by  implication  only  as  is  now  asserted 
this  statement  is  altogether  at  variance  with  the  following  statements  in 
the  introductory  essay: — "The  Greek  mysteries  dealt  onlu  with  two  subjects, 
the  tirst  being  the  Drama  of  the  rape  and  restoration  of  Persephone;  the 
second  that  of  the  incarnation,  martyrdom  and  resuscitation  of  Dionysos 
ZagreuB."  It  cannot,  surely,  be  contended  that  these  form  the  sabject- 
matter  of  the  macrocosmic  presentation  of  the  Divine  Drama:  and  we 
are  further  informed  that  the  Hellenic  mysteries  dealt  only  with  these 
two  subjects.  If  so,  the  presentation  is  pre-eminently  if  not  entirely 
microcosmic  and  the  macrocosmic  position  assigned  to  Dionysos  and  the 
diflEerence  pointed  out  between  him  and  Osiria  in  the  introductory  essay 
by  reason  of  such  position,  is  out  of  place  in  the  Grecian  mysteries. 
Any  number  of  difficulties  may  be  pointed  out  in  the  position  assumed  by 
Dr.  Kingsford,  and  the  explanation  uow  ofiered  is  likely  to  make  matters 
worse. 

As  regards  the  gaardian  angel  of  Christian  Theosophy,  I  tind  it 
necessary  to  state  that  this  guardian  angel  is  not  the  counterpart  of 
Isis.  IE  Isis  is  not  a  principle  but  a  mere  influence  as  stated  by  my 
critic,  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  this  influence  can  discharge  the 
duties  assigned  to,  and  be  invested  with,  the  attributes  of  a  guardian 
angel  in  the  Christian  doctrine. 

"With  reference  to  Dr.  Kingford's  letter  I  have  only  to  state  further 
that  I  did  not  use  the  expression  cited  for  the  purpose  of  disparaging 
the  Grecian  mystical  doctrines.  According  to  ordinary  usage  the  expres- 
sion in  question  was  the  only  one  which  I  could  use  to  indicate  that  part 
of  the  Grecian  literature  which  dealt  with  mysUcal  and  occtdt  subjects. 
But  my  convictions  are  equally  strong  that  there  is  a  greater  depth  of 
occult  significance  in  the  allegorical  fables  of  Egypt  than  in  those  of 
Greece,  and  that  it  will  be  extremely  unjust  to  the  Egyptian  doctrine 
to  interpret  it  in  accordance  with  Hellenic  notions. 

Mr.  Maitland's  letter  requires  but  very  few  words  in  reply.  Ho  makes 
no  attempt  to  justify  his  assertion  that  the  number  of  the  Yedas  or  their 
sub-divisions  is  42,  but  raises  a  discussion  which  is  altogether  irrelevant 
and  unnecessary.  I  do  not  see  how  he  can  liold  me  responsible  for 
any  misapprehension  that  might  have  arisen  from  his  own  words. 
Mr.  Maitland  seems  to  think  that  I  have  no  right  whatever  to  speak  of 
the  misconceptions  regarding  the  Hermetic  doctrine  that  seem  to  exist  in 
the  minds  of  the  so-called  '•  Western  Hermetists,"  because  the  said 
doctrine  is  "  their  own  doctrine,"  and  it  must  therefore  be  presumed  that 
they  know  all  about  it.  If,  by  Hermetic  doctrine  Mr.  Maitland  simply 
means  the  doctrine  now  professed  by  the  so-called    ' '  Western  Hermetists" 

53S 

t)f  the,  praseat  day,  there  is  some  reiaon  for  €he  astertion  made.  Bat  tha 
expresflioa  is  generally  applied  to  the  occult  philosophy  and  the  mystical 
doctrines  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  and  when  I  spoke  of  the  misooncep- 
tions  regarding  the  Hermetic  doctrine  in  my  review,  I  had  this  system 
of  philosophy  in. riew  and  not  any  other  dootriae  to  which  my  critio 
might  apply  the  expression. 

Bat  if  Mr.  Haitland  goes  to  ^he  length  of  aaying  that  the  Hermetic 
doctrine  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  can  be  claimed  by  the  Western  Her- 
metists  "  as  their  doctrine,"  I  am  bound  to  reject  such  a  claim  as  aim* 
ply  absard.  The  real  Hermetic  doctrine  is  far  more  closely  connected 
with  the  Eastern  systems  of  occalt  science  than  with  the  V/estern.  A 
considerable  portion  of  it  has  long  ago  disappeared  from  the  West  en- 
tirely. The  old  Hermetic  doctrine  dealt  with  rarioas  systems  of  initia- 
tion. There  were  mysteries  of  Isis,  of  Osiris,  of  Ilermes,  of  Neith,  of 
Amen-ra  and  Tarions  others  divided  into  distinct  groups.  A  few  of  the 
cloctrines  only  belonging  to  the  mysteries  of  Isis  and  Osiris  came  to  the 
West  through  Hebrew,  Grecian  and  other  sources  considerably  modified. 
The  other  parts  of  the  true  Hermetic  doctrine  were  altogether  lest  to  the 
West. 

Under  such  circumstances  it  is  highly  desirable  that  **  Western  herrae- 
tists"  should  be  a  little  more  tolerant  and  discreet.  Mr.  Maitland's  refer- 
ence to  the  Theosophist  is  entirely  out  of  place  in  the  present  discussion, 
I  must  confess  that  I  have  as  yet  seaa  very  little  of  this  Western  wisdom 
which  is  somewhere  stored  up  in  Europe.  Possibly  it  has  very  wide 
Banges  of  peroeptiou  not  jet  attained  by  Eastern  systems  as  Mr.  Maitland 
is  pleased  to  state. 

But  as  these  ranges  of  perception  have  very  little  to  do  with  the 
Virgin  of  World  or  my  review  of  the  same,  or  with  the  introductory 
essays  appended  to  it,  it  is  unnecessary  to  enter  into  any  controversy  with 
Mr.  Maitland'On  this  subject. 

Tbx  Solas  Sphibx. 

3Q 

BHAGAVAD  GIT  A* 

In  studying  the  Bhagavad  Qita  it  must  not  be  treated  as  if 
isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  Mahabharata  as  it  as  present 
exists.  It  was  inserted  by  Vyasa  in  the  right  place  with 
special  reference  to  some  of  the  incidents  in  that  book.  One 
must  first  realise  the  real  position  of  Arjnna  and  Krishna  in 
order  to  appreciate  the  teaching  of  the  latter.  Among  other 
appellations  Arjuna  has  one  very  strange  name — he  is  called  at 
different  times  by  ten  or  eleven  names,  most  of  which  are  ex- 
plained by  himself  in  Virataparva.  One  name  is  omitted  from 
the  list,  i.e.t  Nara.  This  word  simply  means  *'  man."  But 
why  a  particular  man  should  be  called  by  this  as  a  proper 
name  may  at  first  sight  appear  strange.  Nevertheless  herein 
lies  a  clue,  which  enables  us  to  understand  not  only  the  posi- 
tion of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  in  the  text  and  its  connexion  with 
Arjuna  and  Krishna,  but  the  entire  current  running  through 
the  whole  of  the  Mahabharata,  implying  Vyasa's  real  views 
of  the  origin,  trials  and  destiny  of  man.  Vyasa  looked  upon 
I  Arjuna  as  man,  or  rather  the  real  monad   in   man  ;  and  upon 

I  Krishna  as  the  Logos,  or  the  spirit  that  comes  to  save  man. 
To  some  it  appears  strange  that  this  highly  philosophical 
teaching  should  have  been  inserted  in  a  place  apparently 
utterly  unfitted  for  it.    The  discourse  is  alleged  to  have  takea 

^  place  between  Arjuna  and  Krishna  just  before  the  battle  began 
to  rage.  But  when  once  you  begin  to  appreciate  the  Maha- 
bharata, you  will  see  this  was  the  fittest  place  for  the  Bha* 
gavad  Gita. 

Historically  the  great  battle  was  a  struggle  between  two 
families.    Philosophically  it  is  the  great  battle,   in  which  the 

y  human  spirit  has  to  fight  ag^ainst  the  lower  passions  in  the 
physical  body.  Many  of  our  readers  have  probably  heard 
about  the  so-called  Dweller  on  the  Threshold,  so  vividly  de- 
scribed in  Lytton's  novel  "  Zanoni."  According  to  this  author's 

*  Notes  of  a  lecture,  delirered  at  the  Coavention  of  the  Theosophical 
Society,  1885,  by  Mr.  T.  Subba  Row  as  an  introduction  to  a  set  of  lectures, 
which  be  bad  promised  to  give  at  the  sabseqasat  Asnireraaiy. — £d. 

235 

description,  the  Dweller  on  the  Threshold  aeems  to  be  some 
elemental,  or  other  monster  of  mysterioas  form,  appearing  be- 
fore the  neophyte  jast  as  he  is  about  to  enter  the  mysterioaa 
land,  and  attempting  to  shake  his  resolation  with  menaces  of 
unknown  dangers  if  he  is  not  fully  prepared. 

There  is  no  such  monster  in  reality.     The  description  must 
be   taken   in  a  figurative  sense.     But  nevertheless    there  is  a 
Dweller  on  the  Threshold,  whose  influence  on  the  mental  plane 
is  far  more  trying  than  any  physical  terror  can  be.       The  real 
Dweller   on   the   Threshold  is   formed  of  the  despair  and  de- 
spondency  of  the  neophyte,  who  is  called  upon  to  give  up  all 
his  old   affections  for  kindred,  parents  and  children,  as  well  as 
his  aspirations   for   objects   of  worldly  ambition,  which  have 
perhaps    been   his  associates   for    many  incarnations.     When 
called  upon  to  give  up  these  things,  the  neophyte  feels  a  kind 
of  blank,   before   he   realises  his  higher  possibilities.    After 
having   given    up   all   his  associations,  his  life  itself  seems  to 
vanish   into  thin  air.     He  seems  to  have  lost  all  hope,  and  to 
have   no  object  to  live  and  work  for.     He  sees  no  signs  of  his 
own    future    progress.     All   before  him  seems  darkness;  and  a 
sort  of  pressure  comes  upon  the  soul,  under  which  it  begins  to 
droop,  and   in   most  cases  he  begins  to  fall  back  and  gives  up 
further   progress.     But  in  the  case  of  a  man  who  really  strug- 
gles, he  will  battle  against  that  despair,  and  be  able  to  proceed 
on    the   Path.     I   may   here   refer  you   to  a  few  passages  in 
Mill's  autobiography.      Of  course  the  author  knew  nothing  of 
occultism;   but   there  was  one  stage  in  his  mental  life,  which 
seems  to    have  come  on  at  a  particular  point  of  his  career  and 
to  have  closely  resembled  what  I  have  been    describing.     Mill 
was   a  great  analytical  philosopher.     He  made  an  exhaustive 
analysis  of  all  mental  processes, — mind,  emotions,  and  will. 

*1  now  saw  or  thought  I  saw,  what  I  had  always  before 
received  with  incredulity, — that  the  habit  of  analysis  has  a 
tendency  to  wear  away  the  feelings,  as  indeed  it  has  when 
to  other  mental  habits  is  cultivated.  »  *  *  Thus  neither 
selfish  nor  unselfish  pleaanres  were  pleasures  to  rae.' 

230 

At  last  he  came  to  hapre  analysed  the  whole  man  into  nothings 
At   this   point   a   kind-  of  melancholy  came  over  him,  which 
had   something   of  terror  in  it,    la  this  state  o£  mind  he  con- 
tinned   for   some  years,  until  he  read  a  copy  of  Wordsworth's 
poems   full   of  sympathy  for  natnre's  objects  and  haraan  life- 
"From  them,"  he  say^,  "1  seemed  to  learn  what  would  be  the 
perennial   sources   ot   happiness,   when   all  the  greater  evils 
of  life  should  have  been  removed/''    This  feebly  indicates^what; 
the  chela   must  experience   when   he   has  determiued  to  re- 
Bonuce  all   old  -associates,  and  h  called*  to  Hve  for  a  bright 
future   on   a  higher   plane.      This  transition  stage  was  more 
or  less  the  position  of  Arjuna  before  the  discourse  in  question. 
He   was   about  to   engage   in-  a  war  of  extermination  against 
foes   led  by  some  of  his  nearest  relations,  anxl  he  not  nnuatur- 
ally   shrank  from  the  thought  of  killing  kiodered  and  frieuds. 
We  are  each  of  us  called  upon  to  kill  out  all  our  passions  and 
^  desires,   not  that   they   are  aW  necessarily  evil  in  themselves*^ 
bnt  that   their  iufluenee    must   be  anoihilated  before  we  can 
establish   oursel'ves   on    the   higher   planes.     The  position    of 
Arjuna  is  intended  to  typify  that  of  a  chela,  who  is-  called  upon- 
•to   face  the  Dweller  on  the  Threshold.     As  the  Guro  prepares 
his   chela   for   the  trial*  of  initiation  by  philosophical  teach- 
ing,  so  at  this   critical   point   Krishna  proeeeds  to  instructt 
Arjuna. 

The  Bhagavad  Gfita  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  disconrce- 
addressed  by  a  Guru  to  a  chela  who  has  fnlTy  determined  upon 
the  renunciation  of  all  worldly  desires  and  aspirations,  but  yefc 
feels  a  certain  despondency,  caused  by  the  apparent  blank- 
ness   of  his  existence.     The   book  contains  eighteen  chapters, 

J  all  intimately  connected.  Ekch  chapter  describes  a  particular 
phase  or  aspect  of  human  life.  The  student  should  bear  this 
in  mind  in  reading  the  book,  and  endeavour  to  work  out  the- 
cdrrespondeneesv  He  will  find  what  appear  to  be  necessary 
repetitions.  These  were  a  necessity  of  the  method  adopted  by 
Vyasa,  his  intention  being  to  represent  nature  in  different 
ways,  as  seen  from  the  standpoints  of  the  various  philosophical. 

•^      schools,  which  flourished  in  India,. 

9a7* 

As  regards  the  moral  teaching  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  it  i» 
often  asserted  by  those  who  do  not  appreciate  the  benefits  o£ 
oecnlt  atody,  thnt,  if  everybody  pursued,  this  coarse,  the 
world  wotild  come  to  a  stsncktill  ;.  and,  therefore^  that  this- 
teaching  can  onJy  be  asefnl  to  the  few,  and  not  to  ordinary 
peo{)le.  This  is  not  so.  It  is  of  coarse  true  that  the  majority 
of  men  are  not  in  the  position  to  give  np  their  dnties  as- 
citizans  and  members  of  families.  Bat  Krishna  distinctly 
»tates  that  these  datieSr  if  m)t  reconcilable  with  ascetic  life- 
in  a  forestr  can-  certainly    be   reconciled    with  that   kind  oC 

v/  meutHil  abnegation  which  is  far  more  powerful  i^  the  prodoc- 
tiou  of  effects  od  the  hJgher  planes  than  any  physical  separa- 
tion, from  the  world.  ( For  though  the  ascetic's  body  may  be- 
ia  the  jiingle,  his  thoughts  may  be  in  the  world,  Krishna- 
therefort,  tenches  that  the  real  importance  lies  not  in  physical 
r  {but  in  mental  isolatioa.  Every  man  who  has  dnties  to  dis- 
'  charge  must  devote  his  mind  to  them.  :  Bat,,  says  the  teacher^ 
it  is  one  thing  to  perform  an  action  as  a  matter  of  duty,  and. 
auotlver  thing  to  perform,  tlie  same  from  iuclinution,.  interest, 
or  desire.;  lit  is  thus  plain  that  it  is  in-  the  power  of  a  man  to- 
make  definite  progress  in  the  development  of  his  higher  facnl- 
ties,  whilst  there  is  nothing  noticeable  in  his  mode  of  life  to 
distingnish  him  from  his  fellows.  No  religion  teaches  that 
men  shooJd  be  the  slaves  of  interest  and  desire.  Few  in- 
cul<;ate  the  necessity  of  seel nsion  and  asceticism.  The  great 
objection  that  has  been  brought  against  Hindnism  and  Bnd- 
dhisiu  is  that  by  recommending  such  a  mode  of  life  to  students 
of  occultism  they  tend  to  render  void  the  lives  of  men  engaged 
in  ordinary  avocations.  This  objection,  however,  rests  upon  a- 
misapprehension.  For  these  religions  teach-  that  it  is  not 
the  nature  of  the  act,  but  the  mental  attitude  of  its  performer,. 

"^  that  is  of  importance.,'  This  is  the  moral  teaching  that  runs 
through  the  whole  «)f  the  Bhagavad  Gita.  The  reader  should 
note  carefully  the  various  arguments  by  which  Krishna  esUb- 
lishes  his  proposition.  He  will  fiiid  an  account  of  origin  and 
d«8tiny  of  the  human  monad,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  it? 
attains  salvation  through  the  aid  and  enJighteDmeat  derived. 

n/ 

238 

from  its  Logos.  Some  have  taken  Krishna's  exhortation  to 
Arjnna  to  worship  him  alone  as  supporting  the  doctrine  of  a 
personal  god.  But  this  is  an  erroneous  conclusion.  ]  For, 
though  speaking  of  himself  as  Parabrahm,  Krishna  is 
still  the  Logos.  He  describes  himself  as  Atma,  bat  no  doubt 
is  one  with  Parabrahm,  as  there  is  no  essential  difference 
between  Atma  and  Parabrahm.  Certainly  the  Lo^os  can  speak 
of  itself  as  Parabrahm.  So  all  sons  of  God,  including  Christ, 
have  spoken  of  themselves  as  one  with  the  Father.  His 
saying,  that  he  exists  in  almost  every  entity  in  the  Cosmos, 
expresses  strictly  an  attribute  of  Parabrahm.  But  a  Logos, 
being  a  manifesration  of  Parabrahm,  can  use  these  words  and 
assume  these  attributes.  Thus  Krishna  only  calls  upon  Arjuna 
to  worship  his  own  highest  spirit,  through  which  alone  he  can 
'^  hope  to  attain  salvation.  Krishna  is  teaching  Arjuna  what 
the  Logos  in  the  course  of  initiation  will  teach  the  human 
monad,  pointing  out  that  through  himself  alone  is  salvation  to 
be  obtained.     This  implies  no  idea  of  a  personal  god. 

Again  notice  the  view  of  Krishna  respecting  the  Sankhya 
philosophy.  Some  strange  ideas  are  afloat  about  this  system. 
It  is  supposed  that  the  Sutras  we  possess  represent  the 
original  aphorisms  of  Kapila.  But  this  has  been  denied  by 
many  great  teachers,  including  Shankaracharya,  who  say  that 
they  do  not  represent  his  real  views,  but  those  of  some  other 
Kapila,  or  the  writer  of  the  book.  The  real  rtankhya  philoso- 
phy is  identical  with  the  Pythagorean  system  of  numerals, 
and  the  philosophy  embodied  in  the  Chaldean  system  of 
numbers.  The  philosopher's  object  was  to  represent  all  the 
mysterious  powers  of  nature  by  a  few  simple  formulae,  which 
he  expressed  in  numerals.  The  original  book  is  not  to  be 
found,  though  it  is  possible  that  it  stili  exists.  The  system 
now  put  forward  under  this  name  contains  little  beyond  an 
account  of  the  evolution  of  the  elements  and  a  few  combina- 
tions of  the  same  which  enter  into  the  formation  of  the  various 
tatwams.  Krishna  reconciles  the  Sankhya  philosophy.  Raja 
Yoga,  and  even  Hatta  Yoga,  by  first  pointing  ont  that  the  phi- 
losophy, if  properly  understood,  leads  to  the  sam*  merging  of 

239 

the  human  monad  in  the  Logos.  The  doctrine  of  Karma,  which 
embraces  a  wider  field  than  that  allowed  it  by  orthodox  Pan- 
dits, who  have  limited  its  signification  solely  to  relit^ions 
observances,  is  the  same  in  all  philosophies,  and  is  made  by 
Krishna  to  inclnde  almost  every  good  and  bad  act  or  even 
thonght. )  The  student  must  first  go  through  the  Bhagavat 
Gita,  and  next  try  to  difierentiate  the  teachings  in  the  eighteen 
difierent  parts  under  different  categories.  He  should  observe 
how  these  different  aspects  branch  out  from  our  common 
centre,  and  how  the  teachings  in  these  chapters  are  intended 
to  do  away  with  the  objections  of  different  philosophers  to  the 
occult  theory  and  the  path  of  salvation  here  pointed  out.  If  this 
is  done,  the  book  will  show  the  real  attitude  of  occultists  in 
considering  the  nature  of  the  Logos  and  the  human  monad. 
In  this  way  almost  all  that  is  held  sacred  in  different  systems 
is  combined.  By  snch  teaching  Krishna  succeeds  in  dis- 
pelling Arjnna*s  despondency  and  in  giving  him  a  higher  idea 
of  the  nature  of  the  force  acting  through  him,  though  for  the 
time  being  it  is  manifesting  itself  as  a  distinct  individual.  He 
overcomes  Arjnana's  disinclination  to  fight  by  analysing  the  idea 
of  self,  and  showing  that  ^the  man  is  in  error,  who  thinks  that 
he  is  doing  this,  thatand  the  other.)  When  it  is  found  that  what 
he  calls  "I"  is  a  short  of  fiction,  created  by  his  own  ignorance, 
a  great  part  of  the  difficulty  has  ceased  to  exist.  He  farther 
proceeds  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  a  higher  individua- 
lity, of  which  Arjiina  had  no  previous  knowledge.  Then  he 
points  out  that  this  individuality  is  connected  with  the  Logos, 
He  furthermore  expounds  the  nature  of  the  Logos  and  shows 
that  it  is  Parabrahm.  This  is  the  substance  of  the  first  eleven 
or  twelve  chapters.  In  those  that  follow  Krishna  gives  Arjnna 
farther  teaching  ia  order  to  make  him  firm  of  purpose  ;  and 
explains  to  him  how  through  the  inherent  qualities  of  Prakriti 
and  Purusha  all  the  entities  have  been  brought  into  existence. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  number  eighteen  is  constantly 
recurring  in  the  Mahabharata,  seeing  that  it  contains  eighteen 
Parvas,  the  contending  armies  were  divided  into  eighteen  army- 
corps,  the  battle  raged  eighteen  days,  and  the  book  is  called 

240 

by  ft  name  which  raeaas  eighteen.  This  anmber  is  mysteri- 
4>Q8ly  coonected  with  Arjana.  I  have  been  describing  him  as 
cnan,  bat  even  Prabrahm  manifests  itself  as  a  Logos  in  more 
ways  than  one.  Krishna  may  be  the  Logos,  but  only  one 
particular  form  of  it.  The  nnmber  eighteen  is  to  represent 
this  particular  form.  Krishna  is  the  seventh  |)riaciple  in  man, 
and  his  gift  of  his  sister  in  marriage  to  Arjnna  typifies  the 
anion  between  the  sixth  and  the  fifth.  It  is  worthy  of  note 
that  Arjana  did  not  want  Krishna  to  fight  for  him,  bat  only 
to  act  as  his  charioteer  and  to  be  his  friend  and  counsellor. 
From  this  it  wi'll  be  perceived  that  the  human  monad  must 
fight  its  own  battle,  assisted  when  once  he  "begins  to  tread  the 
true  path  by  his  own  Logos. 

THE  IDTLL  OF  THE  WHITE  LOTUS. 

The  interesting  story  published  under  the  title  above 
mentioned  has  already  attracted  considerable  attention.  It  18 
instructive  in  nwre  ways  than  one.  it  truly  depicts  the 
Egyptian  faith  and  the  Egyptian  priesthood,  when  their 
religion  had  already  begun  to  lose  its  purity  and  degenerate 
into  a  system  of  Taatric  worship  contaminated  and  defiled  by 
"black  magic,  tmscrupulously  used  for  selfish  and  immoral 
purposes.  It  is  probably  also  a  true  frtory.  Sensa  is  re- 
presented to  be  the  last  great  hierophant  of  Egypt  Just  as 
a  tree  leaves  its  seed  to  develope  into  a  similar  tree,  even  if 
it  should  perish  completely,  so  does  every  great  religion  seem 
to  leave  its  life  and  energy  in  one  or  more  great  adepts  destin- 
ed to  preserve  its  wisdom  and  revive  its  growth  at  some 
future  time  when  the  cycle  of  evolation  tends  in  the  course  of 
its  revolution,  to  bring  about  the  desired  result.  The  grand 
old  religion  of  Ohemi  is  destined  to  reappear  on  this  planet  in 
a  higher  and  nobler  form  when  the  appointed  time  arrives, 
and  there  is  nothing  unreasonable  in  the  supposition  that  the 
Sensa  of  oar  story  is  probably  now  a  very  high  adept,  who  it 

waitfng  to  carry  oat  the  commands  of  the  Lady  of  the  White 
Lotas,  Apart  from  these  speculations,  however,  the  story  ia 
question  has  a  very  nobie  lesson  to  teach.  Ia  its  allegorical 
aspect  it  describes  the  trials  and  the  difficmlties  of  a  neophyte. 
It  is  not  easy,  however,  for  the  ordinary  reader  to  remove 
the  veil  of  allegory  and  clearly  nnderstand  its  teachings.  It 
is  to  help  snch  readers  that  I  proceed  to  give  the  following 
explanation  of  the  characters  that  appear  in  the  story  in 
qaestion  and  the  events  therein  related. 

(1.)  Sensa,  the  hero  of  the  story,  is  intended  to  represent 
the  hnman  soal. 

It  is  the  Katashtha  Chitanyam,  or  the  germ  of  Pragna,  in 
which  the  iudiviJaality  of  the  human  being  is  preserved.  It 
corresponds  with  the  hiirher  and  permanent  element  in  the 
6th  principle  of  man.  It  is  the  ego  or  the  self  of  embodied 
existence. 

(2.)  Seboua-t  the  gardener,  is  intuition.  "  They  cannot 
make  a  phantom  of  me,*'  declares  Seb jua  ;  and  in  saying  so 
this  unsophisticated  but  honest  rustic  truly  reveals  his  own 
mystery. 

(3.)  Agdmahd,  Kamen-Bxka  and  the  nine  other  high  priests 
of  the  temple,  who  are  the  devoted  servants  of  the  dark 
goddess  whom  they  worship,  represent  respectively  the  fol- 
lowing entities  : — 

(1.)     Rami      Desire. 

(2.)     Krodha Anger. 

(8.)     Lohha      Cupidity. 

(4.)    Mohck       ••  Ignorance. 

(6.)    Madd       ...         .„         ...  Arrogance. 

(6.)     Matsara  Jealousy. 

(7,  8,  9,  lU  &  11.)        The  five  Senses  and 

their  pleasures. 
31 

245 

(4.)  The  female  characters  that  fignre  in  the  story  are  the 
following  : — 

(1.)    The  dark  and  mysterions   goddess  worshipped  by 
the  priests  ; 

(2.)    The  young  girl  who  played  with  Sensa; 

(3.)     The  grown  np  girl  met  by  him  in  the  City ; 

(4.)    And  lastly,  the  Lady  of  the  Whit€  Lotus. 

It  mnst  be  noticed  here  that  the  2nd  and  the  3rd  are  iden- 
tical. Speaking  of  the  fair  woman  of  the  City,  whom  he  met 
apparently  for  the  first  time,  Sensa  says  that  as  he  gazed  into 
her  tender  eyes  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  knew  her  well  and 
that  her  charms  were  familiar  to  him.  It  is  clear  from  this 
statement  that  this  lady  is  no  other  than  the  yonng  girl  who 
ran  about  the  temple  with  him, 

Prakriti,  say  the  Hindu  philosophers,  has  three  qualities, 
^>atwa,  Kaj'as  and  Taraas.  The  last  of  these  qualities  is 
connected  with  the  grosser  pleasures  and  passions  experienced 
in  Sthulasarira,  Rajoguna  is  the  cause  of  the  restless  activity 
of  the  mind,  while  Satwagnna  is  intimately  associated  with 
the  spiritual  intelligence  of  man,  and  with  his  higher  and 
Doble  asjxirations.  Maya,  then,  makes  its  appearance  in  this 
fltory  in  three  distinct  forms.  ItisVidya,*  spiritual  intelli- 
gence, which  is  represented  by  the  Lady  of  the  White  Lotus. 
It  is  the  Kwan-yin  and  the  Pragua  of  the  Buddhist  writersi. 
She  represents  the  light  or  the  aura  of  the  Logos,  which  is 
wisdom,  and  she  is  the  source  of  the  current  of  conscious  life 
or  Chaitanyam*  The  young  girl  above  referred  to  is  the  Mind 
of  man,  and  it  is  by  her  that  Sensa  is  led  gradually  into  the 
presence  of  the  dark  goddess,  set  up  in  the  holy  of  the  holies 
lor  adoration  by  the  priesthood  whom  we  have  above  described. 

The  dark  goddess  herself  is  Atidya,  It  is  the  dark  side  of 
human  Nature.  It  derives  its  life  and  energy  from  the 
passions  and  desires  of  the  human  soul.  The  ray  of  life  and 
wisdom,  which  originally  emanated  from  the  Logos  and  which 
has" acquired   a  distinct   individuality  of  its   own   when   the 

^4a 

process  of  differentiation  has  set  ia,  is  capable  of  being  trana* 
fcM-med  more  or  less  entirely  into  this  veritable  Kali,  if  the 
light  of  the  Logos  is  altogether  excladed  by  the  bad  Karma 
of  the  hnman  being,  if  the  voice  of  intuition  is  unheard  and 
unnoticed,  and  if  the  man  lives  simply  for  the  purpose  of 
gratifying  his  av?n  passions  and  desires. 

If  these  remarks  are  kept  in  raiud,  the  meaning  of  the  story 
will  become  clear.  It  is  not  my  object  now  to  write  an 
exhaustive  commentary-  I  shall  only  notice  some  of  the^ 
important  incidents  and  their  significance. 

Look  upon  Sensa  as  a  haman  being,  who,  after  running  his 
course  through  several  incarnations,  and  after. having  passed 
through  a  considerable  amount  of  spiritual  training,  is  born 
again  in  this  world  with  his  spiritual  powers  of  perception 
greatly  developed^  and  prepared  to  become  a  neophyte  at  a 
Tery  early  stage  iu  his  ctreer.  As  soon  as  he  enters  ioto  the 
physical  body,  he  is  placed  nader  the  charge  of  the  five  Sensea 
aod  the  six  Emotions  above  enumerated,  who  have  it  a*  their 
place  of  residence.  The  human  Soul  is  first  placed  under  the 
guidance  of  his  own  intuition,  the  simple  aad  honest  gardener 
of  the  temple,  for  whom  the  High  Priests  seem  to  have  na 
respect  or  affection,  and,  when  it  has  not  yet  lost  its  original 
purity,  ge^s  a  glimpse  of  its  spiritual  intelligence,  the  Lady 
of  the  White  Lotns.  The  priests,  however,  are  determined 
that  no  0[)portunity  should  be  given  for  the  intuition  to  workj 
and  they  therefore  remove  the  child  from  its  guardianship  and 
introduce  him  ko  their  own  dark  goddess,  the  goddess  of 
hnman  passion.  The  very  sight  of  this  deity  is  found  re- 
pulsive to  the  human  soul  at  first.  The  proposed  transfer  of 
human  consciousness  and  human  attachment  from  the 
spiritual  plane  to  the  physical  plane  is  too  abrupt  and 
premature  to  succeed.  The  priests  failed  in  their  first  attempt 
and  began  to  devise  their  plans  for  a  second  effort  in  the  same 
direction. 

Before  proceeding  further  I  must  draw  the  reader's  atteo- 
tioa  to  the  real  meaning  of  the  L^tus  tank  in  the  garden 

244" 

Sahasrava  Chakram  in  the  brain  is  often  ppoken  of  as  a  Lotus 
Tank'  in  the  Hindn  mystical  books.  The  "sweet  sonnding 
water"  of  this  taijk  is  descril)ed  as  Amrifam  or  nectar.  See 
p.  349  of  the  second  volnme  of  "Isis  Unveiled"  for  further 
hints  as  regards  the  meaning  of  this  magic  water.  Padma, 
the  White  Lotas,  is  said  to  have  a  thonsauvl  petals,  as  has  the 
mysterious  Sahasravam  of  the  Yogis.  It  is  an  unopened  bud 
in  the  ordinary  mortal,  and  jnst  as  a  lotus  opens  its  petals, 
and  expand  in  all  its  bloom  and  beauty  when  the  sun  rises 
above  the  horizon  and  sheds  his  rays  on  the  flower,  so  does  the 
Sahasravam  of  the  neophyte  open  and  expand  when  the  Logos 
begins  to  pour  its  light  into  its  centre.  When  fully  expanded 
it  becomes  the  glorious  seat  of  the  Lady  of  the  Lotus,  the 
sixth  principle  of  man;  and  sitting  on  this  flower  the  great 
goddess  ponrs  out  the  waters  of  life  and  grace  for  the  grati- 
flcation  and  the  regeneration  of  the  human  soul. 

flatta  Yogis  say  that  the  human  soul  in  Samadki  ascends 
to  this  thonsand-petailed  flower  through  Sushnmua  (the  dath 
of  the  Kabbalists)  and  obtains  a  glimpse  of  the  splendour  of 
the  spiritual  sun. 

In  this  part  of  Sensa's  life  an  event  is  related  which 
deserves  attention.  An  elemental  appearing  in  the  guise  of  a 
neophyte  of  the  temple  tricb  to  take  him  out  from  his  physical 
body.  This  is  a  danger  to  which  a  man  is  liai>le  before  he 
acquires  suflScient  proficiency  as  an  adept  to  guard  himself 
against  all  such  dangers,  especially  when  his  internal  percep- 
tion is  developed  to  a  certain  extent.  Sensa's  guardian  angel 
protects  him  from  the  danger  owing  to  his  innooeuce  and 
purity. 

When  the  mental  activity  of  the  child  commences  and  ab- 
sorbs its  attention,  it  recedes*  farther  aud  farther  from  the  Light 
of  the  Logos.  Its  intuition  will  not  be  in  a  position  to  work 
unshackled.  Its  suggestions  come  to  it  mixed  up  with  othei* 
statep  of  consciousness  which  are  the  result  of  sensation  and 
intellection.     Unable  lo  see  Seusa  and  8pe«ik  to  bim  .persouaJly* 

U6 

Sebona  sends  him    his  beloved  lotna  flower  sarreptitioasly 
thronghoue  of  the  neophytes  of  the  temple. 

Mental  aetiviry  commences  first  by  way  of  sensation.  Emo- 
tions make  their  appeHraQcesnbseqriently.  Tlie  opening  mind 
of  the  child  is  aptly  compared  to  »  little  girl  playing  with 
Sensa.  When  once  the  mind  begins  to  exercise  its  functions 
the  pleasures  of  sensation  soon  pave  the  way  for  the  strong 
and  fierce  emotions  of  the  human  soul.  Sensa  has  descended 
one  step  from  the  spiritual  plane  when  he  loses  sight  of  the 
sublime  lotus  flower  and  its  glorious  goddess  and  begins  to  be 
amused  by  the  frolicsome  little  girl.  "Yon  are  to  live  among 
Earth-ffd  flower,"  says  this  little  girl  to  him,  disclosir-g  the 
change  that  has  already  taken  place.  At  first  it  is  the  simple 
beauty  of  nature  that  engrosses  ihe  attention  of  Sensa  But 
his  mind  soon  leads  him  to  the  dark  goddess  of  the  shrine. 
Avidya  has  its  real  seat  in  mind,  and  it  is  impossible  to  resist 
its  influence  so  long  as  the  mind  of  man  is  not  restrained  in 
its  action.  When  once  the  soul  gets  under  the  influence  of 
this  dark  goddess,  the  high  priests  of  the  temple  begin  to 
utilize  its  powers  lor  their  own  benefit  and  gratification.  The 
goddess  requires  twelve  priests  in  all,  including  Sensa,  to  help 
her  cause.  Unless  the  six  emotions  and  the  five  seusiitious 
above  enumerated  are  banded  together  she  cannot  exercise  her 
sway  completely.  They  support  and  8tren>;then  each  other 
as  every  man's  experience  clearly  demonstrates.  Isolated, 
they  are  weak  and  can  easily  be  subdued,  but  when  associated 
together  their  combined  power  is  strong  enough  to  keep  the 
goal  under  control.  The  fall  of  Sensa  now  becomes  complete, 
but  not  before  he  receives  a  well  merited  rebuke  from  the 
gardener  and  a  word  of  warning  from  the  Lidy  of  the  Lotus. 

Addressing  Sensa,  Seboua  is  made  to  utter  the  foUowing 
words  :  "You  came  first  to  work;  yon  were  to.be  the  drudge 
for  nje;  now  all  is  changed.  Yon  are  to  play,  not  work,  and 
I  am  to  treat  yon  like  a  little  prince.  Well  1  Have  they 
spoiled  thte  yet,  1  wonder,  child  ?  *'  These  words  are  si^Miifi- 
eant^  and  their  meauiug  will   become  plaiu  by   the   light  of 

ne 

the  foreffoinff  remarks.  It  ranst  be  noted  that  the  last  time 
he  went  iato  the  garden,  Sensa  was  taken,  not  to  the  Lotas 
Tank,  bat  to  another  tank  receiving  its  waters  from  the  former. 

Owing  to  the  change  that  has  come  over  him,  Sensa  is  nn* 
able  to  see  the  Light  of  the  Logos  by  direct  perception,  bnt  is 
tinder  the  necessity  of  recognizing  the  same  by  the  operation 
of  his  fifth  principle.  It  is  in  the  astral  fluid  that  he  floats 
and  not  in  the  magic  water  of  the  Lotus  Tank.  He  sees, 
nevertheless,  the  Lady  of  the  Lotus  who  pathetically  says, 
"Soon  thoa  wilt  leave  me;  and  how  can  1  aid  thee  if  thoa 
forgettest  me  utterly  ?  '* 

After  this  occnrrence  Sensa  becomes  completely  a  man 
of  the  world,  liviuj?  for  the  pleasures  of  the  physical  life.  His 
develo[»ed  mind  becomes  his  companion  and  the  priest  of  the 
temple  profit  by  the  change.  Before  proceeding  further  I 
must  draw  the  reader's  attention  to  the  possibility  of  eliciting 
from  a  child  any  desired  information  by  invoking  certain  ele- 
mentalsaud  other  powers,  by  means  of  magic  rites  and  cere- 
monies After  the  soul  gets  completely  under  the  influence 
of  Avidya,  it  may  either  succumb  altogether  to  the  said 
influence,  and  get  absorbed,  as  it  were,  in  the  Tamognna  of 
PrH,kriti,  or  dispel  its  own  ignorance  by  the  light  of  Sftiritual 
wisdom  and  shake  off  this  baneful  influence.  A  critical  moment 
arrives  in  the  history  of  Sensa  when  his  very  existence  is 
merged  up  for  the  time  being  with  the  dark  goddess  of  hnmaa 
passion  on  the  day  of  the  boat  festival.  Such  an  absorption, 
however  short,  is  the  first  step  towards  final  extinction.  H© 
must  either  be  saved  at  this  critical  juncture  or  perish.  The 
Lady  of  the  White  Lotas,  his  guardian  angel,  makes  a  final 
attempt  to  save  him,  and  sacceeds.  In  the  very  holy  of  the 
holies,  she  anveils  the  dark  goddess;  and  Sensa,  perceiving 
his  folly  {>rays  for  deliverance  from  the  accursed  yoke  of  the 
hated  priesthood.  His  prayer  is  granted,  and  relying  npoa 
the  support  of  the  bright  goddess  he  revolts  against  the  autho- 
rity of  the  priests,  and  directs  the  atteatiou  of  the  people  to 
the  iniqaities  of  the  temple  aathorities. 

2ir 

It  is  n€ce88ary  to  say  a  few  words  in  this  connection  as  re- 
gards the  real  nature  of  sonl-death  and  the  ultimate  fate  of  a 
black  ma<::iciari,  to  im[>re88  the  teachinj^s  of  this  book  on  the 
mind  of  the  reader.  The  sonJ,  as  we  have  above  explained,  is 
en  isolated  drop  in  the  ocean  of  cosmic  life.  This  current  of 
cosmic  life  is  but  the  light  and  the  aura  of  the  Logos.  Besides 
the  Logos,  there  are  innumerable  other  existences,  both  spi- 
ritnal  and  astral,  partaking  of  this  life  and  living  in  it.  These 
beings  have  special  aflSuities  with  particular  emotions  of  the 
human  soul  and  particular  characteristics  of  the  human  mind. 
They  have  of  course  a  definite  individual  existence  of  their 
own  which  lasts  up  to  the  end  of  the  Manwantara.  There  are 
tliree  ways  in  which  a  soul  may  cease  to  retain  its  special  in- 
dividuality. Separated  from  its  Logos,  which  is,  as  it  were,  its 
source,  it  may  not  acquire  a  strong  and  abiding  individuality 
of  its  own,  and  may  in  course  of  time  be  reabsorbed  into  the 
current  of  Universal  Life.  This^  is  real  sonl-death.  It  may 
also  place  itself  en  rapport  with  a  spiritual  or  elemental 
existence  by  evoking  it,  and  concentrating  its  attention  and 
regard  on  it  for  purposes  of  black  magic  and  Tantric  worship, 
lu  snch  a  case  it  transfers  its  individuality  to  such  existence 
and  is  sucked  up  into  it,  as  it  were.  In  such  a  case  the  black 
magician  lives  in  such  a  being,  and  as  such  a  being  he  con- 
tinues till  the  end  of  Manwantara. 

The  fate  of  Banasena  illustrates  the  point.  After  his  death 
he  is  said  to  live  as  Mahakala,  one  of  the  most  powerlul 
spirits  of  Pramadhagaua.  In  some  respects  this  amounts  to 
acquiring  immortality  in  evil.  But  unlike  the  immortality  of 
the  Logos  it  does  not  go  beyond  Manwantaric  limits.  Read 
the  8th  chapter  of  Bhagavat  Gita  in  this  connection,  and  my 
meaning  will  become  clear  by  the  light  of  Krishna's  teaching. 
The  occurrence  in  the  boat  of  Isis,  depicted  in  the  book  under 
consideration,  gives  some  idea  of  the  nature  of  this  absorption 
and  the  subsequent  preservation  of  the  magician's  indivi- 
duality. 

When  the  centre  of  absorption  is  the   Logos  and   not  auj 

548 

other  power  or  elemental,  the  maa  acquires  Mnkti  or  Nirvana 
and  becomes  one  with  the  eteraal  Logos  without  any  neces- 
sity of  rebirth. 

The  last  part  of  the  book  describes  the  final  straggle  of  the 
Boal  with  its  inveterate  foes,  its  initiation  and  ultimate  deli* 
verauce  from  the  tyranny  of  Prakriti. 

The  assnrance  and  the  advice  given  by  the  Lady  of  the 
White  Lotas  to  Sensa  in  the  holy  of  holies  marks  tlie  great 
turning  point  in  the  history  of  his  career.  He  has  perceived 
the  light  of  the  Divine  Wis  lorn  and  has  brought  himself 
within  the  pale  of  its  influence.  This  light  of  the  Logos, 
which  is  represented  in  the  story  as  the  fair  goddess  of  the 
sacred  flower  of  Ejjypt,  is  the  bond  of  union  and  brotherhood 
which  maintains  the  chain  of  spiritual  intercourse  and 
sympathy  running  through  the  long  succession  of  the  great 
hierophauts  of  Egypt,  and  extending  to  all  the  great  adepts 
of  this  world  who  derive  their  influx  of  spiritual  life  from  the 
same  source.  It  is  the  Holy  Ghost  that  keeps  up  the  apostoli- 
cal succession  or  Guruparampara  as  the  Hindus  call  it.  It  is 
this  spiritual  light  which  is  transmitted  from  Guru  to  disciple 
when  the  time  of  real  initiation  comes.  The  so-called  "trans- 
fer of  life  "  is  no  other  than  the  transmission  of  this  light. 
And  further,  the  tloly  Ghost,  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  veil  or 
the  body  of  the  Logos  and  hsnue  its  flash  and  blood,  is  the 
basis  of  the  holy  communion.  Every  fraternity  of  adepts  has 
this  bond  of  union;  and  time  and  space  cannot  tear  it  as* 
nnder.  Even  when  there  is  an  apparent  break  in  the  succes* 
sion  on  the  physical  plane,  a  neophyte  following  the  sacred 
law  and  aspiring  towards  a  higher  life.  Will  not  be  in  want  of 
guidance  and  advice  when  the  proper  time  arrives,  though  the 
last  Guru  may  have  died  several  thousands  of  years  before  he 
was  born.  Every  Buddha  meets  at  his  last  initiation  all  the 
great  adepts  who  reached  Buddhaship  daring  the  preceding 
ages  :  and  similarly  every  class  of  adepts  has  its  own  bond  of 
spiritual  communion  which  knits  them  together  into  a  properly 
Organised   fraternity.    The  only  possible   and  effectual  way  of 

249 

entering  into  any  such  brotherhood,  or  partakin":  of  the  holy 
cornmtituoQ,  is  by  bringing  oneself  within  the  inflaence  of  the 
spiritual  light  which  radiates  from  one's  own  Logos.  I  may 
further  point  oat  here,  without  venturing  to  enter  into  details, 
that  snch  communion  is  only  possible  between  persons  whose 
souls  derive  their  life  and  sustenance  from  the  same  divine 
ray,  and  that,  as  seven  distinct  rays  radiate  from  the  "  Central 
Spiritual  Sun,"  all  adepts  and  Dhyan  Chohaos  are  divisible 
into  seven  classes,  each  of  which  is  guided,  controlled  and 
overshAdowed  by  one  of  seven  forms  or  manifestations  of  the 
divine  wisdom. 

In  this  connection  it  is  necessary  to  draw  the  reader's 
attention  to  another  general  law  which  regulates  the  circula- 
tion of  spiritual  life  and  energy  through  the  several  adepts 
who  belong  to  the  same  fraternity*  Erich  adept  may  be  con- 
ceived as  a  centre  wherein  this  spiritual  force  is  generated 
and  stored  op,  and  through  which  it  is  utilized  and  distribut- 
ed. This  mysterious  energy  is  a  kind  of  spiritual  electrical 
force,  and  its  transmission  from  one  centre  to  another  presents 
some  of  the  phenomena  noticed  in  connection  with  electrical 
induction.  Consequently  there  is  a  tendency  towards  the 
equalization  of  the  amounts  of  energy  stored  np  in  the  various 
centres.  The  quantity  of  the  neutral  fluid  existing  in  any 
particular  centre  depends  upon  the  man's  Karma  and  the 
holiness  and  purity  of  his  life.  When  evoked  into  activity  by 
being  brought  into  communication  with  his  Guru  or  Initiator 
it  becomes  dynamic,  and  has  a  tendency  to  transfer  itself  to 
weaker  centres  It  is  sometimes  stated  that,  at  the  time  of 
the  final  initiation,  either  the  hierophantor  the  '*  newly  born," 
the  worthier  of  the  two  must  die  (see  page  38,  Theosophisty 
November  1882).  Whatever  may  be  the  real  nature  of  this 
mysterious  death,  it  is  due  to  the  operation  of  this  law.  It  will 
be  further  seen  that  a  new  initiate,  if  he  is  weak  in  spiritual 
energy,  is  strengthened  by  partaking  of  the  holy  commu- 
nion ;  and  for  obtaining  this  advantage  he  has  to  remain  on 
earth  and  utilize  his  power  for  the  good  of  mankind  until  the 
time  of  final  liberation  arrives.  This  is  an  arrangement 
32 

250. 

wLicb  'hRrmonizes  with  the  Law  of  Karma.  The  neophyte's 
original  weakuess  is  dae  to  his  Karmic  defects.  These 
defects  necessitate  a  longer  period  of  physical  existence.  And 
this  period  he  will  have  to  spend  in  the  canse  of  hnman  pro- 
gress in  return  for  the  benefit  above  indicated.  And,  more* 
over,  the  accnranlated  good  Karma  of  this  period  has  the 
effect  of  strengthening  his  soul,  and  when  he  finally  takes  his 
place  in  the  Sacred  Brotherhood,  he  brings  as  much  spiritual 
«apital  with  liim  as  any  of  the  others  for  carrying  on  the  work 
of  the  said  fraternity. 

If  these  {ew  remarks  are  borne  in  mind,  the  incidents  related 
in  the  last  five  chapters  will  soon  disclose  their  real  signi- 
ficance. When  Seusa  gains  his  power  of  spiritaai  perception 
through  the  grace  of  his  guardian  angel,  and  begins  to  exer- 
cise it  knowingly  anl  voluntarily,  he  has  no  occasion  to  rely 
on  the  flickering  light  of  intuition.  "  Yon  mnst  now  stand 
alone,"  says  the  gardener,  and  places  hira  in  possession  of  his 
beloved  flower,  the  full  meaning  of  wliicli  Sensa  begins  to 
understand.  Having  thus  gained  the  seat  of  spiritnal  clair- 
voyance, Sensa  perceives  the  hierophants  who  preceded  him 
and  into  whose  fraternity  he  has  entered.  The  Guru  is  always 
ready  when  the  disciple  is  read}'.  The  initiation  preceding 
the  final  struggle  lor  liberty  from  the  bondage  of  matter  is 
pretty  plainly  described.  The  highest  Ohohan  reveals  to  him 
the  secrets  of  occult  science,  and  another  adept  of  tha  Brother- 
hood points  out  to  him  the  real  basis  and  nature  of  his  own 
personality.  His  immediate  predecessor  then  comes  to  his 
assistance  and  reveals  to  him  the  mystery  of  his  own  Logos. 
"  The  veil  ol  Isis"  is  removed,  White  Lotus,  his  real  Saviour, 
lay  concealed.  The  Light  of  the  Logos  enters  his  soul  and  he 
is  made  to  pass  through  the  "  baptism  by  Divine  Fire."  He 
hears  the  final  directions  given  by  his  Queen  and  recognises 
the  dnty  cast  upon  his  shoulders. 

His  predecessor,  whose  soul  is  so  "  white  and  spotless,"  is 
commanded  to  give  him  a  portion  of  his  spiritual  strength  and 
energy.    The  three  great  truths  which  underlie  every  religion, 

251 

however,  disfigured  And  distorted,  through  ignorance,  aaper- 
atidonand  prejudice,  are  thea  taught  to  him  for  the  purpose  of 
being  procUiiued  to  the  world  at  large.  It  is  needless  for  lue 
to  explain  these  truths  here  as  their  enanciatiau  in  the  book 
is  sufficiently  plain.  Thus  fortified  and  instructed  Seiisa  pre* 
pares  for  the  final  straggle.  During  these  preparatory  stages 
the  passions  of  the  physical  man  are,  as  it  were,  dormant,  and 
Sensa  is  left  alone  for  the  time  being.  But  they  are  not 
entirely  subdued.  The  decisive  battle  is  yet  to  be  fought  and 
won.  Sdusa  begins  to  enter  an  the  higher  spiritual  life  as 
a  preacher  and  spiritual  guide  to  men,  directed  by  the  light  of 
wisdom  which  has  entered  his  soul.  But  he  cannot  pursue 
this  course  for  any  length  of  time  before  be  has  conquered  his 
foes.  The  moment  for  the  final  struggle  of  the  last  iaitiatioa 
soon  arrives.  The  nature  of  this  initiatiou  is  very  little  under- 
stood. It  is  sometimes  represented  in  vague  terms  as  a 
terrible  ordeal  through  which  an  initiate  has  to  pass  before  he 
becomes  a  real  adept.  It  is  further  characterized  as  "  the 
baptism  by  blood."  These  general  statements  do  not  in  the 
least  indicate  the  precise  nature  of  the  result  to  be  achieved 
by  the  neophyte  or  the  difficulties  he  has  to  encounter. 

It  is  necessary  to  enquire  into  the  nature  of  the  psychic 
cliange  or  transformation  which  is  intended  to  be  effected  by 
this  initiation  before  its  mystery  is  understood.  According  to 
the  ordinary  Vedantic  clissification  there  are  fonr  states  of 
conscious  existence,  viz.,  Viswa^  T/jasa,  Pragna,  and  Tureeya. 
In  modern  language  these  may  be  described  as  the  objec- 
tive, the  clairvoyant,  the  ecstatic,  and  the  ultra-ecstatio 
states  of  consciousness.  The  seats  or  v.padhis  related  to  these 
conditions  are  the  physical  body,  the  astral  body,  the  Karma 
Sarira  or  the  Monad  and  the  Logos.  The  soul  is  the  Monad. 
It  is,  as  it  were,  the  neutral  point  of  consciousness.  It  it 
germ  of  pragna.  When  completely  isolated  no  consiousuese 
is  experienced  by  it.  Its  psychic  condition  is  hence  compared 
by  Hindu  writers  to  Suikupti — a  condition  of  dreamless  sleep. 
"Biit  it  is  under  the  influence  of  the  physical  body  and  the 
Rstral   body   on   the  one    side,   and   the  sixth  and   seventh 

2o2 

principles  on  the  other.  When  the  attraction  of  the  former 
prevails,  the  Jiva  becomes  Buddhd  and  is  snhject  to  all 
the  |ia8sioD8  of  embodied  existence.  The  power  of  these 
passions  grows  weaker  and  weaker  as  the  neutral  point  we 
have  indicated  is  approached.  But  so  long  as  the  nentral 
barrier  is  not  crossed  their  attraction  is  felt.  But  when 
once  this  is  effected,  the  soul  is,  as  it  were,  placed  nnder 
the  control  and  attraction  of  the  other  pole— the  Logos; 
and  the  man  becomes  liberated  from  the  bondage  of 
matter.  'In  short  he  becomes  an  adept.  The  struggle 
for  supremacy  between  these  two  forces  of  attraction  takes 
place  on  this  neutral  barrier.  But  during  the  struggle 
the  person  in  whose  interest  the  battle  is  fonght  is  in  a  quies- 
cent, unconscious  condition,  almost  helpless  to  assist  his 
friends  or  strike  hard  at  his  enemies,  though  the  result  of  the 
fight  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death  to  him.  This  is  the  con- 
dition in  which  Sensa  finds  himself  in  passing  through  the 
last  ordeal,  and  the  description  of  the  said  condition  in  the 
"book  nnder  examination  becomes  olear  by  the  light  of  the  fore- 
going explanations.  It  can  be  easily  seen  that  the  result  of 
the  fight  will  mainly  depend  upon  the  latent  energy  of  the  soul, 
its  previous  training  and  its  past  Karma.  Bat  our  hero  passes 
Buccessfnlly  through  the  ordeal;  his  enemies  are  completely 
overthrown.     But  Sensa  dies  in  the  struggle. 

Strangely  enough  when  the  enemy  is  defeated,  the  Persona' 
lity  of  Sensa  is  destroyed  on  the  field  of  battle.  This  is  the 
final  sacrifice  which  he  makes,  and  his  mother,  Prakriti — the 
mother  of  his  presonality — laments  his  loss,  but  rejoices  at 
the  prospect  of  the  resurrection  of  his  soul.  The  resurrection 
goon  takes  place;  his  soul  rises  from  the  grave  as  it  were, 
nnder  the  vivifying  influence  of  his  spiritual  intelligence,  to 
shed  its  blessings  on  mankind  and  work  for  the  spiritual 
development  of  his  fellow  beings.  Here  ends  the  so-called 
tragedy  of  the  soul.  What  tollows  is  merely  intended  to 
briiij;  the  story  in  its  quasi-historical  aspect  to  a  proper  coo* 
elusion. 

253 

NOTES  Oy   HATA   YOGA* 

The  Sushumna  is  connected  with  the  tube  that  rans  throogH 
the  centre  of  the  spine.  It  is  a  sort  of  vein  of  magnetic  electri- 
city, and  the  energy  passing  through  the  Suskumna  is  a  stream 
of  vital  electricity.  The  tnbe  above-mentioned  is  connected 
with  the  ventricles  of  the  brain. 

The  S'lsh'imna  begins  with  the  Muladharam  and  ends  in 
Sahasrar'im.  The  former  Chakram  is  at  the  base  of  the  spine 
where  it  forms  a  traingle. 

The  Brakmarandhra  is  put  in  different  places  in  different 
books,  it  should  be  taken  to  be  the  top  of  the  head. 

You  may  know  the  action  of  Sisk  *mna  by  feeling  an  acces- 
gion  of  fire  to  the  brain — as  if  a  hi>t  current  of  air  were  being 
blown  through  the  tube  from  the  bottom  to  the  top. 

Hata  Yo^is  say  that  Ida  and  Pinga^a  act  alternately,  bat 
if  you  stop  both  of  th^se  the  hot  current  is  forced  through 
the  Sushumna,  Also  without  haviuif  anything  to  do  with 
Ida  and  Pingala — by  practising  K-im'M.kn  alone — the  5m- 
shumna  comes  into  play  ;  but  9>Rxj  Yogi,  without  using  either 
of  these  methods,  has  a  way  of  rousing  the  Kundalini,  The 
means  the  Raj  Yogi  employs  belong  to  the  mysteries  of 
initiation. 

The  reason  why  Suskumna  is  reckoned  to  be  the  chief  of  the 
Nadis  i?,  because  it  is  only  through  it  that  the  Monad  goes 
out  in  the  case  of  a  Yogi  ;  and  in  the  case  of  an  adept,  at  the 
time  of  his  death,  his  smuI  goes  out  through  the  SusAumna, 
Moreover  it  is  the  seat  of  circulation  of  the  soul  or  Kirana" 
iarira. 

The  Karana  sarira  is  said  to  be  in  a  state  of  sleep,  but  this 
is  no  ordinary  sleep,  it  is  Yoga  sleep.  It  is  the  calm  after 
the  tempest  spoken  of  in  "  Light  on  the  Path"  (Rule  21). 

Samadhi  includes  the  realization  ot  Yoga.  Anandam,  bnt  it 
is  a  generic  term  used  to  denote  several  conditions. 

♦  Note*  of  »  conTetRation  with  "Solar  Sphinx.' 

i        254 

It  is  absnrd  to  suppose,  as  stated  in  some  of  the  books,  that 
the  solar  system  is  contained  in  the  Suskumna.  What  is 
meant  is  that  when  consciousness  is  fixed  for  the  time  being 
in  the  Monad  circulating  in  the  Suskumna,  the  Yogi  becotoea 
en  rapport  with  astral  light  and  the  universal  mind  and  thus 
is  able  to  see  the  whole  cosmos. 

The  six  Ckakrams  are  located  in  the  Sthula-sarira,  but  they 
are  not  visible  when  a  body  is  dissected,  because  the  leaves 
and  petals  described  in  the  books  have  no  objective  existence, 
but  represent  so  many  powers  or  energies. 

For  instance,  Sahasraram  is  considered  to  have  eight  main 
petals,  and  the  meaning  of  this  is  that  the  brain  has  eight 
poles.  Similarly  the  letters,  characters,  symbols,  goddesses, 
etc,  said  in  the  books  to  exist  in  these  Ckakrams,  all  symbo- 
lize different  power. 

The  reason  of  the  differences  between  the  Ckakrams  is  that 
in  the  seven  centres  seven  powers  are  located,  and  it  is  said 
that  as  the  Kundalini  breaks  through  each  Chakramy  it  causes 
the  LLan  to  subdue  that  Chakram. 

As  Kundalini  goes  on  breaking  through  the  Ckakrams  one 
by  one,  it  gains  control  over  so  many  forces  connected  with 
the  elements,  the  astral  counterparts  of  which  are  located  in 
the  respective  Ckukrams.  The  location  of  the  mind  is  said  to 
be  between  the  eyebrows  by  the  Bata  Yogis. 

The  Ckakra  Sammalanam  mentioned  in  the  books  means 
that  when  Kundalini  passes  through  one  Chakram,  it  takes 
Its  essence  or  energy,  and  so  on  with  the  rest,  and  finally  joins 
all  into  a  sort  of  united  current. 

The  seven  Ckakrams  are  connected  with  the  seven  ))lanets 
in  the  following  order,  beginning  with  Muladkaram :  Saturn, 
Jupiter,  Mars,  Venus,  Mercury,  Moon,  Sun.  The  moon  is  con- 
nected with  the  mind  of  man,  because  it  is  so  changeable  and 
vacillating. 

The  mind  of  man  never  penetrates  (aa  sometimes  asserted) 
into  the  Ckakrams^  but  the  K.indalini  does  so   penetrate,  and 

255 

the  mind  itself  will  finally  combine  with  Kundalint  when  tbii 
latter  geta  near  the  Agna  Chakram,  and  then  the  man  be- 
comes clairvoyant. 

Kundalini  is  a  power  or  energy  in  the  Muladkaramf  some- 
times called  the  astral  serpent.  It  has  its  head  in  the  region 
of  the  navel;  it  can  be  roosed  by  increasing  the  fire  in  the 
IduJadharam.  It  is  said  to  be  like  a  serpent,  because  it  moves 
in  carves,  it  appears  to  move  ronnd  and  roand  in  a  circle,  Ida 
and  t*ingala  alternate  on  account  of  its  motion. 

Kundalini  is  said  in  the  books  to  have  three  and  a  half  cir- 
cles to  show  that  it  pervades  the  three  and  half  matras  of 
Pranava.  In  some  cases  it  is  represented  as  light,  because 
its  energy  runs  through  Ashtaprakriti.  Sometimes  it  is  repre- 
sented ss  four. 

Some  say  that,  in  order  to  attain  Raja  Yoga^  one  should 
investigate  Alakavak'iam  ;  others  that  the  mind  must  be  con- 
centrated ou  a  point  and  the  Yogi  must  contemplate  Para- 
brahm  ;  some  say  one's  own  Guru  is  the  true  subject  of  con- 
templatioD,  and  it  is  enongh  to  lead  a  good  life  ;  some  say 
the  repetition  of  the  Prantva  is  in  itself  Raj  Yog,  and  others 
say  yon  must  cultivate  will-power  :  which  of  these  ways  is  the 
true  one  ? 

All  these  are  necessary  and  much  more — read  •'  Light  on 
the  Path." 

The  end  of  Raj  Yog  is  the  attainment  of  immortality. 

CLASSIFICATION  OF '^  PRlNCtPLESr 

In  a  most  admirable  lectare  by  Mr.  T.  Snbba  Row  on  th« 
Bhaganad  Git  i,*  published  in  the  February  [1887]  immber  of 
the  TAeosophistt  the  lectnrer  deals,  iacidentally  as  1  believe, 
with  the  question  ot  septeaary  "  principles"  in  the  Kosiuos 
and  Man.  The  division  is  rather  criticized,  and  the  grouping 
hitherto  adopted  and  favoured  in  theosophical  teachings  is 
resolved  into  one  of  Four. 

This  criticism  has  already  given  rise  to  some  misnnderstand- 
ing,  and  it  is  argned  by  some  that  a  slur  is  thrown  on  the 
original  teachings.  This  appirent  disagreement  with  one 
whose  views  are  rightly  held  as  almost  decisive  on  occult 
matters  in  our  Society  is  certainly  a  dangerous  handle  to  give 
to  opponents  who  are  ever  on  the  alert  to  detect  and  blazon 
forth  contradictions  and  inconsistencies  in  our  philosophy* 
Hence  1  feel  it  my  duty  to  show  that  there  is  in  reality  no 
inconsistency  between  Mr.  Subba  How's  views  and  our  own  in 
the  question  ot  the  septenary  division  ;  aud  to  show,  (a)  that 
the  lecturer  was  perfectly  well  acquainted  with  the  septenary 
division  before  he  joined  the  Theosophical  Society  ;  ij))  that  he 
knew  it  was  the  teaching  of  old  "  Aryan  philosophers  who 
have  associated  seven  occult  powers  with  the  seven  principles'* 
in  the  Macrocosm  and  the  Microcosm  (see  the  end  of  this 
article)  ;  and  {c)  that  from  the  beginning  he  had  objected — 
not  to  the  classification,  but  to  the  form  in  which  it  was 
expressed.  Therefore,  now,  when  he  calls  the  division 
"unscientific  and  misleading,"  and  adds  that  "  this  sevenfold 
classification  is  almost  conspicuous  by  its  absence  in  mawf 
(not  all  ?)  of  our  Hindu  books,"  etc.,  and  that  it  is  better  to 
adopt  the  time-honoured  classification  of  four  principles, 
Mr.  Subba  Row  must  mean  only  some  special  orthodox  books, 
as  it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to  contradict  himself  in  such 
a  conspicuous  way. 

A  few  words  of  explanation,  therefore,  will  not  be  altogether 
out  of  place.     For  the  matter  of  being   "  conspicuous  by   its 

*  This  lecture  has  beon  pablisbcd  in  a  separate  book. 

25f 

absence"  in  tiindn  books,   the  said  classification  is  as  cdn: 

spicuons  by  its  absence  in  Buddhist  books.    This,  for  a  reason 

transparently  clear  :  it  was   always   esoteric  ;  and   as    such* 

rather  inferred  than  openly  tanght.    That  it  is  "  misleading  '* 

is  also  perfectly  trne  j   for   the   great  feature   of  the  day°— 

materialism— has  led  the  minds  of  oar   Western  theosophists 

into  the  prevalent  habit  of  viewing  the   seven  principles  as 

distinct  and  self-existing  entities,  instead  of  what   they  are— 

namely,  upadkis  and  correlating  states— three  tpadkis,  basic 

groups,  and  tour  principlesi    As   to   being  unscientific,"   the 

term  can  be  only  attributed  to  a  lapsus  linguae,  and   in   this 

relation  let  me  quote  what  Mr.   Subba   Row   wrote   about  a 

year  before  he  joined  the  Theosophical  Society  in  one  of  his 

ablest  articles,  *'  Bfahmanism  on   the   sevenfold   principle  itt 

man,"  the  best  review  that  ever  appeared  of  the  Fragments  of 

Occult  Truth— since  embodied  in  "  Esoteric  Buddhism."   Says 
the  author  : — 

*'  I  have  carefully  examined  it  (the  teaching)  and  find  that 
the  results  artived  at  (in  the  Buddhist  doctrine)  do  not  differ 
much  from  the  conclusions  of  our  Aryan  philosophy,  though 
our  mode  of  stating  the  arguments  may  differ  in  form.'* 
Having  ennmeratedj  after  this  the"three  primary  causes"  which 
bring  the  human  being  into  existence — i.  e.,  Parabrahmam, 
Sakti  and  Prakriti — he  explains  :  "  Now,  according  to  the 
Adepts  of  ancient  Aryavarta,  sev6n  principles  are  evolved  out 
of  these  three  primary  entities.  Algebra  teaches  us  that  the 
number  of  combinations  of  things,  taken  one  at  a  time,  two  at  a 
time^  three  at  a  time,  and  so  forth  =  2n-l.  Applying  this 
formula  to  the  present  caaej  the  number  of  entities  evolved  from 
different  combinations  of  these  three  primary  causes  amount 
to  2^-1  =  8-1=7.  As  a  general  rule,  whenever  seven  entities 
are  mentioned  in  the  ancient  occult  sciences  of  India  in  any 
connection  whatsoever,  you  must  suppose  that  these  seven 
entities  come  into  existence  from  three  primary  entities; 
and  that  these  three  entities,  again^  are  evolved  out  of  a 
flingle  entity  or  monad."  (See  *'  Five  Years  of  Theosophy/* 
p*  160.) 
33 

2o8 

This  is  qnite  correct,  from  tlie  occult  standpoint,  and  also 
Kabbalistically,  when  one  looks  into  the  question  of  the  seven 
and  ten  Sephiroths,  and  the  seven  and  ten  Rishis,  Manns,  etc. 
It  shows  that  in  sober  truth  there  is  not,  nor  can  there  be  any 
fundamental  disagreement  between  the  esoteric  philosophy  of 
the  2>a««and  Ci5-Himalayan  Adepts.  The  reader  is  referred, 
moreover,  to  the  earlier  pages  of  the  above  mentioned  article, 
in  which  it  is  stated  that  *'  the  knowledge  of  the  occult 
powers  of  nature  possessed  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  lost 
Atlantis  was  learnt  by  the  ancient  Adepts  of  India,  and  was 
appended  by  them  to  the  esoteric  doctrine  taught  by  the  re- 
sidents of  the  sacred  island  (now  the  Gobi  desert)*.  The 
Tibetan  Adepts,  however,  (their  precursors  of  Central  Asia) 
have  not  accepted  the  addition."  (pp.  155-156.)  But  this 
difference  betweeo  the  two  doctrines  does  not  include  the 
septenary  division,  as  it  was  universal  after  it  had  originated 
with  the  Atlanteans,  who,  as  the  Fourth  Race,  were  of  course 
an  earlier  race  than  the  Fifth — the  Aryan. 

Thus,  from  the  purely  metaphysical  standpoint,  the  remarks 
made  on  the  Septenary  Division  in  the  "  Bhagavad-Gita*^ 
Lecture  hold  good  to-day,  as  they  did  five  or  six  years  ago  in 
the  article  "  Brahmanism  on  the  sevenfold  principle  in  Man," 
their  apparent  discrepancy  notwithstanding.  For  purposes  of 
purely  theoretical  esoterism,  they  are  as  valid  in  Buddhist 
as  they  are  in  Brahmanical  philosophy.  Therefore,  when 
Mr.  Subba  Row  proposes  to  hold  to  '*  the  time-honoured 
classification  of  four  principles"  in  a  lecture  on  a  Vedanta 
work — the  Vedantic  classification,  however,  dividing  man  into 
Jive  "  kosas"'  (sheaths)  and  the  Alma  (the  six  nominally^  of 
course),t  he  simply  shows  thereby  that  he  desires  to  remain 
strictly  within  theoretical  and  metaphysical,  and  also  ortho- 
dox computations  of  the  same.     This  is  how  I  understand   his 

•  See  *•  Isia  Unveiled,"  Vol.  I,  p.  6D0,  and  the  appendices  by   the  Edit- 
or to  the  above  quoted  article  in  "  Five  Years  of  Theosophy." 

t  This    is  the  division  given   to  us   by  Mr.     Subba  Row.    See    "Five 
Years  of  Theosophy,"  p.  136,  article  signed  T.  S. 

259 

words,  at  any  rate.  For  the  Taraka  Raj -Yoga  classification 
is  again  tA7'ee  upadAis,  the  Atma  being  the  foarth  principle,  and 
no  upadAi,  of  course,  as  it  is  one  with  Parabrahm.  This  is 
again  shown  by  himself  in  a  little  article  called  "Septenary 
Division  in  different  Indian  systems."* 

Why  then  should  not  "Buddhist"  Esoterisra,  so  called, 
resort  to  such  a  division  ?  It  is  perhaps  "misleading" — that 
is  admitted;  but  surely  it  cannot  be  called  "unscientific."  I 
will  even  permit  myself  to  call  that  adjective  a  thoughtless 
expression,  since  it  has  been  shown  to  be  on  the  contrary  very 
"scientific"  by  Mr.  Subba  Row  himself;  and  quite  mathemati- 
cally 80,  a  the  aforequoted  algebraic  demonstration  of  the 
same  proves  it.  I  say  that  the  division  is  due  to  nature  herself 
pointing  out  its  necessity  in  Cosmos  and  man-,  just  because 
the  number  seven  is  "  a  power  and  a  spiritual  force"  in  its 
combination  of  tAree  and  /our,  of  the  triangle  and  the 
quarternary.  It  is  no  doubt  far  more  convenient  to  adhere  te 
the  fourfold  classification  in  a  metaphysical  and  synthetical 
sense,  just  as  I  have  adhered  to  the  threefold  classification — of 
body,  soul  and  spirit — in  Isis  Unveiled,  because  had  I  thea 
adopted  the  septenary  division,  as  I  have  been  compelled  to  do 
later  on  for  purposes  of  strict  analysis,  no  one  would  have 
understood  it,  and  the  multiplication  of  principles,  instead  of 
throwing  light  upon  the  subject,  would  have  introduced  end- 
less confusion.  But  now  the  question  has  changed,  and  the 
position  is  different.  We  have  unfortunately — for  it  was 
premature — opened  a  chink  in  the  Chinese  wall  of  esoterism, 
and  we  cannot  now  close  it  again,  even  if  we  would.  I  for  one 
had  to  pay  a  heavy  price  for  the  indiscretion,  but  I  will  not 
shrink  from  the  results. 

I  maintain,  then,  that  when  once  we  pass  from  the  plane  of 
pure  subjective  reasoning  on  esoteric  matters  to  that  of  practi- 
cal demonstration  in  Occultism,  wherein  each  principle  and 
attribute  has  to  be  analysed  and  defined  in  its  application  to 
the  phenomena  of  daily   and   especially   of  post-mortefH  life, 

*  See  "  Five  Yews  of  Theosophy,"  p,  185. 

2f>0 

the  geveufold  classification  is  the  right  one.  For  it  is  simply 
a  convenient  division  which  prevents  in  no  wise  the  recogni- 
tion of  bat  three  groaps — which  Mr.  Sabba  Row  calls  -'  four 
principles  associated  with  fonr  upadhi&,  and  which  are  associat- 
ed in  their  turn  with  four  distinct  states  of  consciousness."* 
This  is  the  Bhagavad  Gita  classification,  it  appears  ;  bat  not 
that  of  the  Vedanta,  nor^^what  the  Raj-Yogis  of  the  pre-kxyst 
Bangu  schools  and  of  the  Mahayana  system  held  to,  and  still 
hold  beyond  the  Himalayas,  and  their  system  is  almost  identi* 
cal  with  the  Turaka  Raj-Y^oga,-^i\iQ  ditference  between  the 
latter  and  the  Vedanta  classification  having  been  pointed  out 
to  us  by  Mr.  Sabba  Row  in  his  little  article  on  the  ''  Septenary 
Division  in  different  Indian  system."  The  Taraka  Raj-Yogis 
recognizie  only  three  upadhis  in  which  Atma  may  work,  which, 
in  India,  if  1  mistake  not,  are  the  Japrata,  or  waking  state 
of  consciousness  (corresponding  to  the  Sthulapadhi)  ;  the 
Svapna,  or  dreaming  state  (in  Suhshmopadhi)  \  and  the 
Sushupti^  or  causal  state,  produced  by  and  through  Karano- 
fadhi^  or  what  we  call  Buddhi^  But  then,  in  transcendental 
states  of  Samadhi^  the  body  with  its  Lingasarira,^  the  vehicle 
of  the  life-principle,  is  entirely  left  out  of  consideration  :  the 
three  states  of  conscioasness  are  made  to  refer  only  to  the 
three  (with  Atma  the  fourth)  principles  which  remain  after 
death.  And  here  lies  the  real  key  to  the  septenary  division 
of  man,  the  three  principles  coming  in  as  an  addition  only 
during  his  life. 

As  in  the  Macrocosm,  so  in  the  Microcosm  :  analogies  hold 
good  throughout  nature.  Thus  the  universe,  our  solar  system, 
oar  earth  down  to  man,  are  to  be  regarded  as  all  equally 
possessing  a  septenary  constitution — four  snperterrestrial  and 

N  *  A  crowning  proof  of  the  fact  that  the  diTisioi)  is  arbitrary  and  varies 
with  the  schools  it  belongs  to,  is  in  the  words  published  in  ♦•  Personal  and 
Impersonal  God"  by  Mr.  Sabba  Bow,  where  he  states  that  ^*  we  have  s/a? 
Btates  of  consciousness,  either^objective  or  subjective.  .  .  and  a  perfect  state 
of  unconsciousness,  etc."  (See  •*  Five  Years  of  Theoaophy,"  pp.  208  and 
£01.)  Of  course  those  who  do  not  bold  to  the  old  school  of  Aryan  an4 
Afhat  Adepts  »|-e  in  no  vfay  bound  to  adopt  the  septenary  classification, 

2G1 

Btiperhnman,  so  to  say  ',~-three  objective  and  astral.  In  deal- 
ing with  the  special  case  of  man,  only,  there  are  two  stand-' 
points  from  which  the  question  may  be  conuidered.  Man  in 
incarnation  is  certainly  made  up  of  seven  principles,  if  we  fo 
term  the  seven  states  of  his  material,  astral,  and  spiritual 
framework,  which  are  all  on  diflFerent  planes.  But  if  we 
classify  the  principles  according  to  the  seat  of  the  four  degrees 
of  consciousness,  these  Mjoara?At5  may  be  reduced  to  four  groups.* 
Thus  his  consciousness,  never  being  centred  in  the  second  or 
third  principles —  both  of  which  are  composed  of  states  of 
matter  (or  rather  of  "  substance  ")  on  different  planes,  each 
corresponding  to  one  of  the  planes  and  principles  in  Cosmos 
— is  necessary  to  form  links  between  the  first,  fourth  and  fifth 
principles,  as  well  as  subserving  certain  vital  and  psychic 
phenomena.  These  latter  may  be  conveniently  classified  with 
the  physical  body  under  one  head,  and  laid  aside  during 
trance  (^Samadhi),  as  after  death,  thus  leaving  only  the  tradi- 
tional exoteric  and  metaphysical  ybwr.  Any  charge  of  contra- 
dictory teaching,  therefore,  based  on  this  simple  fact,  would 
obviously  be  wholly  invalid  ;  the  classification  of  principles  as 
septenary  or  quaternary  depending  wholly  on  the  stand-point 
from  which  they  are  regarded,  as  said.  It  is  purely  a  matter 
of  choice  which  classification  we  adopt.  Strictly  speaking, 
however,  occult — as  also  profane — physics  would  favour  the 
septenary  one  for  these  reasons,  f 

*  Mr.  Subba  Bow's  argument  that  in  the  matter  of  the  three  divisions 
of  the  body  ''we  may  make  any  number  of  divisions,  and  may  as  well 
enumerate  nerve-force,  blood  and  bones,''  is  not  valid,  I  think.  Nerve- 
force— well  and  good,  though  it  is  one  with  the  life-principle  and  proceeds 
from  it :  as  to  blood,  bones,  etc.,  these  are  objective  material  things,  and 
ore  with,  and  inseparable  from,  the  human  body  ;  while  all  the  other  six 
principles  are  in  their  Seventh— the  Jody— purely  subjective  principles,  and 
therefore  all  denied  by  material  science,  which  ignores  them. 

t  In  that  most  admirable  article  of  his  "Personal  and  Impersonal  God'* 
—one  which  has  attracted  much  attention  in  the  Western  Theosophical 
circles,  Mr,  Subba  Row  says,  "Just  as  a  human  being  is  composed  of  seven 
principles,  differentiated  matter  in  the  solar  system  exists  in  seven  different 
concUfcions.    These  do  not  all  come  within  the  range  of  our  present  objective 

262 

There  are  six  Forces  in  nature  :  this  in  Buddhism  as  in 
Brahmanism,  whether  exoteric,  or  esoteric  and  the  seventh — the 
all-Force^  or  the  absolute  Force,  which  is  the  synthesis  of  all. 
Natare  again  in  her  constructive  activity  strikes  the  key-note 
to  this  classification  in  more  than  one  way.  As  stated  in  the 
third  aphorism  of  '-'■Sankhya,  Karika'^  of  Prakriti — "the  root 
and  substance  of  all  things,"  she  {Prakriti^  or  nature)  is  no 
production,  but  herself  a  Producer  of  seven  things,  "which,  pro- 
duced by  her,  become  all  in  their  turn  producers."  Thus  all 
the  liquids  in  nature  begin,  when  separated  from  their  parent 
mass,  by  becoming  a  spheroid  (a  drop)  ;  and  when  the  globule 
is  formed,  and  it  falls,  the  impulse  given  to  it  transforms  it, 
when  it  touches  ground,  almost  invariably  into  an  equilateral 
triangle  (or  three),  and  then  into  an  hexagon^  after  which  out 
of  the  corners  of  the  latter  begin  to  be  formed  squares  or  cubes 
as  plane  figures.  Look  at  the  natural  work  of  nature,  so  to 
speak,  her  artificial,  or  helped  production — the  prying  into 
her  occult  work-shop  by  science.  Behold  the  coloured  rings 
of  a  soap-bubble,  and  those  produced  by  polarized  light.  The 
rings  obtained,  whether  in  Newton's  soap-bubble,  or  in  the 
crystal  through  the  polarizer,  will  exhibit  invariably,  six  of 
seven  rings —  "  a  black  spot  surrounded  by  six  rings,  or  a  circle 
with  a  plane  cube  inside,  circumscribed  with  six  distinct  rings, 
the  circle  itself  the  seventh.  The  "  Noremberg  "  polarizing 
apparatus  throws  into  objectivity  almost  all  our  occult  geo- 
metrical symbols,  though  physicists  are  none  the  wiser  for  it. 
(See  Newton's  and  Tyndall's  experiments*). 

conscioasness,  bat  they  can  be  perceived  by  the  spiritual  ego  in  man.  Fur- 
ther Prdgna,  or  the  capacity  of  perception,  exists  in  sevea  different  aspects^ 
corresponding  to  the  seven  conditions  of  matter.  Strictly  speaking  there 
are  six  states  of  differentiated  'pragiia,  the  seventh  state  being  a  condition 
of  perfect  unconsciousness  (or  absolute  consciousness).  By  differentiated 
fragna  I  mean  the  condition  in  which  pragna,  is  split  up  into  various  states 
of  consciousness.  Thus  we  have  six  states  of  consciousness,  etc.,  etc. 
("Five  Years  of  Theosophy,"  pp.  200  and  201.)  This  is  precisely  our 
d?ran8-Himalayan  Doctrine. 

*  One  need  only  open  Webster's  Dictionary  and  examine  the  snowflakes 
and  crystals  at  the  word  "Snow"  to  peroeive  nature's  work.  "Qod  geoa 
metrites,"  aays  Plato. 

2fi3 

The  number  seven  is  at  the  very  root  of  occult  Costnogony 
and  Authropogony.  No  symbol  to  express  evolution  from  it0 
starting  to  its  completion  points  vrould  be  possible  without  it. 
For  the  circle  produces  the  point;  the  point  expands  into  a 
triangle,  returning  after  two  angles  upon  itself,  and  then  forma 
the  mystical  Tetraktis — the  plane  cube;  which  three  when  pas- 
sing into  the  manifested  world  of  effects,  differentiated  nature^ 
become  geometrically  and  numerically  3-f4=«7.  The  best 
Kabbalists  have  been  demonstrating  this  for  ages  ever  since 
Pythagoras,  and  down  to  the  modern  mathematicians  and  sym- 
bologists,  one  of  whom  has  succeeded  in  wrenching  for  ever 
one  of  the  seven  occult  keys,  and  has  proved  his  victory  by 
a  volume  of  figures.  Set  any  of  our  theosophiats  interested 
in  the  question  to  read  the  wonderful  work  called  *'The  Heb- 
rew Egyptian  Mystery,  the  Source  of  Measures  ;*'  and  those 
of  them  who  are  good  mathematicians  will  remain  aghast 
before  the  revelations  contained  in  it.  For  it  shows  indeed 
that  occult  source  of  the  measure  by  which  were  built  kosmos 
and  man,  and  then  by  the  Litter  the  great  Pyramid  of  Egypt, 
as  all  the  towers,  mounds,  obelisks,  eave-temples  of  India,  and 
pyramids  in  Peru  and  Mexico,  and  all  the  archaic  monuments; 
symbols  in  stone  of  Chaldaea,  both  Americas,  and  even  of  the 
Eastern  Islands — the  living  and  solitary  witness  of  a  sub- 
merged prehistoric  continent  in  the  midst  of  the  Pacific  Ocean. 
It  shows  that  the  same  figures  and  measures  for  the  same 
esoteric  symbology  existed  throughout  the  world;  it  shows  in 
the  words  of  the  author  that  the  Kabbala  is  a  "whole  series 
of  developments  based  upon  the  use  of  geometrical  elements; 
giving  expression  in  nuoaerical  values,  founded  on  integral 
values  of  the  circle"  (one  of  the  seven  keys  hitherto  known 
but  to  the  Initiates),  discovered  by  Peter  Metine  in  the  16th 
century,  and  re-discovered  by  the  late  John  A.  Parker.* 
Moreover,  that  the  system  from  whence  all  these  developments 
were  derived  '"was  anciently  considered   to   be  one   resting  in 

*  Of  Kewark,  in  his  work  TAc  Quadrature  of  the  Circle,  \\\b    "problem   ol 
the  three  revolving  bodies"— (N.  Y.,  Johu  Wiley  it  Son.) 

S64 

nature  (ot  dod),  as  the  6a8iif  or  taiO  of  the  etertiona  practically 
of  creative  design;"  and  that  it  also  anderlies  the  Biblical 
Btractures,  being  found  in  the  measurements  given  for  Solo- 
mon's templcj  the  ark  of  the  Covenant,  Noah's  ark,  etc.,  etc*, 
— in  all  the  symbolical  myths,  in  short,  of  the  Bible* 

And  what  are  the  figures,  the  m  easure  in  which  the  sacred 
Cubit  is  derived  from  the  esoteric  Quadrature,  which  the  Ini- 
tiates know  to  have  been  contained  in  the  Tetraktis  of  Pytha- 
goras? Why  it  is  the  universal  primordial  symbol.  The 
figures  found  in  the  Ansated  Gross  of  Egypt,  fas  I  maintain) 
in  the  Indian  Sivastikai  "  the  sacred  sign"  which  embellishes 
the  thousand  heads  of  Sesba,  the  Serpent-cycle  of  eternity, 
on  which  rests  Vishnu,  the  deity  in  Infinitude;  and  which  also 
may  be  pointed  out  in  the  threefold  (treta)  fire  of  Pururavas, 
the  first  fire  in  thd  present  Mantantara^  out  of  the  forty-nine 
(7  X  7)  mystic  fires.  It  may  be  absent  from  many  of  the  Hindu 
books,  but  the  Vishnu  and  other  Pnranas  teem  with  this  sym- 
bol and  figure  under  every  possible  form,  which  I  mean  to 
prove  in  the  "Secret  Doctrine."  The  author  of  the  "Source 
of  Measures  "  does  not,  of  course,  himself  know  as  yet  the 
whole  scope  of  what  he  has  discovered.  He  applies  his  key, 
so  far,  only  to  the  esoteric  language  and  the  symbology  in  the 
Bible,  and  the  Books  of  Moses  especially.  The  great  error  of 
the  able  author,  in  my  opinion,  is,  that  he  applies  the  key  dis- 
covered by  him  chifly  to  post-Atlantean  and  qua  si- historical 
phallic  elements  in  the  world  religions;  feeling,  intuitioually, 
a  nobler^  or  higher^  a  more  transcendental  meaning  in  all  this 
— onhj  in  the  Bible, — and  a  mere  sexual  worship  in  all  other 
religions.  This  phallic  element,  however,  in  the  older  pagan 
worship  related^  in  truth,  to  the  physiological  evolntion  of  the 
human  races,  something  that  could  not  be  discovered  in  the 
Bible,  as  it  is  absent  from  it,  fthe  Pentateuch  being  the  latest 
of  all  the  old  Scriptures.)  Nevertheless,  what  the  learned 
author  has  discovered  and  proved  mathematically,  is  wonder- 
ful enough,  and  sufficient  to  make  our  claim  good  :  namely, 
that  the  figures  0  A  [Zl  and  3,  4  =  7,  are  at  the  very  basisy 
and  are  the  aouloi  cosmogony  and  the  evolatiou  of  mankind. 

S65 

To  whosoever  desires  to  display  this  process  by  way  of  sym* 
bol,  says  the  author  speakinj^  of  the  ansasted  cross,  the    Tait 
J  of  the  Egyptians   and   the   Christian   cross— "it  would  be 
by  the  figure  of  the  cube  unfolded  in  connection   with  the  circle 
whose  measure  is  taken  of  on  to  the  edges   of  the   cube.     The 
cnbe  unfolded  becomes  in  superficial    display  a  cross  proper, 
or  of  the  tau  forna,  and  the  attachment  of  the   circle  to  this 
last,  gives  the  ansated  cross  of  the  Egyptians  with  its  obvious 
meaning  of  the  Origin   of  Measures.*     Because  this    kind  of 
measure  was  also  made  to  co-ordinate   with  the  idea  of  the 
origin  of  life,  it  was  made  to  assume  the  type  of  the   herma- 
phrodite, and  in  fact  it  is  placed    by   representation   to   cover 
this  part  of  the  human  person  in   the  Hindu  form..."     [It   is 
"the  hermaphrodite  Indranse  Indra,  the    nature  goddess,    the 
Issa  of  the  Hebrews,  and  the  Isis  of  the  Egyptians,"   as   the 
author  calls  them  in  another  place.]  "...  It  is  very  observable, 
that  while  there  are  but  six  faces  to  a  cube,  the  representation 
of  the  cross  as  the  cube  unfolded  as  to  the  cross    bars  displays 
one  face  of  the  cube  as  common  to  tido  bars,  counted  as  belong-^- 
ing  to  either;  then,  while  the  faces  originally  represented   are 
bat  six,  the  use  of  the  two  bars  counts  the  square  as  fonr  for 
the  upright  and  three  for  the  cross  bar,  making   seven  in  all. 
Here  we  have  the  famous  four,  three  and  seven  again,  the  four 
and  three  on  the  factor  members  of  the  Parker  (quadrature  and 
of  the  "three  revolving  bodies")  problem"  .  .  .  (pp.  50  and  51.) 

And  they  are  the  factor  members  in  the  building  of  the  Uni- 
verse and  Man.  Wittoba^ — an  aspect  of  Krishna  and  Vishna 
- — is  therefore  the  "man  crucified  in  space,"  or  the  "cube  un- 
folded," as  explained  (See   Moore's   Pantheon,   for    Wittoba)% 

♦  And  by  adding  to  to  the  cross  proper  +  the  symbol  of  the  four  cardinal 
points  and  infinity  at  the  sam  time,  thus    ^',  the    arms   pointing  above, 

below,  and  right,  and  left,  making  six    in   the  circle— the   Archaic  sign   of 
the  Yomas — it  vroald  make  of  it  the  Swastika,  the  "sacred   sign"    used    by 
the  order  of  ''Ishmael  masons,"   which   they  call  the   Unirersal  Hermetic 
Cross,  and  do  not  uii'ieritand  if;  real  wi^loni,  uor  know  its  origin. 

34 

266 

It  is  the  oldest  symbol  in  India,  now  nearly  lost,  as  the  real 
meaning  of  Viskvakarina  and  Vikkarttana  (the  "snn  shora 
of  his  beams")  is  also  lost.  It  is  the  Egyptian  ansated  cross^ 
and  vice  versa,  and  the  latter— even  the  sistrum,  with  its  cross 
'l)ars — is  simply  tke  symbol  of  the  Dedij  as  man — however 
phallic  it  may  have  become  later,  after  the  snbmersion  of 
Atlantis.  The  ansated  cross  J  is  of  coarse,  as  Professor 
■Seyflorth  has  shown —  (^  again  the  six  with  its 
head — the  seventh.  Seyf- 
sknll  with  the  brains, 
the  nerves  exten  ling  to 
and  ears.    For  the  Tan  is 

r§ 

forth  says  :  "It  is  the 
the  seat  of  thesonl  with 
the  spine,  back,  and  eyes 
stone  thus  translates  it 
repeatedly  by  antkropos  (man);  and  we  have  the  Coptic  ank^ 
.{vita,  life)  properly  animal  which  corresponds  with  the  Hebrew 
anosky  properly  meaning  anima.  The  Egyptian  anki  signifies 
**aay  sobI."* 

It  means  in  its  synthesi,  the  seven  ^jrinciples^  the  details 
coming  later.  Now  the  ansated  cross,  as  given  above,  having 
been  discovered  on  the  backs  of  the  o:io:antic  statnes  found  on 
the  Easter  Isles  (mid-Pacific  Ocean)  which  is  a  part  of  the 
submerged  continent ;  this  remnant  being  described  as 
"thickly  studded  with  cyclopean  statues,  remnants  of  the 
civilization  of  a  dense  and  cultivated  people;" — and  Mr.  Sabba 
Row  having  told  us  what  he  had  found  in  the  old  Hindu  books, 
namely,  that  the  ancient  Adepts  of  India  had  learned  occult 
powers  from  the  Atlanteans  {vide  supra) — the  logical  infer- 
ence is  that  they  had  their  septenary  division  from  them,  just 
as  our  Adepts  irom  the  "Sacred  Island"  had.  This  ought  to 
settle  the  (question. 

And  this  Tau  cross  is  ever  septenary^  under  whatever  form 
— it  has  many  forms,  though  the  main  idea  is  always  one. 
What  are  the  Egyptian  oozas  (the  eyes),  the  amulets  called 
the  "mystic  eye,"  but  symbols  of  the  same  ?  There  are  the 
four  eyes  in  the  upper  row  and  the  three  smallar  ones   in  the 

*  Quoted  iu  ♦'source  of  ileaaurec." 

267 

lower.    Or  again,  the  ooza  with  the  semn  luUts  hanging  front . 
it,  "the  combiaed  melody  of  y^Uch  creates  one  man,''  ^y  i\iQ 
hieroglyphics.     Or  again,  the  hexagon  formed  of  six  traingles 
whose  apices   converge   to  a  point— thus  @  the  5y w^o/ 0/ f/^^ 
Lniversal  creation,  which  Kenneth   Mackenzie   tells  us   "was 
worn  as  a  ring  by  the  Sovereiga  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret"" 
—which  they  never  knew  by  the  bye.     If  seven  has  uoiv^ht  to 
do  with  the   mysteries  of  the  universe   and  men,  then  indeed 
from  the  Vedas   down  to  the  Bible  all  the  archaic   Scriptures- 
— the  Puranas,    the    Avesta  and  all  the  fragments   that  have 
reached  us — have   no  esoteric  meaning,  and  must  be  regarded 
as  the  Orientalists  regard  them — as  a  farago  of  childish  tales. 
It  is  quite  true  that  the  three  upadhis  of  the    Taraka  Raj 
Yoga  are,   as  Mr.  Subba  Row   explains  in  his   little  article 
"The  Septenary    Division  in  different  Indian  Systems/*  "the 
best  and  the   simplest** — but   only  in    purely   contemplative 
Yoga,  and    he  adds:     "Thouirh  there   are  seven   principles  iu 
man  there  are  but  three  distinct   upadhis,  in   each   of  which 
his  A'ma  may  work  independently  of  the   rest.     These   three 
upadhis  can  be  separated  by  the  Adept  without  killing  him- 
self    He  caunot  separate  the  seven  principles  from  each  other 
without  destroying  his  constitution"  ("Five   Years  of   Theo- 
sophy,"  p.  185).     Most  decidedly  he  cannot.     But  this   again 
holds  good  only  with  regard  to  his  lower  three  principles — the 
body  and  its  (in  life)  inseparable  prana  and  linga  sarira.  The 
rest  can  be  separated,  as  they  constitute  no  vital,  but  rather  a 
mental  and  spiritual  necessity.     As  to  the  remark  in  the  same 
article  objecting  to  the   fourth  principle  being  "  inclnded   in 
the  third  kosa  as  the  said  principle  is  but  a  vehicle  of  will- 
power, which  is  but  an  energy  of  the  mind."     I  answer:  Just 
so.     But  as  the  higher  attributes  of  the  fifth  (Manas),  goto 
make   up   the    original  t7'iad,   and  it   is  just   the  terrestritil 
energies,  feelings  and  volitions  which  remain   in  the  Kama- 
loka,  what,  is  the  vehicle,  the  astral  form,  to  carry  them  about 
a  bhoota  until   they  fade  out — which  may   take   centuries   to 
accomplish  ?      Can  the    "false"  personality,  or   the  pisacha 
whose  ego  is  made  up  precisely  of  all  those  terrestrial  passions 

26S 

and  feelings,  remain  in  Kamaloka,  and  occasionally  appear, 
■without  a  sobstantial  vehicle,  however  ethereal  ?  Or  are  we 
to  give  up  the  seven  principles,  and  the  belief  that  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  an  astral  body,   and  a   bhoot,  or  spook  ? 

Most  decidedly  not.  For  Mr.  Subba  Row  himself  once 
more  explains  how,  from  the  Hindu  standpoint,  the  lower 
fifth,  or  Manas,  can  re-appear  after  death,  remarking  very 
justly,  that  it  is  absurd  to  call  it  a  disembodied  spirit.  "Five 
Years  of  Theosophy,"  p.  174.)  As  he  says  ;  "  It  is  merely 
a  power,  or  force,  retaining  the  impressions  of  the  thoughts 
or  ideas  of  the  individual  zw^o  whose  composition  it  originally 
entered.  It  sometimes  summons  to  its  aid  the  Kamarupa 
power,  and  creates  for  itself  some  particular,  etherial  form.*' 

Now  that  which  ■'  sometimes  summons  "  Kamarupa^  and 
the  **power"  of  that  name  make  already  two  principles,  two 
"powers" — call  them  as  you  will.  Then  we  have  Atma  and 
its  vehicle — Buddhi — which  make  four.  With  the  three 
which  disappeared  on  earth  this  will  be  equivalent  to  seven. 
How  can  we,  then,  speak  of  modern  Spiritualism,  of  its 
materalizations  and  other  phenomena,  without  resorting  to 
the  Septenary. 

To  qoote  our  friend  and  much  respected  brother  for  the 
last  time,  since  he  says  that  "our  (Aryan)  philosophers  have 
associated  seven  occult  powers  with  the  seven  principles  (in 
men  and  in  the  kosmos),  which  seven  occult  powers  corres- 
pond in  the  microcosm  with,  or  are  counterparts  of,  occult 
powers  in  the  macrocosm."* — fjuite  an  esoteric  sentence, — it 
does  seem  almost  a  pity,  that  words  pronounced  in  an 
ex  tempore  lecture,  though  such  an  able  one,  should  have  been 
published  without  revision, 

H.  P.  Blavatsky. 

*  •'  BrfthBianism  on  the  Sevenfold  Principle  in  Man.'* 

269 
THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MICROCOSM. 

Thb  few  remarks  which  I  have  made  in  ray  first  lecture  on 
the  Bhagavad  Gita  published  in  the  February  issue  of  Tkeoso- 
phist,  ou  the  septenary   classification  of  the   various   princi- 
ples in  man  hitherto  adopted  in  theosophical  publications,  have 
elicited  a  reply  from  Madame  H.  P.  Blavatsky,  which  appear- 
ed in  the  last  issue   of  this   Journal   under   the   heading  of 
"Classification   of  Principles."      The   reply   was   apjiarently 
intended  to  explain  away  the  remarks  which  fell  Irom  my  lips 
and  justify    tiie   classification   hitherto   advocated.       1   feel 
extremely  thankful   to   the  writer  for    the    friendly   tone   of 
criticism  which  she  has  adopted.     I  cannot,  however,  fail  to 
see  that  the  line   of  arguments   which   she   had   followed  is 
likely   to  create  a   wrong  impression   in   the   minds  of  her 
readers   regarding   my   real  attitude  in   the  matter   without 
a  few  words  of  explanation  on  my   part.     And   moreover  the 
important  question  raised  by  the  controversy  which  is  set  on 
foot   by  the  article   under   consideration  deserve  a  thorough 
investigation.     1  think  it  necessary  therefore  to  define  clearly 
the  position   taken   up  by  me,  and  examine  how   far   the 
arguments  now  advanced  in  defence   of  the  septenary  classi- 
fication are  calculated  to  remove  the  objections  raised  against 
the  said  classification  and  weaken  the  force  of  my  criticism. 
Looking  at  the  tenour   of  the  reply   it  becomes   necessary  to 
decide  at  the  outset  whether  my  remarks  were  intentional   or 
whether  they  were  due  to  a   lapsus  linguae  as   my   critic   is 
pleased   to   assert,   and   formulate   the  real  question  at  issue 
in  case  there  should  be  found  a  serious  difi'erence   of   opinion 
between   us.     I   cannot  but  confess   that   my  remarks  were 
deliberate  and  intentional.      I   thought   it  fit  to  condemn  the 
seven-fold  classification  after  serious   and  anxious   considera- 
tion, and  I  duly  weighed  my  words  in  using  them.    It  will  be 
easily  conceded  that  my  evidence  is  the   best  and   the   most 
direct  evidence  available  as  regards  my  own  states   of  ronsci- 
ODsness  which  accompanied  the  expressions  used.     The   term 
unscientific    is   characteri/.ed   as    a  thoughtless    expression. 

270 

Whether  the  epithet  was  rightly  or  wrongly  applied  is  the 
very  issue  to  be  settled  between  us;  but  it  was  certainly  not 
due  to  any  negligence  or  carelessness  on  my  part.  It  is 
further  alleged  in  the  article  under  examination  that  when 
1  said  that  the  seven-fold  classification  was  conspicuous  by 
its  absence  in  many  Hindu  books,  I  must  have  meant  "^some 
special  orthodox.**  This  allegation  has  no  foundation 
whatsoever.  I  was  not  speaking  from  the  standpoint  of  any 
special  orthodox  system  and  could  not  have  referred  therefore 
to  any  special  orthodox  books.  The  word  'many'  is  taken 
advantage  of  by  my  critic  for  the  purpose  of  attributing  to 
me  an  intention  which  I  never  had  I  could  not  very  well 
have  said  that  the  classification  was  absent  in  the  whole 
range  of  Sanskrit  mystic  literature  unless  I  had  examined  etei^y 
book  on  the  subject.  I  did  not  come  across  this  classifica- 
tion in  any  book  that  I  have  read,  though  I  have  perused 
many  of  these  books.  If  my  learned  critic  means  to  assert 
that  it  would  be  found  in  some  book  which  I  have  not  read, 
she  ought  to  name  the  book  and  the  author.  A  classification 
like  this  should  not  be  allowed  to  rest  merely  on  the  basis 
of  a  theoretically  possible  inference  without  some  clear  and 
definite  proof  of  its  existence.  And,  again,  I  really  cannot 
see  what  authority  my  critic  has  for  asserting  that,  in  making 
the  remarks  commented  upon,  I  desired  to  remain  strictly 
*'withia  theoretical  and  metaphysical  and  also  orthodox 
computations"  of  the  microcosmic  principles.  For  the  pur- 
poses of  this  controversy  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  occult 
theories  which  are  theoretically  and  metaphysically  good,  and 
those  which  are  good  for  "practical  demonstration"  whatever 
the  expression  may  mean.  This  is  simply  absurd.  Occultism 
is  both  a  science  and  an  art.  Its  scientific  principles,  if  they 
are  correct,  must  be  consistent  with  the  rules  of  their  practical 
application  which  are,  as  it  were,  but  matters  of  inference  from 
the  said  principles.  Any  system  of  occultism  which  has  got 
one  set  of  principles  for  its  theory,  and  another  set  of  prin- 
ciples inconsistent  with  the  former  for  its  practice,  would  be 
font  an  empirical  system  which  could  hardly  be  called  scientific* 

S7i 

"  li'ortnnately  for  tlie  occnit  science  of  the  ancients  snob  a 
•distinction  does  not  exist.  I  ara  obliged  therefore  to 
repudiate  the  specific  motives  and  intentions  attribnted  to  rae 
and  frankly  confess  that  the  diiFerence  of  opinion  between  . 
ns  is  not  merely  apparent  bnt  real.  Snch  being  the  case  I 
am  fally  prepared  to  justify  my  assertions. 

Any  farther  discnssion  of  the  snbject  will  of  conrse  be  out 
of  theqnestion  if  it  is  asserted  that  I  am  not  at  liberty  to 
question  the  correctness  of  the  so-called  "original  teachings." 
Some  have  argned,  it  wonld  appear,  that  a  slnr  was  thrown 
on  "the  original  teachings'*  by  my  remarks,  thereby  implying 
that  1  had  no  business  to  make  them  and  contradict  these 
teachings.  The  author  of  the  article  probably  endorses  this 
view,  as  she  virtually  informs  her  readers  in  the  footnote  on 
page  450,  that  they  must  either  adopt  the  seven-fold  classi- 
fication or  give  up  their  adherence  "to  the  old  School  of 
Aryan  and  Arhat  adepts."  I  am  indeed  very  sorry  that  she 
thought  it  proper  to  assume  this  uncompromising  attitude. 

It  is  now  necessary  to  examine  what  these  "  original 
teachings"  are  and  how  far  they  mast  be  considered  as  con- 
elnsive  on  the  snbject.  The  "original  teachings"  on  the  snbject 
in  qnestiou  first  made  their  appearance  in  an  editorial  headed 
"Fragments  of  Occnit  Truth"  published  in  the  issue  of  the 
Tkeosophist  for  October  1881.  They  were  subsequently 
referred  to  in  various  articles  written  by  the  Editor,  and 
additional  explanations  have  been  given  from  time  to  time. 
These  teachings  were  also  embodied  in  Mr.  Sinuett's 
"  Esoteric  Buddhism,"  which  has  been  put  forth  as  an 
authoritative  book.  They  were  farther  alluded  to  in  "Men," 
which  has  been  considered  equally  authoritative,  but  whose 
teachings  are  materially  inconsistent  with  those  of  "Esoteric 
Buddhism." 

As  far  as  I  am  in  a  position  to  see,  these  are  the  authori- 
ties on  which  these  so-called  "  Original  tsachings  "  have 
their  foundation. 

272 

In  my  hamble  opinion  it  would  be  highly  dangerous  fof 
the  future  well-being  and  prosperity  of  the  Theosophical 
Society,  if  it  were  to  evolve,  so  early  in  its  career,  an  ortho- 
dox creed  from  the  materials  supplied  by  the  above  mention- 
ed sources  and  raise  the  publications  above  named  to  the 
dignity  of  an  originally  revelation.  Most  of  the  members  of 
Theosophical  Society  know  full  well  the  circumstances  under 
Tfhich  these  teachings  were  given.  Their  fragmentary 
character  has  been  repeatedly  acknowledged.  Their  de- 
fective exposition  is  apparent  an  their  very  face,'  and  their 
imperfection  can  be  easily  detected  by  a  careful  examination. 
It  was  also  pointed  out,  1  believe^  that  these  teachings  were 
derived  from  teachers  who  could  not  and  Would  not  reveal 
their  real  secrets,  and  fully  explain  their  doctrines  except 
to  real  initiates.  The  writers  of  these  various  publications 
had  to  work  according  to  their  own  lights  on  a  few  hints 
thrown  out  to  them-  It  was  often  pointed  out  that  the 
Teal  teachings  of  the  ancient  Arcane  Science  had  to  ba 
approached  very  gradually  and  that  the  line  of  exposition 
followed  was  of  a  tentative  character.  It  will  be  found  on 
examination  that  the  teachings  connected  with  the  seven- 
fold classification  have  gone  through  various  changes  since 
the  appearance  of  the  first  article  on  the  subject;  and  it  is 
in  my  humble  opinion  premature  to  say  that  we  have  arrived 
at  the  end  of  onr  labours  in  this  direction  and  ascertained 
the  true  constitution  of  the  Microcosm.  Under  these  circnm- 
Btances  it  will  be  inconsistent  with  the  policy  which  has 
been  hitherto  adopted  to  declare  now  that  these  "original 
teachings,"  which  have  already  gone  through  so  many  trans- 
formations, should  be  accepted  as  an  infallible  revelation. 
Such  a  declaration  will  effectually  prevent  all  further 
progress  in  the  work  of  investigation  which  the  Society  has 
undertaken  and  perpetuate  the  blunders  already  committed. 
The  introduction  of  anything  like  an  orthodox  dogmatic 
creed  at  this  stage  of  our  progress  will  simply  be  ruinous  to 
the  cause  of  our  Society.  It  is  submitted  that  under  such 
circomstauces   it  will  be   no   crime  on  my  part  to  raaintaia 

373 

tbe  correctness  of  ray  remarks  regarding  the  unsatisfactory 
natare  of  this  seven-fold  classification,  and  I  am  not  in  the 
least  afraid  that  by  doing  so  I  shall  forfeit  my  right  to  follow 
the  teachings  of  "  the  old  school  of  Aryan  and  Arhat  adepts." 
I  am  yet  to  be  convinced  that  the  seven-fold  classification 
we  have  adopted  was  the  real  seven-fold  classification  of  this 
ancient  school  of  occultism. 

I  have  characterized  this  seven-fold  classification  as  mis- 
leading and  unscientific.  It  is  admitted  in  the  reply  that 
the  classification  is  really  misleading,  but  tbe  blame  is 
throvrn  on  Western  Materilaism.  This  is  putting  the  blame 
on  the  wrong  party.  If  the  classification  has  misled  no 
less  a  person  than  its  original  exponent  herself,  and  made 
her  change  her  conceptions  about  the  natare  of  the  varions 
principles  from  time  to  time,  it  is  pretty  nearly  certain  that 
the  classification  itself  must  be  held  responsible  for  all  the 
confusion  it  has  created. 

I  must  now  invite  the  attention  of  my  readers  to  the 
"  Fragments  of  Occult  Truth  "  (p.  17,  Tkeosopkist,  Oct.  1881) 
which  contains  the  "  original  teaching  "  on  the  subject,  and 
the  other  articles  and  publications  herein  referred  to.  I 
shall  take  up  principle  after  principle  in  the  order  of  enun- 
ciation, and  point  out  what  new  ideas  have  subsequently 
been  introduced  into  the  conception  of  these  various  princi- 
ples. 

7 he  first  principle  is  here  desQribed  as  the  physical  body. 
It  is  made  to  correspond  to  Rupa  or  form  in  "Esoteric 
Buddism  "  (p.  21).  It  will  perhaps  be  said  that  both  mean 
the  same  thing.  But  a  distinction  is  drawn  iu  the  original 
article  between  the  astral  body  and  the  astral  shapz.  They 
are  counted  as  two  distinct  principles. 

The   second  p7'inciple  [^  here  c2MqA  the   yital   principle  or 

Jiva-Atma.    It  is  differentiated  from   the  astral  eletnents  in 

the  human  constitution  and  is  described  as  a  "form  of  force.'* 

it  is  however  identified  in  an  article  headed  •' Trausmigratious 

36 

274 

of  Life  Atoms'*  (p.  535,  "Five  Years  of  Theosophy*')  written 
by  the  same  anther,  with  anima  mundi  which  is  eqnivaleot  to 
astral  light  (See  p»  301,  Vol.  I,  Isis  Unveiled).  And  again 
tlae  same  anthor  has  identified  this  very  principle  with  kdrana. 
^arira  in  an  article  on  "The  Septenary  Principle  in  Esoteri- 
cism"  (p.  193,  "Fiv€  Years  of  Theosophy").  Here  then  we 
have  a  mysterious  principle  which  was  at  first  described  as  an 
indestrnctible  force  different  from  astral  light,  which  was 
afterwards  identified  with  the  astral  light  itself,  and  which 
was  ultimately  transformed  into  karana  sarira.  And  yet  we 
are  bound  to  accept  the  classification,  it  would  appear,  as 
thoroughly  scientific  and  correct. 

The  third  principle  of  the  original  classification  is  stated  to 
be  the  astral  body,  otherwise  called  therein  Linga  Sarira.  It 
is  considered  as  sukskma  sarira  in  "The  Septenary  Principle 
in  Esotericism"  above  referred  to  ;  in  another  place  (p.  197), 
however,  in  the  same  article,  it  is  considered  as  a  part  of  the 
manomaya  kosa.  The  *'  original  teaching  "  places  this  princi- 
ple in  the  second  group  which  represents  the  Perisprit  of  man. 
It  is  apparently  transferred  to  the  first  group  representing  the 
physical  man  in  the  "  Transmigrations  of  life  Atoms  "  (p.  538). 
It  is  brought  back  into  the  second  group  subsequently  (see 
p.  235,  The  Path^  November  1886,  and  p.  70,  The  Theosophiat, 
Nov.  1886).  In  the  present  article  it  \b  again  retransferred 
to  the  first  group  (p.  451,  1.  23).  It  will  be  interesting  to 
notice  further  in  this  connection  that  this  principle  is  described 
as  something  difiereut  from  the  astral  body  in  "Esoteric  Bud- 
dhism." More  than  five  years  have  elapsed  since  the  appear- 
ance of  the  "original  teachings,"  and  yet  we  are  not  quite  cer- 
tain whether  this  third  principle  is  a  part  of  the  physical  man 
or  of  the  astral  man.  Moreover  the  "  original  teaching  "  says 
that  this  principle  dies  with  the  body.  *'  Esoteric  Buddhism" 
repeats  the  same  lesson.  But  this  principle  is  made  to  sur- 
vive the  dissolution  of  the  physical  body  in  "The  Theories 
about  Keincarnation  and  Spirits"  (paras.  3  and  4,  p.  235, 
The  Path,  Nov.  1886).  My  critic,  however,  reverts  to  the 
original  view  in  her  present  article  (p.  451,  lines  3,  4,  5).     Ib 

275 

spite  of  all  these  contradictions  we  are  assured  that  thas  Beven<> 
fold  classification  is  the  right  one  for  explaining  the  pheno- 
mena ", especially  of  post-mortem  life". 

The  fourth  principle  is  described  as  the  astral  shape  in  th© 
"Fragments"  and  as  something  different  from  the  astral  bodtf. 
The  reason  for  this  distinction  is  not  yet  clear.  It  has  snbse- 
qnently  usurped  the  place  of  the  astral  body.  The  original 
teaching  seems  to  imply  that  it  is  astral  in  its  constitution. 
Curiously  enough,  however,  the  present  article  divides  the 
seven  principles  into  two  groups  ;  the  three  principles  of  the 
first  group  are  described  as  ''objective  and  astral^*  and  the 
four  principles  of  the  second  group  as  "  Snperterrestrial  and 
Superhuman."  Is  this  fourth  principle  then  to  be  removed 
from  the  plane  of  astral  light  ?  If  not,  what  is  the  reason  for 
drawing  a  line  of  demarcation  between  the  third  principle  and 
the  fourth  principle  which  are  so  intimately  connected  with 
each  other  according  to  the  ''Fragments  "?  In  this  connectioQ 
a  strange  blunder  has  been  committed  by  my  critic.  The 
following  statement  occurs  in  an  article  by  me  published  in 
"Five  Years  of  Theosophy"  (p.  185): — "It  will  also  be  seen 
that  the  fonrth  principle  is  included  m  the  third  Kosa  (sheatb) 
as  the  said  principle  is  but  the  vehicle  of  will-power,  which  i» 
but  an  energy  of  the  mind.  Now  see  what  my  critic  says  in 
present  article  :  "As  to  the  remark  in  the  same  article  (the 
one  above  referred  to)  objecting  to  the  fourth  principle  being 
included  in  the  third  Kosa,  as  the  said  principle  is  but  a  vehi- 
cle of  will-power  which  is  but  an  energy  of  the  mind,  I  answer : 
Just  so."  In  saying  so,  she  is  misquoting  my  statement  and 
contradicting  the  assertion  which  she  made  in  her  article  on 
"The  Septenary  Principle  in  Esotericism"  (p.  19,  "Five  Years 
of  Theosophy")  to  the  effect  that  this  fourth  principle  was  a 
part  of  the  third  Kosa.  This  is  sufficient  to  show  how  ready 
she  is  to  change  her  opinions  about  these  "original  teachings" 
which  are  declared  to  be  almost  infallible. 

The  Afth  principle  of  the  classification  originally   occupied 
but  a  very  humble  position.     It  was  nothing  more  than  the 

276 

animal  or  physical  intelligence  of  man  not  far  removed  from 
"reason  instinct,  memory,  imagination,  &c.,"  of  the  brnte 
creation.  No  part  of  it  was  then  allowed  to  go  to  Devachan. 
It  was  simply  a  part  of  the  animal  soal  which  was  ultimately 
dissolved  in  Kamaloka  (See  Fragments,  pp.  18,  19  and  20), 
The  real  ego  of  man— the  permanent  element  in  him  which 
runs  through  the  various  incarnations, — had  not  its  basis  in 
this  principle  originally  or  any  part  of  it.  The  "Elixir  of 
Life"  assigns  to  it  more  or  less  the  same  position  as  the  follow- 
ing passage  shows: — "  Each  of  these  (seven  principles)  has 
in  turn  to  survive  the  preceding  and  more  dense  one  and  then 
die.  The  exception  is  the  6th  when  absorbed  into  and  blend- 
ed with  the  7th.*'  It  is  partly  mixed  up  with  Ananda-Maya 
Kosa  and  partly  with  Vignanamaya  Kosa  according  to  the 
"Septenary  Principle"  (p.  197,  Five  Years  of  Theosophy)y 
these  two  Kosas  being  described  jji^s  the  ^*illu8ion  of  supreme 
bliss'*  and  the  ''^envelope  of  ael/'delusion"  respectively.  It 
is  also  to  be  inferred  from  the  "Replies  to  an  English  F.  T.S." 
(p.  274,  "Five  Years  of  Theosophy")  that  it  is  not  the 
ego  or  the  human  monad.  It  is  further  declared  in  the 
Iransmigrarion  of  Life-atoms  (p.  539,  "Five  Years  of  Theoso- 
phy'*) that  the  particles  composing  this  principle  disperse 
after  death  and  "reform  after  going  through  various  trans- 
migrations to  constitute  over  again"  the  fifth  principle  of  the 
next  incarnation.  The  nature  of  this  principle  has  gradually 
changed.  Though  originally  it  was  but  the  animal  conscious- 
ness of  man,  it  has  subsequently  been  represented  as  the  fully 
developed  human  mind.  The  whole  of  it  used  to  perish  ori- 
ginally, but  subsequently  a  part  of  it  has  been  allowed  to  re- 
main in  existence.  The  whole  of  it  was  originally  destined 
for  Kamaloka,  but  a  portion  has  been  subsequently  lifted  up 
to  Devachan.  In  this  connection  it  must  be  noticed  that  it 
has  not  up  to  this  time  been  explained  whether  after  death 
this  principle  is  physically  split  up  into  two  parts,  or  whether 
the  principle  merely  leaves  impressions  of  its  mental  activity  on 
the  fourth  principle  taking  its  physical  constitution  to 
Devachan,  or  whether  the  sixth  principle  in  conjunction   with 

277 

the  7th  takes  with  it  to  Devachan  the  mere  vasana  (aroma) 
of  this  fifth  principle  leaving  its  material  constitation  behind 
with  the  foarth  principle  in  Kamaloka.  If  the  first  view  is 
accepted  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  material  constitation  of 
this  principle  is  something  peculiar  and  unintelligible.  No 
other  similar  phenomenon  is  presented  to  ns  by  Natare.  la 
case  we  accept  the  second  view,  we  shall  be  placing  the 
Devachanee  in  a  very  uncomfortable  position  as,  according  to 
**  The  Transmigrations  of  Life-atoms/*  the  particles  compos- 
ing his  fifth  principle  will  have  to  undergo  the  process  of 
disintegration  before  the  next  incarnation.  The  third  view 
will  require  us  to  have  the  sixth  principle  for  the  real  seat 
of  the  Ego.  But  it  has  been  declared  in  an  article  published 
in  The  Path  (p.  235  November  1886)  that  Manas  or  the 
fifth  principle  should  be  considered  as  the  seat  of  the  Ego. 
The  first  view  is  inconsistent  with  the  original  teaching,  the 
second  view  with  the  philosophy  of  "Esoteric  Buddhism,'* 
and  third  view  with  the  later  developments  of  the  occult 
theory.  And  to  make  our  difficulties  worse  there  is  no  other 
view  possible.  The  latest  change  in  the  doctrine  is  yet  to  be 
noticed.  According  to  the  present  article  this  principle  is  a 
mere  '''correlating  state"— b.  condition  of  existence — and  not 
a  physical  upadkL  It  will  be  very  interesting  to  enquire 
whether  "correlating  state"  or  composed  of  particles  which 
disperse  and  reform  as  originally  taught.  It  is  further  declared 
in  this  article  that  this  principle  is  in  its  nature  "superterres- 
trial  and  superhuman."  The  change  from  animal  conscious- 
ness to  something  that  is  superhuman  is  indeed  very  vast; 
but  it  has  qaeitly  been  efi"ected  within  the  last  five  years. 

Now  taking  the  whole  of  this  teaching  into  account  this 
principle  may  be  described  as  follows : 

The  fifth  principle  of  man  is  his  "animal  or  physical  con- 
sciousness" composed  of  particles  subject  to  post-mortem 
disintegration  which  is  under  certain  conditions  "the  illusion 
of  supreme  bliss"  and  under  other  conditions  the  "envelope 
of  self-delusion,"  but  which  must  be  conceived   as  the  seat  of 

278 

the  Ego,  and  "a  snperterresfxial  and  snperhnraan  "  "correlat- 
ing state''  corresponding  to  the  dreamy  condition. 

Let  us  now  tarn  our  attention  to  the  sixth  principle.  It 
was  originally  described  as  the  higher  or  spiritual  intelligence 
or  consciousness  in  man,  and  the  main  seat  of  consciousness 
in  the  ''perfect  man'*  ("Fragments,"  p.  19,  Theos.,  Oct.  1881). 
It  must  be  noticed  that  the  expression  "perfect  man"  used 
in  this  connection  does  not  mean  the  perfected  man  or  an 
adept,  but  a  human  being  who  has  fully  reached  the  level  of 
humanity  in  the  course  of  evolutionary  progress  from  the 
animal  kingdom. 

According  to  the  original  teaching  of  the  "Fragments" 
the  post-mortem  career  of  this  principle  is  something  very 
peculiar.  It  is  stated  that  if  this  principle — "spiritual  ego" 
— "has  been  in  life  material  in  its  tendencies  ,"  it  clings 
blindly  to  the  lower  principles  and  severs  its  connection  with 
the  7th  (p.  19,  para.  3)  It  is  further  stated  that  its  severance 
from  the  7th  principle  brings  abont  its  dissolution.  The 
author  of  the  "Fragments"  writes  thus  on  the  subject, 
"Withdraw  the  oxygen  and  the  flame  ceases.  Withdraw  the 
spirit  and  the  spiritual  Ego  disappears."  It  is  further  declar- 
ed that  in  such  cases  the  7th  principle  passes  away  "taking 
with  it  no  fragment  of  the  individual  consciousness  of  the 
man  with  which  it  was  temporarily  aseociated."  It  is  also- 
pointed  out  on  the  next  page  that  under  certain  peculiar 
conditions  this  principle  may  remain  in  combination  with  the 
fifth  as  an  elementary.  Is  Madame  H  P.  Blavatsky  prepared 
to  adhere  to  this  original  view  at  present  ?  If  so  a  consider- 
able portion  of  the  subsequent  theosophical  literature  will 
have  to  be  thrown  to  the  winds.  If  the  spiritual  ego,  the 
main  seat  of  consciousness  in  the  so-called  "perfect  man,'*  is 
liable:to  be  destroyed  whenever  the  man's  tendencies  in  life 
happen  to  be  material;  if  the  fifth  principle  is  likewise  to  be 
dissolved  in  Kamaloka,  and  if  the  7th  principle  carries  nothing 
connected  with  the  individual  with  it,  how  is  the  chain  of  in- 
carnations kept  up  and  sustained  ? 

37Si 

What  becomes  of  the  doctrine  of  karma  then  ?  Now  »ea 
what  changes  have  been  introdaced  into  the  conception  of  thi» 
principle  by  sabseqnent  articles  and  other  publications.  Ac- 
cording to  "  The  Elixir  of  Life  "  the  6th  principle  does  not 
perish  in  the  manner  stated.  "  The  Replies  to  an  English 
F.  T.  S."  speak  of  it  in  conjunction  with  the  7th  principle  as 
the  permanent  monad  which  rnns  through  the  whole  series  of 
incarnations.  The  teachings  of  "Esoteric  Buddhism''  are 
utterly  inconsistent  with  the  original  view  as  may  be  easily 
perceived.  In  the  present  article  my  critic  identifies  it  with 
Karanopadhi  and  calls  it  at  the  same  time  a  "correlating 
state."  This  very  Karanopadhi  she  has  some  time  ago  identifi' 
ed  with  the  2nd  principle,  as  above  shown.  She  has  thus 
contradicted  the  original  teaching  any  number  oi  times  in  her 
subsequent  writingH.  It  must  also  be  remembered  that  is 
writing  these  "  Fragments  "  she  has  made  the  following 
distinct  declaration  :  "  These  are  no  speculations — we  speak 
what  we  do  know."  And  yet  she  herself  has  treated  them  as 
if  they  were  something  worse  than  mere  speculations.  Never- 
theless with  all  these  contradictions  and  all  this  confusion 
people  must  accept,  it  would  appear,  these  teachings  as  gospel 
truths,  and  not  utter  a  single  word  to  criticize  them. 

There  is  not  much  difficulty  perhaps  about  the  7th  principle 
as  nothing  very  definite  has  ever  been  said  about  it.  One  fact 
about  it  is  pretty  nearly  certain.  It  must  be  considered  as  the 
Logos,  there  being  no  other  entity  in  the  Cosmos  which  posses- 
ses the  attributes  assigned  to  it.  It  has  been  often  declared, 
as  far  as  my  recollection  goes,  that  the  ancient  occultists  re- 
garded this  principle  as  something  existing  out  of  the  body 
and  not  in  the  body.  It  was  once  loosely  stated  that  this 
principle  should  be  considered  as  a  principle  running  through 
the  other  principles  (p.  197,  "Five  Years  of  Theosophy"). 
This  might  be  true  as  regards  its  light  or  aura;  but  the  Logos 
itself  is  never  present  in  the  microcosm  except  when  it  finally 
enters  into  a  man  before  his  final  emancipation  from  the  tra- 
mmels of  incarnate  existence.  It  is  erroneous  in  my  humble 
opinion  to  name  the  Logos  as  a  principle  in  man.      it  will  be 

280 

qaite  as  proper  to  name  Farabrahmam  itself  as  a  principle  in 
man. 

In  tracing  the  coarse  of  evolution  it  is  stated  in  "Esoteric 
Baddhism"  and  some  other  writings,  that  each  sacceediug 
planetary  roand  is  calculated  to  bring  about  the  development 
of  one  of  the  seven  principles*.  But  to  avoid  certain  difficol- 
ties  which  are  obvious,  it  is  farther  asserted  that  the  germs  of 
the  higher  principles  in  man  are  present  in  him  at  every  stage 
of  his  evolutionary  progress.  These  various  statements  when 
put  together  are  apt  to  give  rise  to  the  belief  that  the  7th 
principle  is  subject  to  a  course  of  evolutionary  development. 
This  difficulty  has  long  ago  been  pointed  out  by  one  or  two 
writers,  but  received  no  consideration  from  the  propounders 
of  the  original  doctrine-  My  critic  calls  even  this  principle 
"a  correlating  state."  There  is  no  use  quarrelling  about  the 
nature  of  this  principle  when  so  little  has  been  or  can  be  said 
about  it. 

From  the  foregoing  remarks  it  will  be  seen  that  this  unfor- 
tanate  seven-fold  classification  is  misleading,  not  on  account 
of  western  materialism  as  my  critic  asserts,  but  on  account  of 
its  own  inherent  defects.  Its  unscientific  nature  is  equally 
clear  from  all  that  has  been  said  about  it.  A  Classification 
which  has  brought  about  such  a  state  of  things,  and  required 
so  many  alterations  in  the  conceptions  associated  with  it  to 
keep  it  in  existence,  must  be  supported,  if  it  can  be  supported 
at  all,  by  clear  definitions  and  powerful  arguments.  On  the 
other  hand  my  critic  virtually  evades  the  real  question  at 
issue  and  undertakes  to  establish  a  proposition  which  I  have 
never  denied. 

281 

RE^CLASSIFICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES. 

In  the  May  TheosophiH  (1887,)  I  find  the  first  part  of  a  long 
explanatory  article,  by  Mr.  T.  Subba  Row,  in  which  the  able 
author  has  gone  to  the  trouble  of  diraecting  almost  everything 
I  have  written  for  the  last  ten  years,  upon  the  subject  under 
review. 

My  first  thought  was,  to  leave  his  "  answer"  without  reply. 
Upon  reading  it  carefully  over,  however,  I  have  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  perhaps  it  would  not  be  safe  to  do  so.  The 
article  in  question  is  a  manifesto.  I  am  not  allowed  to  labour 
any  longer  under  the  impression  that  it  wa«»  only  an  apparent 
disagreement.  Those  members  and  ex-members  of  our  Society 
who  had  rejoecerf  at  Mr.  Subba  Row's  remarks  were  conse. 
quently  right  in  their  conclusions,  and  I — wrong.  As  I  do  not 
admit — in  our  case,  at  any  rate — that  "a  house  divided  against 
itself"  must  fall,  for  the  Theosophical  Society  can  never  fall 
80  long  as  its  foundation  is  very  strong,  I  regard  the  disagree- 
ment, even  if  real^  as  of  no  great  or  vital  importance.  Yet, 
were  I  to  fail  to  answer  the  strictures  in  question,  it  would  be 
immediately  inferred  that  I  was  silenced  by  the  arguments; 
or,  worse,  that  I  had  expounded  a  tenet  which  had  no 
basis. 

Before  I  say  anything  further  upon  the  main  subject,  how- 
ever, I  must  express  my  surprise  at  finding  the  learned  author 
referring  to  me  continually  as  his  "critic."  I  have  never 
criticized  him,  nor  his  teachings,  whether  orally,  or  in  print, 
I  had  simply  expressed  regret  at  finding  in  the  Theosophiat 
words  calculated,  as  1  then  thought,  to  create  false  impres- 
Bions-  The  position  assumed  by  the  lecturer  on  the  Gita  wag 
as  unexpected  as  it  was  new  to  me,  and  my  remarks  were 
meant  to  be  as  friendly  as  I  could  make  them.  Nor  am  I 
actuated  even  now  by  any  other  feelings.  I  can  only  regret, 
and  nothing  more,  that  such  new  developments  of  ideas  should 
occur  just  now,  after  nearly  seven  years  of  tacit ^  if  no  actual, 
agreement. 
36 

282 

Nor  do  I  find  on  page  450  of  the  April  Theosophist  in  my 
foot-note  anything  that  shoald  imply,  even  remotely,  least  of 
all  "probably,*'  that  I  endorse  the  views  that  "a  slur  was 
thrown  on  the  original  teaching."  I  had  said  that  "some 
(Theosophists)  argaed  that  it  looked  like  a  slar."  As  for  my- 
self I  have  too  much  reverence  for  the  "original"  Teachers 
to  ever  admit  that  anything  said  or  done,  conld  ever  be  "a 
slur"  upon  their  teachings.  Bat  if  1,  personally^  am  made 
out  "the  original  expounder,"  there  can  be  no  slur  whatever. 
It  is,  at  the  worst,  a  disagreement  io  personal  views.  Every- 
one is  free  in  the  Theosophical  Society  to  give  full  expression 
to  his  own  ideas, — I  among  the  rest ;  especially  when  1  know 
that  those  views  are  those  of  ^ra««-Himalayan  esotericism,  if 
not  of  ct«-Himalayan  esoteric  Brahmanism,  as  I  am  now  told 
squarely — for  the  first  time.  The  words  written  by  me  in  the 
foot-note,  therefore — "  Of  course  those  who  do  not  hold  to  the 
old  school  of  Aryan  and  Arhat  adopts  are  in  no  way  bound  to 
adopt  the  septenary  classification " — were  never  meant  lor 
Mr.  Subba  Row.  They  applied  most  innocently,  aod  as  I 
thought  liberally,  to  every  and  each  member  of  our  Associ- 
ation. Why  my  friend,  Mr.  T.  Subba  Row,  should  have 
applied  them  to  himself  is  one  of  those  mysterious  combina- 
tions— evolved  by  my  own  harma  no  doubt — which  pass  my 
comprehension.  To  expect  a  Brahmin,  a  Yedautin  (whether 
an  occultist  or  otherwise)  to  accept  in  their  dead-letter  the 
tenets  of  Buddhist  (even  if  Aryan)  adepts,  is  like  expecting  a 
Western  Kabbalist,  an  Israelite  by  birth  and  views,  to  adhere 
to  our  Lord  Buddha  instead  of  to  Moses.  To  charge  me  on 
such  grounds  with  dogmatism  and  a  desire  to  evolve  "  an  or- 
thodox creed'*  out  of  tenets  I  have  tried  to  explain  to  those 
who  are  interested  in  Buddhistic  occultism,  is  rather  hard. 
All  this  compels  me  to  explain  my  past  as  well  as  my  present 
position.  As  the  second  portion  of  Mr.  Subba  Row's  reply 
can  hardly  contain  stronger  charges  than  I  find  in  the  first, 
1  ask  permission  to  state  that : — 

I.  Neither  the  original  '•  Fragments  of  Occnlt  Trnths" 
nor  yet  "  Esoteric  Buddhism"  were  ever  meant  to  expound 

283 

Brakminieal  philosophy,  bnt  that  of  the  fran«-IIimalayan 
Arhats,  as  rery  correctly  stated  by  Mr.  Sabba  Row  in  big 
*' Brabminism  on  the  Seven-fold  Principle  in  Man" — **it  is 
extremely  diflScuIt  to  show  (to  the  profane  H.  P.  B.  I) 
whether  the  Tibetans  derived  their  doctrine  from  the  ancient 
Bishis  of  India,  or  the  ancient  Brahmans  learned  their  occult 
science  from  the  adepts  of  Tibet;  or  again,  whether  the 
adepts  of  both  countries  professed  originally  the  same  doctrine 
and  derived  it  from  a  common  source.  However  that  may 
be,  the  knowledge  of  the  occult  power  of  nature  possessed  by 
the  inhabitants  of  the  lost  Atlantis,  was  learnt  by  the  ancient 
adepts  of  India,  and  was  appended  by  them  to  thuir  esoteric 
doctrine  taught  by  the  residenti  of  the  sacred  island  (Sham- 
bhala).  The  Tibetan  adepts,  however,  have  not  accepted  this 
addition  to  their  esoteric  doctrine".  Thus,  the  readers  of 
the  Theosophist  were  told  from  the  first  (in  1882)  that  they 
*'  should  expect  to  find  a  difference  between  the  two  doctrines." 
One  of  the  said  "  differences"  is  found  in  the  exoteric  exposi- 
tion, or  form  of  presentation  of  the  seven-fold  principle  in 
man. 

II.  Though  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  Occultism  and 
Esoteric  philosophy  are  one  and  the  same  the  world  over,  and 
that  is  the  secret  meaning  under  the  outward  shell  of  every 
old  religion — however  much  they  may  conflict  in  appearance — 
is  the  outcome  of,  and  proceeds  from,  the  universal  Wwdom- 
Religion — the  modes  of  thought  and  of  its  expression  must 
necessarily  differ.  There  are  Sanskrit  words  used— "  Jiva,' * 
for  one — by  trans- Himalayan  adepts,  whose  meaning  differs 
greatly  in  verbal  applications  froM  the  meaning  it  has  among 
Brahmans  in  India. 

III.  I  have  never  boasted  of  any  knowledge  of  Sanskrit, 
and,  when  I  came  to  India  last,  in  1879,  knew  very  super- 
ficially the  philosophies  of  the  six  schools  of  Brahminism.  I 
never  pretended  to  teach  Sanskrit  or  explain  Occultism  in 
that  language.  I  claimed  to  know  the  esoteric  philosophy  of 
the  ^raK^-Hiraalayan  Occultists  and  no  more.    What  I  knew 

284 

ftgaiD,  was  that  the  philosophy  of  the  ancient  JDwijas  and 
loitiatei  did  not,  nor  coald  it,  differ  essentially  from  the 
esoterism  of  the  "  Wisdom-Religion,"  any  more  than  ancient 
Zoroastrianism,  Hermetic  philosophy,  or  Chaldean  Kabbala 
could  do  BO.  I  have  tried  to  prove  it  by  rendering  the  techni- 
cal termi  Died  by  the  Tibetan  Arhats  of  things  and  principles, 
as  adopted  in  trans- Himalayan  teaching  (and  which,  when 
given  to  Mr.  Sinnett  and  others  withont  their  Sanskrit  or 
European  equivalents,  remained  to  them  unintelligible,  as 
they  would  to  all  in  India) — in  terms  used  in  Brahmanical 
philosophy,  I  may  hare  failed  to  do  so  correctly,  very  likely 
I  have,  and  made  mistakes, — 1  never  claimed  infallibility— 
but  this  is  no  reason  why  the  seven-fold  division  should  be 
regarded  as  "  unscientific.'*  That  it  was  puzzling  I  had 
already  admitted,  yet,  once  properly  explained,  it  is  the  right 
one,  though,  in  transcendental  metaphysics,  the  quarternary 
may  do  as  well.  In  my  writings  in  the  Theosophist  I  have 
always  consulted  learned  and  (even  not  very  learned)  Sanskrit 
speaking  Brahmans,  giving  credit  to  everyone  of  them  for 
knowing  the  value  of  Sanskrit  terms  better  than  I  did.  The 
question  then  is  not,  whether  I  may  or  may  not  have  made 
use  of  wrong  Sanskrit  terms,  but  whether  the  occult  tenets 
expounded  through  me  are  the  right  ones — at  any  rate  those 
of  the  "Aryan-Chaldeo-Iibetan  doctrine"  as  we  call  the 
"universal  Wisdom-religion."  (See  Five  Years  of  Theosophy^ 
1st  note,  to  Mr.  Subba  Row's  "Brahminism  on  the  seven-fold 
Principle  in  Man,"  p.  177-9), 

IV.  When  saying  that  the  seven-fold  classification  of 
principles  is  absolutely  necessary  to  explain  post-mortem  phe- 
nomena, I  repeat  only  that  which  I  had  always  said  and  that 
which  every  mystic  will  understand.  "Once  we  pass  from 
the  plane  of  pure  subjective  (or  methaphysical,  hence  purely 
theoretical)  reasoning  on  esoteric  matters  to  that  of  practical 
demonstration  in  occultism,  wherein  each  (lower)  principle 
and  attribute  has  to  be  analised  and  defined  in  its  application 
•  .  .  to  postmortem  life  (that  of  spooks  and  pisachas), 
the    seven-fold  classification  is  the  right  one."    These  are  my 

285 

words,  which  every  spiritnalist  will  nnderstand.  Vedantin 
metaphysiciaBS,  denying  as  they  do  objective  reality  or  im- 
portance even  to  oar  physical  body,  are  not  likely  to  lose  their 
time  in  dividing  the  lower  principles  in  man,  the  compoand 
aspects  and  nature  of  the  phantom  of  that  body.  Practical 
occnltism  does;  and  it  is  one  of  the  doties  of  those  Theo- 
sophists  who  study  occnltism  to  warn  their  brethren  of  the 
dangers  incurred  by  those  who  know  nothing  of  the  real 
nature  of  those  apparitions:  to  warn  them  that  a  shell  is  not 
**  spirit."  This  statement  of  mine  I  find  qualified  as  "  simply 
absurd,"  Having  never  regarded  as  absurd  anything  said  or 
written  by  Mr.  Subba  Row,  I  could  not  retaliate  even  if  I 
would,  1  can  only  pronounce  the  epithet,  let  us  say — unkind, 
and  demur  to  the  qualification.  Had  the  author  to  face 
"  practical  demonstration"  in  spiritual  phenomena  and 
"  materializations  of  spirits,"  so  called,  he  would  soon  find 
that  his  four  principles  could  never  cover  the  ground  of  this 
kind  of  phenomena.  Even  the  lower  aspect  of  the  principle 
of  manas  (physical  brain,  or  its  post-mortem  auric  8urvival)and 
of  kamarupa  are  hardly  sufficient  to  explain  the  seemingly 
intelligent  and  spiritual  principles  {bhuta  or  elements)  that 
manifest  through  mediums. 

V.  It  is  not  consistent  with  fact  and  truth  to  charge  me, 
*•  the  original  (?)  exponent  herself "  with  changing  my 
conceptions  about  the  nature  of  principles.  *'I  have  never 
changed  them,  nor  could  I  do  so."  In  this  I  claim  my  right, 
too,  as  Mr.  Subba  Row  does,  to  my  evidence  being  ''the  best 
and  the  most  direct  evidence  available  as  regards  my  own 
states  of  consciousness,^*  I  may  have  used  wrong  Sanskrit 
expressions,  (and  even  wrong  and  clumsily  put  English 
sentences,  for  the  matter  of  that)— while  trying  to  blend  the 
Arhat  with  the  Brahmiuical  occult  tenets.  As  to  those  con- 
ceptions, my  *'  four  principles  "  have  to  disintegrate  and 
vanish  in  the  air,  before  any  amount  of  criticism  can  make 
me  regard  my  ten  fingers  as  only  four;  although  meta- 
physically, I  am  fully  prepared  to  admit  that  they  exist  only 
in  my  own  mayavic  perceptions  and  states  of  consciousness. 

286 

VI.  Mr.  Sabba  Row,  taking  hold  of  "Esoteric  Baddhism," 
th«  "Elixir  of  Life"  and  *'Man,"  is  pleased  to  father  all  their 
sins  of  omission  and  commission  on  the  "Original  Expounder.'* 
Tbis  is  hardly  fair.  The  first  work  was  written  absolutely 
without  my  knowledge,  and  as  the  author  understood  those 
teachings  from  letters  he  had  received,  what  have  I  to  do  with 
them  ?  The  Elixir  of  Life  was  written  by  its  author  under 
direct  dictation,  or  inspection,  in  his  own  house,  in  a  far  way 
country,  in  which  I  had  never  been  till  two  years  later.  Fin- 
ally "Man"  was  entirely  rewritten  by  one  of  the  two  "chelas" 
and  from  the  same  materials  as  those  used  by  Mr.  Sinnett  for 
"Esoteric  Buddhism";  the  two  having  understood  the  teach- 
ings, each  in  his  own  way.  What  had  I  to  do  with  the  "states 
of  consciousness"  of  the  three  authors,  two  of  whom  wrote  in 
England  while  I  was  in  India  ?  He  may  attribute  to  the  lack 
of  scientific  precision  in  the  "original  teachings,"  there  being 
**a  jumble,'*  No  one  would  accuse  Mr.  Snbba  Row's  Bhaga- 
j  tat  Gita  lectures  of  any  such  defects.  Yf  t,  I  have  already 
/  heard  three  or  four  intelligent  persons  among  our  members 
j  expounding  the  said  three  lectures  (those  which  have  already 
V^appeared) — in  three  different  and  diametrically  opposite  ways* 

This  will  do,  I  believe.  The  Secret  Doctrine  will  contain, 
no  doubt,  still  more  heterodox  statements  from  the  Brahmini- 
cal  view.  No  one  is  forced  to  accept  my  opinions  or  teaching 
in  the  Theosophical  Society,  one  of  the  rules  of  which  enforces 
only  mutual  tolerence  for  religious  views.  Our  body  is  entire- 
ly unsectarian  and  "only  exacts  from  each  member  that  tole- 
ration of  the  beliefs  of  others  which  he  desires  .  •  in  regard 
to  his  own  faith." 

Most  of  us  have  been  playing  truants  to  this  golden  rule  as 
to  all  others :  more's  the  pity, 

H,  P,   BXiAVATSKY. 

28r 

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MICROCOSM, 

I  shall  now  proceed  with  the  continnation  of  my  article  on 
the  Constitution  of  the  Microcosm.  Madame  H,  P.  Bla- 
vatsky  has  sent  a  reply  to  the  previoas  portion  of  my  article 
for  poblication  in  this  issue,  and  to  avoid  the  necessity  of 
writing  another  article  on  the  subject,  1  find  it  necessary  to 
take  this  reply  also  into  consideration  in  this  very  article. 

The  real  question  at  ii^sue  between  us  is  after  all  a  very 
simple  one;  but  it  has  been  obscured  and  unnecessarily 
complicated  by  the  line  of  argument  which  Madame  H.  P. 
Blavatsky  has  chosen  to  adopt.  I  have  nowhere  denied  the 
importance  of  number  seven  in  the  processes  of  natural 
evolution  or  the  interpretation  of  cosmic  phenomena.  On 
the  other  hand  it  will  be  clearly  seen  from  my  first  lecture 
that  I  fully  admitted  its  importance  while  rejecting  the 
seven-fold  classification  hitherto  adopted  as  unsound  and 
unscientific.  1  have  not  even  denied  the  possibility  of* 
seven-fold  classification  in  the  case  of  the  microcosmic  princi- 
ples, or  the  existence  of  a  seven-fold  classification  recognized 
by  the  ancient  occult  science.  My  remarks  and  criticism 
were  strictly  confined  to  the  particular  classification  which 
has  hitherto  been  explained  and  commented  upon  in  Theo- 
sophical  publications.  It  must  further  be  noted  in  this 
connection  that  my  criticism  did  not  proceed  from  the 
necessity  of  maintaining  any  orthodox  Brahminical  dogma. 
I  found  it  necessary  to  condemn  this  classification  on  account 
of  its  own  inherent  defects,  and  not  because  it  emanated  from 
a  trans-Himalayan  source.  I  found  fault,  not  with  Madame 
H.  P.  Blavatsky,  or  her  use  of  Sanskrit  terms,  or  her  ex- 
position of  Brahminical  philosophy,  but  with  the  incorrect 
and  misleading  classification  which  has  introduced  so  many 
contradictions  and  so  much  confusion  into  Theosophical 
writings.  If  these  few  facts  are  borne  in  mind,  it  will  be 
found  that  a  considerable  portion  of  Madame  H.  P.  Blavat- 
sky's  argument  is  altogether  irrelevant  to  the  real  question 
at  issue.    The  whole  argument,  from  the  commencement  of 

288 

page  452  to  the  end  of  the  second  paragraph  on  page  455, 
can  only  establish  the  fact  that  the  number  seven  is  of  great 
importance  in  nature  and  the  arrangements  of  occult  symbo- 
logy.  Even  if  this  fact  is  admitted,  it  does  no  necessarily 
follow  that  in  every  case  we  are  bound  to  adopt  a  seven-fold 
classification.  The  only  inference  that  can  fairly  be  drawn 
from  it  is,  that  in  all  probability  there  are  seven  principles 
which  enter  into  the  composition  of  a  human  being.  But 
this  inference  can  by  no  means  establish  the  correctness  of 
the  particular  classification  under  consideration.  Otherwise 
the  truth  of  any  seven-fold  classification  we  may  choose  to 
adopt  can  be  equally  proved  by  this  process  of  reasoning. 
Any  person  can  name  any  seven  principles  in  the  complex 
structure  of  man  and  claim  the  sanction  of  nature  for  his 
classification,  as  is  now  done  by  my  critic. 

It  is  pointed  out  in  the  reply  that  the  seven-fold  classifi- 
cation is  essential  for  "practical  demonstration  in  Occultism," 
and  that  the  four-fold  classification,  though  "metaphysically" 
and  "theoretically"  sound,  is  incapable  of  any  practical 
application  to  "the  phenomena  of  daily  and  especially  of 
post-mortem  life."  The  same  argument  is  repeated  in 
various  forms  throughout  the  reply.  This  is  one  of  those 
vague  general  arguments  which  seem  to  mean  a  good  deal, 
and  which  take  easy  possession  of  the  minds  of  people  who  ar« 
not  generally  in  the  habit  of  scrutinizing  or  analyzing  their 
own  ideas.  I  fail  to  understand  what  kind  of  pratical  demon- 
stration it  is  which  necessitates  the  adoption  of  this  classifica- 
tion. My  critic  is  silent  on  the  point.  I  know  for  certain  that 
this  seven-fold  classification  will  be  an  obstacle  in|the  way  in  a 
considerable  number  of  occult  process  which  an  initiate  has 
to  pass  through  in  seeking  that  final  union  with  the  Logos, 
which  is  to  be  the  ultimate  result  of  his  labours.  This  in- 
convenience results  from  the  fact  that  the  mystic  constitution 
of  the  Logos  itself,  as  represented  by  the  sacred  Tetragram, 
has  not  a  septenary  basis.  If  the  assertion,  however,  does 
not  mean  anything  more  than  that  the  septenary  classifi- 
cation is  required   for  explaining  the  so-called  spiritualistic 

289 

phenomena,  1  am  fully  prepared  to  account  for  everyone  ot 
these  phenomena  from  the  stand-point  of  the  claasificatiou 
1  have  adopted.  I  have  in  fact  dealt  with  the  general  aspects 
of  spiritualism  in  my  lectures  from  this  very  stand-point. 
The  very  fact  that  this  four-fold  classification  was  found 
sufficient  for  all  practical  purposes  by  occultists  who  in- 
vestigated these  phenomena  for  thousands  of  years  and 
examined  the  workings  of  nature  on  all  its  planes  of  activity, 
will  be  an  unanswerable  reply  to  this  argument.  I  am  quite 
certain  that  Pisachas  and  Bhutas  will  never  succeed  in  dis- 
proving my  classification.  I  think  that  this  defect  is  the  result 
ot  a  serious  misapprehension  in  my  critic's  mind  regarding 
the  nature  of  this  four-fold  classification.  At  the  end  of 
page  450,  Madame  fi.  P.  Blavatsky  points  out  that  the  three 
Upadhis  ot  the  Raja-yoga  classification  are  Jagrata,  Swapnji 
and  Sushupti,  and  continues  as  follows  : — "  But  then,  in 
transcendental  states  of  Samadhi,  the  body  with  its  linga 
sarira,  the  vehicle  of  the  life  principle,  is  entirely  left  out  of 
consideration;  the  three  states  of  consciousness  are  made  to 
refer  only  to  the  three  (with  Atma  the  fourth)  principles 
which  remain  after  death.  And  here  lies  the  real  key  to  the 
septenary  division  of  man,  the  three  principles  coming  in  as 
an  addition  only  during  his  life."  This  real  key  unfortunately 
breaks  in  our  hands  the  moment  we  begin  to  apply  it.  The 
whole  mistake  has  arisen  from  confounding  Upadhi  with  the 
state  of  Pragna  associated  with  it.  Upadhi  is  the  physical 
organism.  The  first  Upadhi  is  the  physical  body  itself,  and 
not  merely  Jagrata  Avastha.  And  again  how  is  Jagrata  to 
be  identified  with  the  fourth  principle  ?  If,  as  my  critic  says, 
the  three  states  of  consciousness — Jagrata,  Swapna  and 
Sushupti— are  made  to  refer  only  to  the  three  principles 
which  remain  after  death  in  addition  to  Atma,  Jagrata  must 
necessarily  be  identified  with  the  fourth  principle.  But  sure 
enough  the  fourth  principle  is  not  the  physical  body.  The 
tour  principles  of  my  classification  can  by  no  means  be 
superadded  to  the  first  three  principles  of  the  seven-fold 
classification,  seeing  that  the  physical  body  is  the  first 
S7 

290 

principle  of  the  fonr-fold  classification.  Even  if  Upadhi  is 
mistaken  for  a  state  of  consciousness,  the  seven-fold  classifi- 
cation cannot  be  deduced  from  the  Raja-yoga  classification. 
Jagrata  Avastha  is  not  the  condition  of  Pragna  associated 
with  the  fourth  principle.  The  whole  argument  thus  ends  in 
nothing;  and  yet  on  the  basis  of  this  argument  Madame 
H.  P.  Blavatflky  has  thought  it  proper,  in  the  fourth  argu- 
ment of  her  present  reply,  to  pronounce  an  opinion  to  the 
effect  that  the  Vedantins  have  denied  the  objective  reality 
and  the  importance  of  the  physical  body,  and  overlooked  its 
existence  in  their  classification,  which  has  thereby  been 
rendered  unfit  for  practical  purposes.  My  critic  would  have 
done  better  if  she  had  paused  to  ascertain  the  real  meaning 
of  Upadhi  and  of  Jagrata  before  using  such  a  worthless 
argument  in   defence   of  her   own    classification   and   giving 

expression  to  such  an  erroneous  view  regarding  the  Vedautic 
theory. 

The  whole  argument  about  the  comparative  merits  of  the  two 
classifications  rests  on  a  series  of  misconceptions,  or  arbitrary 
assumptions.  The  first  Upadhi  is  identified  with  Jagratavastha, 
and  then  it  is  assumed  that  the  latter  is  the  same  as  the  fonrth 
principle  of  the  septenary  classification.  I  must  here 
call  the  reader's  attention  to  another  curious  mistake  in  the 
reply.  It  is  stated  in  the  second  para,  on  page  456,  that  the 
four-fold  classification  is  the  "  Bhagavad  Gita  classification," 
"but  not  that  of  the  T'Waw^a."  This  statement  is  apparently 
made  for  the  purpose  of  somehow  or  other  discrediting  the 
four-fold  classification.  It  has,  however,  no  real  foundation 
in  fact,  and  is  altogether  misleading.  Madame  H.  P.  Blavat- 
sky  has  probably  ventured  to  make  this  assertion  on  account 
of  the  headings  given  to  the  five-fold  and  the  four-fold 
classifications  in  my  note  on  the  "  [Septenary  Division  in 
different  Indian  Systems."  I  called  the  five-fold  classitication, 
the  Vedantic:  classification,  and  the  four-fold  classification 
the  Raja-Yoga  classification,  merely  for  convenience  of 
reference  and  not  because  the  two  classifications  refer  to  two 
difi'ereut  systems  of  philosophy.  Though  both  the  classifications 

291 

are  used  in  Vedantic  philosophy,  the  fonr-fold  classifi- 
cation is  the  one  frequently  referred  to,  Tharaka  Raja-Yoga 
is,  as  it  were,  the  centre  and  the  heart  of  Vedantic  philo- 
sophy, as  it  is  decidedly,  in  its  higher  aspects,  the  moat 
important  portion  of  the  ancient  Wisdom- Religion.  Very  little 
of  it  is  known  at  present  in  India.  What  is  generally  seen 
of  it  in  the  books  ordinarily  read,  gives  bat  a  very  inade- 
qnate  idea  of  its  scope  or  importance.  In  truth,  however,  it 
is  one  of  the  seven  main  branches  into  which  the  whole  of  the 
occult  science  is  divided,  and  is  derived  according  to  all 
accounts  from  the  "children  of  the  fire-mist"  of  the  my- 
sterious land  of  Shamballah. 

It  is  necessary  to  state  further  in  this  connection  that  the 
four-fold  classification  I  have  used  is  not  the  only  classification 
to  be  found  in  this  magnificent  system  of  philosophy.  It  has 
also  a  seven-fold  classification,  which  will  hereafter  be  noticed. 

Attention  has  been  called  to  some  of  my  former  articles  in 
the  Theotophist,  and  it  is  argued  that  I  have  already  admitted 
the  truth  and  the  correctness  of  the  classification  which  I  am 
now  criticizing,  and  that  I  am  now  estopped  from  denying  the 
same.  This  kind  of  argument  is  altogether  out  of  place  in 
the  present  case.  The  only  article  in  which  I  had  seriously 
considered  the  question,  is  the  one  referred  to  as  the  article  on 
"Brahminism  on  the  Seven-fold  principles  in  man."  I  must 
explain  the  circumstances  under  which  this  so-called  article 
was  written.  While  yet  an  utter  stranger  to  me,  Madame 
H.  P.  Blavatsky,  after  seeing  my  article  on  the  Zodiac,  asked 
me  certain  questions  by  letter  about  the  classification  of  the 
various  powers  and  forces  recognised  by  occultism,  and  further, 
calling  my  attention  to  the  "Fragments  of  Occult  Truth," 
enquired  of  me  whether  a«  regards  spiritualistic  phenomena  my 
views  harmonized  with  those  put  forward  in  the  said  article. 
I  sent  her  a  letter  in  reply,  not  having  the  slightest  notion 
at  the  time  of  writing  the  same  that  it  would  ever  be  publish- 
ed as  an  article  for  the  information  of  the  public.  This  fact 
was  acknowledged  by  the  editor    in  her  preface    to  the  said 

292 

article,  when  it  was  originally  published  in  the  colnmns  of  the 
Th$080phist,  and  it  was  the  editor  who  selected  the  title.  It 
will  be  clearly  see  i  that  the  article  is  divided  into  two  parts. 
The  first  part  is  confined  to  the  qnestions  pnt  regarding  the 
classification  of  the  "  powers  of  natnre,"  while  the  second  part 
deals  with  the  spiritualistic  phenomena.  Madame  H.  P.  Bla- 
vatsky  has,  however,  thought  it  proper  to  quote  a  passage 
from  the  first  part,  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  classifi- 
cation of  the  microcosraic  principles,  or  the  spiritualistic  phe- 
nomena, for  the  purpose  of  drawing  an  unwarranted  inference 
in  support  of  her  contention,  and  for  the  purpose  of  making  a 
disagreeable  insinuation  against  the  ancient  occult  science  of 
India. 

The  passage  in  question  is  as  follows  : 

"However  that  may  be,  the  knowledge  of  the  occult  powers 
of  nature  (the  italics  are  in  the  original,  see  p.  155,  "^f* 
Years  of  Theosophy'^)  possessed  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  lost 
Atlantis  was  learnt  by  the  ancient  adepts  of  lodia,  and  was 
appended  by  them  to  the  esoteric  doctrine  taught  by  the 
residence  of  the  sacred  island.  The  Tibetan  adepts,  however, 
have  not  accepted  this  addition  to  their  esoteric  doctrine;  and 
it  is  in  this  respect  that  one  should  expect  to  find  a  difierence 
between  the  two  doctrines." 

There  is  nothing  ambiguous  in  this  passage.  It  clearly 
refers  to  the  Tantras  and  Agamas  which  were  originally 
cultivated  and  developed  by  the  Atlanteans.  In  course  of 
time  their  doctrines  and  ritual  gradually  crept  into  the 
Brahminical  doctrine,  as  the  Dngpa  doctrines  crept  into 
Tibetan  Buddhism  before  the  time  of  Song-ka-pa.  And  just 
as  the  last  named  adept  undertook  to  weed  out  these  doctrines 
from  the  Tibetan  religion,  Shankaracharya  attempted  to 
purify  the  Brahminical  faith.  The  assertion  made  in  the 
article  does  not  in  the  least  justify  the  assumption  that  the 
ancient  Brahminical  occult  science  was  derived  from  the 
Atlantean.  Tantras  and  Agamas  have  little  or  nothing  to  do 
with  the  classification  of  the  microcosm ic  principles;  and   the 

i93 

Btatement  quoted  has  not  the  remotest  reference  to  the  seven- 
fold or  the  fonr-fold  classification.  My  critic  was  more  or 
less  of  the  same  opinion  when  she  wrote  her  first  article 
oti  the  "Classification  of  Principles,"  published  in  the  April 
issue  of  this  Journal.  After  quoting  the  above-mentioned 
paragraph  from  my  article,  she  makes  the  following  obser-' 
vation  on  p.  44:i; — "But  this  difference  between  the  two 
doctrines  does  not  include  the  septenary  division  .  •  .  "  Bat 
this  poinion  seems  to  have  changed  subsequently.  For,  in  the 
present  article,  after  citing  the  same  passage,  she  makes  the 
following  remark:  "  Thus,  the  readers  of  the  Thuosoohiat 
were  told  from  the  first  (in  1882)  that  they  'should  expect  to 
to  find  a  difference  between  the  two  doctrines;  One  of  the 
said  '  differences'  is  found  in  the  Esoteric  Exposition  or  form 
of  presentation  of  the  seven-fold  principle  in  man.  As  might 
naturally  be  expected,  this  statement  is  a  little  obscure. 
This  '*  Exoteric  Exposition"  cannot  possibly  refer  to  the 
seven-fold  classification,  because  in  her  opinion  this  classifi- 
cation '*  was  always  esoteric"  (p.  448).  It  must  therefore 
refer  to  the  four-fold  classification  which  is  looked  upon  as 
the  exoteric  form  of  the  esoteric  seven-fold  classification. 
The  statement  now  made  amounts  to  this  then.  The  seven- 
fold classification  was  esoteric  and  was  derived  by  the  Tibetaa 
adepts  from  Shamballah;  the  four-fold  classification  was 
exoteric  and  was  derived  by  the  ancient  adepts  of  India  from 
the  Atlanteans.  This  difference  was  noticed  and  admitted 
by  the  article  on  "  Brahminism  and  the  Seven-fold  principles 
in  man." 

This  is  the  gist  of  the  present  agrnment.  This  argnment  is 
sufficiently  refuted  by  what  she  herself  wrote  in  the  April 
article.  She  then  thought  that  my  statement  did  not  refer 
to  the  classifications,  and  alleged  that  both  the  parties 
derived  the  seven-fold  classification  from  the  Atlanteans  (see 
page  449).  It  will  be  a  mere  waste  of  time  to  dissect  this 
argument  any  further.  I  can  only  regret  that  my  critic 
should  stoop  to  such  arguments  and  insinuations  for  the 
purpose  of  defending  her  position. 

294 

The  second  part  of  my  article  deals  with  the  seven-fold 
classification  only  incidentally.  It  was  not  necessary  to 
discuss  the  merits  of  the  seven-fold  classification  of  the 
"Fragments"  in  that  article.  And  I  did  not  think  it  proper 
to  go  out  of  my  way  and  criticize  the  said  classification.  It 
would  have  been  foolish  on  my  part  to  have  done  so  when  my 
correspondent  was  a  stranger  to  me,  and  when  I  was  assured 
that  in  her  opinion  it  was  a  correct  classification.  I  there- 
fore followed  the  classification  of  the  "  Fragments*'  as  far  as 
it  was  convenient,  introducing  such  changes  into  it  as  were 
absolutely  necessary.  The  following  passage  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  second  part  of  my  article  will  show  what 
I  undertook  to  establish  in  the  said  article,  and  why  I  adopted 
the  seven-fold  classification: —  "  I  have  carefully  examined 
it  (The  Fragments)  and  fiad  that  the  results  arrived  at  do  not 
difi'er  much  from  the  conclusions  of  our  Aryan  philosophy, 
though  our  mode  of  stating  the  arguments  may  difi'er  in  form. 
I  shall  now  discuss  the  question  from  my  own  stand-point 
though  following,  for  facility  of  comparison  mnd  convenience 
o/fl^ia<:MMion,  the  sequence  of  classification  of  the  seven-fold 
entities,  or  pjpnciples  constituting  man  which  is  adopted  in 
the  'Fragments.'  The  questions  raised  for  discussion  are — 
(1)  whether  the  disembodied  spirits  of  human  beings  appear 
in  the  seance  rooms  and  elsewhere,  and  (2)  whether  the 
manifestations  taking  place  are  produced  wholly  or  partly 
through  their  agency."  The  conclusions  referred  to  herein 
do  not  refer  to  the  classification  adopted,  but  to  the  views 
expressed  on  the  questions  raised.  The  reason  given  for 
following  the  seven-fold  classification  is  clearly  stated  and 
cannot  possibly  mislead  anybody.  The  so-called  mathe- 
matical demonstration  of  the  evolution  of  eeven  entities  from 
three  can  only  establish,  if  correct,  the  probability  of  a  seven- 
fold classification,  but  is  utterly  insufficient  to  establish  the 
trnth  of  the  seven-fold  classification  therein  adopted.  It 
will  be  further  seen  that  the  seven- feld  classification  [ 
adopted  in  that  article  is  different  in  many  important  respects, 
viz.y  the  position  of  Prana   and   the   nature   and   importance 

295 

of  the  5th  and  the  6th  principles,  from  the  classification  of 
the  "Fragments,"  in  which  the  so-called  "original  teachings" 
was  embodied.  Cnrionslj  enough  mj  alterations  were  qoietly 
accepted  in  sabseqnent  expositions  in  spite  of  the  "  original 
teachings,"  to  which  so  much  importance  is  now  attached. 
1  was  not  then  pretending,  and  I  have  nerer  pretended  sub- 
sequently, that  I  was  teaching  occult  wisdom  to  the  members 
of  the  Theosophical  Society.  Under  such  circumstances  it 
is  altogether  unreasonable  to  lay  so  much  stress  on  the 
importance  of  my  article  in  discussing  the  important  question 
now  formally  raised  for  final  decision.  It  is  quite  true  that 
I  refrained  from  pointing  out  fully  the  defects  and  the  un- 
soundness of  the  seven-fold  classification  in  my  note  on  the 
various  classifications  while  I  was  the  acting  editor  of  the 
Theosophist,  though  I  stated  that,  in  some  respects,  it  would 
be  more  convenient  to  follow  the  four-fold  classification.  I 
did  not  then  think  it  proper  in  the  interests  of  theosophical 
investigation  to  raise  an  important  issue  about  the  correct- 
ness of  the  seven-fold  classification,  as  I  thought  it  would 
be  premature  to  do  so.  The  seven-fold  classification,  though 
incorrect,  was  a  step  in  advance.  It  did  serve  some  purpose 
in  its  own  way  towards  the  investigation  of  the  ancient 
systems  of  occult  psychology.  And  I  did  not  think  it 
prudent  to  disturb  it  when  matters  were  hardly  ripe  for 
taking  another  step  in  the  right  direction.  My  article  on 
the  "  Personal  and  Impersonal  God"  does  not,  in  fact,  touch 
the  question  at  issue.  It  does  speak  no  doubt  of  seven 
states  of  matter,  of  seven  principles  in  man,  and  «even 
aspects  of  Pragna.  Bnt  the  article  does  not  adopt  the  seven- 
fold classification  under  consideration.  It  is  based  on  Mau- 
dukyopanishad  which  enumerates  seven  phases  of  conscious- 
ness, while  it  accepts  the  four-fold  classification.  These 
articles  therefore  do  not  settle  the  point  in  dispute,  and 
there  cannot  be  a  better  proof  of  the  weakness  of  my  critic's 
position,  than  the  fact  that,  instead  of  attempting  to  justify 
the  seven-fold  classification  on  its  merits,  she  is  trying  to 
find  a  support  for  it  in  the  articles-  above  alluded  to. 

296 

Madame  H.  P.  Blavatsky  says  that  she  is  certain  that  the 
claasifioatioQ  in  dispute  is  the  real  esoteric  seven-fold  classi- 
fication. I  am  very  sorry  she  is  so  positive  in  her  state- 
ments. In  my  bumble  opinion  it  is  not  the  real  esoteric 
classification.  There  is  but  one  source  from  which  all  the 
various  writers  on  occult  science  have  derived  their  classi- 
fication. It  is  one  of  the  oldest  directions  of  the  ancient 
Wisdom-Religion  that  the  macrocosm  should  be  interpreted 
according  to  the  plan  revealed  by  Malchutk,  and  that  She- 
chinah  should  be  accepted  as  a  guide  to  the  interpretation  of 
the  constitution  of  the  microcosm.  I  use  the  Kabbalistic 
names,  though  not  precisely  in  the  Kabbalistic  sense,  as  I 
am  not  at  liberty  to  use  tha  Sanskrit  equivalents.  This 
Shechinah  is  an  androgyne  power,  and  is  the  Thureeya 
Chaitaayam  of  the  cosmos.  Its  male  form  is  the  figure  of 
man  seen  on  the  mysterious  throne  in  the  vision  of  Ezekiel. 
Its  mystic  constitution  gives  us,  as  it  were,  the  equation  to 
the  microcosm.  It  is  the  eternal  model  of  the  perfected 
microcosm.  The  universal  life  copies  this  model  in  its  work 
of  evolutionary  construction.  This  equation  can  be  inter- 
preted in  nine  ways,  and  it  has  been  so  interpreted  by  the 
ancient  teachers.  There  are  nine  stand-points  from  which 
the  microcosm  can  be  looked  at,  and  in  nine  ways  has  the 
constitution  of  the  microcosm  been  explained.  The  real 
esoteric  seven-fold  classification  is  one  of  the  most  impor- 
tant, if  not  the  most  important  classification,  which  has 
received  its  arrangement  from  the  mysterious  constitution  of 
this  eternal  type.  I  may  also  mention  in  this  connection  that 
the  four-fold  classification  claims  the  same  origin.  The  light 
of  life,  as  it  were,  seems  to  be  refracted  by  the  treble-faced 
prism  of  Prakriti,  having  three  Guuams  for  its  three  faces, 
and  divided  into  seven  rays,  which  develop  in  course  of 
time  the  seven  principles  of  this  classification.  The  progress 
of  development  presents  some  points  of  similarity  of  the 
gradual  development  of  the  rays  of  the  spectrum.  While  the 
four-foid  classification  is  amply  sufficient  for  all  practical 
purposes,  this  real  seven-fold  classification  is  of  great  theoretical 

297 

and  scientific  importance.  It  will  be  necessary  to  adopt 
it  to  explain  certain  classes  of  phenomena  noticed  by 
occnltists  ;  and  it  is  perhaps  better  fitted  to  be  the  basis  of 
a  perfect  system  of  psychology.  It  is  not  the  peculiar 
property  of  "  the  trans-Himalayan  esoteric  doctrine."  In  fact 
it  has  a  closer  connection  with  the  Brahminical  Logos  than 
with  the  Bnddhist  Logos.  In  order  to  make  my  meaning 
clear  I  may  point  out  here  that  the  Logos  has  seven  forms. 
In  other  words,  there  are  seven  kinds  of  Logoi  in  the 
cosmos.  Each  of  these  has  become  the  central  figure  of  one 
of  the  seven  main  branches  of  the  ancient  Wisdom-Religion. 
This  classification  is  not  the  seven-fold  classification  we 
have  adopted.  1  make  this  assertion  without  the  slightest  fear 
of  contradiction.  The  real  classification  has  all  the  requisites 
of  a  scientific  classification.  It  has  seven  distinct  princi- 
ples, which  correspond  with  seven  distinct  states  of  Pragna  or 
consciousness.  It  bridges  the  golf  between  the  objective  and 
subjective,  and  indicates  the  mysterious  circuit  through  which 
ideation  passes.  The  seven  principles  are  allied  to  seven 
states  of  matter,  and  to  seven  forms  of  force.  These  princi- 
ples are  harmoniously  arranged  between  two  poles,  which 
define  the  limits  of  human  concionsness.  It  is  abundantly 
clear  from  all  that  has  been  said  in  this  controversy,  that 
the  classification  we  have  adopted  does  not  possess  these 
requisites.  It  is  admitted  by  Madame  H.  P.  Blavatsky,  that 
in  her  classification  there  are  not  seven  distinct  seats  of 
consciousness  (see  p.  451).  The  arrangement  of  the  princi- 
ples also  is  not  regular.  The  life  principle,  for  instance, 
which  is  alleged  to  have  for  its  vehicle  the  lingo,  sarira,  is 
mado  to  precede  the  latter  instead  of  following  it.  Such 
defects  show  that  the  classification  we  have  hitherto  used  is 
not  quite  sound  and  scientific.  It  was  to  pave  the  way  for 
the  adoption  of  the  real  classification  that  I  ventured  to 
criticize  the  old  classification,  and  I  hardly  expected  that  my 
remarks  would  give  rise  to  such  a  controversy.  It  will  be  a 
mere  waste  of  time  at  present  to  explain  the  real  seven-fold 
classification.  There  is  not  the  slightest  chance  of  my  being 
38 

298 

heard.  Time  will  show  whether  I  was  justified  in  my 
criticism  or  not.  Personally  I  am  not  in  the  least  interested 
whether  the  members  of  the  Theosophical  Society  adhere  to 
or  reject  the  seven-fold  classification.  I  have  no  desire  of 
having  a  following  of  my  own  in  the  Society,  or  starting  a 
separate  branch  for  enforcing  my  own  views  on  the  matter. 
There  is  but  one  staiament  more  in  the  reply  to  which  it  is 
necessary  for  me  to  advert.  1  have  not  held  Madame  H.  P. 
Blavatsky  responsible  for  the  mistakes  of  "  Man "  and 
"  Esoteric  Buddhism,"  as  she  and  some  of  her  friends  seem 
to  think.  I  merely  grouped  together  all  the  various  in- 
consistent statements  found  in  prominent  theosophical  publi- 
cations about  the  classification  under  enquiry,  and  in  giving 
my  quotations  I  referred  to  the  various  books  and  articles  by 
name.  1  nowhere  alleged  or  insinuated  fhat  Madame  H.  P. 
Blavatsky  should  be  held  responsible  for  the  bJanders  com- 
mitted by  others.  The  scope  of  my  argument  will  be  clear 
if  my  article  is  carefully  perused.  But  before  the  heat  of 
advocacy  subsides  there  is  no  chance  of  preventing  people 
for  raising  unnecessary  side  issues  for  the  purpose  O'f 
quarrelling.  I  am  extremely  sorry  that  I  have  entered  into 
this  unpleasant  controversy.  I  hope  Madame  H.  P.  Blavat- 
sky will  kindly  excuse  me  if  1  have  in  any  way  wounded  her 
feelings  by  my  remarks  or  criticism, 

T.  SuBBA  Row. 

299 

THE  BHAGAVAD  GIT  A 

AND 

THE  MICROCOSMIC  PRINCIPLES. 
Mr.  T.  SuBBA.  Row  has  thrown  a  new  light  on  the  study  of 
the  Bhagavad  Gita  by  the  very  learned  lectures  delivered  by 
him  at  the  last  anniversary  of  the  Society.  The  publication 
of  these  in  the  Tkeosophist  has  afforded  the  opportunity  to 
numerous  students  of  philosophy  to  have  something  like  a 
clear  introduction  to  some  of  the  teachings  of  the  Vedanta. 
There  are  several  points,  however,  which  need  some  further 
elucidation  before  they  become  quite  explicable  to  the  reader, 
3'nd  as  these  difficulties  have  been  felt  by  a  large  number  of 
Theosophists  and  non-Theosophists,  I  shall  try  to  state  some 
of  them  as  shortly  as  possible  in  the  hope  that  Mr.  Subba 
Row  will  be  good  enough  to  add  some  more  information  and 
thus  make  his  notes  as  useful  and  instructive  as  possible. 

Mr.  Subba  Row  says: — "  Now  creation  or  evolution  com- 
menced by  the  intellectual  energy  of  the  Logos."  Is  the  «n- 
tellectual  energy  the  same  as  the  Light  of  the  Logos  ?  Again, 
"  What  springs  up  in  the  Logos  at  first  is  simply  an  image, 
a  conception  of  what  it  is  to  be  in  the  cosmos."  Whence 
springs  this  image  ? 

The  four  principles  of  the  whole  of  the  infinite  cosmos  are 
said  to  be — 

1 .  The  manifested  solar  system  in  all  its  principles  and 
totality  constituting  the  Sthula  sarira. 

2.  The  Light  of  the  Logos,  the  Sukshma  sarira, 

3.  The  Logos  which  is  the  one  germ  from  which  the  whole 
cosmos  springs,  and  which  contains  the  image  of  the  universe, 
stands  in  the  position  of  the  Karana  sarira. 

4.  Parabrahm. 

The  four  principles  of  the  manifested  cosmos  are  enumerated 
as  follows: — 
1.     Vishwanara  or  the  basis  of  the  objective  world. 

300 

2.  Hiranyagarbha  or  the  basis  of  the  astral  world. 

3.  Eshwara  or  rather   Sutratma. 

4.  Parabrahm. 

It  is  said  that  regarding  this  4th  principle  "differences  of 
opinion  have  sprung  np,  and  as  for  this  principle  we  onght  to 
have,  as  we  have  for  the  cosmos,  some  particular  entity  out  of 
which  the  other  three  principles  start  into  existence,  and 
which  exist  in  it,  and  by  reason  of  it,  we  onght  no  doubt  to 
accept  the  Avyaktam  or  Mulaprakriti  of  the  Sankhyas  as  this 
4th  principle."  "Yoa  most  conceive  without  my  going 
through  the  whole  process  of  evolution  that  out  of  these  three 
principles,  having  as  their  foundation  Mulprakriti,  the  whole 
manifested  solar  system  with  all  the  various  objects  in  it  has 
started  into  being."  Now  Mulprakriti  is  said  to  be,  **veil  of 
Tarabrahmam  considered  from  the  objective  stand  point  of  the 
Logos."  And  yet,  in  the  above  passages,  if;  is  said  to  be  the 
foundation  out  of  which  the  three  first  principles  of  the  mani- 
fested solar  system,  including  the  Logos,  start  into  existence. 
Parabrahm  would  be  the  proper  4th  principle  and  not  Mula- 
prakritit  out  of  which  the  Logos  does  not  and  cannot  arise. 
These  passages  therefore  require  to  be  explained. 

"By  the  time  we  reach  man  this  one  light  (the  light  of  the 
Logos)  becomes  differentiated  into  certain  monads  and  hence 
individuality  is  fixed." 

The  term  "human  monad"  has  not  yet  been  properly  ex- 
plained, and  a  great  deal  of  confusion  therefore  arises  in 
speaking  about  it,  and  in  reference  to  the  four  principles  that 
have  been  enumerated  in  the  notes,  a  clear  conception  of  the 
human  monad  is  necessary. 

The  four  principles  in  man  are  said  to  be — 

1.  The  physical  body. 

2.  Sukshma  sarira. 

3.  Karana  sarira,  which  can  only  be  conceived  as  a  centre 
of  pragvAt — a  centre  of  force  or  energy   into  wnich   the  3rd 

301 

principle  {or  sidraima)  of  the  cosmos  was  differentiated  by 
reason  of  the  same  impulse  which  has  broaght  about  the  dif- 
ferentiation of  all  these  cosmic  principles,  and  "now  the 
question  is,  what  is  it  that  completes  this  trinity  and  makes 
it  a  quaternary  ?" 

4.    "Of  course  this  light  of  the  Logos.'** 

Again  it  is  said  :  "  In  the  opinion  of  the  Vedantists  and 
in  the  opinion  of  Krishna  also  man  is  a  quaternary.  He  has 
first  the  physical  body  or  Stkula  sarira;  secondly,  the  astral 
body  or  Sukskma  sarira;  thirdly,  the  seat  of  his  higher 
individuality,  the  Karana  sarira;  and  fourthly  and  lastly,  his 
atma]." 

Is  the  human  atma  then  the  light  of  the  Logos  ?  The  word 
atma  is  used  several  times  in  the  lectures,  and  it  seems  that 
the  terra  atma  is  applied  to  the  Logos.  What  does  the 
word  '•'■atmcC  mean  in  reference  to  the  four-fold  classi- 
fication ? 

The  word  human  soul  is  also  used  in  several  places,  and 
it  is  not  clear  what  is  meant  by  the  word  "soul**  as  applied 
to  the  four-fold  classification  of  man. 

"The  Sukshma  sarira  or  [the  astral  body  is  simply  said  to 
be  the  seat  of  the  lower  nature  of  man-  His  animal  passions 
and  emotions,  and  those  ordinary  thoughts  which  are 
generally  connected  with  the  physical  wants  of  man,  may  no 
doubt  communicate  themselves  to  the  astral  man,  but  higher 
than  this  they  do  not  go.'* 

"The  Karana  sarira  is  what  passes  as  the  real  ego  which 
subsists  through  incarnation  after  incarnation,  adding  in  each 
incarnation  something  to  its  fund  of  experiences  and  evolving 
a  hio-her  individuality  as  the  resultant  of  the  whole  process 
of  assimilation.  It  is  for  this  that  the  Karana  sarira  is 
called  the  Ego  of  man,  and  in  certain  systems  of  philosophy 
it  is  called  the  Jim'* 

•  Tlitotophist,  page  309,  vol.  VIU.  t  ^^m*.  P»ge  310. 

302 

'  "It  mnst  be  clearly  borne  ia  mind  that  this  Kara.na 
^arira  is  primarily  the  result  of  the  action  of  the  light 
of  the  Logos,  which  is  its  life  and  energy,  and  which  is 
farther  its  source  of  consciousness  on  that  plan  of  Mulapra- 
^riti,  which  we  have  called  Sutratma  and  which  is  its  physical 
basis." 

The  word  Sutratma  has  been  applied  to  Eshwara  or  the 
Logos.  What  then  is  meant  by  the  plan  of  Mulaprakriti 
called  Sutratma  ?  The  Logos  is  certainly  not  a  plane  of 
Mulaprakriti. 

In  rejecting  the  septenary  classification  and  adopting  the 
fonr-fold  classification,  it  has  been  said  that  this  latter 
classification  divides  man  into  so  many  entities  as  are  capable 
of  having  separate  existences,  and  these  four  principles  are 
further  associated  with  four  Upadhis. 

Nov^  what  are  the  four  Upadhis  of  the  four  principles 
mentioned  above  ? 

The  two  principles,  Karana  sarira  and  Sukhshma  sarira^ 
are  in  no  way  more  intelligible  than  the  3rd,  4th,  5th,  and 
6th  principles  of  the  septenary  classification.  The  de- 
scription given  of  these  two  will  have  to  be  considerably 
amplified  and  brought  home  to  the  mind  of  the  ordinary 
reader  before  the  existence  of  these  principles  as  separate 
entities  is  recognized.  Under  what  principles  are  the  human 
mind,  the  will,  the  emotions,  passions,  desires,  intuitions,  &c., 
to  be  classified,  and  by  what  means  or  in  what  way  are  these 
two  principles  to  be  known  as  separately  existing  entities  in 
man  ;  Again,  as  to  the  4th  principle  called'the  light  of  the 
Logos,  does  it  simply  show  itself  as  the  Karana  sarira^  or 
besides  acting  as  the  Karana  sarira  does  it  separately  act 
as  a  4th  principle,  and  what  function  does  it  then  fulfil  and 
how  is  it  to  be  recognized  ?  According  to  this  classification 
the  Logos  does  not  form  one  of  the  human  principle  but  is 
something  higher  towards  which  the  human  monad  must 
ultimately  go.    In  the  cosmic  principles  as  well  as  in  those 

SOS 

of  the  solar  system  the  Logos  forms  the  3fd  principle,  whffff 
in  man  the  Logos  forms  no  principle  at  all.  The  doctrine  of 
correspondence  shifts  here  a  great  deal.  The  Logos,  which 
is  the  3rd  in  the  cosmos,  become  something  beyond  the  4th 
in  man.     Some  explanation  as  to  this  diflfereace  is  necessary. 

Regarding  the  Logos  it  is  said  that  "it  is  a  centre  of 
energy,  but  that  such  centres  of  energy  are  innumerable  in 
the  bosom  of  Parabrahm,  and  there  may  eren  be  difference 
even  in  this  one  centre  of  energy."  "Maha  Vishnn  is  a 
representative  of  the  Logos,  but  it  must  not  be  inferred  that 
there  is  one  Logos  in  the  cosmos  or  even  that  but  one  form 
of  Logos  is  possible  in  the  cosmos."  .  . .  "Maha  Vishnu  seems 
to  be  a  Dhyan  Chohan  that  first  appeared  on  this  planet  when 
human  evolution  commenced  during  this  Kalpa."  Owing  ta 
there  being  innumerable  Logoi  in  the  cosmos,  the  Logos  ia 
said  to  be  considered  in  the  abstract. 

As  the  doctrine  of  the  Logos  is  the  very  basis  of  the 
teachings  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  and  as  almost  every  reader 
of  the  "  Notes  "  has  been  startled  by  hearing  af  innumerable 
Logoi,  a  good  deal  of  explanation  is  necessary  to  make  thi» 
portion  of  the  teachiag  as  clear  as  possible.  What  are  the 
innumerable  Logoi  and  what  relation  do  they  bear  to  each 
other  ?  Are  they  the  same  as  the  Dhyan  Chohans  as  the 
hint  regarding  Maha  Vishnu  would  lead  one  to  suppose  ? 

In  the  introductory  lecture*  to  the  Bhagavad  Gita, 
Mr.  Subba  Row  says,"  Krishna  may  be  the  Logos,  but  only  a 
particular  form  of  it.  The  number  18  is  to  represent  this 
particular  form."  Krishna  is  the  7th  principle  in  man, 
and  his  gift  of  his  sister  in  marriage  to  Arjuna  typifies  the 
union  between  the  6th  and  the  5th.  What  is  meant  by  the 
form  of  the  Logos  ?  Again,  in  this,  Mr.  Subba  Row  speaks 
of  the  Logos  as  the  7th  or  highest  principle  in  man;  while 
in  his  four-fold  classification  the  Logos  has  no  place.  Again, 
what  would  be  meant  in  terms  of  the  four-fold  classification 
by  the    words  "  the  union  between  the  6th  and  the  .5th  ?' 

♦  Theotopliitt,  Vol.   VII,  page  235. 

304 

In  this  review*  of  the  "Virgin  of  the  World,*'  it  is  said 
that  Osiris  is  not  the  Logos,  but  something  higher  than  the 
Logos.  The  Logos  itself  has  a  sonl  and  a  spirit  as  everything 
else  which  is  manifested,  and  there  is  nothing  unreasonable 
in  supposing  that  Osiris  or  Buddha  may  represent  the  soul 
of  the  Logos." 

What  is  meant  by  saying  that  the  Logos  has  a  soul  and 
a  spirit,  and  if  the  Logos  is  the  very  first  emanation  from 
Parabrahm,  how  is  Osiris  higher  than  the  Logos  ? 

In  another  placet  Mr.  Subba  Row  says  :  Where  Videha 
Kaivalyam  (the  union  of  the  disembodied  monad  with  the 
absolute  Parabrahm)  is  reached  by  any  monad,  the  sum  total 
of  its  Karma  goes  to  enrich  the  universal  mind,  wherein  lie 
the  archetypes  of  all  that  is,  was,  or  will  be.  In  the  "Notes'* 
the  union  of  the  monad  with  the  Logos  is  spoken  of.  Is  the 
Videha  Kaivalyam  the  same  as  the  union  with  the  Logos,  or 
is  it  different  ?  What  again  is  the  universal  mind  ?  From  the 
words  used  above  the  universal  mind  seems  to  correspond 
with  the  Logos. 

It  is  said  that  "the  four-fold  classification  is  amply  suffi- 
cient for  all  practical  purposes,  and  that  there  is  another  and 
a  real  seven-fold  classification  (difierent  from  the  one  that  has 
hitherto  been  put  forward)  which  is  of  great  theoretical  and 
scientific  importance,  fitter  to  be  tha  basis  of  a  perfect  system 
of  psychology.  It  has  a  closer  connection  with  the  Brah- 
manical  Logos  than  with  the  Buddhistic  Logos.  There  are 
seven  kinds  of  Logoi  in  the  cosmos.  Each  of  these  has 
become  the  central  figure  of  one  of  the  seven  main  branches 
of  the  ancient  Wisdom-Religion. 

Mr.  Subba  Row  complains  that  "it  was  to  pave  the  way 
for  the  adoption  of  the   real  classification   that   he   ventured 

*  Theosophid,  Vol.  VII,  page  156. 

t  Obecrvatious  on  a  letter  addrc^isad  to  tho  Fellows  of  the  London 
Lodge. 

305 

to  ontrage  the  old  classificatiou,  and  he  hardly  expected  that 
his  remarks  would  give  rise  to  such  a  controversy."  He  says 
again,  "It  will  be  mere  waste  of  time  at  present  to  explain 
the  real  seven-fold  classification.  There  is  not  the  slightest 
chance  of  my  being  heard." 

Mr.  Sabba  Row  takes  here  a  very  gloomy  view  of  the 
short  controversy  that  was  (jaite  inevitable  when  for  years 
he  kept  quite  silent  and  tacitly  allowed  the  readers  of  the 
Theosophist  to  snppose  that  he  agreed  in  the  trath  of  the 
septenary  classification  that  has  hitherto  been  given  oat. 
The  year  before  last  Mr.  Sabba  Row  gave  an  introdactory 
lectare  on  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  and  in  that  leotare,  as  qaoted 
above,  he  distinctly  spoke  of  the  7th  principle,  and  the  anion 
between  the  5th  and  6th.  When  he  commenced  his  notes 
at  the  last  anniversary  there  was  a  short  and  sadden  attack 
on  the  septenary  classification,  and  no  reasons  were  given  for 
taking  ap  what  seemed  a  hostile  aititade. 

Had  he  ia  the  introdactory  lectare  to  the  Bhagavad  Gita 
said  somewhat  as  follows: — "In  explaining  the  philosophy 
of  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  1  shall  not  adopt  the  septenary 
classification  of  man,  which  has  hitherto  been  pat  forward, 
as  that  classification  has  not  yet  been  properly  explained  as 
having  a  scintific  basis,  neither  have  the  seven  principles 
been  accurately  defined.  I  shall  adopt  and  explain  to  yoa 
hereafter  the  Vedantic  four-fold  classification,  which  is  far 
more  scientific  and  practical.  I  might  tell  you  here  that 
there  is  another  and  a  real  seven-fold  classification  which  is 
fitted  to  be  the  basis  of  a  perfect  system  of  psychology.  I 
shall  try  and  explain  that  septenary  classification  also,  and 
then  you  will  be  able  to  judge  for  yourself  which  classi- 
fication appears  to  be  the  trne  one.*' 

Some  such  calm  remarks,  coupled  with  a  promise  to 
explain  clearly  what  he  meant,  would  have  saved  a  great 
deal  of  useless  controversy. 

From  Mr.  Sabba  Row's  notes,  it  appeared  to  many  as  if 
he  meant  to  urge  that  there  was  no  septenary  classification 
39 

806 

of  any  kind,  the.  intaitioas  of  nameroas  students  of  philo- 
sophy led  them  to  suppose  that  there  was  a  septenary  classi- 
fication somewhere,  and  Mr.  Subba  Row  has  at  last  confirmed 
that  belief.  We  are  almost  all  of  ds  quite  aware  that  the 
septenary  principles  as  explained  at  present  do  create  a  good 
deal  of  confusion  in  the  mind,  and  we  are  unable  to  form  a 
clear  conception  of  several  of  these  principles.  We  do  not 
at  all  go,  however,  upon  the  supposition  that  the  theory  of 
these  principles  ought  to  be  an  accepted  truth. 

In  the  same  manner  we  must  with  all  due  deference  say 
that  we  do  not  as  yet  clearly  understand  what  Mr.  Subba 
Row  means  by  his  four  microcosmic  principles.  There  seems 
to  be  a  Brahminical  Logos  and  Buddhistic  Logos,  and  there 
are  innumerable  Logoi  and  so  forth.  All  the  statements 
puzzle  the  mind  ;  not  because  we  cannot  comprehend  what 
is  said,  but  because  short  statements  are  made  here  and  there 
and  no  explanation  is  given  of  them. 

Mr.  Subba  Row  is  very  much  mistaken  when  he  says  that 
**lt  would  be  a  mere  waste  of  time  at  present  to  explain  the 
real  seven-fold  classification,  and  that  there  is  not  the 
slightest  chance  of  his  being  heard."  Every  thing  that 
Mr.  Subba  Row  has  hitherto  written  has  been  read  and  studied 
with  care  by  almost  all  the  educated  Theosophists,  and  how- 
ever much  he  may  differ  upon  certain  points  of  esoteric 
philosophy  from  Madame  Blavatsky  and  other  writers  on  the 
same  subject,  whatever  more  he  has  to  say  will  very  readily 
and  thankfully  be  received  by  all  learned  Theosophists. 
Hypothesis,  theories  and  truths  are  not  studied  and  accepted 
because  they  emanate  from  A  or  B.  but  on  their  own  in- 
trinsic merits,  and  this  is  just  the  time  when  Mr.  Subba  Row 
will  find  many  readers  and  hearers.  The  letter  of  Mr.  W.  Q. 
Judge  in  the  August  number  of  the  Theosophist  will  show 
that  even  in  the  far  West  he  is  not  likely  to  be  misunderstood 
neither  will  he  be  here. 

Since  Mr.  Subba  Row  has   boldly  pointed  out   the   defect 
of  the  septenary  classification  as  given  out  at  present,  and  he 

307 

also  asserts  that  a  foar-fold  and  also  a  septenary  classifi- 
cation on  a  different  basis  are  the  trae  classification  recogniz- 
ed in  Brahminical  occultism,  and  that  he  knows  them,  it  will 
be  a  great  pity  to  refuse  farther  explanation.  The  grounds 
on  which  Mr.  Subba  Row  tries  to  keep  silence  have,  as  I 
have  said  before,  no  existence.  He  will  have  numerous 
hearers  fair  and  impartial,  and  now  that  the  difterence  has 
been  proclaimed  in  somewhat  large  language,  all  unneces- 
sary disagreements  could  only  be  ended  by  Mr.  Subba  Row's 
clearly  explaining  his  four  principles  as  well  as  the  real 
seven-fold  principles  of  which  he  is  aware.  There  is  clearly 
no  other  way  out  of  the  difficulty. 

Navroji  Dorab.ii  Khandalavala, 

THE  FORMS  OF  VAK. 

With  reference  to  Mr.  Subba  Row's  lectures  on  Bhagavad  Qita, 
published  in  the  Theosophist  for  April  1887,  page  446,  where  he  says,  '•  I 
would  here  call  your  attention  to  the  1st  Anhika  of  Mthabhashya,  where 
Patanjali  speaks  of  three  forms  manifested,  Pasyanti,  Maddhyama  and 
Vaikhari  vach  ;  the  way  he  classifies  is  different.  ,  .  .  ,"  I  have  to  state 
that  the  Ist  Anhika  of  Mahabhashya  does  not  contain  any  such  particular 
divisions.  Patanjali  quotes  a  verse  from  Rig  Veda  "Cbatvarivak 
parimitapadam,"  ice,  and  interprets  "Chatvarivak"  nama,  akyata,  npa- 
sarga,  and  nipata.  The  sime  verse  of  Rig  Veda  is  interpreted  by  Yaska 
in  his  Nirukta,  chapter  12,  in  the  same  way  as  by  Patanjali,  and  be  adds 
some  other  explanations  than  those  quoted  by  Mr.  Subba  Bow;  nor  does 
Eaita,  the  well-known  commentator  of  Mahabhashya,  give  them  in  bis 
Bhashyapradipa.  But  Nageshabhatta,  a  commentator  of  Bbashyapradipa, 
gives  Mr.  Subba  Row's  sub-divisions  in  detail,  in  his  Bhasbyapradipoth- 
yota,  referring  to  Harikarika,  or  Vakyapadiya  of  Bhartrihari.  This 
Nageshabhatta  speaks  of  the  same  sub-divisions  in  the  Sphotavada  of  his 
Manjusha  and  some  modern  grammarians  give  the  same  sab-divisions 
quoting  from  Mahabharata  ;  Annambhatta,  a  commentator  on  Bhashya- 
pradipa, who  lived  before  Nageshabhatta,  did  not  interpret  the  passage  in 
question  in  the  way  that  Nageshabhatta  did. 

I  would  therefore  ask  you  to  draw  Mr.  Subba  Row's  attention  to  tb« 
above  facts,  and  to  explain  the  thing  in  a  more  acceptable  way.  I  have 
herewith  enclosed  extracts  from  Mahabhashya,  Kaita,  and  Nirukta  on  this 
point. 

Yours  fraternally, 
N.  BuashvacbaRy. 

308 

I  have  to  thank  Mr.  Bhasbyaobarj  for  having  called  my  attention 
to  the  wrong  reference  given  in  my  third[lecture.  Instead  of  referring 
to  Nageshabhatta's  Bhashyapradipodyota  and  Sphotavada,  I  referred  to  the 
Mahabhasbyam  itself  tbrongh  oversigbt.  I  had  especially  in  my  mind 
Nageshabhatta's  remarks  on  the  four  forms  of  Vak  in  his  Sphotavada  when 
I  made  the  statements  adverted  to  in  your  learned  correspondent's  letter. 
Patanjali  had  to  interpret  the  original  rik  of  the  Uig  Veda  from  the 
stand-point  of  a  grammarian  in  bis  Mababhasbya  :  but  be  certainly 
recognised  the  importance  of  the  interpretation  put  upon  it  by  Hatayogis 
and  Rajayogis  as  might  be  easily  seen  by  the  symbols  he  introdnced  into 
the  mystic  arrangements  of  the  Chidambaram  jtemple.  Apart  from 
mystic  symbology,  Nagesbabhatta  had  very  high  and  ancient  anthorities  to 
guide  him  in  interpreting  this  risk.  Nearly  seven  interpretations  have 
been  suggested  for  this  rik  by  various  classes  of  writers  and  philosophers. 
The  four  forms  of  Vak  enumerated  by  me  are  common  to  the  interpre- 
tation of  Hatayogis  and  Mantrayogis  on  the  one  hand  and  Bajayogis  on 
the  other.  I  request  your  learned  correspondent  to  refer  to  Vidyaranya'a 
commentary  on  the  45th  rik  of  the  161  Sukta  of  the  22nd  Anuvaka  of 
the  first  Mandala  of  Kig-veda.  Most  of  these  various  interpretations  are 
therein  enumerated  and  explained.  The  learned  commentator  refers  to 
Para,  Pasyanti,  Madhyama  and  Vaikhari  and  indicates  the  order  of  their 
development  as  stated  by  Mantrayogis  and  Hatayogis.  It  will  be  useful 
to  refer  to  Yoga  Sikba  and  other  Upanisbads  in  this  connection.  There 
is  still  higher  authority  for  the  views  expressed  in  my  lecture  and  the 
statements  made  by  Nagesbabhatta  in  Sbankaracharya's  commentary  on 
Nrisimbottara  Tapani  (see  page  118,  Calcutta  edition,  from  line  14  to  the 
end  of  the  para).  These  four  forms  of  vak  art  therein  explained  from 
the  stand-point  of  Tharaka  Kajayoga.  I  would  particularly  invite  the 
reader's  attention  to  the  explanation  of  Madhyama.  Madhyama  is  so 
called  because  it  occupies  an  intermediate  position  bctwaen  the  objective 
form  and  the  subjective  image.  On  careiully  perusing  this  portion  of  the 
commentary,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  explanations  therein  given  form,  as 
it  were,  the  foundation  of  the  various  statements  made  by  me  in  my 
lectures  regarding  these  four  forms  of  Vak.  Whether  this  commentary 
is  attributed  to  Shankaracharya  as  many  have  done,  or  to  Goudapatha  as 
some  have  stated,  its  authority  is  unimpeachable.  I  do  not  think  it 
necessary  to  refer  to  any  works  on  Mantra  Shastra  in  this  connection,  as 
the  authorities  cited  above  are  amply  sufficient  to  justify  my  statements. 
I  may  perhaps  have  to  refer  to  the  mystic  philosophy  of  vak  at  greater 
length  in  another  connection. 

T.  S.  R. 

309 

THE  OCCULTISM  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

Southern  India  has  always  prodnced  the  greatest  Aryan 
philosophers.  Madavacharya  came  from  Southern  India, 
and  Shankaracharya  was  born  in  Malabar ;  and  at  the  present 
day  there  are  high  adepts  and  schools  of  occnltism  in  Sonthern 
India.  In  the  adept  hierarchy,  there  are  always  seven  classes 
of  adepts,  corresponding  to  the  seven  rays  of  the  Logos. 
Two  of  these  classes  of  adepts  are  so  mysterious,  and  their 
representatives  on  earth  are  so  rare,  that  they  are  seldom 
spoken  of.  Perhaps  one  or  two  adepts  of  these  two  mystrions 
orders  appear  every  two  or  three  thousand  years. 

It  is  probable  that  Buddha  and  Shankarach&rya  come  under 
this  category. 

But  of  the  other  five  classes  of  adepts,  representatives  are 
always  to  be  found  on  earth. 

All  five  classes  are  represented  in  the  Him&iayan  school. 

At  present,  it  is  unlikely  that  all  five  classes  are  represented 
in  Sonthern  India :  though  all  the  adepts  of  this  and  every 
other  school  must  belong  to  one  of  these  five  classes. 

It  is  a  doctrine  of  the  Southern  Indian  school  that,  though 
belonging  to  one  of  these  five  classes,  and  falling  into  one  of 
these  five  rays,  all  of  which  are  represented  in  the  Himalayan 
school,  adepts  in  India,  for  example,  need  not  be  correlated  to 
the  Tibetan  school, — need  not  dovetail,  so  to  speak,  into  the 
Giiruparampara  chain  of  the  Him&layan  school, — and  need 
not  therefore  owe  allegiance  to  one  of  the  five  ChoAans,  or 
chinfs  of  the  five  classes  of  adepts  in  Tibet. 

When  a  great  adept  has  passed  away  from  incarnated  life, 
his  spiritual  self  may  select  some  suitable  person  on  whom  to 
impress  his  teachings,  who  thus  becomes  his  unconscious 
medium  and  apostle :  tliis  chosen  exponent  of  the  adept's 
wisdom  may  not  recognise  the  source  of  his  knowledge  and 
power  ;  to  recognise  their  source  is  almost  impossible,  since 
these  idease  are  instilled  into  the  inmost  spirit  of  the  man,  the 
deep,  secret   place  of  his   nature,   from   whence   arise   moral 

310 

leadings  and  spiritnal  ideals.  Sach  apostles  have  often  found 
that  their  wisdom  left  them  even  in  life,  when  their  work  was 
done  the  overshadowing  adept  then  withdrawing  his  inspira- 
tion thns  overshadowing  by  a  high  adept  is  what  is  called  a 
divine  incarnation,*^an  avatar. 

It  is  probable  that  Shankaracharya  was  such  an  incarnation. 

He  was  already  a  great  adept  when  he  was  sixteen  years 
old ;  at  which  time  he  wrote  his  great  philosophical  works. 

It  seems  that  Gaatama  Bnddha  was  not  such  an  incarnation 
as  we  see  in  him  the  actual  life  straggle  of  man  striving  to 
perfection,  and  not  the  fraition  of  a  great  soul  who  had  already 
reached  its  goal.  But  in  Shankaracharya  we  see  no  such 
struggle  ;  this  is  why  we  say  he  is  a  divine  incarnation. 

The  seven  rays  we  have  spoken  of  represent  the  outflowing 
energy  from  the  seven  centres  of  force  in  the  Logos;  represent 
seven  forces,  so  to  speak,  which  must  enter  into  every  thing 
in  the  universe.  No  object  can  exist  without  the  presence  of 
each  of  these  seven  forces. 

A  man's  past  Karma  determines  which  of  the  seven,  or, 
practically  speaking,  five  rays  of  occult  wisdom  he  shall  take 
his  place  in  ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  the  fact  of 
belonging  to  one  of  these  rays  indicates  the  presence  in  a 
man  of  any  particular  moral  or  mental  quality  ;  such  as 
patience,  honesty,  or  courage,  on  the  one  hand ;  or  the  poetic 
or  artistic  faculty,  on  the  other. 

The  Southern  Occult  school  divides  the  states  of  conscions- 
ness  into  three: — (X)  jagrat,  or  waking  consciousness;  (2) 
stoa.pna,  or  dream  consciousness,  and  (3)  sushupti,  or  the 
consciousness  of  dreamless  sleep.  As  this  classification  stands, 
however,  it  is  purposely  obscure  :  to  make  it  perfect,  it  must 
be  understood  that  each  of  these  three  states  is  fnrther  divid- 
ed into  three  states. 

Let  us  take  these  in  their  order   beginning  with  the  lowest. 

The  jagrat  conciousness  is  divided  into  three ;  (1)  the 
jagrat  ofjagrat,  which  is  ordinary  waking  consciousness;  (2) 

311 

the  swapna  of  jagrat,   the  ordinary  dream   state;  (3)    the 
sushupti  oi  jagrati  which  is  dreamless  sleep. 

Similarly,  the  swapiia  state  has  three  divisions;  (1)  the 
jagrat  of  swapna^  which  is  the  consciousness  of  waking 
clairvoyance;  (2)  the  swapna  of  swapna,  or  somnambulic 
clairvoyance  ;  and  (3)  the  sushupti  oi  swapna,  the  conscions- 
ness  of  Rama  Loka- 

The  sushupti  state  is  also  divided  into  three  states:  (1) 
the  jagrat  of  sushupti,  the  concionsness  of  Devachan;  (2) 
the  swapfia  of  sushupii,  the  consciousness  in  the  interval 
between  two  planets  ;  and  (3)  the  sushupti  of  sushupti^  the 
true  arupa  (formless)  consciousness  which  exists  between  two 
planetary  rounds. 

To  make  this  clear,  the  following  table  may  be  useful: 

Jagrat, — Waking  consciousness. 
Jagrat,        ^    Swapna. — Dreaming. 

Sushupti. — Dreamless  sleep. 
Jagrat. — Waking  clairvoyance. 
Swapna.      -J    Swapna. — Somnambulic  clairvoyance. 
Sushupti. — Kama  Loka. 
r   Jagrat. — Devachan. 
Sushupti,     <    Swapna. — Between  planets. 
i   Sushupti. — Between  Rounds. 

Above  these  nine  stages,  come  the  true  mystical  states  of 
consciousness,  to  which  the  adepts  have  access. 

These  diflFerent  states  of  consciousness  mean  simply  this, 
that  the  one  observer,  the  at?na,  or  self,  observes  nine  classes 
of  objects ;  the  fact  that  the  atma  observes  one  class  of  objects 
is  indicated  by  saying  that  such  and  such  a  state  of  conscious- 
ness is  active. 

In  each  of  these  classes  of  objects,  which  are  on  the  different 
planes,  there  are  five  elements,  each  corresponding  to  one  of 
the  senses.  In  the  view  of  the  occultists  of  Southern  India, 
it  is  erroneous    to  speak  of  seven  senses,  two  being  considered 

{ 
{ 

312 

still  nndeveloped.  It  is  trae  that  there  are  seven  factors  in 
each  plane  of  conscionsness;  but  only  five  of  these  are  senses, 
nor,  in  the  view  of  this  school,  will  there  ever  be  two  addi- 
tional senses  analogous  to  these. 

The  sixth  factor  is  the  mind,  which  rules  and  guides  the 
senses,  and  draws  deductions  from  their  impressions  when 
collected  and  arranged.  The  seventh  factor  is  the  atma, 
which  is  the  observer  of  the  generalization  which  the  mind 
makes  from  the  impressions  of  the  senses.  It  is  the  self,  the 
sense  of  "I,"  in  us,  behind  which  it  is  impossible  to  go,  either 
in  logic  or  in  observation.  The  seven  factors  must  be 
present  on  every  plane:  in  dreaming,  for  example,  objects 
corresponding  to  the  senses  of  sight,  touch,  taste,  smell  and 
hearing,  pass  before  the  dreamer:  his  mind  classifies  these 
impressions  and  he  feels  the  sense  of  "I,"  the  observer  which 
is  the  subject  of  these  subjects.  There  is  the  sense  of  "I"  on 
each  plane,  but  it  is  not  quite  identical,  only  the  kernel,  or 
basic  notion  of  "I"  remained  unchanged. 

Corresponding  to  the  five  senses  are  the  five  classes  of 
objects  on  each  plane ;  or,  as  we  may  call  them,  the  five 
qualities  of  impression,  or  five  elements. 

These  are  (1)  earth,  corresponding  to  the  sense  of  smell; 
(2)  water,  corresponding  to  the  sense  of  taste;  (3)  air,  corres- 
ponding to  the  sense  of  touch;  (4)  fire,  corresponding  to  the 
sense  of  sight;  (5)  ether,  or  Akash,  corresponding  to  the 
sense  ot  hearing.  Bach  of  these  has  its  psychic  counterpart; 
the  counterpart  ol  earth  is  magnetism;  the  counterpart  of 
water  is  electricity;  the  counterpart  of  air  is  perhaps  the 
forces  discovered  by  Keely;  while  the  counterparts  of  the 
other  two  are  m}  stical  forces  the  names  of  which  it  is  useless 
to  give. 

When  the  seven  rays  we  have  spoken  of  proceed  from  the 
logos^  they  are  separate,  and  subsequently  co-mingle  in  the 
formation  of  all  beings.  When  an  individual  begins  his 
course  of  evolution,  these  rays  are  equally  balanced  in  him, 
none   preponderating   more   than   another.     In  the  course  of 

813 

time  the  man's  actions^  his  karma^  cause  him  to  come  particn* 
larly  under  the  influence  of  one  or  other  of  the  rays.  Up  this 
ray  he  must  make  his  further  progress,  till  he  has  succeeded 
iu  merging  his  life  in  the  life  of  the  Logos, — the  grand  foun- 
tain-head of  light  and  power. 

When  this  mergence  takes  place,  the  man  does  not  suffer 
loss  of  individuality;  rather  he  enjoyes  an  almost  infinite  ex- 
tension of  individuality.  Each  of  the  seven  classes  of  Xoyoe 
has  its  own  peculiar  consciousness,  and  knows  that  this  is  so; 
that  is  to  say,  each  Logos  recognises  its  own  light ;  but  each 
Logos  also  participates  in  the  life  of  all  the  other  classes  of 
Logoi',  that  is  to  say,  the  peculiar  quality  of  their  life  is  re- 
presented in  it  also;  so  that  an  individuality,  in  merging  in  a 
particular  LogoSy  is  not  cut  off  from  the  consciousness  of  the 
other  Logoiy  but  shares  in,  and  experiences,  their  conscious- 
ness also. 

We  have  said  that  the  Atma  is  represented  on  every  plane, 
and  the  Logos  is  related  to  the.4^wa  on  each  of  the  planes.  It 
is  however,  useless  to  attempt  to  understand  the  relation 
between  the   Atmet  on  any  plane,  and  the  Logos. 

This  relation  must  be  known,  however,  after  the  last  initia- 
tion, when  man  will  thoroughly  understand  his  spiritual 
nature. 

After  the  last  initiation,  the  adept  thoroughly  comprehends 
the  relation  of  Mma  with  the  Logos^  and  the  method  of  merg- 
ing himself  in  the  Logos,  by  which  he  obtains  immorfality  : 
but  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  life  of  the  Logos  rises 
up  within  the  man  at  the  last  initiation,  or  that  its  light 
enters  into  him. 

He  understands  his  spiritual  nature,  and  sees  the  way  to 
the  Logos ;  but  it  may  take  him  {several  incarnations  alter  the 
last  initiation  before  he  can  merge  in  the  Logos. 

This  philosophy  recognises  two  paths,  both  having  the  same 
end,  a  glorified  immortality, 
40 

314 

The  ooe  is  the  steady  natnral  path  of  progress  through 
moral  effort,  and  practice  of  the  virtues.  A  natural,  coherent, 
and  sure  growth  of  the  soul  is  the  result,  a  position  of  firm 
equilibrium  is  reached  and  maintained,  which  cannot  be  over- 
thrown or  shaken  by  any  unexpected  assault.  It  is  the 
normal  method  followed  by  the  vast  mass  of  humanity,  and 
this  is  the  course  Shankaracharya  recommended  to  all  his 
Sannayasis  and  successors.  The  other  road  is  the  precipitous 
path  of  occultism,  through  a  series  of  initiations.  Only  a 
few  specially  organised  and  peculiar  natures  are  fit  for  thia 
path. 

Occult  progress,  growth  along  this  path,  is  effected  by  the 
adept  directing  through  the  chela  various  occult  forces,  which 
enable  him  to  obtain  prematurely,  so  to  speak,  a  knowledge 
of  his  spiritual  nature:  and  to  obtain  powers  to  which  he  is 
not  morally  entitled  by  degree  of  his  progess. 

Under  these  circumstances  it  may  happen  that  the  chela 
loses  his  moral  balance,  and  falls  into  the  dugpa  path. 

From  this  it  must  not  be  concluded  that  the  Southern 
Indian  school  of  occultism  regards  adeptship  and  initiation 
as  a  mistake,  as  a  violent  and  dangerous  usurpation  of  nature's 
functions. 

The  adept  hierarchy  is  as  strictly  a  product  of  nature  as  a 
tree  is:  it  has  definite  and  indispensable  purpose  and  function 
in  the  development  of  the  human  race  :  this  function  is  to 
keep  open  the  upward  path,  through  which  descend  the  light 
and  leading  without  which  our  race  would  require  to  make 
each  step  by  the  wearisome,  never  ending  method  of  trial 
and  failure  in  every  direction,  until  chance  showed  the  right 
■way. 

In  fact  the  function  of  the  adept  hierarchy  is  to  provide 
religious   teachers   for  the  stumbling  masses  of  mankind. 

But  this  path  is  eminently  dangerous  to  those  who  do  not 
hold  the   talisman   which  ensures  safety ;  this   talisman  is  a 

315 

perfectly  unselfish,  self-forgetting,  self  annihilating  devotion  to 
the  religions  good  of  mankind,  a  self-abnegation,  which  is  not 
temporal,  bat  must  have  no  end  for  ever,  and  the  object  of 
which  is  the  religious  enlightenment  of  the  human  race. 
Without  this  talisman,  though  the  progress  of  the  chela  may 
be  very  rapid  for  a  time,  a  point  will  come  when  his  upward 
advance  will  be  arrested,  when  real  moral  worth  will  tell;  and 
the  man  who  progressed  along  the  slow  and  steady  path  may 
be  first  to  merge  himself  in  the  light  of  the  Logos. 

This  school  recommended  as  the  best  path  for  all,  a 
devotion  to  virtue,  a  gradual  withdrawal  from  the  grosser 
material  concerns,  a  withdrawal  of  the  life  forces  from  the 
outward  world  and  its  interests,  and  the  direction  of  these 
forces  to  the  inner  life  of  the  soul,  until  the  man  is  able  to 
withdraw  himself  within  himself,  so  to  speak,  and  then, 
turning  round  to  direct  himself  towards  the  Logos  and  the 
spiritual  life  and  away  from  the  material  plane;  passing 
first  into  the  astral  life,  and  then  into  spiritual  life,  till  at 
last  the  Logos  is  reached,  and  he  attains  Nirvana. 

It  is  therefore  wiser  not  to  seek  the  path  of  chelaship; 
if  the  man  is  fit  for  it,  his  Karma  will  lead  him  to  it 
imperceptibly  and  infallibly;  for  the  path  of  occultism 
seeks  the  chela  and  will  not  fail  to  find  him,  when  the  fit 
man  presents  himself. 

[The  foregoing  is  a  summary  of  a  discnssion  with  Mr.  T.  Sabba  Bow, 
B.A.,  B.L.,  at  the  Adyar  Library,  on  the  1st  December  1888.    JEd.] 

To 

MADAME  H.  P.  BLAVATSKY, 

Corresponding  Secretary  to  the 

Theosophical  Society, 
Madame, 

After  a  carefal  examination  of  the  private  and  confidential 
"  Letter  "  addressed  to  the  Fellows  of  the  London  Lodge  by 
its  President  and  one  of  the  Vice-Presidents,  I  conld  not  help 
coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the  writers  of  the  letter  have 
greatly  misunderstood  the  relations  of  the  Himalayan  Brother- 
hood to  the  Theosophical  Society,  and  the  peculiar  circum- 
stances under  which  Mr.  Sinnett's  book  on  Esoteric  Buddhism 
was  written..  Their  criticism,  moreover,  of  the  doctrines  con- 
tained in  that  work  seems  to  me  illogical,  and  quite  uncalled 
for,  as  I  have  attempted  to  show  in  the  accompanying  observa- 
tions. 

In  accordance  with  the  order  of  the  Mahatmas  and  the 
desire  of  the  Council,  I  have  in  every  case  given  full  reasons 
for  the  conclusions  I  have  arrived  at.  Now  1  have  the  honor 
to  request  you  to  forward  these  observations  to  the  London 
Lodge  for  the  consideration  of  its  members,  with  such  addi- 
tional remarks  as  yon  may  think  proper. 

Yours,  &c., 
T.  SUBBA  ROW,  c.  t.  s. 

Forwarded  to  the  London  Lodge  Theosophical  Society^  for 
the  consideration  of  its  Fellows. 

Head-quarters  of  the  "\  By  order, 

Theosophical  Society,  /  H.  P.  BLAVATSKY, 

Adyar  (Madras),  India,  f  Corresponding  Secretary  to  the 

January  27,  1884.  J  Theosophical  Society, 

Observations  on  "a  letter  addressed  to  the  Fellows 
of  the  London  Lodge  of  the  Theosophical 
Society,  by  the  President  and  a  Vice- 
President  of  the  Lodge-" 

By    T.    Si-bSa    Row. 

There  is  nothing  said  in  the  Roles  of  the  Theosophical 
Society  which  is  likely  to  indnce  one  into  the  belief  that  the 
Society,  as  sach,  has  any  particular  religions  doctrines,  or  owes 
exclnsive  allegiance  to  any  definite  school  or  system  of  philoso- 
phy, or  to  any  fraternity  of  religions  teachers.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Rales  clearly  indicate  that  the  Society  is  at  full 
liberty  to  investigate  any  philosophical  systfm,  ancient  or 
modern,  with  a  view  to  ascertain  the  broad  fundamental 
principles  which  form  the  basis  of  every  school  of  religions 
philosophy,  properly  so  called,  and  thereby  "  promote  the 
principle  of  a  Universal  Brotherhood  of  humanity,  without 
distinction  of  race  or  creed."  It  is,  no  doubt,  expected  that, 
after  carefully  inquiring  into  the  doctrines  of  every  such 
existing  system,  the  Society  will  be  able  to  •' reconstruct 
religion  on  a  scientific,  and  science  on  a  religions,  basis,  and 
elaborate  a  perfect  system  of  thought  and  rule  of  life; "  just 
as  a  body  of  jurists  may  construct  a  perfectly  scientific  system 
of  jurisprudence  after  investigating  and  comparing  the  various 
codes  of  law  which  are  in  force  in  all  the  civilized  countries  of 
this  world.  Before  this  grand  object  can  be  accomplished, 
every  member  is  expected  to  study,  to  the  best  of  his  abilities, 
any  system  of  religious  philosophy  which  he  may  select,  and 
place  the  result  of  his  investigations  before  his  fellow-members 
for  comparison  and  discussion.  But  no  member  is  allowed,  by 
the  Roles  of  the  Association,  to  force  his  own  individual 
opinions  or  beliefs  on   his  fellow.members,  or  insist  on  their 

318 

being  accepted  by  tliem.  The  Society  does  not  constitnte  & 
body  of  religions  teachers,  bat  is  simply  an  association  of 
investigators  and  inquirers. 

These  are  the  principles  that  are  definitely  laid  down  for  the 
guidance  of  the  Theosophical  Society.,  with  the  approval  and 
approbation  of  the  great  Himalayan  Initiates,  who  are  its  real 
founders.  Now  as  our  Mahatmas  have  not  offered  themselves 
as  the  sole  instructors  of  the  members  who  join  our  Body,  nor 
have  they  claimed  "to  monopolise  for  themselves  their  exclu- 
sive allegiance,"  therefore,  no  intention  can  be  said  to  exist  on 
their  part  to  swerve  from  the  above  principles,  or  to  interfere, 
in  any  way,  with  the  work  of  any  branch,  so  long  as  it  acts 
within  its  prescribed  limits.  A  doctrine,  or  fragments  of  a 
doctrine,  although  professedly  emanating  from  the  Mahatmas, 
has  to  rest  on  its  own  merits,  and  no  other  considerations  are 
ever  urged  in  its  favour.  Under  such  circumstances,  there  can- 
not be  any  valid  reason  for  supposing  that  the  system  set 
forth  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  book  "was  intended  by  \jia  compilers 
to  supplant  every  other,  and  monopolise  for  themselves  the 
exclusive  allegiance  of  the  Theosophical  Society."  It  thus 
seems  hardly  necessary  for  Mr.  E.  Maitland  to  complain  that 
the  "  choice  of  instructors  "  involved  no  exercise  of  judgment 
or  that  he  was  compelled  to  accept  any  one  as  an  instructor, 
as  nobody  has  yet,  so  far  as  we  know,  offered  himself  in  this 
capacity.  If  Mr.  Sinnett  has  positively  prohibited  any  expres- 
sion of  dissent  from,  or  criticism  of,  his  book,  or  '*  of  its  supreme 
authority,"  as  is  alleged  in  the  letter  under  examination,  he 
is,  no  doubt,  acting  against  the  Rules  of  the  Society;  and  it 
is  fully  competent  for  the  London  Lodge  to  prevent  him  from 
doing  so,  without  any  necessity  for  an  appeal  to  the  Head- 
quarters. But  if  Mr,  Sinnett  has  merely  refused  to  accept  the 
view  taken  of  the  doctrines,  embodied  in  his  book,  by  Mrs. 
Kingsford  and  Mr.  Maitland,  and  has  urged  in  their  favour 
such  reasons  as  ho  has  thought  proper,  his  position  is  unim- 
peachable. Mr.  Sinnett  has  as  much  right  to  explain  his 
Esoteric  Buddhism  to  the  members  of  the  London  Lodge  a» 
Mrs.  Kingsford  and  Mr.  Maitland  have  to  explain  their  esoterie 

319 

jBignificance  of  Christian  symbology.  The  latter  are  no  more 
entitled  to  interpret  Mr.  Sinnett's  book  in  their  own  way,  and 
claim  the  sanction  of  the  head-qnarters,  or  of  the  Mahatmas, 
for  so  doing,  than  the  former  is,  to  pat  his  own  constrnction 
on  the  •'  Perfect  Way  "  and  appeal  to  an  authority  from  the 
same  source  to  be  regaided  as  the  apostle  alike  of  Eastern  and 
of  Western  Theosophy.  Nevertheless,  Mrs.  Kingsford  and 
Mr.  Maitland  hold  that  the  doctrines  contained  in  Mr.  Sin- 
nett'a  book  are  atheistic,  illogical,  unscientific,  incongrnoaa 
and  non-Buddhistic, — if  accepted  as  literally  true;  and  they 
are  under  the  impression  that  those  doctrines  are  presented  in 
an  allegorical  or  figurative  garb,  with  the  intention  of  testing 
the  powers  of  discernment  of  the  Western  Theosophists,  be- 
tween truth  and  falsehood-  They  feel  indignant,  moreover, 
that  Mr.  Sinnett  has  been  pertinaciously  insisting  on  the 
borrectness  of  his  own  interpretation,  when  that  interpretation 
is  such  as  to  bring  discredit  upon  the  Himalayan  Brotherhood, 
and  their  philosophy.  This  is  the  gist  of  their  complaint  and 
*'  the  head  and  front "  of  Mr.  Sinnett's  offending.  The  gifted 
President  of  the  London  Lodge  may,  no  doubt,  imagine  that 
she  has  discovered  "  the  true  solution  of  the  Sphynx's  riddle". 
The  Sphynx  in  question,  however,  not  being  a  Christian  but  a 
Hindu-Bnddhistic  Sphynx,  may  not  be  altogether  prepared  to 
commit  suicide,  in  the  manner  indicated  by  the  talented 
**  writers  of  the 'Perfect  Way.'"  Rejecting  four  out  of  the 
five  distinct  hypotheses,  proposed  by  Mr.  Maitland,  we  may 
admit,  with  certain  limitations,  hypothesis  the  3rd  (page  25); 
namely,  "  that  the  system,  as  presented,  is  but  a  portion  (or 
rather  several  portions  picked  out  at  random)  of  a  system 
which,  as  a  whole,  is  perfect  ;  and  that,  when  received,  it  will 
prove  complete  and  harmonious." 

The  Egyptian  S^jhynx  propounded  riddles,  and  (EJipus 
solved  them  ;  while  now  the  Buddhist  Sphynx  speaks  the 
sober  language  of  fact  and  the  (Edipus  of  the  iOth  century  is 
grievously  misled:  perhaps,  because  "truth  is  stranger  than 
fiction."  Mr.  Sinnett's  book  has,  indeed,  served  the  purposes 
of  "  a  test,"  but  in  a  direction  quite  unexpected- 

320 

I  may  be  now  permitted  to  examine,  in  detail,  the  adverse 
criticism  to  which  this  work  has  been  subjected.  It  is  neces- 
sary, however,  that  I  should  preface  my  remarks  with  a  few 
words  regarding  the  circumstances  under  which  Mr.  Sinnett 
came  to  write  his  book,  and  the  sources  from  which  the  doc* 
trines,  therein  embodied,  were  derived. 

After  Messrs.  Hume  and  Sinnett  were  introduced  to,  and 
put  in  communication  with,  the  Mahatmas,  they  commenced 
asking  them  questions  on  various  subjects,  first  to  satisfy 
their  own  curiosity,  and  probably  also  to  gauge  the  depth  of 
the  knowledge,  possessed  by  them,  respecting  religious  and 
scientific  subjects.  It  was  not,  and  could  not  have  been,  their 
intention,  at  first,  to  construct  a  complete  system  of  philosophy 
from  the  meagre  answers  elicited. 

The  questions  were  first  asked  through  Mme,  Blavatsky, 
who,  fearing  to  commit  herself  by  treading  upon  forbidden 
ground,  submitted  them  to  our  Guru,  Mahatma  M — ,  who 
checked  ofF  most  of  the  questions  proposed,  as  subjects  to  be 
explained  only  to  regular  Chelas  at  later  initiations,  and  per- 
mitted very  little  information  to  be  given  upon  most  of  the 
queries.  This  restriction  and  secrecy  provoked  much  discon- 
tent. Neither  Mr.  Sinnett  nor  Mr.  Hume  could  understand 
such  a  "  policy  of  selfishness  "  that  allowed  them  only  "  pain- 
fully doled  out  glimpses  of  the  hidden  higher  knowledge,"  it 
was  "  &8in  in  the  Teachers  not  to  communicate  to  the  world  all 
the  knowledge  they  possess.  .  .'  which  "  they  are  bound  to 
give.  .  ."  &c.,  &c.,  as  Mr.  Hume  thought.  Such  accusations 
expressed  publicly  in  the  Theosophist  (see  Sept.  1882,  p.324-6), 
raised,  from  the  first,  a  great  discontent  among  the  Hindu 
Chelas;  and  called  forth  a  Protest  from  them,  in  the  same 
number  of  our  Magazine.  After  much  solicitation,  Mahatma 
K.  H.,  who  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  instructions  at  first 
received,  promised  to  give  Mr.  Sinnett  such  information  and  ex- 
planation as  would  be  permitted  by  the  strict  rules  of  the 
Brotherhood.  The  idea  of  publication  being  an  after  thought, 
questions  were  often  put  at  random.    They  were  not  certainly 

321 

each  as  to  elicit  complete  and  coDuected  instractions  on  any 
particular  subject;  nor  were  the  answers  given,  calculated  to  en- 
able one  to  obtain  a  faultless,  systematic,  and  complete  exposi- 
tion of  department  of  the  Esoteric  doctrine,  or  of  the  knowledfje 
possessed  by  the  Esoteric  Teachera.  The  Himalayan  Adepts 
have  never  professed  to  instruct  any  particular  section  of  the 
Theosophical  Association.  The  Simla  Theosophical  Society 
was  distinctly  informed  by  one  of  them  that  it  would  be  highly 
nnadvisable,  if  not  altogether  impracticable,  to  depute  one  of 
the  Adepts,  or  even  an  advanced  Chela^  to  become  the  direct 
instructor  of  that  Anglo-Indian  Society.  And  when  permis- 
sion was  subsequently  granted  to  Mr.  Sinnett  to  publish  the 
Fragments  (  fragments^  indeed  !  )  of  information  obtained  by 
him,  it  was  left  entirely  to  his  discretion  to  present  the  phi- 
losophy embodied  therein  in  the  manner  he  thought  proper. 
It  is  necessary  also  to  give  some  idea  of  the  materials  that 
Mr.  Sinnett  possessed  for  writing  his  book,  and  the  difficulties 
he  had  to  encounter,  before  deciding  upon  the  proper  course  to 
be  adopted.  Mr.  Sinnett,  I  may  here  state,  had  from  the 
Mahatmas,  in  addition  to  their  lettters  bearing  on  the  planetary 
evolution,  the  Law  of  Karma,  the  nature  of  Devachanic  Exist- 
ence, the  Seven  Principles  in  Man,  and  other  cognate  subjects 
discussed  by  him  as  fully  and  as  clearly  as  he  was  able,  a  few 
letters  or  communications  touching  the  nature  of  Purusha  and 
Prakriti,  the  commencement  of  cosmic  evolution,  the  septe- 
nary constitution  of  the  manifested  Cosmos,  the  nature  and 
evolution  of  the  germs  of  the  primary  elements  in  nature 
(Mahabhutams),  and  some  isolated  subjects  connected  with 
physical  science.  But  not  one  solitary  subject  among  the  last 
named  class  had  he  ever  received,  except  in  bare  outlines.  As 
to  the  details  and  their  direct  bearing  upon  other  and  far  more 
important  subjects,  closely  connected  with  the  rest  they  have 
never  been  even  remotely  approached  by  the  Masters — revela- 
tions  of  this  nature  belonging  strictly  to  the  mysteries  of 
Initiation.  Thus,  the  contents  of  some  of  the  letters,  ovviug»to 
distinct  prohibition,  were  introduced  in  a  very  incomplete 
form,  while  other  subjects  of  vital  importance,  for  the  correct 
41 

322 

understanding  of  the  whole,  were  not  even  mentioned  in  the 
book  80  severely  criticized  by  Mr.  E.  Maitland — simply 
because  they  conld  not  be  given  to  Mr.  Sinnett-*  With  these 
meagre  materials,  he  undertook  to  write  a  book,  and  give  the 
public  in  general,  and  the  Theosophists  in  particular,  an 
approximately  correct  conception  of  the  system  of  Esoteric 
Science  and  Philosophy  in  the  keeping  of  the  "great  Teachers 
of  the  Snowy  Range."  That  he  did  as  well  as  he  has,  is  as 
surprising  as  it  is  highly  creditable  to  his  acute  intelligence. 
But  a  complete  system  of  Esoteric  Philosophy  which  may  be 
accepted  as  "  a  perfect  system  of  thought  and  rule  of  life  " 
must  not  only  be  able  to  explain  fully  and  clearly  the  nature 
of  the  primal  causes  in  the  Cosmos  and  their  ultimate  effects 
in  the  manifested  system,  and  to  trace  the  whole  current  of 
evolution,  in  all  its  aspects,  from  its  commencement  up  to  the 
time  of  Pralaya,  but  also  supply  every  individual   with  such  a 

*  The  specification  implied  in  the  second  word  of  the  title  is  itself  mislead- 
ing to  all  those  who  are  not  aware  that  "Bnddbism''  in  this  application 
refers  entirely  to  the  universal  secret  "Wisdom, — meaning  spiritual  enliffhten- 
ment — and  not  at  all  to  the  religion  now  popularly  known  as  the  philosophy 
of  Gautama  Buddha.  Therefore,  to  set  ofE  Esoteric  Christianity  against 
Esoteric  Buddhism  (in  the  latter  sense)  is  simply  to  oSer  one  part  of  the 
whole  against  another  such  part — not  one  specified  religion  or  philsophy 
the  world  oyer,  having  now  the  right  to  claim  that  it  has  the  whole  of  the 
Esoteric  truth.  Brahmavidya  (which  is  not  Brahmanism  or  any  of  its 
numerous  sects)  and  Ouptavidya — the  ancient  and  secret  WisdoM-RbligION, 
the  inheritance  of  the  Initiates  of  the  inner  Temple — have  alone  such  a 
right.  No  doubt,  Mrs.  Kingsford,  the  gifted  author  of  "The  Perfect 
Way,"  is  the  most  competent  person  in  all  Europe — I  say  it  advisedly 
and  unhesitatingly — to  reveal  the  hidden  mysteries  of  real  Christianity, 
But,  no  more  than  Mr.  Sinnett  is  she  an  initiate,  and  cannot,  therefore, 
know  anything  about  a  doctrine,  the  real  and  correct  meaning  of  which  no 
amount  of  natural  seership  can  reveal,  as  it  lies  altogether  beyond  the 
regions  accessible  to  untrained  seers.  If  revealed,  its  secrets  would,  for  long 
years,  remain  utterly  incomprehensible  even  to  the  highest  physical 
sciences.  I  hope,  this  may  not  be  construed  into  a  desire  of  claiming  any 
great  knowledge  for  myself ;  for  I  certainly  do  not  possess  it.  All  that 
I  seek  to  establish  is,  that  such  secrets  do  exist,  and  that,  outside  of  the 
initiates,  no  one  is  competent  to  prove,  much  less  to  disprove,  the  doctrines 
now  given  out  through  Mr.  Sinnett.—fl.  P.  Blavatsky. 

823 

system  of  physical,  intellectual,  moral,  and  spiritaal  training, 
as  woald  enable  him  to  reach  the  highest  condition  of  develop- 
ment possible;  it  mast  furnish  mankind  with  such  a  code  of 
morals   and  such  a  system  of  political  and  social  organization 
as  would  enable   them   en  masse,   to  move  on   rapidly  and 
smoothly  with   the  current  of  progressive  evolution,  and  to 
reach  the  desired  goal — the  condition  of  spiritaal  perfection. 
Such  a  system,  when  it  reaches  the  maximum  oi  elaboration, 
assumes  the  form  of  a  deductive  science  in  common  with  every 
particular  branch  of  science.    And  just   as  every  branch  of 
science,   entitled  to  the  dignity  of  that  name,  has  to  adopt  th« 
inductive  method  in  its  infancy,  so  Esoteric  Science  must  also 
pursue  a  similar   method   in   the  preliminary  stages  of  its 
progress   to  be  able  to  construct  religion  on  a  really  scientific 
basis.    As  Mr.  Sinnett  bad  neither  the  knowledge  nor  the 
materials  that  would  have  enabled  him  to  construct  a  complete 
system  of  Esoteric  Science  and  Philosophy,  be  had  to  content 
himself  with  simply  presenting,  in  a  comprehensible  form,  to 
the  members  of  the  Theosophical  Society  and   the  intelligent 
public,   a   collection   of  interesting  and  useful  information. 
This  he  did  with  regard  to  the  nature  and  directioo  of  plane- 
tary  evolution  and  the  constitution  of  n>an,  and  such  kindred 
subjects  as  are  calculated  to  throw  some  light,  at  least,  on  a 
few  of  the  profoundest  questions  of  religious  philosophy,  and 
indicating,  in  some  measure,  the  lineswj  which  further  enquiry 
would  prove  profitable.     He   thought  it  prudent  to  abstain 
from  recording  in  his  book  any  decisive  opinions  regarding  the 
real  nature  of  the  primal  causes,  operating  in  the  Cosmos,  the 
highest  spiritual  principle  in  man,  and  the  first  beginnings  of 
cosmic   evolution,  or  any  other  subject,  equally  momentous  to 
religious  metaphysics  and  dogmatic  theology.    Such  isolated 
remarks  as  are  to  be  found  in  his  book  touching  them,  are 
merely  intended  to  convey   to  the  reader's  mind  some  con- 
ception, however  imperfect,  which  it  is  necessary  to  realise  for 
the  purpose  of  clearly  understanding  the  operation  of  parti- 
cular laws,  or  the  nature  of  a  particular  group  of  phenomena. 
But  none  of  these  are  intended  to  supply  the  place  of  a 

324 

complete  exposition  of  the  Esoteric  Philosophy  connected  with 
those  subjects  ;  nor  do  they  amonut  to  a  denial  of  the  possibility 
of  auy  other  cooception,  or  the  correctness  of  any  other  view* 
which  may  be  entertained  with  respect  .to  other  phases  of  the 
Cosmos.  In  elucidating  Esoteric  Philosophy,  it  is  not  seldom 
necessary  to  adopt  the  same  codrsej  that  is  almost  always 
adopted,  for  the  sake  of  convenience,  by  a  teacher  of  astro- 
nomy, in  explaining  to  the  student  the  relation  between  the 
zenith,  the  pole,  the  equator,  the  ecliptic  and  the  horizon;  the 
definitions  of  right  ascension  and  declination,  latitude  and 
longitude  ;  the  causes  of  the  change  of  seasons,  the  application 
of  spherical  trignometry  for  the  solution  of  astronomical 
problems,  and  various  other  subjects,  with  reference  to  the 
geocentric  system.  The  assumption  that  the  Earth  is  the 
fixed  centre,  and  that  all  the  heavenly  bodies  revolve  round  it, 
is  doubtless  wrong  ;  but  such  a  conception  is  found  necessary 
for  the  easier  explanation  of  the  subjects  above  enumerated. 
Again,  when  at  a  further  stage  of  progress  the  heliocentric 
system  is  expounded,  the  sun  is  assumed  to  occupy  in  space  a 
fixed  position.  This  assumption  is  equally  erroneous,  as  it  ia 
now  ascertained  that  the  sun  has  a  proper  motion  in  space. 
Suppose,  a  professor  of  astroaomy,  taking  into  consideration 
all  these  motions,  and  ascertaining  the  complicated  and  pecu- 
liar curve  which  a  given  point  on  the  Earth's  surface  traces  ia 
space,  were  to  begin  ta  account  to  his  pupils  for  these  most 
ordinary  phenomena:  is  it  not  evident  that  he  and  his 
students  would  soon  get  into  a  terrible  state  of  confusion  ? 
Can  it  be  contended,  under  such  circumstances,  that  every 
teacher  of  astronomy,  at  the  present  time,  who  places  the 
geocentric  system  before  his  students,  for  the  purpose  of  giving- 
certain  explanations,  is  ignorant  of  the  heliocentric  system 
and  the  proper  motion  of  the  so-called  fixed  stars  in  space? 
or  that  he  is  giving  a  wrong  explanation  of  the  phenomena 
dealt  with  ;  or  that  he  is  speaking  in  riddles  which  require  an 
(Edipus  for  their  solution  ;  or  that  he  is  employing  allegorical 
language  for  the  purpose  of  wilfully  misleading  his  students 
and  testing  their  powers  of  discrimination  between  fact  and 

325 

fancy  ?  It  will  be  easily  conceded  that  all  sach  snppositions 
must  be  equally  nnreasonable,  the  preliminary  conception  in 
question  being  introduced  merely  for  the  sake  of  convenience . 
This  possibility,  however,  is  entirely  left  out  of  consideration 
by  Mr.  Sinuett's  critics.  To  exclude  every  ground  of  mis- 
apprehension, it  is  necessary  for  me  to  state,  at  this  point,  that 
the  foregoing  remarks  are  applicable  only  to  the  particular 
class  of  observations  in  Esoteric  Buddhism  to  which  reference 
is  already  made. 

While  on  the  subject,  I  may  as  well  point  out  that  Mr. 
Sinnett  has  not  given  in  his  book  as  much  explanation  as  he 
might  have  given  even  with  the  scanty  information  in  his 
possession,  regarding  cosmogony,  the  nature  of  Pnrusha  and 
Prakriti,  the  germs  out  of  which  the  elements  were  evolved, 
and  some  other  subjects  above  alluded  to.  But,  besides  the 
very  good  reason  that  his  limited  knowledge  prescribed  impera- 
tively such  a  prudential  policy,  the  following  reasons  may  also 
be  assigned  for  the  course  adopted  by  him.  They  will,  I  trust, 
be  found  satisfactory  when  closely  and  impartially  examined: 

I.  Almost  every  religion,  every  dogmatic  system  of  theo- 
logy, and  every  sectarian  doctrine  has  some  decisive  opinions 
to  oflfer  regarding  these  subjects,  and  it  is  in  connection  with 
these  questions  that  sectarian  strife  and  casuistry  have  always 
raged  with  unmitigated  fury,  for  thousands  of  years.  In 
these  days  of  inquiry  and  investigation,  such  controversy  can 
be  set  at  rest  not  by  appealing  to  the  authority  of  this  or  that 
religions  book,  or  religious  teacher,  but  by  introducing  into 
the  discussion  the  same  scientific  method  which  is  found  so 
very  useful  in  other  departments  of  human  inquiry.  It  is 
necessary  for  such  a  course,  that  all  the  phenomena  which 
may  throw  light  on  these  subjects  should  be  clearly  observed 
and  closely  examined.  The  nature  of  the  effects  must  be 
scrutinised  before  any  valid  inferences  can  be  drawn  regarding 
the  nature  of  their  cause.  This  is  the  only  way  open  to  the 
public  at  large.  An  initiate  may  be  able  to  perceive  the 
eternal  verities  by  his  developed  spiritual  power,  and  those 

526 

who  rely  opon  his  statements  may  take  them  on  trast.  Bat 
it  is  impossible  to  expect  the  secrets  of  initiation  to  be  made 
public,  or  even  if  made  public,  to  be  accepted  nnchallenged» 
in  these  days,  simply  on  the  authority  of  even  the  highest 
adept.  Under  such  circumstances,  when  religions  prejudices 
are  yet  so  very  strong,  and  when  the  public  is  not  scienti- 
fically prepared  to  test  the  correctness  of  the  views  of  the 
Himalayan  Mahatmas — it  is  not  desirable  to  publish  them  in 
any  other  but  a  fragmentary  form. 

II.  As  already  pointed  out,  the  Mahatmas  have  no  inten- 
tion whatsoever  of  assuming  the  attitude  of  world-instructors; 
norarethey  in  any  way  anxious  that  the  public,  or  any  portion 
of  it,  or  even  any  of  our  own  members,  should  relinquish  their 
own  settled  religions  opinions,  and  accept  their  views  without 
inquiry.  As  any  explanation  regarding  the  subjects  in  ques- 
tion is  likely  to  come  directly  into  collision  with  the  religious 
doctrines  prevalent  in  various  parts  of  the  civilized  world,  it 
will  be  premature  to  give  out  any  such  explanation,  until  the 
public  is  prepared  to  test  the  correctness  of  their  respective 
religious  dogmas,  in  the  same  manner  in  which  the  validity  of 
a  scientific  hypothesis  is  tested.  In  a  word,  they  must  wait 
antil  humanity  has  evolved  up  to  the  plane  of  spiritual 
intuitiveness,  or  take  the  crashing  responsibility  of  trying  to 
force  artificially  such  a  preternatural  psychic  growth.  Very 
slight  occult  experience  is  sufficient  to  show  how  futile  would 
be  the  task,  how  disastrous  the  failure,  how  direful  the  reac- 
tion in  its  consequences,  were  the  Masters  to  adopt  any  other 
policy  ! 

III.  It  is  impossible  to  give  complete  explanations  regard- 
ing most  of  the  subjects  touched  upon  in  "Esoteric  Buddhism," 
without  disclosing  some  of  the  secrets  0/  initiation. 

IV.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  express  in  English  the 
abstract  and  metaphysical  ideas  connected  with  these  subjects. 
Until  many  of  these  ideas  are  gradually  made  familiar  to  the 
mind  of  the  Western  reader,  any  attempt  at  a  general  explana- 
tion of  these  questions  in  the  language  of  ordinary  life,  is 

827 

likely  to  be  resented,  to  provoke  failure,  and  may  even  lead  to 
some  very  dangerous  misconceptions. 

V.  It  must  be  frankly  admitted  that  Mr.  Sinnett  himself 
has  not  thoroughly  understood  much  of  the  information  given 
to  him  by  the  Mahatmas  on  several  subjects,  (as  for  instance 
the  part  played  by  the  8th  sphere  in  the  scheme  of  evolution, 
and  the  opprobrium  thrown  upon  the  visible  moon,) — he, 
having  no.time  to  obtain  the  required  additional  explanations, 
during  his  short  stay  iit  the  Head-quarters,  on  his  way  to 
England.  For  these  reasons,  Mr.  Sinnett  was  obliged  to 
refrain  from  introducing  into  his  work  anything  like  a  syste- 
matic discussion  of  more  than  one  subject  from  the  stand-point 
of  the  Esoteric  Philosophy  of  the  Himalayan  Mahatmas.  The 
plan,  however,  that  he  has  adopted  is  in  perfect  accordance 
•with  the  intentions  ot  the  Masters,  and  is  well  adopted  to  the 
programme  laid  down  for  the  guidance  of  the  Theosophical 
Society.  "Esoteric  Buddhism,'*  in  short,  is  not  intended  to 
be  a  complete  and  systematic  exposition  of  the  religious 
philosophy  of  the  Initiated  Fraternity,  or  an  authoritative 
declaration  to  Theosophists  in  general  of  our  Teachers'  views 
which  they  are  called  upoo  to  accept  "as  necessarily  fiual  and 
beyond  appeal."  It  is  merely  intended  to  be  an  important 
contribution  to  the  mass  of  information,  which,  it  is  the  object 
of  the  Theosophical  Society  to  accumulate,  for  the  purpose  of 
leading  ultimately  to  the  evolution  of  a  complete  system  of 
philosophy.  If  any  member  of  the  London  Lodge  was  led  to 
anticipate,  from  the  publication  of  Mr.  Sinnett's  book,  **a  for- 
mal communication  to  the  world,  in  a  crisis  of  the  gravest 
description,  and  for  the  first  time  in  the  world's  history,  of  (all) 
the  most  sacred  mysteries  of  existence'^ — he  was  entirely  mis- 
taken; and  if  any  member  expected  that  the  publication  in 
question  would  supply  the  requirements  of  "a  prefect  system 
of  thought  and  rule  of  life"  and  is  now  disappointed,  no  one  is 
responsible  for  his  disappointment.  It  is  altogether  unfair  to 
condemn  Mr.  Sinnett's  book  as  wholly  misleading  or  allego- 
rical, and  undervalue  the  important  services  rendered  by  him 
to  the  Theosophical  Association,  on  the  ground  that  his  work 

3^ 

does  not  satisfy  the  unwarranted  expectations  of  a  few  Theoso- 
phists  who  are  more  sanguine  than  prudent. 

In  order  to  show  the  correctness  of  my  assertions,  I  shall 
endeavour  to  point  out  how  far  the  criticisms  of  Mrs.  Kings- 
ford  and  Mr.  Maitiand  are  justified,  and  how  far  they  are  mis- 
directed and  erroneous. 

For  the  sake  of  convenience,  I  shall  arrange  the  remarks  of 
Mrs.  Kingsford  and  Mr.  Maitiand  on  "Esoteric  Buddhism" 
with  reference  to  the  subjects  to  which  they  relate.  That 
part  of  their  criticism  which  refers  to  the  views  put  forth  by 
Mr.  Sinnett  regarding  Purusha  and  Prakriti  claims  our  atten- 
tion first. 

Mr.  Maitland's  first  and  most  important  objection  against 
"Esoteric  Buddhism"  is,  that  its  doctrine  is  distinctly  athe- 
istic, and  that  its  statements  regarding  the  nature  and  attri- 
butes of  Parabrahma  are  inconsistent  with  each  other.  It  is 
admitted,  however,  that  a  considerable  number  of  the  passages, 
quoted  by  the  critic  from  Mr.  Sinnett's  writitfigs  are  not  athe- 
istic in  their  tone;  and  that  the  existence  of  a  universal 
spiritual  principle  prior  to  "any  organized  or  derived  entities,'* 
is  distinctly  postulated  therein,  under  the  same  of  Parabrahm, 
which  is  spoken  of  as  "the  motion,  that  animates  Cosmio 
matter"  and  as  "the  energy  of  the  universe."  It  is,  I  believe, 
an  acknowledged  canon  of  interpretation,  that,  when  a  large 
number  of  dispersed  statements  regarding  a  particular  subject 
are  to  be  found  in  any  book,  the  author's  views  on  that  subject 
should  be  gathered  from  a  careful  comparison  of  all  such 
statements,  and  a  critical  examination  of  the  contexts  in  which 
they  appear,  and  not  from  the  literal  meaning  of  particular 
words  or  phrases.  "When  metaphysical  or  philosophical  diffi- 
culties  are  involved  in  any  subject,  and  the  phraseology  in 
which  it  has  been  discussed  by  various  writers  has  been  render- 
ed extremely  vague  and  uncertain  by  the  different  connota- 
tions attached  to  the  words  used,  it  becomes  absolutely  neces- 
sary to  proceed  according  to  this  method.  And  this  necessity 
is  considerably  enhanced  in  the  case  of  "Esoteric  Buddhism  " 

329 

—as  a  complete  discnssion  of  the  subjects  involred  is  not  nn- 
dertaken  by  the  author.  But  Mr.  Sinnett's  critic  has  thought 
it  proper  to  depart  from  this  principle,  for  the  not  overkind 
purpose  of  detecting  contradictions  and  absurdities  where 
there  are  really  none.  It  now  remains  to  be  seen,  how  far  he 
has  gained  his  object  even  by  the  false  cannon  of  criticisnj 
adopted.  We  are  informed  by  him  that  the  doctrine  "openly 
avowed"  in  "Esoteric  Buddhism"  is  "distinctly  atheistic" 
So  far  as  I  can  see,  there  is  no  such  open  avowal  in  any  part 
of  the  book  ;  nor  are  we  informed  on  what  page  we  are  to 
eearch  for  it.  The  assertion  made  by  the  critic  is,  therefore,  a 
mere  matter  of  inference  ;  and  a  very  painful  and  circuitous 
process  of  reasoning  is  adopted  to  establish  the  strange  pro- 
position. It  is  stated  that  the  epithet  "atheistic"  is  used 
"not  reproachfully  but  descriptively."  But  the  required 
description  is  not  given  by  the  plaintiff  though  it  is  so  very 
essential  for  a  just  appreciation  of  the  correctness  of  his 
reason!  Qg  and  the  validity  of  his  inference.  It  is  left  to  his 
readers  to  ascertain  the  bearing  of  his  conclusions  by  an 
examination  of  the  reasons  assigned  for  them.  This  is  by  no 
means  an  easy  task;  and  the  reasons  for,  and  against,  his 
inferences  are,  moreover,  left  in  a  tangled  maze  of  confusion. 
When  extricated  from  it,  the  reasons  which  are  intended  to 
support  the  position  may  be  enumerated  in  the  following 
order: — 

I.  "The  Parabrahm  or  spirit  of  matter  is  motion,"  we  are 
told, — from  the  stand-point  of  "Esoteric  Buddhism." 

II.  "Elsewhere  (p.  153;  it  is  called  Energy." 

III.  It  is  declared  (p.  182)  that  the  end  of  all  existence 
is  the  "merging  by  man  of  his  glorified  Individ aality 
in  that  sum  total  of  all  consciousness,  which  Esoteric 
Metaphysicians  treat  as  absolute  consciousness,  which  is 
non-consciousness." 

IV.  "Objection  is  taken  (by  Mr.  Sinnett;  to  the  being  of 
42 

330 

God,  on  the  ground  that  it  wonld  be  incompatible  with  free- 
dom of  will  on  the  part  of  mao.** 

^    I  shall  examine  these  reasons  seriatinu 

I.    The  first    reason    for  the  inference  involves  a  mis- 
Btatement  of  the  author's  view.    Mr.  Sinnett  says  that  the 
tinmanifested    basis  of  the  manifested   cosmos  is  "matter 
animated  by   motion,  its  Parabrahm   or  spirit  "  (p.   183). 
Motion   that  animates   Cosmic   matter  is  not  equivalent  to 
motion  in  general.    The  motion  of  a  cricket  ball,  for  instance, 
is    not  to  be  considered  as  motion   that   animates  matter. 
Molecular  motion,  in  the  particles  ot  a  decomposing  body, 
is,  no  doubt,  motion,  but  it  is  not  motion   that  animates   the 
dead  body.  The  qualifying  clause  is  used  by  Mr.  Sinnett  with 
a  definite  object.    Parabrahma  is  often  spoken   of  as  '*  the 
One  Life"  by  the  Buddhist  philosophers,  and  is  considered  as 
the    Mahachaitanyam  (an   equivalent  expression)      by    the 
Adwaitees.    And  even  Kabalists  have  described  En-soph  as 
"The  life  that  is  no  life."    The  word  "animates"  is  calculated 
to  draw  the  reader's  attention  to  this   aspect  of  Parabrahma. 
1  fail  to  see  the  incongruity  really  involved  in  further  investing 
Paramatma  with  the  attributes  of  motion.    When  heat,  light, 
and  electricity  are  the  manifestations,  or  effects,  of  particular 
kinds  of  motion,  the  material  plane  of  action  being  the  same 
in  the  opinion  of   modern  science,  there  is  nothing  very 
ridiculous  in  the  assertion  that  the  life  existing  in  Mulaprakriti 
and  manifesting  itself  in  various  forms  in  difi'erentiated  and 
organized  Prakriti,  is  but  the   effect  of  a  mysterious  kind   of 
motion.    Perhaps,  we  shall  be  informed  by  Mr.  Maitland  that 
the  First  Cause  cannot  have  the  essential  attributes  of  motion, 
as  some   pre-existing  force  or  energy  is  required  to  produce 
this  motion.    But  there  is  no  necessity  for  any  such  supposition. 
Every  force  or  energy  in  nature,  when  properly  examined,  will 
be  found  to   have   in  itself  some  kind  of  motion   or   other. 
When  correctly  stated,  the  author's  assertion  amounts  to  saying 
that  Parabrahma  pervades  the  infinite  expanse  of  cosmic 

3Sl 

matter — Malaprakriti— and  conseqaently  every  differentiated 
and  organized  form  in  it;  that  it  has  the  essential  attribntef 
of  motion,  and  that  the  pecaliar  characteristic  of  this  motion 
is,  that  the  life  existing  everywhere  thronghont  the  Cosmos, 
whether  in  its  primary  or  secondary  aspects,  is  its  mani- 
festation or  effect.  It  is  not  pretended  that  this  amoants  to  a 
compute  description  of  Parabrahma.  Bnt  it  is  maintained 
that  it  is  a  correct  representation  of  one  of  its  phases.  The 
critic  is  welcome  to  show,  if  he  can,  that  this  description  Is 
wrong;  but  why  should  he  cover  the  main  question  with  a 
cloud  of  irrelevant  matter  ?  If  this  amounts  to  atheism  in 
his  opinion,  so  be  it;  Mr.  Maitland  is  fully  entitled  to  have 
his  own  definition  of  the  word. 

II.  The  second  reason  for  the  inference  is  likewise  based 
upon  a  misconstruction  of  the  author's  views.  On  p.  153  of 
his  work,  Mr.  Sinnett  has  defined  Parabrahma  from  the 
stand-point  of  Adwaita  philosophy,  and  in  the  following 
words  :  '•  Brahma  or  Parabrahma,  is  thus  a  passive,  incompre* 
hensible,  unconscious  principle,  but  the  essence,  one  life,  or 
energy  of  the  universe,"  and  here,  Mr.  Maitland  asserts  again 
that  Parabrahma  is  called  energy  (in  any  form  apparently)  by 
the  author  I  He  further  contends  that  a  principle,  or  entity, 
possessing  the  attributes  of  motion  cannot  be  considered  as 
the  "energy  of  the  universe"  ;  evidently  forgetting  that 
motion  in  the  abstract  is  one  thing,  and  the  object  in 
motion — quite  another.  Energy  is  defined  by  him  as  the 
cause  of  motion,  and  if  motion  is  not  energy  under  any 
circumstances,  in  that  gentleman's  opinion,  one  kind  of  motion 
can  never  be  the  cause  of  another  kind  of  motion.  For 
instance,  it  will  be  wrong,  in  his  opinion,  to  say  that  the 
motion  of  the  particles  composing  a  certain  quantity  of  steam 
caused  by  its  inherent  tendency  to  expand,  produces  the 
motion  of  the  steam  engine  !  This,  I  believe,  will  make  clear 
that  Mr.  Sinnett's  statement  involves  no  such  absurdity. 
Energy  is  but  the  statical  aspect  of  motion,  and  motion  is  but 
the  kinetic  aspect  of  energy.    Parabrahma  has  both  these 

832 

aspects.  Daring  Pralaya  it  is  the  snra  total  of  the  energy  of 
the  Infinite  Universe,  and  daring  the  peroid  of  Cosmic 
activity  it  manifests  itself  as  the  motion  in  Cosmic  matter, 
which  is  the  basis  of  Life,  in  all  its  forms  and  aspects.  And 
this,  again,  is  atheistic  in  Mr.   Maitland's  opinion. 

III.  It  is  more  diflScalt  to  perceive  how  the  third  reason  is 
intended  to  prove  the  charge  of  atheism.  The  author  has 
stated  that  the  consciousness  realized  in  Nirvana  is  *'  absolute 
conscionsness,**  which  is  "non" — consciousness.  It  is  absolute 
consciousness,  because  the  soul  is  fully  en  rapport  with  the 
universal  mind — the  Adam  Kadmon  of  the  Kabalists,  and  the 
Adonai  of  the  Jews  ; — and  it  is  non-consciousness,  because  it 
is  not  consciousness  in  any  way  similar  to  the  consciousness 
realized  by  us  in  any  of  the  conditions  with  which  we  are 
familiar.  But  we  are  once  more  informed  that  this  also  is  an 
atheistical  doctrine.  In  Mr.  Maitland's  opinion,  therefore,  a 
doctrine  is  said  to  be  atheistical  when  it  declares  that  the  con- 
sciousness realized  in  Nirvana,  or  the  highest  paradise,*  is  not 
similar  to  the  consciousness  realized  by  man  in  his  objectiye 
condition  of  existence,  because,  according  to  our  opponent's 
Esoteric  Philosophy,  the  case  is  entirely  different.  In  his 
ideas,  it  seems,  even  in  Heaven  we  are  not  going  to  be 
deprived  of  our  enjoyments  and  amusements  of  our  picnics, 
theatres  and  fashionable  dress-parties. 

IV.  The  fourth  and  the  last  reason,  in  support  of  the 
allegation  made,  has  no  foundation  whatever,  except  in  the 
imagination  of  the  learned  Vice-President  of  the  **London 
Lodge."  On  p.  185  of  his  work,  the  author  merely  points  out 
that  the  doctrines  propounded  therein  are  free  from  the  diffi- 
culties generally  raised  in  connection  with  the  doctrine  of  free 
will  and  pre-destination,  in  the  ordinary  theological  sense.  To 
this  Mr.  Sinnett's  opponent  replies  that  the  Esoteric  Buddhist 

♦  ,,*It  is  very  unfortunate  that  the  English  language  has  no  word  to 
indicate  a  higher  state  of  existence  than  what  is  realized  in  Swaraga,  or 
Detachan. 

333 

doctrine  has  contrived  to  get  rid  of  the  idea  of  God  (Mr. 
Maitland's  "idea"  probably)  for  the  parpoae  of  avoiding  these 
difficalties.  This  is  clearly  fallacioas.  In  the  Esoteric 
doctrine,  Parabrahma  is  not  a  matter  of  inference.  If  the 
necessities  of  logic  and  theoretical  metaphysics  have  not  led 
the  stadents  of  Esoteric  science  to  adopt  any  particular  view 
regarding  the  "first  caase,"  it  is  because  their  knowledge  if 
derived  by  a  more  direct  method  ;  and  thus,  they  being  most 
pronounced  gnostics,  it  becomes  the  more  ridiculous  to  suspect 
them  of  agnosticism.  Highly  developed  spiritual  powers,  and 
a  keen  sense  of  intuitive  perception  have  enabled  them  to 
arrive  at  the  truth  without  any  reference  whatever  to  the  diflS- 
cnlties  of  theoretical  religious  philosophy,  as  conceived  by 
Western  minds.  Mr.  Maitland  is  simply  trying  to  throw  dis- 
credit on  "Esoteric  Buddhism"  by  the  dint  of  far  fetched  and 
strained  constructions,  in  direct  connection  with  those  inter- 
minable and  meaningless  controversies  regarding  free  will  and 
pre-desli nation,  which  occupy  such  a  prominent  place  in  the 
arena  of  Western  religious  speculation,  and  are  so  happily  con- 
spicuous by  their  absence  from  the  plane  of  Hindu  and 
Buddhist  religions  thought. 

From  this  it  becomes  quite  clear,  that,  (a)  in  our  critic's 
opinion,  the  denial  of  a  personal  God  is  synonymous  with  rank 
atheism;  and  (d)  that  the  teachings  of  "Esoteric  Buddhism  " 
as  really  stated  by  the  author,  are»  in  no  way,  inconsistent, 
illogical,  or  unscientific;  but  that  simply  Mr.  Maitland  has 
run  away  with  a  very  hazy  idea  of  what  those  teachings  are, 
in  truth.  Whatever  those  teachings  may  be,  one  thing  is 
certain:  they  are  neither  atheistic  nor  even  materialistic  in 
the  ordinary  sense  of  the  words;  for,  if  anything,  they  are 
pantheistic.  Mr.  Maitland's  definition  of  atheism  seems  to  be 
one  of  a  very  complicated  character.  From  his  stand-point,  an 
atheist  is  to  be  defined  as  one  who  believes  the  doctrines  of 
Esoteric  Buddhism,  or  entertains  the  same  opinions  as 
Mr.  Sinuett  regarding  Parabrahma;  and  this  is  to  be  con- 
sidered as  the  outcome  of  the  whole  discussion  I 

334 

The  second  part  of  Mr.  Maitland'a  objection  w  to  the  effect 
that  expressions  are  used  in  Esoteric  Buddhism,  whi6h  impliy 
"a  conscious,  intelligent  and,  therefore,  personal  being  as 
subsisting  prior  to  any  organized  or  derived  entities,''  and  are^ 
therefore,  inconsistent  with  the  statements  examined  above. 
The  reasons  assigned  for  this  new  objection  are  equally 
unsatisfactory,  as  I  shall  presently  &how. 

Such  expressions  as  "the  purposes  of  nature,"  *'the  con- 
tinuous effort  made  by  nature,"  and  others,  similarly  worded, 
do  not  imply  the  existence  of  a  "personal"  God.  I  am 
surprised  to  find  that  an  argument  of  this  nature  is  introduced 
into  a  serious  philosophical  discussion.  Every  man  who 
believes  in  the  diurnal  rotation  of  the  earth,  ordinarily  speaks 
of  sunrise  and  sunset.  Can  it  be  advanced  as  a  serious 
argument  against  the  existence  of  this  rotation  that  the  very 
language  used  disproves  the  theory  ?  The  argument  brought 
forward  is  precisely  similar  to  the  baseless  objections  advanced 
against  Mills'  Cosmological  theory,  on  the  ground  that  the 
ordinary  language  in  use  supports  the  realistic  theory.  The 
English  language  is  no  more,  than  any  other  language,  the 
special  creation  ot  philosophers  against  whose  authority  there 
is  no  appeal.  For,  it  is  developed  by  the  national  common 
sense  of  England  and  the  usages  of  every  day  life;  and 
certainly  no  great  philosophical  acumen  can  be  claimed  for  it 
under  these  circumstances.  If  Mr.  Maitland's  objection  is 
admitted,  all  figurative  language  will  have  to  be  studiously 
eschewed  from  philosophical  writings.  If  there  is^  however, 
any  real  foundation  beneath  the  objection,  it  is  tantamount  to 
saying  that  the  existence  ot  a  definite  method  in  the  order  of 
Cosmic  evolution  necessitates  the  admission  of  a  personal  God. 
This  question,  however,  will  be  more  fully  discussed  further 
on,  in  connection  with  Mr.  Maitland's  inferences  from  tha 
existence  of  Cosmic  laws. 

We  are  informed  by  the  critic  that  Theism  finds  expression  ra 
the  statements  made  regarding  the  7th  principle  in  man,  and 
thus  shows  Mr.    Sinnett's  inconsistency. 

S35 

Now,  Mr.  Maitland's  endeavours  to  catch  Theism  **ander 
yet  another  mode"  of  expression  are  very  unsuccessfal. 
Although,"  it  is  urged,  "the  name  [of  Theism]  is  repudiated, 
the  idea  is  retained  under  the  term  "Seventh  Principle" 
(p.  179)  or  "Universal  Spirit,"  which  is  described  as  "existing 
everywhere  and  operating  on  matter,  provoking  the  existence 
of  man  himself,  «and  the  world  in  which  he  lives,  and  the 
future  conditions  towards  which  he  is  pressing."  "The 
Seventh  Principle,  indefinable  for  us  in  our  present  state  of 
enlightenment,  is,*'  we  are  further  assured,  "the  only  God 
recognized  by  Esoteric  knowledge,  and  no  personification  of 
this  can  be  otherwise  than  symbolical.  It  is,  we  are  told, 
"the  all-pervading  Judge,  to  whom  men  have  to  give  account." 
Unfortunately.,  Mr,  Maitland  has  omitted  to  define  the  term 
Theism,  and  thus  prevented  us  from  examining  the  process  by 
which  he  has  evolved  that  faith  out  of  the  above  quotations 
from  "Esoteric  Buddhism."  All  that,  under  the  circumstances, 
remains  for  us  to  do  is,  to  show  that  Mr.  Sinnett's  statements, 
although  the  word  "God"  occurs  therein,  do  not  warrant  the 
acceptance  of  a  personal  God.  It  is  not  certainly  justifiable  to 
convert  the  ''Seventh  Principle"  or  ''Universal  Spirit"  into 
a  Jehovah,  from  what  has  been  said  of  it  in  one  place,  utterly 
regardless  of  the  reiterations  about  it,  in  other  connections. 
In  one  passage,  for  instance  (p.  176),  we  find  Mr.  Sinnett 
saying: — "  The  one  and  chief  attribute  of  the  Universal  Spi- 
ritual principle,  the  unconscious  but  ever  active  life-giver,  is  to 
expand  and  shed ;  that  of  the  Universal  Material  Principle  is 
to  gather  in  and  fecundate.' '  Then  on  the  same  page  and  the 
following  creation  is  denied  in  toto.  Without  endorsing  the 
phraseology  adopted  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  which  is,  however,  that 
of  all  the  Kabalists  and  may  be  even  found  in  Eliphas  Levi*s 
"Dograe  et  Rituel  de  la  Haate  Magie,"  as  in  the  great  book 
of  Khiu-ti,  1  may  safely  assert  that  no  Theist  would  be  over- 
anxious to  claim  the  author  of  "  Esoteric  Buddhism"  as  a 
fellow-worshipper.  The  argument  founded  upon  Mr.  Sinnett's 
use  of  such  words  as  "God"  and  "Judge"  has  already  been 
disposed  of.    lu  fact,  such  criticism  only  reminds  one  of 

336 

Lamb's  North  Briton   friend,   whose  sense  of  propriety  wai 
outraged  by  the  commonest  figures  of  speech. 

The  tenour  of  the  whole  argnment  on  theistic  or  atheistic 
character  of  "  Esoteric  Baddhism,'*  most  unmistakably 
betrays  a  great  want  of  comprehension  on  the  part  of  the 
critic  of  Baddhism  in  general,  and  eioteric  Baddhism  especially. 
A  system,  of  which  one  part  appears  as  theistic  and  another 
part  atheistic,  ought  certainly  not  to  be  placed  in  either  of 
the  categories  and  then  condemned  as  self-contradictory, 
BO  long  as  a  third  course  remains  open.  And  unless  he  has 
shown  that  the  division  of  religions  philosophy,  as  above, 
into  theism  and  atheism,  is  a  division  by  dichotomy,  it  is 
unreasonable  for  him  to  talk  of  Mr.  Sinnett's  wholly  uatenable 
"radical  inconsistencies  and  contradictions  ;"  and  at  the  same 
time,  it  shows  him  hardly  acquainted  with  the  subtle  monism 
of  the  pantheistic  philosophy  as  taught  in  oar  great  schools. 
Mr.  Maitland  seems  to  have  endeavoured  to  lay  the  doctrines 
contained  in  "Esoteric  Baddhism"  on  the  Procrustean  bed  of 
his  own  ideas,  and,  failing  in  the  attempt,  is  now  seeking  to 
discredit  them  as  inconsistent  with  themselves.  As  well  call 
Shankaracharya,  the  greatest  Occultist  and  adept  of  all  the 
ages,  4;he  founder,  of  the  Adwita  school,  the  master  whose 
followers  are  to  this  day  referred  to  as  Prachanna  Bauddhas 
(Buddhists  in  disguise),  so  identical  are  the  two  teachings — 
one  day  an  atheist,  and  a  theist  the  next. 

The  next  argument  that  Mr.  Maitland  brings  forward 
(p.  15),  comes  to  this:  since  law  implies  a  person,  the  expres- 
sion of  whose  will  the  law  is,  therefore,  Mr.  Sinnett  by  speakig 
of  "the  law  of  evolution"  tacitly  admits  the  existence  of  a 
personal  God,  whose  impressed  will  is  the  law  of  the  Universe. 
This  is  a  very  extraordinary  argument.  1  could  hardly  believe 
that  the  talented  Vice-President  of  the  London  Lodge  would 
have  failed  to  recognize  the  diflference  between  the  command 
of  the  sovereign  power  in  a  political  body,  and  the  sequence 
of  causation  implied  in  a  natural  law,  especially  after  such  a 
masterly  exposition  of  the  subject  by  such  thinkers  as  Mill 

and  Austin.  My  surprise  becomes  greater  still  to  find 
Mrs.  Kingsford,  with  her  splendid  natural  gifts,  standing 
sponsor  to  such  an  intellectual  deformity  !  It  is  now  pefectly 
clear  that  Mr.  Maitland's  statements  that  "  these  citations 
imply  theism,"  and  that  they  "  describe  precisely  that  which 
the  theist  means  by  a  personal  God,"  are  merely  gratuitous 
assumptions. 

Then  comes  a  point,  the  objection  to  which  involves  a 
totally  inaccurate  presentation  of  Mr.  Sinnett's  statements. 
'•  This  Eternal  Something,"  says  Mr.  Maitland,  "  it  is  further 
declared,  although  there  is  nothing  but  Matter,  Motion,  Space, 
and  Duration,  consists  of  two  principles,  the  Universal  Spiritual 
Principle  and  the  Universal  Material  Principle,  which,  when 
separate,  are  unconscious  and  non-existing,  and  only  when 
brought  together  (by  whom  or  from  whence,  it  is  not  said) 
become  consciousness  and  life." 

Before  proceeding  to  answer  the  objections  arising  out  of 
what  Mr.  Sinnett  is  represented  to  have  said  above,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  tally  it  with  what  Mr.  Sinnett  actually  says.  On  page 
176  of  "  Esoteric  Buddhism"  we  read  : — "The  one  eternal, 
imperishable  thing  in  the  Universe  which  Universal  Prala- 
yas  themselves  pass  over  without  destroying,  is  that  which 
may  be  regarded  indifferently  as  Space,  Duration,  Matter  and 
Motion,  not  as  something  having  these  four  attributes,  but  a 
something  which  is  these  four  things  at  once,  and  always.  And 
evolution  takes  its  rise  in  the  atomic  polarity  which  motion 
engenders.  In  cosmogony  ih.e  positive  and  the  negative,  or  the 
active  and  the  passive,  forces  correspond  to  the  mal^  and 
female  principles.  The  spiritual  efflux  enters  into  the  veil  of 
Cosmic  matter  ;  the  active  is  attracted  by  the  passive  princi- 
ple ;  and  if  we  may  here  assist  imagination  by  having  recourse 
to  old  occult  symbology — the  great  Nag — the  serpent,  emblem 
of  eternity,  attracts  its  tail  to  its  moitth,  forming  thereby  the 
circle  of  eternity,  or  rather  cycles  in  eternity.  The  one  and  chief 
attribute  of  the  Universal  Spiritual  Principle  the  unconscious 
43 

33S 

bat  ever  active  life — giver,  is  to  expand  and  shed;  that 
of  the  Universal  Material  Principle  to  gather  in  and  fecundate. 
Unconscious  and  non-existing  when  separate,  they  become 
consciousness  and  life  when  brought  together.  "  If  this  is  not 
sound,  orthodox  Kabalistic  and  "  Hermetic  Philosophy  "  to 
which  Mrs.  Kingsford  confesses  she  feels  herself  "  especially 
attracted,  "  then  Eliphas  Levi  has  written  his  theistic  "  dog- 
mas and  Ritual  of  High  Magic  "  in  vain  ?  Let  the  Fellows 
of  the  "  London  Lodge  "  open  his  Vol.  I  ;  and  see  what  this 
great  master  of  Christian  Esoteric  Doctrine  says  on  the  sub- 
ject, on  pages  123-26  et  seq,  and  then  draw  their  conclusions. 
Mr.  Sinnett's  language  is  that  of  every  occultist,  who  refuses 
to  substitute  his  own  personal  fancy  for  the  accepted  theories 
of  the   ancient  Hermetic  Philosophy.* 

Now,  from  an  examination  of  Mr.  Maitland's  citations  with 
the  original,  with  special  reference  to  the  passages  italicised, 
it  will  appear  that  what  Mr.  Sinnetfc  does  say  is  not  that  the 
Eternal  Something  does  "  consist  "  of  the  two  principles  nam- 
ed, but  that  the  latter  are  the  two  force-emanating  poles  engen- 
dered by  Parabrahman,  considered  the  animating  motion  of 
the  Universe  (  Purusha  ),  in  itself,  the  exhaustless  fountain  of 

*  I  would  draw  the  attention  of  Mrs.  Kingsford,  Mr.  Maitland,  and  the 
other  Members  of  the  London  Lodge  to  that  whole  chapter  In  the  work 
cited,  and  ask  them  to  compare  its  grossly  materialistic  language  with  the 
explanation  oflered  on  the  same  subject  by  Mr.  Sinnett.  If  Eliphas  Levi's 
"number  of  gnosis^^.,. this  "Adam,  the  human  tetragrammaton  resumed  in 
the  mysterious  jod,  the  image  of  the  Kabalistic  i^ifwTZtts  ...the  insertion  of 
the  vertiole  phallus  in  the  horizontal  cteis  forming  the  stauros  of  the 
gnostics,  or  the  philosophical  cross  of  the  Masons,  in  the  mysterious  lan- 
guage of  the  Talmudic  Kabalists" — as  he  calls  it— can  be  preferred  to  the 
chaste  images  oifered  by  the  Eastern  Esotericism,  it  is  only  by  those  who 
are  unable  to  divorce  their  thoughts  from  an  anthropomorphic  God  and  his 
material  progeny,  the  Adam  of  the  Old  Testament.  Withal,  the  idea  and 
substance,  if  not  the  language,  are  identical;  for  Elphas  Levi  expounding 
the  true  Hermetic  Philosophy,  in  the  course  language  of  the  Jewish  Seers 
and  for  the  benefits  of  a  Christian  born  public  says  neither  more  nor  less 
than  what  was  given  to,  and  written  by,  Mr.  Sinnett  in  the  far  more  philo- 
sophical phraseology  of  "Esoteric  Buddhism."— £r.  P.  Blavatsky. 

339 

material  existence  (Prakriti).  Bearing  this  explanation  in 
raiud,  many  of  Mr.  Maitland's  difficulties  will  entirely  dis- 
appear. The  Universal  Spiritual  Principle  or  Pnrusha  does 
not  certainly  exist  as  a  separate  entity  at  the  time  of  the  Maha* 
pralaya,  but  is  iuterblended  with  Prakriti  (the  Material  Princi- 
ple )  and  both  exist  in  their  eternal  and  ineffable  state  of 
Parabrahman.*  When  by  the  operation  of  the  chain  of  causa- 
tion, which  is  embodied  in  Parabrahman,  the  emanating  impulse 
is  awakened,  the  two  principles  spring  forth  into  Being,  and 
by  their  mutual  action  prodnce  the  manifested  Cosmos.  Some 
reflection  might  give  us  a  glimpse  of  the  grand  fact  that  prior 
to  the  moment  when  the  emanation  takes  place  no  duality  can 
possibly  exist.  The  primal  duality,  Prakriti  and  Purusha 
are  each  the  necessary  condition  of  the  other's  existence. 
This  fact  is  sufficiently  well  implied  by  what  Mr.  Sinnett  says 
of  the  "  atomic  polarity  which  motion  engendered."  One  pole 
cannot  exist  without  the  other.  And  now  will  be  thrown  into 
bold  relief  what  Mr.  Sinnett  means  when  he  says; — "Uncon- 
scions  and  non-existing  when  separate,  they  become  conscious- 
ness and  life  when  brought  together" — by  their  inherent 
guiddity,  the  Sw%bh(imt  of  the  Buddhists.f  The  next  objec- 
tion of  Mr.  Maitland  comes  to  this:— If  Pnrusha  is  ''uncon- 
scious"  and  Prakriti  is  "  unconscious,"  how  can  consciousness 
evolve  at  all  ?    The  first  idea  to  be  clearly  grasped,  is  the 

•  In  the  Bigmia  it  is  said  that  prior  to  the  period  of  evolution  in  the 
celebrated  Mantra  beginning,  Nasadasit  nasadasit  (X.  129;—*'  neither  asat 
or  Prakriti  nor  saf  or  Paru8ha  was  "  bat  the  one  Life  latent  in  the  one 
Element,  "  was  breathing  without  breath." 

t  The  entire  chain  of  Mr.  Maitland's  reasoning  is  vitiated  by  a  false 
assumption.  He  seems  to  think  that  Prakriti  and  Purusha  existed  prior 
to  the  period  of  Cosmic  activity  as  to  separate  entities  and  required  some 
motor  to  bring  them  together  to  interact  on  each  other,  just  as  oxygen 
and  hydrogen  are  caused  to  combine  chemically  by  the  agency  of 
electricity.  But  the  real  fact  is  that  Prakriti  and  Purusha  are  separate 
entities  to  us  o^^y  subjectively.  We  can  only  imagine  that  they  are  separate 
and  then  try  to  comprehend  their  nature  from  that  atand-point.  In  point 
of  fact  neither  of  them  can  exist  by  itself. 

340 

natnre  of  Prakriti  and  Pnrnsha.  This  subject,  however,  need 
not  be  pnrsned  at  length,  as  it  has  been  pretty  fally  treated 
by  me  in  an  article  in  the  Theosopkist  for  Jnly  last 
(Vol.  IV,  No.  10.  ),  to  which  reference  may  be  made  for  fuller 
information. 

Now  to  turn  to  the  evolution  of  conscious  existence.  If  it 
is  maintained  that  the  great  first  cause — Parabrahman  — is 
unconscious,  in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  negation  of  all  cons- 
ciousness— it  is  a  great  fallacy.  If,  od  the  other  hand,  it  is 
imagined  to  be  conscious  in  our  sense  of  consciousness — it  is 
equally  fallacious-  If  words  are  to  have  any  meaning,  cons- 
cious existence  involves  three  elements— the  Knower,  the 
Knowledge  and  the  Known.  Now  Parabrahman  is  "  Only 
One  without  a  second  " — ekamexsadmUyam^ — or,  in  other  words, 
the  unification  of  the  three  elements  of  conscious  existence, 
mentioned  above  —the  break-up  of  the  three  receptacles  as  it 
is  technically  called — triputi  hhangam.  Therefore  there  can 
be  no  conscious  existence  in  Parabrahman.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  Parabrahman  is  regarded  as  absolute  unconsciousness  violence 
will  be  done  to  the  first  principles  of  our  philosophy.  Uncon- 
sciousness is  the  negation  of  every  form  of  consciousness,  and 
therefore,  without  any  relation  thereto;  to  derive  the  latter 
from  the  former  is  to  establish  some  sort  of  relation  between 
the  two,  which,  as  we  have  seen  is  impossible.  Therefore, 
Parabrahman  is  not  unconsciousness,  and  as  has  been  showed 
before,  it  is  not  conscious,  in  the  sense  the  word  must  always 
be  used.  We  are,  therefore,  reduced  to  the  conclusion  that 
Parabraman  is  absolute  consciousness,  or  nirupadhikam  maha. 
chaitanyam,  as  the  Upanishad  says.  This,  again,  is  verified 
by  the  experience  of  practical  occultists.  The  emanations 
of  Mulaprakriti  become  conscious  by  the  reflection  of  this 
absolute  consciousness.  By  the  interposition  of  the  veils  of 
Maya,  this  absolute  consciousness  gives  rise  to  conditioned 
Sopadkikam — consciousness,  or  conscious  existence.  The 
details  of  the  process  cannot  be  entered  into  here,  as  they 
touch  many  grand  secrets  of  initiation. 

341 

The  next  thing  I  notice,  shall  be  Mr.  Maitlaod's  criticism 
with  regard  to  the  position  assigned  to  the  Dhyan  Chohans  in 
the  scheme  of  Cosmic  evolution.  His  objection  relates  first  to 
the  question — how  the  first  Dhyan  Chohans  could  evolve,  if 
there  be  no  personal  God  to  produce  them  consciously  ?  and 
then  urges,  *'  it  the  assistance  of  the  Dhyan  Chohans  be 
indispensible  to  the  production  of  the  universe  "  how  came 
"  the  universe  to  reach  such  perfection  as  to  produce  Dhyan 
Chohans  in  the  first  instance,  when  there  were  no  Dhyan 
Chohans  to  aid  it  ?  "  If  Mr.  Maitland  has  brought  forward 
these  objections  for  the  purpose  of  eliciting  further  informa- 
tion, all  I  have  to  say  is,  that  such  information  will  be 
forthcoming  when  the  ground  is  prepared  for  it  by  the 
doctrines  which  he  now  criticises.  But  if  there  are  intended 
to  imperil  the  position  taken  up  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  I  have  only 
to  point  out  that  Mr.  Maitland  puts  entirely  out  of  calculation 
the  agency  involved  in  the  ideation  of  the  Universal  Mind, 
the  Demiurgos'of  Western  Mystics.  It  must  not,  however, 
be  here  understood,  that  the  ideation  of  the  Universal  Mind 
is  set  in  motion  by  an  act  of  that  mind's  volition  ;  quite  the 
contrary.  The  ideation  of  the  Demiurgos  is  governed  by  an 
eternal  chain  of  causation,  and  is  absolutely  involuntary.  A 
flood  of  light  will  be  thrown  on  this  subject  by  letter  from 
one  of  the  Mahatmas,  now  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Sinnett. 
Then,  again,  it  must  be  remembered  that  all  Dhyan  Chohans 
are  not  evolved  in  one  and  the  same  way.  It  may  as  well  be 
here  remarked,  that  to  talk  of  the  first  Dhyan  Chohans— is 
slightly  illogical.  The  chain  of  Manvantara  and  Pralaya — 
"  Cosmic  Day  and  Night  " — is  an  endless  one.  As  there  can  be 
no  beginning  of  eternity,  so  there  can  be  no  first  Dhyan 
Chohans. 

I  shall  now  pass  to  a  question  of  great  importance.  The 
gifted  President  maintains  that  the  septenary  constitution  of 
man  is  the  same  as  the  seven  productive  vikaras  or  products 
of  Prakriti,  as  given  by  Kapila,  in  his  Sankhya  philosophy  : 
only  inverted  and    more  materialized.    I  regret   to  have  to 

342 

point  oat  that  the  talented  lady  is  here  entirely  in  the  wrong. 
If  she  takes  the  last  of  the  seven  vikaras  she  wonld  find  that 
it  is  a  subtile  element  as  far  removed  from  the  gross  onter 
human  body,  the  first  principle  in  Mr.  Sinnett*s  classification 
— as  can  possibly  be  imagined.  In  the  system  of  Kapila, 
whatever  relation  it  may  bear  to  the  system  adopted  in 
"  Esoteric  Buddhism  "  the  tativas  (  or  principles  )  are  not 
certainly  those  mentioned  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  book.  The  true 
relation  has,  to  a  certain  extent,  been  shadowed  forth  in  an 
article  on  the  "  Septenary  Principle  in  Esotericism, "  publish- 
ed in  the  T/ieosophistior  July  last  (  Vol.  IV,  No-  10 ).  But  the 
best  exposition  of  the  subject  will  be  found  in  another  letter 
from  the  Mahatma  to  Mr.  Sinnett,  where,  if  one  will  but  look 
for  it,  the  order  is  correctly  given,  and  special  attention  is 
drawn  to  the  difi^erence  in  the  two  classifications.  The  seven- 
fold division,  that  appears  in  "  Esoteric  Buddhism,"  is  not 
given  by  Kapila  iu  the  same  form.  I  am  sorry  to  have  to 
come  to  the  conclusion,  that  the  gifted  lady  has,  besides 
misunderstanding  Kapila,  hardly  bestowed  on  Mr.  Sinnett's 
book  that  degree  of  attention  that  should  be  given  to  a  work, 
before  it  is  subjected  to  the  fiery  ordeal  of  such  merciless 
criticism. 

Further  on,  the  President  finds  fault  with  Mrs.  Sinnett 
for  having  degraded,  as  she  thinks  Kapila's  Prakriti  by 
calling  it  "  molecular  matter,  *  which,  according  to  her,  has  the 
efi'ect  of  charging  it  with  divisibility.  I  have  carefully  gone 
through  Mr.  Sinnett's  book  and  have  to  confess  my  inability 
to  identify  the  passage  where  the  peccant  expression  occurs. 
But  apart  from  that,  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  how  the 
word  "  essence,"  which  she  proposes  as  a  better  substitute,  can 
be  freed  from  the  charge  of  materialistic  degradation  attach- 
ing to  the  phrase  against  which  her  own  criticism  is  directed  ; 
the  more  so  as  ultimate  "  molecular,"  hence,"  motion  " 
is  entirely  unknown  to  modern  science,  from  which  alone 
Mrs.  Kingsford  can  derive  her  conception  of  molecules.  She 
will  feel  the  force  of  this  argument,  if  she  only  tries  to  frame 

343 

a  scientific  definition  of  the  word  "essence."  Her  strictures 
on  Mr.  Sinnett's  use  of  the  words  "matter"  and  "motion," 
clearly  show  that  she  has  woefally  misconceived  the  nature  of 
both,  and  that  all  her  animadversions  in  this  connection  hang — 
like  those  of  her  co-worker — upon  her  own  misconceptions. 

There  is  no  portion  of  Mrs.  Kingsford's  and  Mr.  Maitland's 
objections  which  is  so  full  of  erroneous  notions,  as  that  relating 
to  the  Dhyan  Chohans.  Mrs.  Kingsford,  on  page  7  of  the 
pamphlet  under  notice,  says: — "There  is  no  doctrine  in  his 
(Mr.  Sinnett's)  book  which  is  more  repugnant  to  common 
sense,  and  to  the  intuitive  perception  of  the  fitness  of  things, 
than  that  which  attributes  the  physical  creation  of  the  worlds 
to  perfected  men  or  Dhyan  Chohans.  We  are  told  that  they 
and  they  alone,  are  the  artificers  of  the  planets  and  the  re- 
constructors  of  the  Universe."  Here,  if  nowhere  else,  we  find 
the  gifted  President  unable  to  rise  entirely  above  the 
peculiarities  of  her  sex.  This  is,  indeed,  an  instance  of  what 
Shakespeare  calls  a  "lady's  reason."  Before  dealing  with 
that  lady's  statement,  I  shall  correct  a  slight  inaccuracy  into 
which  she  has  fallen.  Mr.  Sinnett  does  not  attribute  "physical 
creation"  to  the  Dhyan  Chohans.  His  words  are  perfectly 
unequivocal: — "All  things  are  accounted  for  by  law,  working 
on  matter  in  its  diverse  forms,  plus  the  guiding  and  modifying 
influence  of  the  highest  intelligences  associated  with  the 
Solar  System,  the  Dhyan  Chohans."  Does  this  endow  the 
Dhyan  Chohans  with  the  privilege  of  creation,  physical  or 
otherwise  ?  Further  on,  Mr.  Sinnett  says,  "they  (the  Dhyan 
Chohans)  can  only  work  through  the  principle  of  evolution,"  Ac* 
This  certainly  shows  that  the  Dhyan  Chohans  are  not  creators 
at  all,  at  any  rate,  not  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  that  word. 
Nevertheless,  the  first  objection  that  she  levels  against  the 
doctrine  is  its  repugnance  "to  common  sense."  Common 
sense  is,  no  doubt,  a  very  elastic  word,  as  deceitful  as  the 
Greek  god  Proteus,  but  I  have  never  yet  heard  it  being 
appealed  to  as  an  arbiter,  on  the  transcendental  plane,  where 
admittedly  our  every  day   experience  has   no  room   to  stand 

344 

upon.  The  only  other  argnmenb  against  the  position  is,  that 
it  is  opposed  "  to  the  intuitive  conception  of  the  fitness  of 
things.  "  The  doctrine  presents  a  distinct  line  of  cleavage,  and 
I  shall  endeavour  to  find  out,  which  of  the  divisions  objection 
is  taken  to,  on  the  aforesaid  ground.  Does  it  militate  against 
Mrs.  Kingsford's  notion  of  the  fitness  of  things  that  Dhyan 
Ohohans  should  be  allowed  to  have  a  hand  in  the  fashioning 
of  the  planets,  or  that  human  entities  should  be  allowed  to 
rise  to  the  height  of  Dhyan  Chohans  ?  The  former  can  scarcely 
be  objectionable.  The  offending  doctrine  then  is  that  which 
teaches  that  the  state  of  Dhyan  Chohans 'is  not  beyond  the 
reach  of  humanity.  But  a  little  reflection  will  show  the  per- 
fect consonance  of  the  doctrine  with  reason — and  justice.  If 
the  Dhyan  Chohans  were  free  from  the  necessity  of  passing 
through  all  the  diff'erent  stages  of  evolutionary  progress 
and  thus  appearing  as  men,  at  some  time  or  another,  where 
will  be  the  dominion  of  absolute  justice  in  the  world  ?  Such 
a  monstrous  doctrine,  in  fact,  woald  be  but  the  restatement 
of  the  horrid  Glavinistic  dogma  of  salvation  by  election  and 
damnation  by  predestination.  1  would  request  the  gifted  lady 
to  consider  whether  the  doctrine  as  presented  by  Mr.  Sinnett 
is  so  much  opposed  to  the  fitness  of  things  as  she  imagines. 
Mrs.  Kingsford  lays  down  that  the  doctrine  of  Dhyan  Chohan 
is  common  alike  to  Buddhism  and  Christianity,  and  then  goes 
on  to  explain  it  from  her  own  stand-point.  "  It  is  taught  " 
she  says,  "  by  the  former  of  these  religions  [  i.  e.  Buddhism  ] 
that  whenever  a  Buddha  passes  into  Nirvana,  his  Karma  is 
poured  out  through  the  worlds  as  a  living  moral  energy 
whereby  a  fresh  influx  of  spiritual  life  is  developed.  "  To 
this  she  offers  as  a  parallel  the  Christian  doctrine  embodied 
in  the  saying  of  Christ — "  If  I  go  not  away,  the  Paraclete 
will  not  come  to  you;  but  if  I  go,  I  will  send  him  to  you.  " 

With  all  deference,  I  must  here  submit  that  Mrs.  Kingsford 
has  taken  an  entirely  wrong  view  of  the  nature  of  the  energy, 
evolved  by  a  Monad  in  the  state  of  mukti  (  freedom  from  the 
wheel  of  births  and  deaths  ),  and   also  of  the  Nirxanic  con- 

345 

dition.    Every  Imman  beins:,  on  attainment  of  a  certain  stage 
in   his  spiritnal  development,  begins  to  shed  on  the  world  "a 
living  moral  energy,  whereby  a  fresh  inflox  of  spiritual  life  is 
developed,''  and  for  this,  passage  into  Nirvana  (in  the  sense  in 
which   she   understands  it)  is  not  necessary.    The  Paraclete 
that  descends   has   nothing   to  do  with  the  Dhyan  Ohohans, 
who  are  not  Monads  in  the  Nirvanic  condition,  contemplated 
above.     When    Videha  Kaivalyam  (the   union  of  the  disem- 
bodied Monad  with  the  absolute  Parabrahman;  is  reached  by 
any   Monad,   the   sum    total  of  its  Karma  goes  to  enrich  the 
Universal  Mind,  wherein  lie  the  archetype  of  all  that  is,  was, 
or  will  be.     The  fresh  influx  of  realised  ideas  thus  brought  in, 
is   showered  by  the  Cosmic  energy,  called  Fohat  by  Buddhist 
Occultists   and   the  Initiates.    This  is  how  the  Paraclete  (or 
the   manifested  Buddhi)  is  made  to  descend,  in  the  true  Eso- 
teric doctrine.     But  the  Dhyan  Chohans  are  not  in  that  state 
of  Nirvana  from  which  the  Buddhi  or  the  Praqnt  (the  Sophia 
of  the   Gnostics,  or  again  the  Christian  Paraclete)  descends. 
As  all  Eastern  Occultists  know,  there  are  fourteen  gradations 
in  Nirvana,  exclusive  of  two  others  (  which  are  but  one,  the 
manifested  and  the   unmanifested  ),  some  of  which,  in  truth 
nine,  are  attained  by  the  adepts  even  while   alive,  and  others 
reached  only  when  in  the    Dhyan  Chohanic   state,  and  so  on. 
This  explanation  will  clearly  show  that  the  doctrine  of  Dhyan 
Chohans,     whether    repugnant    or   not   to  Mrs-    Kingsford's 
"  common  sense,  "  is  certainly  not  what  she  takes  it  to  be. 

I  shall  now  pass  to  Mr.  Maitland's  objections  on  this  head- 
The  first  exception  that  he  takes  is,  that  the  presence  of  the 
Dhyan  Chohans  interferes  with  the  freedom  of  the  human 
will.  The  subject  of  free-will  and  predestination  is  one  which 
has  been  a  bone  of  contention  among  Western  theologians  and 
metaphysicians,  time  out  of  mind,  and  as  such,  no  doubt, 
possesses  a  peculiar  charm  for  the  Western  intellect  ;  bat  it 
must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  metaphysical  problem  of  free- 
will and  predestination  has  very  little  importance  outside  of  a 
religious  system  which  rests  upon  an  almighty  and  omniscient 
44 

346 

God,  who  brings  into  existence   beings   from  the  realms  of 
absolute   nothingness  by  an  act  of  his   volition.     The  Dhyan 
Chohans,  as  has  been  already  shown,  are  no  more  creatures  or 
creators,   than    we   are  ourselves.    With  us,  all  will  is  free, 
because  there  is  no  overruling   Power  to  interfere   with  its 
exercise.     At  the  same  time,  it  must  be    borne   in  mind   that 
there  is  a  law  which  every  will  has  to  obey,  because  the  nature 
of  the  One  and  only  Substance  in  the  Universe  is  the  embodi- 
ment of  that  Law,     I  have  stated  the  doctrine  quite  plainly, 
I  believe,  and   will   now  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  iind  out  if  it 
agrees  with  his  notions  of  free-will  and  predestination,  or  not 
The  objection   under   notice  seems  to  have  arisen  from  a  mis- 
taken apprehension  of  the  nature  of  the  Dhyan  Chohans  ;  and, 
when   once  explained,   the   doctrine   contained  in  "  Esoteric 
Buddhism  "  will  be  found  more  scientific   than  the  objectors 
imagine.    The  two  passages  in  that  book  which,  according  to 
Mr.   Maitland,   conflict   with  human   "  free-will,  "  have  thus 
been,  again,  very  strangely  misunderstood.     It  is  said  on  page 
189  that  the  Dhyan  Chohans  "  reign  in  a  divine  way  over  the 
destinies  of  the   world.  "     Here,  perhaps,  the   word  '*  divine" 
has  led  Mr.  Maitland  to  imagine  that  Mr.  Sinnett  has  invested 
the  Dhyan   Chohans  with  all  the  attributes  of  the  God  of  the 
hoi  polloi.     But  to  any  ordinary   reader  it   naturally  appears 
that  Mr.  Sinnett's   intention  was  simply  to  show  what  is  the 
nearest  approach,  in   truth,  to  the   common   idea  about  God. 
The  other  passage  C  p.  177  )  runs  thus  : — '•*  [  The  Dhyan  Cho- 
hans ]  exercise  a  guiding  and  modifying  influence   throughout 
the  whole  progress  of  evolution,  all  things  being  accounted  for 
by  law  working  on  matter  in  its  diverse  forms,  /»^it-s  the  guiding 
and  modifying  influence  of  .    .    .  the  Dhyan  Chohans-  "     No 
more  in  this,   than  in  the  previous  passage,  is  there  anything 
said   which    would   support     Mr.     Maitland's   position.    All 
that  Mr.  Sinnett  asserts  here  is,  that  a  certain  amount  of  the 
evolutionary  energy  of  the  universe   operate^  through  the  en- 
deavours of  a  host  of  exalted  beings,  the  conscious  agents  of  the 
Immutable    Law,  inherent  in  the  One  Life,  which  is  non-con- 
scious,  only  because  consciousness  is  limited  and  conditioned. 

347 

This  does  by  no  means  show  that  the  Dhyan  Chohans  can, 
like  the  so-called  personal  God,  be  charged  with  having 
created  the  iron-chain  of  causation  which  produces  results,  to 
some — pleasurable,  to  others — painful. 

Mr.  Maitland  is  not  more  fortunate  in  his  next  objection 
against  the  doctrine  of  Dhyan  Chohans.  Stated  shortly,  his 
argument  comes  to  this  :  Esoteric  Doctrine  and  Occultism 
are  perfectly  useless,  since  "  the  highest,  or  rather  only,  objects 
offered  us  for  worship,  are  our  own  perishable  selves  —in  au 
advanced  stage  of  evolution,  it  is  true,  but  a  stage,  which  is  so 
far  from  involving  our  perpetuation,  so  far  from  securing  to  us 
that '  gift  of  God  which  is  eternal  life' — that  the  attainment 
of  it  is  but  the  prelude  to  inevitable  extinction, — extinction 
not  of  mere  existence  of  manifested  being  but  or  being  itself.  " 
After  reading  the  above,  one  feels  inclined  to  drop  the  pen  in 
despair !  Evidently,  Mr.  Sinnett  has  written  his  book  in  vain 
for  readers  of  his  Vice-President's  stamp  !  Is  the  idea,  ex- 
pressed above,  that  Nirvana,  the  final  goal  of  man,  is  nothing 
but  annihilation  justified  by  the  teachings  of  "  Esoteric 
Buddhism  ?  "  J^'or,  it  is  stated  on  page  163  : — "  All  that  words 
can  convey  is  that  Nirvana  is  a  sublime  state  of  conscious  rest 
in  omniscience. "  Is  the  state  of  Nirvana  which  is  attempted 
to  be  shadowed  forth  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  in  the  above  words, 
nothing  but  annihilation  ?  If  so,  the  sooner  it  is  recognised  that 
language  has  ceased  to  be  the  medium  of  communication 
between  man  and  man, — the  better.  It  is  perfectly  plain  that 
Mr.  Maitland  has  opened  his  critical  volley  on  Mr.  Sinnett's 
devoted  head,  without  even  taking  the  trouble  to  acquaint 
himself  sufficiently  with  the  subject  of  his  criticism,  and  must, 
therefore,  submit  to  the  censure  which  such  reckless  conduct 
deservedly  calls  for. 

Considering  the  cloudy  mist  which  seems  to  surround  the 
subject  of  Dhyan  Chohans,  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to 
subjoin  a  few  observations  thereon  from  the  Hindu,  or  rather 
the  Adwaita,  stand-point — the  latter  being  identical  with 
Esoteric  *'  Buddhism.  "     I  wish  it,   however,  to  be  distinctly 

348 

understood  that  my  views  are  not  at  all  compulsory  on  any 
Fellow  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  in  this  conntry  or  abroad  ; 
my  object  being  simply  to  offer  food  for  reflection,  and  to  lead 
our  Brother-members  to  more  active  and  independent  in- 
vestigation. 

The  Dhyan  Chohaus  are  referred  to  by  a  variety  of  names 
in  the  Hindu  sacred  writings.  The  Dhyan  Chohan  when 
incarnating  himself  as  a  man,  at  the  first  appearance  of 
humanity  on  our  planet,  is  referred  to  as  Manu  Swayambha 
(the  self-existent)  who  begets  the  seven  Rishis  uncorporeally, 
they  being  known  as  his  ma7iasaputras — the  children  oimanas 
or  mind — and  who,  therefore,  represent  the  5th  principle 
of  the  planet.  These  are  referred  to  as  7  x  7  in  Occult 
treatises;  and  it  is  they  again,  who  are  appointed,  we  are 
taught,  to  hold  in  trust  for  the  nascent  human  race  the 
sacred  Wisdom-Religion.  These  Rishis  beget,  i.  g.,  take  under 
their  charge,  the  seven  Pitris,  the  first  evolved  men  on  this 
planet,  and  ancestors  of  all  the  human  family.  This  is  one 
aspect  of  the  thing.  As  the  offspring  of  Aditi  or  the 
"  Measureless,"  the  Infinite  (  Prakriti )  the  Dhyan  Chohans  are 
known  as  the  Adityas,  who  are  said  to  be  twelve  in  number, 
with  reference  to  the  different  grades  among  them.  These 
Dhyan  Chohans,  as  the  guardian  spirits  of  this  world,  are 
known  also  as  Dikpalas  (  the  keepers  of  the  different  points 
of  the  compass  ),  a  name  under  which,  it  will  be  found,  they 
are  constantly  referred  to  in  the  earlier  Buddhist  writings. 
As  agents  of  destruction  of  our  system,  when  it  comes  to  its 
proper  termination,  they  are  the  twelve  Rndras  (  "  burning 
with  anger,"*  erroneously  translated  as  "  Howlers  "  by  Max 
Miiller  ),  who  reduce   everything  back  to  its  undifferentiated 

*  This  has  reference  to  the  fiery  consummation  which  oup  sjrstem  most 
undergo  at  the  time  of  the  Solar  Mahapralaya.  Twelve  Suryas  (  suns  ) 
will  arise,  it  is  exotericaUy  taught,  to  burn  up  the  solar  universe — and 
bring  on  the  Pralaya.  This  is  a  travesty  of  the  esoteric  teaching  that 
our  end  will  come  from  the  exposure  of  the  real  sun  "  by  the  withdrawal 
of  the  veil  "—the  chromo  and  photo  sphere,  perhaps,  of  which  the  Royal 
Society  thinks,  it  has  learnt  so  ranch— H.  P.   Blavatsky. 

349 

state.  Mr.  Maitland  represents  Mr,  Sinnett  to  have  said  that 
the  Dhyan  Chohans  perish  like  everything  else.  Bat,  as 
has  been  shown  before,  no  entity  that  has  once  reached 
Paranirvana  can  be  said  to  perish  ;  though  the  state  of  exist- 
ence known  as  the  Dhyan  Chohanic,  no  doubt,  merges  into, 
or  assimilates  itself  with,  the  state  of  Absolute  Consciousness 
for  the  time  being,  as  the  hour  of  the  Mahapralaya  strikes, 
but  to  be  propelled  again  into  existence  at  the  dawn  of  the 
following  Manvantara.*  This,  by  no  means,  shows  that  the 
entities,  who  existed  as  Dhyan  ChohtLUS, perish,  any  more  than 
the  water  converted  into  steam  perishes.  The  Dhyan  Chohans 
are,  in  fact,  the  gods  mentioned  allegorically  in  our  Paranas. 
These  exalted  beings,  in  common  with  all  the  other  classes 
of  the  Devi  (  god  )  kingdom  are  of  two  types — one  consisting 
of  those  who  have  been  men,  and  the  other  of  those  who  ivili 
be  men  at  some  future  period.  It  is  distinctly  mentioned  in 
our  books  that  those  who  are  now  gods  lived  once  on  this 
earth  as  men.  The  Dhyan  Chohans  are  the  Elohim  of 
the  Western  Kabalists.  I  was  obliged  to  make  this  some- 
what lengthy  digression  to  show  that  the  doctrine  of  the 
Dhyan  Chohans  as  taught  in  the  Esoteric  doctrine,  and 
faintly  delineated  in  "  Esoteric  Buddhism,  "  is  essentially  the 
same  as  taught  by  the  ancient  Rishis,  by  Shankaracharya, 
and  even  b^  the  present  Brahmanical  authorities — however 
distorted  the  modern  forms.  Those  who  consider  this  doctrine 
"  as  repugnant  to  common  sense,  "  and  yet  would,  in  the 
face  of"  the  urgency  of  the  demand  in  the  West  for  fuller 
enlightenment  from  the  East,  "  "  invite  teaching  from  yet 
other  schools  of  Occult  Science  "  would  ouly  fall  from  the 
frying  pan  into  the  fire.  There  is  not  a  school  in  India, 
whether  esoteric  or  exoteric,  that  teaches  any  other  doctrine 
as  regards  the  Adityas  or  the  Dhyan  Chohans — unless,  indeed, 
it   be     the     world-famed   Vallabhacharya    or     the    "  Black 

The  word  Manvantara  literally  means  a  "  different  Mann,  "  or  incar- 
nate Dhyan  Choban.  It  is  applied  to  the  period  of  time  interveninf; 
between  two  successive  appearances  of  Manu  on  this  earth,  as  the  word 
Mann-anMra  shows. 

350 

Tantrika  " — school,  to  whose  philosophical  tenets  Mr.  Maitland 
and  his  followers  are  quite  welcome  to  address  themselves. 

I  shall  now  deal  with  Mrs.  Kingsford's  objection  to  the 
whole  system  of  evolution  as  given  by  Mr.  Sinnett.  "  The 
mathematical  precision,  "  it  is  argued,  "  of  the  clockwork 
arrangement  invoked  by  Mr.  Sinnett's  mechanical  system " 
shows  its  disaccord  with  "  the  suggestions  of  scientific  and 
spiritual  thought." 

Whatever  may  be  the  merits  or  demerits  of  the  system  in 
question,  it  is  very  hard  to  see  how  any  system  can  be  con- 
demned as  "  unscientific  "  merely  because  of  its  mathematical 
precision.  If  everything  in  the  universe  is  subject  to  a 
rigorous  chain  of  causation,  then,  it  cannot  be  denied  that 
all  natural  facts  are  capable  of  being  represented  "  with  the 
mathematical  precision  of  a  clockwork  arrangement,"  although 
the  official  science  of  the  day  may  not  acquire  the  capacity 
of  so  representing  them.  But,  it  cannot,  for  a  single  moment, 
be  denied  that  the  more  precision  any  science  acquires,  the 
closer  does  it  approach  its  abstract  ideal — immutable  Law. 
The  only  thing  that  seems  to  me  unscientific  in  the  whole 
matter  is — Mrs.   Kingsford's  objections. 

Attack  is  next  directed  by  the  gifted  lady  against  the 
physical  existence  of  the  seven  planets,  which  form  the 
planetary  chain  spoken  of  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  book.  On  the 
authority  of  some  exoteric  Buddhist  dogmas,  Mrs.  Kingsford 
asserts  that  the  seven  planets  in  question  are  only "  an 
allegory,  "  and  really  indicate  so  many  "  spiritual  states." 
But  elsewhere  she  admits  the  reality  of  a  diversity  of  spiritual 
states,  and  then  with  a  strange  forgetfulness  of  one  of  the 
fundamental  axioms  of  Occult  Science — "as  it  is  above,  so  it 
is  below  " — denies  diversity  to  material  conditions  of  existence. 
If  there  are  several  conditions  of  Devachan,  and  several  states 
of  Nirvana,  why  should  then  material  existence  be  limited  to 
only  one  ?  I  find,  however,  from  a  foot-note  on  page  6,  that 
Mrs.  Kingsford  does  not  question  the  fact  of  "  planetary 
evolution    and  transmigration  ;  "  and  I  infer  therefrom,  that 

351 

her  objections  apply  only  to  matters  of  detail.     But,  as  it  does 
not  appear   what   her  objections  really  are,  they  cannot   be 
examined   any   farther.     With  regard  to  the  submergence  of 
Atlantis,  Mr.  Maitland's  idea  seems  to  be  <  p.  22 )  that  although 
the  sinking  of  continents  is  a  well-proved  geological  fact,  yet 
"  the  tale  of  Atlantis  is  a  parable  "  which  has  a  meaning  pure- 
ly spiritual.    Although  this  is  no  new  idea  of  his,  and  was  only 
recently     expounded    at    length    by    another    Spiritualist, 
Mr.  Gerald  Massey,  it  is  nevertheless  as  purely  fanciful.    The 
author  of  Surya  Siddhanta  lived,  in  spite  of  the   attempts  of 
Western  Sanskritists,  to  assign  to  him  quite  a  modern  date,  in 
the  lost  Atlantis,  as  all  our  traditions  and  chronicles  declare. 
In  the  geographical   system   given  in   the  above-mentioned 
astronomical  work,    mention  is  made  of  the  seven  Islands  of 
Atlantis — Plakshadvipa   and    others,   and   their   position   is 
indicated   with   scientific  precision.     So  much,  as   regards  a 
work  in  the  possession  of  European  Sanskritists.     As  to  the 
numerous  works  in  which   the  subject  of  the  lost  continents 
and  the  third  and  fourth   races  that  inhabited  them  is  fully 
treated,  but  which  no  European  eye  has  ever  beheld — no  need 
of  mentioning  them  since  they  would  only  give  rise  to  a  very 
impolite  denial.    The  celebrated  astronomer  **  Asnra  Maya  " 
(  whom   Prof.     Weber    has    transformed    into   the     Greek 
Ptolemaios  )   was    another,  a  native  of  Atlantis.    The  sub- 
mergence of  this  island  is  also  spoken  of  in  Uttara  Ramayana, 
if  people  would  but  understand  it,  and  various  other  works  of 
unquestionable  authprity.    The  real  fact,  therefore,  is,  that  the 
disappearance   of  Atlantis   is  a  geographical,   and   will   soon 
become  an  historical  fact,   although  I  do  not  deny  that  it  has 
also  been   made  to   serve  as  an   allegorical  represenation  of 
certain  spiritual  truths. 

The  next  point  that  I  notice  shall  be  Mr.  Maitland's  most 
extraordinary  travesty  of  Mr.  Sinnett's  view  of  Bnddha.  I  do 
not  consider  myself  justified  to  speak  publicly  of  the  real 
Esoteric  Doctrine  of  Buddhaship.  So,  all  I  can  here  say  is,, 
that     Mr.     Sinnett's    presentation   of  the    doctrine  though 

352 

f  incomplete,  is  correct  so  far  as  it  goes.  The  first  thing  I  have 
to  emphasise  is,  that  Christ  and  Buddha  do  not  signify  one 
and  the  same  thing  :  Christ  is  a  principltt  and  Baddha  is  a 
state.  It  is  not  necessary  for  every  Monad  to  pass  through 
Bnddhahood  in  its  progress  towards  Nirvana.*  Every  man 
who  passes  through  the  last  state  of  initiation  (^oes  not  neces- 
sarily become  a  Buddha.  The  historical  view  of  the  case  is 
after  all  the  correct  one,  and  no  confusion  has  been  made  by 
Mr.  Sinnett  between  *'  similarity  "  and  "  identity  "  as  sug- 
gested by  Mr.  Maitland  on  page  22. 

I  shall  now  conclude  my  review  of  the  misconceptions 
charged  on,  and  arguments  urged  against,  the  teachings  con- 
tained in  "  Esoteric  Buddhism,  "  by  calling  attention  to 
Mr.  Maitland's  sarcastic  reference  to  the  *'  chief  inspiring 
adept  himself,  "  as  he  calls  the  Master.  Mr.  Maitland  con- 
siders it  '*  worthy  of  note  that  although  the  being  of  God,  or 
of  any  absolute  good,  is  strenuously  denied,  that  of  "  absolute 
evil  "is  ...  maintained,  the  phrase  being  used  by  the  chief 
inspiring  adept  himself  of  the  book.  "  The  phrase  quoted  by 
him  is  so  completely  separated  from  the  context  of  what  the 
said  "  adept  "  really  asserts,  that  to  draw  inferences  from  such 
an  isolated  expression  without  having  it  more  clearly  defined 
by  what  precedes  and  what  follows  it — is  not  far  removed 
from  misrepresentation.  Begging  Mr.  Maitland's  pardon,  it  is 
distinctly  stated  on  page  61,  "  that  when  your  race,  the  fifth,  will 
have  reached  the  zenith  of  its  physical  intellectuality  and  deve* 
loped  its  highest  civilization  .  .  .  unable  to  go  on  any  higher 
in  its  own  cycle,  its  progress  towards  absolute  evil  will  be 
arrested  (  as  its  predecessors  .  .  .  were  arrested  in  their  pro- 
gress toward  the  same  )."  Strange,  indeed,  must  be  the  con- 
struction by  which,  from  the  above  citation,  the  Vice-Presi- 
dent's  proposition   can   be   extracted   '•  that   the     existence 

*  It  must  be  here  borne  in  mind  that  no  man, — Gautama  Buddha, 
Christ,  or  any  other  is  here  referred  to.  The  state  which  Siddhartha 
Gautama  attained  by  placing  himself  in  direct  rapport  with  a  particular 
ray  of  the  Absolute  Wisdom  is  called — Buddha. 

353 

of  '  absolute  evil  *  is  asserted  by  the  adept  !  '*  On 
the  contrary,  the  implicatioQ  is  plaia  that  no  such  thing 
*'  as  absolute  evil"'  is  ever  realised  by  humanity.  If,  however, 
still  further  elucidation  of  the  subject  is  sought,  I  have  but  to 
point  out  another  passage,  on  the  same  subject,  on  page  84, 
and  by  tho  same  *« inspiring  adept;"  which  will  render 
Mr.  Maitlahd's — I  love  to  think  2<ncowsi?«<?M5— misrepresentation 
as  clear  as  day  to  everyone.  "  There  is  more  apparent  and 
relative  than  actual  evil  even  on  earthy  and  it  is  not  given  to 
the  Jioi  poloi  to  reach  the  fatal  grandeur  and  eminence  of  a 
Satan  every  day  " — writes  the  venerated  Master  on  the  said 
page-  It  is,  indeed,  very  hard  to  conceive  how  a  person  of 
Mr.  Maitland's  undoubted  fairness  and  ability  could  have  so 
hopelessly  sunk  in  such  a  slough  of  ^serious  errors  ! 

To  crown  the  list  of  voluntary  and  involuntary  mistakes  and 
misconceptions,  we  must  mention  his  ascription  to  Madame 
Blavatsky  of  certain  statements  that,  considering  her  relation 
to  the  holy  personage  to  whom  they  refer,  could  never  have 
been,  nor  were  they  made  by  her.  The  internal  evidence,  in 
the  absence  of  any  signature  to  the  article  (  Replies  to  an 
English  F.  T.  S. ),  in  which  the  sentence  occurs  ( see  The^so- 
phist^  October  1883,  p.  3  ),  is  strong  enough  to  warn  off  all 
careful  readers  from  the  unwarranted  assumption  which 
Mr.  Maitland  has  made.  But  it  is  certainly  curious  that  the 
gentleman  should  have  never  missed  a  single  chance  of  falling 
into  blunder  I  The  "  Replies  " — as  every  one  in  our  Society  is 
aware  of — were  written  by  three  "  adepts  "  as  Mr.  Maitland 
calls  them — none  of  whom  is  known  to  the  London  Lodge, 
with  the  exception  of  one — to  Mr.  Sinnett  The  sentence 
quoted  and  fathered  upon  Madame  Blavatsky  is  found  in  the 
MSS.  sent  by  a  Mahatma  who  resides  in  Southern  India, 
and  who  had  alone  the  right  to  speak,  as  he  did,  of  another 
Mahatma.     But   even  his   words  are  not  correctly  stated,*  as 

•  I  here  deny  most  emphatically  of  having  ever  caused  to  be  printed— 
let  alone  to  have  myself  written  it— the  sentence  ai  it  now  stands  quoted 
by  Mr.  Maitland  in  his  «'  Remarks".  The  Theosophist  of  October  is,  I 
believe,   available  in  England  and  the  two  sentences  may  be  easily  compared, 

45 

354 

shown  in  the  footnote.     With   this   remark,   I  may  begin  to 
wind  up  this  already  too  prolonged  controversy. 

To  sum  up.  Oar  rather  lengthy  examination  of  the  stric- 
tures contained  in  the  joint  papers  by  the  President  and  a 
'  Vice-President  of  the  London  Lodge  '  will  now  clearly  show 
to  our  fellow  members,  and  to  any  impartial  reader  of  "  Eso- 
teric Buddhism,  "  that  its  doctrines  are  neither  unscientific, 
nor  are  they  entirely  allegorical.  If,  owing  to  their  extremely 
abstruse  character,  they  are  misleading,  or  rather  difficult 
of  comprehension, — the  author  should  hardly  be  blamed 
for  it.  He  has  done  his  best ;  and,  as  the  system  of 
philosophy  explained  by  Mr.  Sinnett  comes  assuredly  from 
the  highest  sources  of  esoteric  knowledge  known  to  us  in  the 
East— he  has  deserved,  on  the  contrary,  the  best  thanks,  for 
even  the  little  he  has  done.  His  book  forms  part  of  a 
complete  system  of  Esoteric  Science  and  philosophy  which 
is  neither  Hindu  nor  Buddhist  in  its  origion,  but  which  is 
identical  with  the  ancient  Wisdom-Religion  itself,  and  which 
forms  the  basis  or  foundation  of  every  system  of  religion 
conceived  by  the  human  mind  since  the  time  when  the  first 
Dhyan   Chohan  appeared   on  this  planet   to   plant  the  germ 

When  the  writer  of  Reply  No.  2,  referring  to  "  Greeks  and  Romans, " 
jocularly  remarked  that  their  ancestors  might  have  been  mentioned  by 
lome  other  name,  and  added  that  *•  besides  the  very  plausible  excnse  that 
the  names  used  were  embodied  in  a  private  letter,  written  (  as  many  unim- 
portant letters  are )  in  great  haste,  and  which  (  this  particular  letter,) 
♦'was  hardly  worthy  of  the  honour  of  being  quoted  verbatim  with  all  its 
imperfections  "—he  certainly  never  meant  his  remark  to  yield  any  such 
charge  as  is  implied  in  Mr.  Maitland's  incorrect  quotation.  Let  any  one 
of  the  London  Lodge  compare  and  decide  whether  the  said  sentence  can 
lead  any  person  to  doubt  «' the  accuracy  of  the  adept  Brothers,"  or  infer 
•♦  that  they  are  frequently  given  to  write  in  great  haste  things  which  are 
hardly  worthy  of  the  honour  of  being  quoted,  etc."  And  since  the  word 
'♦  frequently  "  does  not  occur  in  the  alleged  quotation,  and  altera  a  good 
deal  the  spirit  of  the  remark,  I  can  only  express  my  regret  that,  under  the 
present  serious  oircnmstanoes,  Mr.  Maitland  should  have  become  himself 
( inadv©rttngly,no  doubt, )  guilty  of  such  an  inaccuracy.— B.  P.  Blavatsky. 

355 

of  Esoteric  Wisdom.  Its  form  may  appear  indistinct,  and 
the  conceptions  pat  forth  may  be  under  the  necesssity  of 
being  expanded  or  modified,  when  the  whole  system  in  its 
completeness  is  given  oat.  U  ntil  then,  it  would  be  extremely 
improper  to  form  any  hasty  ideas  as  regards  the  highest  aims 
and  objects  of  the  said  system,  or  its  insufficiency  to  serve  as 
*'  a  perfect  system  of  thought  and  rule  of  life-  '*  To  realise 
such  an  expectation,  we  have  to  wait  till  it  is  presented  to  us 
in  its  most  perfect  form,  not  assuredly  from  the  fragmentary 
doctrines  put  together  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  work  ;  and  it  appears 
equally  unreasonable  to  criticize  the  doctrines  now  before  the 
world  from  the  isolated  stand-point  of  Esoteric  Christianity. 
If  any  of  the  members  of  the  London  Lodge  are  of  opinion 
that  there  are  higher  and  purer  doctrines  in  the  East,  they  are 
at  fall  liberty  to  investigate  them-  But  the  fullest  freedom 
given  to  them  in  their  option  can  never  justify  the  many 
uncalled  for  remarks,  scattered  over  the  two  "  Letters  " 
against  the  *'  inspirers  "  of  Mr-  Sinnett's  "  Esoteric  Buddhism.'* 
To  hint  at  length,  as  Mr.  Maitland  has  done,  "  that  nothing 
would  be  more  likely  than  that  ...  we  ( the  members  of  the 
L.  L.  )  should  ...  be  pledging  ourselves  to  an  obscure  and 
outlying  sect  -  .  .  with  but  a  fragment  of  the  truth,  ...  so 
perverted,  as  to  represent  no  longer  truth  but  error  "  is 
surely,  in  the  absence  of  final  proof,  neither  Theosophical, 
Buddhistic,  nor  even  Christian,  but  simply  very  uncharitable, 
and  as  unjust  to  our  Society  at  large. 

As  to  the  proposal  made  to  split  the  London  Branch  into  two 

sections,   to   be  called  the   Tibetan    and  the   Catholic,  in  our 

humble  opinion,  it  is   hardly  calculated  to  promote  the  cause 

of  Theosophy   in  the   West.    There  may    be,   as  the  revered 

Mahatmas  have  suggested,  two  distinct  groups  in  the  London 

Lodge  Theosophical  Society  ;  but   these  groups  must   be  on 

a   footing  of  perfect  equality.     To    adopt   Mrs.     Kingsford 

and  Mr.  Maitland's  views  in  their  entirety — excepting   so  far 

as  they   coincide  with  the   views   of  the  Master — would    be 

fatal  to  the  Society's  Catholic  policy,  and  as  such,  the  Parent 

Society   would  not  give  to  its   sanction.     According  to   the 

356 

rules  of  the  Association,  every  Theosophical  Society  is 
"  Catholic  "  in  its  aims  and  intentions,  and  we  do  not  see 
the  propriety  of  calling  any  particular  section  of  the  Society 
Catholic  or  Universal — in  contrast  with  any  other  section, 
to  limit  it,  after  all,  only  to  one  particular  person's  views. 
I  gather  farther,  from  Mrs.  Kingsford's  letter,  that  the  object 
of  the  Catholic  section  is  to  proclaim  Esoteric  Christianity  to 
the  Western  world.  If  this  is  to  be  its  sole  object,  and  if  Eso- 
teric Christianity  is  to  be  interpreted,  agreeably  to  the 
authority  of  two  individuals,  and  every  other  system  of  Eso- 
teric doctrine  is  to  be  treated  in  the  same  manner  in  which 
Mr.  Sinnett's  book  has  been,  then  the  section  in  question  will 
be  as  much  entitled  to  the  distinctive  appellation  proposed, 
a«  an  obscure  Hindu  sect  to  identify  itself  with  the  Ancient 
Wisdom-Religion.  As  for  all  practical  details  of  administra- 
tion, the  President-Founder,  who  will  be  in  London  within  a 
short  time  of  the  receipt  of  the  present,  will  be  best  competent 
to  deal  with  them,  in  accordance  with  instructions  received 
by  him  from  the  Mahatmas — his,  and  our  guides  and 
Masters. 

ENGLISH  SERIES. 

Bs.  a. 

Bhagavad-Gita  Translation  of,  with  notes  and  annotations  by  the 
late  Mr.  Tukaram  Tatya       0    8 

2he  Jivanmnktiviveka  or  the  path  to  liberation  in  this  life  by  Swami 
Shri  Vidyaranya  Saraswati  rendered  into  English  by  Manilal 
N.  Dvivedi,  B.  A 1    4 

Lectures  on  the  Study  on  the  Bhagavad-Oita  being  a  help  to  students 
of  its  philosophy  by  T.  Subba  Rao,  B.  A.,  B.  L.,  F.  T.  8.      ...    0  10 

nttva-kaumudi  (Sankbya)  of  Wachaspati  Jfi^a  with  an  English 
Translation  of  the  Sanskrit  Text  by  Ganganath  Jha,  M.  A., 
F.  T.  S 1    8 

The  Ishavasyopanishad,  translated  into  English  with  the  oommen- 
taries  of  Shri  Shankaracharya  elnd  Shri  Anantaoharya  and  notes 
from  the  Tikas  of  Anaudagiri,  Uvataoharya,,  Shankarananda, 
Ramohandra  Pandit  and  Anandabhatta  by  Shrisa  Chandra 
Vasu,B.  A.,  F.  T.  S 0    8  ' 

OherandaSanihitaheing  a  Treatise  on  the  Hatha  and  Raja  Yogasr  | 

printed  with  Sanskrit  Test  and  an  appendix  containing  ex- 
tracts from  English  works  of  authority,  describing  the  Samadhi 
taken  by  the  Sadhu   Haridas  at  the  Ooart  of  Ranjitiingha  in  . 

Pnnjab 0    8  i 

The  Twelve  Prinoipal  Ujxinishads,  translated  into  English  by  Raja  I 

Rajendralal  Mitra  and  other  Oriental  Scholars,  with  notes 
from  the  Bhashya   of  Shankarscharya,  and  the  Qlossary  of  j 

Anandgiri,  being  a  reprint  of  the  translations  published  by  the  ' 

Royal  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal 4    0  1 

The  Matulukyopanisliad,  with  6aadapd,da's  K^rik^s  and  the  Bh^- 
shaya  of  Shankara,  translated   into  English,  by  Manilal  N. 

Dvivedi,    B.   A 1    8 

The  Yogsara-Sangraha,  or  the  Philosophy  of  Yoga-shistra,  be- 
ing one  of  the  rare  Treatises  by  Vidny&nabhikshu,  the  greatest 
authority  on   the  Sankhya  and  Yoga-Sb^stras  with   English 

translation  by  Gang&n^th  Jha,  M.  A.,  F.  T.S 0  12 

A  Compendium  of  The  Baja-Yoga  Philosophy,  comprising  prin- 
cipal Treatises  of  Shankaracharya  Swimi ;  such  as  the  Aparok- 
shanubnti,  the  Atmanatma-Viveka,  the  Viveka  Cbudamani,  the 
Charpatpanjari  and  the  Vftkyasudhl  with  the  Vedtlntasara  of 
Sadanand  Swami.    Some  of  these  Treatises  are  printed  with 

Sanskrit  Texts,  2nd  Edition 1     4 

37»e  loga  Sutras  of  Patanjali,  translated  by    Professor  ManiUl 
NabhubhM  Dvivedi,  B.A.,  F.T.S.,  with  nots,  explaining  fully 
the  meaning  of  each  Sutra  with  the  help  of  Vy&s*s  Commen- 
tary and  other  works  by  subsequent  writers.     He  has  also 
brought  to  bear  on  the  subject  the  light  of  modem  research, 
wherever  necessary - " 

R».  a. 

12.  Bhagavad-Oita,  translated  by  Mr.  Charles  Wilkins,  New  Edition, 

revised  and  enlarged,  "with  two  learned  Introductions  by 
Professor  Manilal  N.  Dvivedi  and  Mr.  Nobinchandra  Banarji...    0   12 

13.  Prabodha  Chandrodaya  Nataka,  a  drama  on  the  conflict  between 

the  higher  and  lower  Nature  of  Man,  ultimately  ending  in  the 
triumph  of  the  former;  and  Shrimat  Shankaracharya's  Atma- 
bodha,  translated  by  Mr.  Taylor 0    8 

14.  The  Purpose  of  Theosophy,  by  Mrs.  A.  P.  Sinnetfc.    Cheap  Edition  0     4 

15.  Sankhya  Karika,  a  Treaties  on  the  Sankhya  Philosophy,   with 

Gaudapada's  Commentary,  translated  into  English,  with  intro- 
duction and  notes  by  Professor  H.  H.  "Wilson  and  T.  Cole- 
brooke 1       8 

16.  Yoga  Philosophy,  explained  with  the  help  of  the  modern  sciences 

by  Dr.  Paul 0     6 

17.  Letters  to  an  Indian  Baja,  hy  an  Indian  Kecluse...  1      0 

18.  Math-yoga-Pradipika.    English    translation  with  the    Sanskrit 

Text  and  Commentary  and  an  able  Introduction,  proving  that 
the  Yoga  is  a  compliment  of  the  Dnyana  (knowledge)  and  vice 
versa.  ...         ....  ....  1     0 

19.  The  Uttara-Oita,  being  the  Initiation  of  Arjoona  by  Shri  Krishna 

into  Yoga  and  Dnyana 

20.  Ihe  Philosophy  of  Brahmamcal  Sandhya  and  Gayatn,    ... 

21.  The  Mahimnastotra,    or  a  Hymn   to  Shiva  with  the  Sanskrit 

Text 

22.  The  Higher  lAfe,  or  Rules  of  Raja- Yoga,  by  Bhagwan  Buddha... 

23.  An  Introduction  to  the  Sttuly  of  the  Yoga  Aphorisms  of  Patanjali  ... 

24.  An  Introduction  to  the  Mantra-Shastra.         

25.  Aparkshyanubhuti  or  Direct  Cognition  of  the  Unity  of  Jiva  and 

Brahma.  

26.  Atmanatma-Yiveka 

27.  Shree-Vakya-Sudha- 

28.  Crest-Jewel   of  Wisdom 

29.  The  Mental  Cure  mth  Notes,  by  Dr.  W.   F.  Evans 

30.  Ihe  Mental  Medicine  do 

31.  The  Divine  Law  of  Cure  do 

32.  Soul  and  Body.  do 

33.  Yoga  Darshana  by  Ganganath  Jh& 

INPBESS— 
1.    Panchdashi  translated  by  Rao-Saheb  Raoji  B.  Pavagi. 
Intending  purchasers  should  get  their  names  registered  as  early  as  possible. 
^^  These  Books  can  be  had  from  Mr.  Bajaram  Tukaram  Taiya,  21,  Hum- 
mum  Street,  Fort,  Bombay;  also  from  the  Manager,  "Theosophist",  Adyar, 
Madras;  and  from  the  Theosophieal  Publishing  Society,  Benares  City. 

Bombay:— Printed  by  Bhiva  Hari  Shinde,    at  the   "tatva-vivechaka" 
PRESS,  Nos.  1-2-3,  Khetwadi  Back  Road. 

0 

4 

0 

6 

0 

2 

0 

2 

0 

4 

0 

6 

0 

4 

0 

6 

0 

6 

0 

8 

1 

8 

2 

0 

2 

0 

1 

0 

1 

8 

University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hllgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 

NON-RENEWiiBLE 

■  JAN  0  4 199' 
DUE2WKSFRQM.DATtt]ti;tlVED 

PSD  2343    9 

X SOJ^HEWjREGIONW.  UBRABr  FAdUTY 

A     000  574  869     4 

•BTUJOJ
