The Face of the Earth, Vol. 1 (Eduard Suess (W. J. Sollas, trans.), 1904)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.42506). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

THE FACE OF THE EARTH

(DA8 ANTLITZ DER ERDE)


By EDUARD SUESS


TROFESSOll OK GEOLOClV IV THE UXIYEIISITV OF VIEWA
F0IIEI(;N MEMBER OF THE KOVAL SOCIETY OF LONDON


TRANSLATED BV


HERTHA B. C. SOLT.AS

IMl.D. IIKIDKLHERG ; OF NEWXHAM COLLEOF, ( AMBKIDGR


UNDER THE DIRECTION OF

VV. J. SOLI.AS

SC.I). (cANTAH.), LL.I). (dUKIJN), M.A. (oXON.), F.K.S.
FELLOW OF UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, OXFORD
PROFESSOR OF GEOLOGY IS THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD


VOL. I

WITH 4 MAPS, 2 FLJLL-PAfJK PJ^AFES AND
48 OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS


OXFORD

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS


1904


HENRY FROWDE, M.A.

rUBLISHKR TO THE ITNIVERSITY OK OXKORD
rX^NDON, KDIKBURCrH
NEW YORK


PREFACE BY THE AUTHOR


Dear Professor Sollas,

I ain extremely gratified by the news that the Clarendon
Press intends to do me the honour of issuing an English edition
of my book Das AntiUz der Erde, and that this is to appear under
an aegis so distinguished as youiu The honour is so much the
greater since the first volume had already appeared in 1885, the
second in 1888, and the fimt half of the third in 1901. With
. the lapse of time so much has been accomplislicd in the explora-
tion of distant regions, as well as in the more detailed study of
countries already known to us, that the reader will meet here and
there in the first two volumes with a description already anti»
quated. In a comprehensive work, however, which is devoted
not to the formulation of laws, but to the comparison of observa-
tions scattered over the whole earth, and the endeavour to estab-
lish connexion and cori'espondenco between them, deficiencies of
this kind can never bo entii’ely avoided, ceitainly not when the
advance of knowledge is so rapid m .at present. A criticism of
previous views must in addition be the natural result of this
method.

Now, however, you must permit me to say a little more
conceiTiing myself than would under other circumstances be
consistent with the laws of modesty.

In the year 1849 my geological investigations began in the
Archaean and Silurian districts of Bohemia ; in 1850 I proceeded
to the Alps ; and in 1851 1 was commissioned to make a section
across the Dachstein mountains, one of the lofty masses of Trias
limestone in the eastern Alps. The contrast to Bohemia, with
its vast rounded masses of gneiss and horizontal sheets of
Quader sandstone, was particularly striking. In 1854 I became
acquainted in Switzerland with Bernhard Studer, and Arnold Escher
von der Linth. Escher with all his sinaplicity was a remarkable
man. He was one of those possessed of the penetrating eye,
which is able to distinguish with precision, amidst all the variety



IV


, PEEPACE


t'


of a mountain landscape, the main lines of its structurei He had
just come forward with the magnificent conception, unheard of in
the views of that time, of a double folding of certain parts of the
Alps, which has since received the name of the ‘ double fold of
’Olarus.’ Studer opposed him. Such movements of the mountains
were, he said, contrary to nature and inexplicable. Escher did
not concern himself with the explanation, but with the facts.

A few years later I had the good foi*tune to make the
acquaintance of Sir Charles Lyell, with whom, as with Escher,
1 maintained friendly relations till the close of his life. On
the one side stood Sir Charles, the calm superior philosopher,
the lucid thinker and clear writer ; on the other dear old Arnold
Escher, who entrusted his admirable sketches and diaries to
every one indiscriminately, but to whom every line he had to
publish was a torment, and who was perhaps only quite in his
element up in the snow and ice, when the wind swept his grey
head and his eye roamed over a sea of peaks. In characterizing
this time I only mention these two important men, because in
the contrast of their qualities the whole wide field of activity in
our glorious science is brought into view. Lyell’s Principles,
however, of which the ninth edition appeared in 1853, while
investigating at length many fundamental questions, scarcely
touched that of mountain-formation : Escher would not enter at
all into the discussion of theoretical questions.

In 1852 Elie do Beaumont’s ‘Notice sur les systemes des
montagnes’ appeared in a form not very easily accessible, the
Dictionnaire universel ^histoire naturelle. The geometrical theories
put forward found little appreciation outside France ; apart from
these, however, the treatise contained many new and suggestive
views on tlio origin of mountains. Nevertlieless the idea of the
dependence of the more recent on the older folding found no
expression in it, and when I tliought of the contrast between
Bohemia and the Alps one of the few beacon-lights appeared to
mo to be the profound words of Sir Henry de la BScho published in
the year 1846 in the first volume of the Memoirs of the Geological
Survey of Great Britain, p. 221 : * tJuit the foldings of the mountains of
South Wdes correspond to adaptation to a complicated lateral pressure*

Let me now review rapidly the subsequent decennia, in which



PREFACE


V


geological* opinions underwent i^tep by step a profound change.
They were modified in England as elsewhere. I have observed
with great pleasure that as early as 1873 you yourself put forward
in a Syllabus of a Course of Lectures on Geology tho two principles
that earthquakes may proceed from tectonic processes, and that
the buttress of earlier Palaeozoic land may have had considerable
influence in determining tho direction of the folds in South Wales.

Tho theory of elevation crateis fell to the ground. ‘ Wliat,’
it was asked, ‘is really meant by elevation?’ The classical
examples, the temple of Serapis and the Baltic sea, even pre-
supposing the complete correctness of the fiicts, illustrated only
locally limited processes, and it was not possible to explain by
them the undeniable fact that the teniiinology of fonnations,
created in England, might bo applied over the whole globe.
Some universally active causes must exist. Tho formation of
mountains, however, evidently belongs to quite another series of
phenomena, and the horizontal strand-linos which may be observed
above the existing sea-level are quite independent of tho an ticlinals
and synclinals of tho slope along which they extend.

If wo consider one of tho most regularly built and most
exactly knoAvn of mountain ranges, tho Jura, Ave shall find nothing
that would correspond to a central axis of elevation in the older
sense of tho term. The dependence of tho processes of mountain-
formation on older elements which check and oppose, on lateral
pressure and deflexion, become daily more eAudent, as for instance
in the thinisting of the north-west of Scotland over the gneiss of the
Hebrides. Thus our very first consideration of existing observa-
tions brings us back to tho felicitous expression of accommodation
to lateral pressure. Now we understand why tho Alps extend
towards the Carpathians in a concave curve, avoiding tho older
Bohemian mass, and we are led to a comparison of tho mutual
relations between the great structural units.

Evennn 1885 and 1888, the dates at which the first volumes
of this work appeared, the possibility was recognized of deducing
from the uniform strike of tho folds of a mountain-chain a mean
general direction or trend-lino ; such trend-lines were seen to bo
seldom straight, but as a rule arcs or curves, often Auolently bent
curves of accommodation ; the trend-lines of central Europe wore

• a3



VI


PREFACE


observed to possess a certain r^ular arrangement and to be trace-
able in part as far .as Asia. It was further recognized that the
ocean from the mouth of the Ganges to Alaska and cape Horn is
bordered by folded clmins, Avhile in the other hemisphere this is
not the case, so that a Pacific and Atlantic typo may be distin-
guished ; that the Mediterranean is not part of the Atlantic
Ocean, but tlie remains of a sea which once crossed the existing
continent of Asia, and has since boon enlarged by subsidence :
that at various times, as for instance during the middle and upper
Cretaceous period, an extension of the seas occurred much too
general and too equable to be explained by the subsidence of
continental land, and so on. All these results completely crushed
the hope of arriving at a geometrical plan of the face of the earth,
but the desire to discover whether some plan of another kind
might not determine the distribution of mountain ranges received
a fresh impulse. In 1888, however, it was not possible to further
pursue this path. Important English investigations had been
published on the Himdlaya ; Java was known ; Richthofen had
explored China; Japan was becoming accessible. The results of
all these important researches, however, and the map of the curves
formed by the islands of eastern Asia show a munber of peripheral,
chiefly arc-shaped fragments surrounding a vast and wholly un-
known centre situated in Mongolia and Siberia, the exploration of
which could alone furnish continuity.

The third volume had already advanced far towards comple-
tion within the limits originally proposed when an examination
of these very regions was commenced on a large scale preparatory
to the construction of the Siberian Railway. At the same time
a number of distinguished geologists combined in Paris under the
direction of MM. Marcel Bertrand and Emile de Margerie with a
view to publishing a French edition of the Antlitz, and this flatter-
ing circumstance strengthened me in the resolve to extend my
task before its conclusion. Meanwhile Telcki and Hohnel had* dis-
covered lake Rudolf in Africa, and with it the Ethiopian rift valley ;
Szecheny and Loezy, Obrutsehew and others had explored central
Asia and enabled us to bring the trend-lines of Burma into con-
nexion with those of the great ranges of the interior ; the united
efforts of French and Swiss geologists in the western Alps led to



PEEPACE


vu


conceptiorte which went much further than Escher’s double fold,
received with so much incredulity at the time ; Tdrnobohm pointed
to lateral movements in Scandinavia of no less importance ; through
the devotion and insight of our American colleagues tho remark-
able structure of Alaska became increasingly clear. From all’
sides came fresh information.

The first half of the third volume is thus mainly devoted to
Siberia and the relations of the inner Asiatic ti’end-lines. The
second half will contain tho conclusion of the descriptive part, and
some chapters of synthetic matter which refer to tho whole planet.
In ^is a plan of the trend-lines of tho earth will be found. It will
be a first attempt, burdened by all tho difficulties, perhaps too all
tho errors, arising from this circumstance, but it will have fully
accomplished its purpose if it is found fit to servo as a link to tho
fresh observations which unceasingly succeed one another.

I remain, esteemed colleague.

Yours very sincerely,

E. SUESS.

Vienna: January, 1904.


ix


CONTENTS

PAGE>

Introduction. Wedge-like foi-ui of the continents. Great depth of the oceans.
Difference between the Pacific and Atlantic regions. Subsidence. *What
is a geological formation?* Cycles of development. The stratigraphical
terminology of Europe applicable to the whole world. Extent of transgressions.
Independence of ancient coast-lines and mountain-structure. Contents of the
following parts 1

PART I

: The Movements in the Outer Crust of the Earth

Chapter I. The Deluge. Oceanic floods. In the biblical story two accounts
combined. Berosus : the Izdubar epic. Locality. Use of asphalt. Warnings.

The catastrophe. Stranding. Conclusion of the event. More recent events in
the lower coui'scs of the livers of India. Indus. Rann of Cutch. Ganges and
Brahmaputra. Cyclones. Niaturo and extent of the Deluge. Classification
of accounts. Berosus and Izdubar epic. Biblical accounts. Egypt. Hellenic-
Syrian grouji. India. China. Conclusion 17

Chapter II. Some Seismic Areas. Various branches of research. The
north-eastern Alps. South Italy. The continent of Central America. Alleged
spasmodic elevation of Chili. Rebounding of objects. Movement of submarine
sediment. Valparaiso, 1822. Concepcion, 1835. Valdivia, 1837. Elevation
of the land not proved 73

Chapter III. Dislocations. Resolution of stresses. Dislocation by tangmtial
movement. Folding. Imbricated structure. Overthrusts or Wechsel. Disloca-
tion on flaw (Blatt) planes. Torsion. Dislocation by radial movement.
Subsidence on a yielding base. Flexures and faults. Networks of fracture.
Caldron subsidences. Dislocation by combined radial and tangential movement.
Backfolding and squeezing in. Forcfolding 106

Chapter IV. Volcanos. Stages of denudation. Vesuvius and Monte Nuovo.
Monte Venda. Laccolites. Palandocan and Dary-dagh. The Whin Sill. The
Hebrides. Predazzo. The Fissure of the Banat. Syenite cicatrice of Brtlnn.

Elk mountains and the Hai*z. Batholites ; Drammen granite ; Vosges ; Erzge-
birge. Maculae. Invagination. The denudation series 144

Chapter V. Diversity of the Movements. Attempts to classify earthquakes.
Earthquakes of volcanic origin, and those caused by dislocation. Earthquakes
associated with flaws. Earthquakes associated with over-riding. Earthquakes
caused by subsidence. Aetna, 1780, and 1874 to 1883. Different nature of
vokanic earthquakes. The denudation series 173

PART II

The Mountain Ranges op the Earth

Chapter I. The Northern Foreland of the Alpine System. The Russian Plat-
fom. The Sudetes. The Franconian-Swabian area of subsidence. Ries and
HOhgau. The horsts. Quartz dykes in the horsts. Zigzag outlines. Jurassic
relicts of the Sudetes. Relation of the Alpine system to its foreland . .180



X


CONTENTS


PAGB

Chapter II. The Trend-lines of the Alpine System. The northern border of
the Alps and the Carpathians. Local overthrusting of the outer border. Curvar
ture of the extremity of the Carpathians. Curvature of the mountains of
Western Transylvania. Curvature of the Apennines. Sicily. Mountains of
North Africa. Gibraltar. The Betic Cordillera. Spiral aiTangement of the

' trend-lines «... 216

Chapter III. The Basin of the Adriatic. Significance of the Adame) lo. The
Judicarian line. Fiuctures of the Cima d* Asta. Region between the Judicaria
and the fracture of Schio. Dislocations on the north of the fractures of the
Cima d* Asta. Fractures of the Drau and the Gail. Dinaric fractures or fractures
of the Karst. Recent extension of the Adriatic sea. Summary .... 236

Chapter IV. The Mediterranean. Five historical phases of unequal value.
Relations to America. The Atlantic Ocean. Guadalquivir, Gironde, Rhone.

First Mediterranean stage. The Schlier. Second Mediterranean stage. The
Sarinatian inland sea. The Pontic lakes. More recent times. Northern imiux-
grants. The latest subsidences. Summary 277

Chapter V. The Great Desert Plateau. The Sahara and Egypt. South Arabia
and Abyssinia. Sinai, Syria, and north Arabia. Suez and the Nile . . . 356

Chapter VI. The Fragments of the Indian Continent. South Africa. The
East Indian peninsula. Madagascar. Summary 387

Chapter Vn. The Syntaxis of the Mountains of India. The exterior chains of
Iran. The Salt range. The Tertiary chains. The western Himalaya. Mustagh
and Kuenduen. Hindu Kush and Pamir, The eastern Himalaya. Burma,
Malacca, Sumatra. Summary 421

Chapter VIII. The Relation of the Alps to the Mountains of Asia. The object
of this chapter. Thian-shan by J. Muschketoif. Western branches of the Thian-
shan. Nuni-tau, Scheich-Djeli, Mangischlik, Coal-field of the Donetz. Paropa-
misuB, Khorassan, Kopet-dagh, Balkan, Caucasus, Crimea. Matschin. Balkans
and Carpathians. Albourz, Iranian-Tauiic syntaxis. Dinaric chain. Explana-
tion of the vortical arrangement of the Alps. Ural, Pae-khoi, and Timan.
Summary 463

Chapter IX. South America. The'Brazilism mass. The Argentine chains. The
Andes of Bolivia and Chili, The coast Cordilleras and Patagonia. Peru.
Ecuador. North Granada and Venezuela. Summary 508

Chapter X. The Antilles. The three series of islands. Cuba. Haiti. Jamaica.
Puerto Rico to Barbados. The Cordillera of the Antilles. Comparison with
the border of the western Mediterranean. Earthquakes 542

Chapter XI. North America. The foldings in the east. Prairies and Black
hills. Division of the mountain ranges of the west. Rocky mountains. -Uinta
mountains. Walisatch and mountain chains on the Snake river. Colorado
plateau. The table-land of Utah and the grand canon of Colorado. Basin
ranges. Sierra Nevada. The Coast Cordilleras and lower California. The west
of Canada. Summary " . 553

Chapter XII. The Continents. Old and New World, These expressions unten-
able. Age of the continents. America. Separation of Indo- Africa and Eurasia.
Folding of Eurasia. The ITan-hai and the depression of Turkestan. The
Mcditermnean seas. The Indian Ocean. The great units. Multiformity of
the mountains. Collapse of the lithosphere 593



XI


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

PLATE

I. Folding of Strata on one Side of a Tributary to the Bambadhuni

Glacier, Lissar Valley, Dliarma Valley, Kumann .... FiWftiitpfWfi

II. Lago di Gampo and Passo della Forcellina, Adamello, South Tyrol Ib face p, 237

III. The System of the Alps 180

IV. The Syntaxis at the Foot of the Hindu Kush and the Himalaya . „ 421

V. The Relaijon of Europe to Asia 463

VI. The Virgation of the Hocky Mountains 553

FIO. t PAGE

1. Fissures and Funnel-shaped Apertures produced by the Earthquake of Cachar

on Januaiy 10, 1869 51

2; The Path of some Indian Cyclones '. . . 54

3. Recent Earthquakes in the North-east of the Alps and West of the Carpathians 7S

4. The Peripheral Line of the Lipari Islands 83

5. The Western Part of the Volcanos of Central America 93

6. Scene of the Earthquake of Februaiy 20, 1835 99

7. Folded Menilite Shales. Wolfsgraben near Nikolschitz, Moravia . . , 108

8. Reversed Fold on the Summit of the Mamrang Pass, Himalaya . . . 109

9. Summit of the Gstelli-Horn, Mass of the Finster-Aarhorn, seen from the

Laucherli 110

10. The BOtzberg Tunnel .US

11. The Habsburg 114

12. The System of Fractures of St. Andreasberg 123

13. The Faults of the High Plateaux of Utah 130

14. Stereogram of a Part of the * Musinia Zone of Diverse Displacement ’ . . 132

15. Prdttigau and Rhaeticon 140

16. Foot of the Heiligenstein at the Hohe-Wand near Wiener-Neustadt (Lower

Austria) 141

17. Disturbances in the Belgian Coal-fields 142

18. The Mount Hillers Group of Laccolites 150

19. The Volcanos of the Inner Hebrides 156

20. Predazzo (South Tyrol) 158

21. The Volcanic Line of the Banat 162

22. Sections to correspond to Fig. 23 164

23. Arrangement of the Lowest Parts of the Cretaceous Formation around Snow

Mass and White Rock in the'Elk Mountains 165

24. The Foreland of the Western Carpathians 186

25. The Foreland of the Eastern Carpathians 187

26. Diagram of the Trend-lines of the Alpine System 232

27. Monte DojU. Mass of the Re di Gastello . . . . . . . 239

28. Cima delle Casinelle. (South Part of the Adamcllo Mass.) .... 241

29. Approximate Arrangement of the Principal Fractures and Flexures which

surround the Cima d’ Asta 245

30. Seilspitz, Ascent to the Penserjoch (West of the Brenner Road) . . . 247

31. Trias Limestone overthrust by Phyllite, in the Limestone Wedge of the Seilspitz 248

32. Entrance to the Gorge of Torrente Maso, South Side of the Cima d* Asta . . 250

33. Thj J^orrente Silano (Val Rovina) entering the Plain (West of the Brenta) . 252



XU


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


FIO. ^ page

34. Castles of the Montagues and Gapulets to the West of Vicenza .... 257

35. Northern Border of the Palaeozoic Zone to the South of Hermagor . . . 265

36. South Side of the Palaeozoic Zone South of Hermagor 266

37. The Tertiary Deposits on the North Side of the Gulf of Mexico . . . 284

38. Suder^e, the most southerly of the Faer5e Islands 287

*39. The Trough-subsidence of Malta and Gozzo . . . , . . . . 348

40. View of the Fault of Malak on the South Coast of the Island of Malta . . 349

41. Sketch-map showing the Distribution of the Formations in the Desert of Sahara 360

42. Morbat on the South Coast of Arabia 365

43. Jebel AUqa near Suez 371

44. South Africa 388

45. The Salt Range near Kalabdgh 430

46. View of the Silakank * . . 437

47. Diagram of the Trend-lines of the Carpathians and the Balkans . . . 480

48. The Curvature of the Strike on the Lower Danube t 482



INTRODUCTION


Wedge-like form of the continents. Great depth of the oceans. Difference between
the Pacific and Atlantic regions. Subsidence. * What is a geological formation ? ’
Cycles of development. The stratigmphical terminology of Europe applicable to the
whole world. Extent of transgressions. Independence of ancient coast-lines and
mountain-structure. Contents of the following parts.

If we imagine an observer to approach our planet from outer spacCi and,
pusl^g aside the belts of red-brown clouds which obscure our atmosphere,
to gaze for a whole day on the surface of the earth as it rotates beneath
him, the feature beyond all others most likely to arrest his attention would
be the wedge-like outlines of the continents as they narrow away to the
South.

This is indeed the most striking character presented by our map of the
world, and has been so regarded ever since the chief features of our planet
have become known to us. It recurs in the most diverse latitudes : Cape
Horn, the Cape of Good Hope, Cape Comorin in the East Indies, Cape
Farewell in Greenland are some of the best known examples.

Attempts have been made to explain this form by the alleged existence
of an excessive accumulation of water towards the South Pole : but these
promontories do not slope gradually into the sea, on the contrary they aie
rocky, and their declivities as a rule descend abruptly to great depths. An
equal accumulation of water about the North Pole would not give rise to
analogous outlines.

Such forms must consequently have been determined by the structure
of the outer parts of the planet itself.

Our observer would have no doubt on this point, if, as he had previously
pushed aside the clouds, he were now to remove the sea, so that he could
gaze directly on the rocky crust of the globe thus laid bare. The remark-
able depth of the ocean basins as opposed to the trifling height of the
continents, and the steep slope of a great part of the coasts, would then
become apparent to him.

Long ago Alexander von Humboldt aptly compared the continents to
' plateaux ’ igsing out of the ocean depths.

Carpenter estimates the mean height of the continents in round numbers
at 1,000 feet at most, the mean depth of the oceans at 13,000 feet\

Kriimmel, following Leipoldt, calculates the average elevation of the
Continents at 440 meters, the average depth of the oceans at 3,438-4 meters

' W. B. Carpenter, Land and Sea, considered in relation to geological Time ; lecture
Roy. Ij^fit. Gr. Brit, Jan. 23, 1880, p. 4.

%OLLA8


B



2 INTRODUCTION

(1,880 fathoms). If all the inequalities of relief were reducecf to a mean
level the whole surface of the planet would, according to Kriimmcrs data,
be covered with water to the depth of 1*5625 miles (2*52 kilometers or 1,875
fathoms) ^

The mean value of existing inequalities, obtained by e»ddiiig the mean
height of the continents and the mean depth of the oceans, will be,
according to Carpenter, 14,000 feet (4,267 meters), or, according to Kriimmel,
8,878*4 meters. But our observer of the exposed globe would peixseive
a more marked contrast in relief than these figures indicate, for they have
been determined without taking into consideration a circumj^ance which
masks to a great extent the steepness of the coasts and the contrast
between land and sea, namely, the attraction which the continents ^xert
upon the mass of the ocean.

It is usually assumed that the surface of the ocean is everywhere of
equal elevation, that is to say, that every part of it, and consequently
every part of its coast-line, is equally distant from the centre of the earth.
But this assumption, although a great deal of our geodetic woi*k is based
upon it, cannot be maintained. Since the earlier investigations of Saigey
and Stokes, and particularly since the more recent researches of Fischer,
and the lucid exposition of the facts which we owe to Hann, it must bo
considered as proved that the mass of the continents exerts a considerable
attraction upon the ocean and that consequently the surface of the sea rises
towards the mainland If we were to make a section across one of the
gfeat oceans in the plane of a parallel of latitude, we should see that, at
the middle of the ocean, the surface lies nearer the centre of the earth than
the coast-line on either side. The difference of elevation in meters amounts,
according to Fischer, to about 122 times the difference of the number of
oscillations of the pendulum in twenty-four hours. This would give, with
a difference of nine oscillations, for example, between an oceanic island and
the coast, an actual difference in elevation of about 1,100 meters, or 3,609
feet. The shores of the continents, and the continents themselves, con-
sequently appear much lower to the eye than is actually the case ; the
attraction of the sea to the land conceals to a great extent the contrast
which really exists between continent and ocean \

* 0. Kriimmel, Versuch einer vergl. Morphologie der Meeresriiume, 8vo, Leipzig, 1879,
pp. 102, 106, 107. ^

’ Fischer, Untersuchungen fiber die Gestalt der Erde, 8vo, 1868 ; Hann,*[Jeber gewisse
betrachtliche Unregelmiissigkeiten dcs Meeresiiivcau’s, Mitth. Geogr. Gcs. Wien, 1875,
VIII, pp. 554-569.

^ Listing attempted to determine the effect of the attraction in a large number of places
and found: London, 118 meters; Paris, 268 m.; Island of Marahon (N. Brazil coast),
567 m.; Bonin Island, - 1,309 m.; St. Helena, -847 m.; Spitzbergen, - 217 m.; Berlin,
37'7 m. ; Kfinigsberg, 92*6 m.; cf. Listing, Neue geometr. und dynam. Constanten des
Erdkfirpers, Nachrichten d. k. Gesellsch. d. Wiss. zu Gottingen, 1877, pp. 749-81^^



DEPTH OP THE OCEAN BASINS


3


The significance of this fact becomes apparent if we suppose the attrac-
tion to cease. That portion of the ocean which is now drawn up over the
margin of the continents would subside, many of the bays which deeply
indent the continents would bo laid completely dry ; the continents would
gain somewhat in extent, and a great deal in height and continuity. Bui
while the continents wouI<l gain in prominence, the ocean would gain in
depth, and the uniform distribution of that portion of the ocean formerly
held bound by the continents would perhaps lead to the submergence of
a number of low oceanic islands.

Soundings made from the coast to the open sea apply therefore not to
a horizontal, but to a concave surface ; this circumstance makes an essential
dilfifrence in the profile of the sea bottom.

Carpenter, as we have said, estimates the mean height of the continents
at 1,000 feet at most, Kriimmel at 440 meters ; the example taken to show
the influence of attraction gave 1,100 meters for the rise of the ocean, that
is to say, more than twice, indeed nearly three times, the higher estimate for
the mean height of the continents. Even supposing these figures to be
exceptional, and the mean result of attraction to sink to less than one-half the
figure quoted (a point on which I lack means of forming an opinion), there
still remains ground for a comprehensive correction of prevailing views.

If wo further wish to determine the verticiil distance between the line
of mean elevation of the continents and the line of mean depression of the
ocean, that is to say, the mean value of the difterence in relief, it is not
sufficient to add together Kriimmers two figures (440 + 3,438*4 = 3,878*4
meters) as has been done above. Another figure must be added for the force
of attraction, which will increase this sum considerably^ certainly to far
above 4,000 meters. This would be the mean value of the inequalities
which would present themselves to the eye of our observer.

A number of the most difficult questions thus confront us on our first
consideration of the main features of the earth's surface.

How can we account for these great abysses of the ocean ?

Under the impression produced by their extraordinary magnitude, and
under the conviction that the older notions as to the rise and fall of the
land are by no means sufficient to account for such startling and extensive
differences in relief, an opinion has taken root that the changes so often
cited as having occurred in the distribution of land and sea arc after all
only ^demoftstrablc, and indee<I conceivable, within somewhat narrow
limits ; and that the position of the great continents and ocean basins has
remained essentially unaltered since their first existence ^

' L. Agassiz, Report upon Deep-Sea Dredgings, Bull. Muh. Comp. Zool. Harvard Coll.,
Cambridge, Mass., 3rd ser., 1869, p. 368 ; Dana, Am. Journ. Sc. Arts, 1873, 3rd ser., VI,
p. 169 ; Geikie, On Geographical Evolution, Proc. Roy. Geogr. Soc., 1879, new ser., f,
pp. 48^443.



A


INTRODUCTION


It indeed appear as though the submersion of our existing con-

tinents in past times, that is, since the completion of the lower Silurian
period, had hardly extended further than to a comparatively small fhMstion
of the mean depth of the existing ocean. Murray has shown in a most
thorough and convincing manner that the deposits now forming at great
depths in the ocean are exclusively of organic, volcanic, or meteoric origin.
They are completely free from any admixture of mineral matter derived
from the surface of the land, and are thus distinguished from the immense
mass of marine deposits, which are to be met with in our mountains and
plains, and which find their nearest equivalents in sediments nqw accumu-
lating at comparatively slight distances from the land, and at moderate
depths of the sea ^

The frequent intercalation of fresh-water deposits during later periods,
as well as the concomitant replacement of one terrestrial fauna by another —
a fact which so clearly demonstrates the continuity of life on the dry
land — may be regarded as confirming this opinion with regard to the
later periods of terrestrial history.

On the other hand, the thickness of the marine deposits which contribute
to the formation of the continents is at times so extraordinarily great, that
it is difficult to account for the absence of abyssal characters ; and not only
is the manner in which such considerable masses of sediment are incor-
porated with the continents an unsolved problem, but also the question as
to the position of those other continents, by the demolition of which these
vast masses were produced.

It is sufficient to recall the thousands of feet of Triassic and Bhaetic lime-
stone in the Alps, and the thickness of the much younger. Flysch, not to
mention the great development of Palaeozoic deposits in England. In
Central Pennsylvania, according to measurements of a transverse section
made by Ashburton, the total thickness of deposits from the summit of the
AUeghamy Riv&r Coal Series to the Trenton limestone (neglecting, that is,
the lower part of the Silurian) amounts to 18,394 feet \

It would not be difficult to cite a large number of regions where the
total thickness of the marine deposits is as great as the approximate mean
depth of the sea at the present day, that is, from 4,000 to 5,000 meters.
How great then, on prevailing assumptions, must the subsidence of a district
once have been, where not merely the depth of the ocean covering it, but even
the thickness of sediment deposited have attained so great a magnitude !

The extremely important part which Palaeozoic deposits play in the
formation of continents, as for instance in China, is an irrefutable testi-

* Murray, On the Distribution of Volcanic Debris over the Floor of the Ocean ; Froc.
Roy. Soc., Edinb., 1877, IX, pp. 247-261, and elsewhere.

* C. A. Ashburton, A measured Section of the Palaeozoic Rocks of Central Fennq^lvaaia ;

Froc. Am. Phil. Soc., Philadelphia, 1877, XVI, pp. 519-560. • «



PACIFIC AND ATLANTIC TYPES OP COAST-LINE 6

mony to the vastness of the change which has taken place. The high
pedestals on which our continents rest may therefore be very ancient,
they may even date, in great part, from the Mesozoic period ; but for the
Palaeozoic period it would be impossible to maintain the theory of
generally persistent continents ; and that part of the borders of continents*
which cuts across the strike of younger mountain ranges is certainly of
quite recent date.

In considering, therefore, the wedge-like form of the continents, we are
not dealing with something which has remained unaltered since the
formation o$ the globe ; still, in any attempt to underatand the movements
of the earth’s crust and its changes of form, tliis most important feature of
the planetary surface must be taken into account. —

Let us now further suppose that our imaginary observer has ap-
proached so near to the earth, that he can perceive not only the outlines
and ‘the relief of the continents, but also the relations existing between
their outlines and the - mountain ranges they support. Then he will
perceive that two regions may be distinguished on the planet, marked by
a difference in the relations of the boundaries of the ocean basins to the
mountain chains of the continents'.

From Chittagong, at the head of the Bay of Bengal, down to Java,
and along the Asiatic coast of the Pacific Ocean, through Japan and
the Kuriles, and then eastwaixls through the Aleutian islands to Alaska,
there occur on the mainland itself, or on the long rows of bordering
islands, more or less continuous lines of mountain chains, the course of
which runs either parallel to the coast or in curves concave to it, so that
the islands surround the mainland like so many pendent festoons; thus
showing that some definite connexion unquestionably exists between the
outer delimitation of the continent and its internal structure.

Equally obvious is the relationship between the direction of the coast-
line and the course of the mountain chains on the west coast of North
America, as far as California,' and throughout the whole of South
America.

From the Ganges to Cape Hor'n a correlation of this kind is the rule ;
it is the distinctive character of the Padjic Type.

If we turn now to the cast side of Cape Horn wo find the case entirely
changed. The mountains strike towards Staten Island, and Cape Horn
itself*folloWs the Pacific rule. But to the coast of Patagonia and Brazil,
and indeed the whole eastern side of America os far as Greenland, with
the exception of the region of the Antilles, this rule does not apply. Where
a mountain range does occur in close proximity to the sea, as for example
in the case of the Appalachian mountains, it turns its back to the sea ; no
causal coimexion whatever is perceptible between the coast-line and the
Rtraqjb])Fe of the continent. This is the case along the whole of the west



fi INTRODUCTION

coast of the Old World, with the exception of a part of the western
I^renees.

Scotland, Brittany, and Portugal afford striking examples of coast-
lines which cut transversely across the structure of the land. In the north
V)f Scotland we see with unusual distinctness how the great faults trending
to the north-east, which traverse the whole country, run out against the
sea, while the dislocation of the land between them has indented the shore
in zigzag form

This absence of connexion between the course of the sea-coast and that
of the mountain chains is characteristic of the Atlaivtic region. ,

Thus the existing outlines of the aqueous envelope of the plancn
coincide, in by far the larger part of the Pacific region, with easily recog-
nizable features in the structure of the globe, while in the Atlantic region
no such correspondence is to be olmorved. But as soon as wo attempt to
apply this distinction to the Indian Ocean we perceive that while the whole
of the east coast of Africa, the Arabian coast, and that of the Indian
Peninsula as far as the Ganges conform to the Atlantic type, and that
the same is true of the Australian coasts far to the south-west, yet that
between these, from Chittagong to beyond Java, the Pacific type, as already
mentioned, makes its appearance. The boundary of the two regions is to
be sought on the mainland. It runs from the plains of Bengal, along the
outer chains of the Himalayas, to the north-west, then from the Punjab to
the mouths of the Indus, then along the Persian Gulf and the lower course
of the Euphrates, and is continued, as we shall see later, under most com-
plicated conditions, from the Gulf of Gabes through Morocco to the Atlantic
coast of Africa. In this manner the three great southern masses of Africa,
India, and Australia, which follow the Atlantic type, are separated from
the north.

The mightiest mountain chains of the earth are themselves only
subordinate members of far greater structural features which dominate
the whole globe. We may observe and describe in detail the disposition
of the strata and the stinicture of any single mountain chain we please,
but it will be found impossible to give an explanation of the facts it
presents without talking into account the relations which exist between this
particular chain and the assemblage of mountain chains in general. —

Let us now place our observer on the green sod of our earth, that he
may more closely observe the relations of the strata in «the ^rious
mountain chains. He wanders over hill and vale, but sees scant traces
of the mighty movements which have affected so many parts of the earth’s
surface. The ridges are worn away by wind and weather, the low ground
covered with mud and sand. Great mountain ranges are reduced to hilly

' Judd, The Secondary Rocks of Scotland, I ; Quart.. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1873, XXIX,
p. 180, and pi. vii, map of Moray Firth.


f.



SUBSIDENCE


7


land or even to plains; the fractures, along which displacements of
mountain segments have taken place to the extent of thousands of feet,
are so completely concealed from the eye that they have only become
known at all by means of subterranean workings.

The fault in the tunnel of Fuveau near Marseilles, which has a throw*
of about 1,200 meters, and brings the Muschelkalk into contact with much
younger strata, was not even suspected at the surface of the ground \

The brothers Rogers infer subsidences of strata in the coalfields of
Virginia to the extent of 7,000-8,000 feet^ and in the same district the
west side of the anticlinal ‘ Cove Canoe * is, according to Lesley, traversed
Wy a fault twenty miles in length, with a throw of at least 20,000 feet
yjfe have only, however, to try to picture to oui*selves any district, the
structure of which is fairly well known, suppressing in thought the results
of denudation, and we shall often enough see mountain ranges rise to
heights which (though they may indeed never have been tictually attained,
since denudation probably progressed simultaneously with elevation) yet
nevertheless afford us a true measure of the vertical movements which
have taken place. Let us imagine the whole Palaeozoic mantle of
Saxony, which at present terminates in a fold at the northern border
of the Erzgebirge, to be continued on to the heights of this mountain
range, in place of the little patches of Rothliegende and Cretaceous,
which reveal the great antiquity of the denudation ; or let us extend
over the older rocks of our Alps only a part even of the Mesozoic
formations which form their lateral zones, and how completely the aspect
of our mountains is transformed ! In this way Clarence King, prolonging
the Palaeozoic strata from the east to the crest of the fracture, along
which, on the Great Salt Lake, the western part of the Wahsatch
mountains is thrown down, estimates the amount of this throw as at
least 30,000 feet, or even 40,000 if the Cretaceous fonnation be taken
into account^. In this consists the great interest of the stereogram of
the Uinta mountains constructed by Powell at Gilbert’s suggestion, by
which the true proportions of the subsidence make a direct appeal to the
eye®.

We shall, however, have occasion to show that the cnist of the earth
is traversed not only by isolated faults of this kind, but by whole systems
of fractures, that extensive areas have thus been broken up and have
foundbred into the interior of the planet. —

* Dieulafait, Coinptes rend., 1879, t. 88, p. 351.

* H. D. Itogers, The Geol. of Pennsylvania, 4to, Philad., 1858, vol. ii b, p. 897.

; ' Dana, Manual of Geol., 3rd ed., p. 899.

* Clarence King, U. S. Explor. Exped. of the 40th ParalL, 4to, 1878, T, p. 44 ; Emmons,
op. cit. IT, p. 340.

® J. W. Powell, Report on the Geol. of the Eastern portion of the Uinta Mount., 4to,
1876,^^175, Ail. pi. iii.



8 IMTBODUCTION

We will now torn our attention from phenomena of this kind and
lead onr observer down from the mountains into our schoola He has
already taken count, under the panoply of clouds, of the wedge-shaped
outlines of our continents, then, beneath the *sea, has perceived the great
•depth of the ocean basins; ho has recognized the difference between the
Pacific and Atlantic coasts, and finally the thoroughgoing concealment of
great fractures. The wanderer shall now become a listener. The leading
features of this noble branch of science, the history of the earth, shall be
expounded to him. Ho hears of the wonderful extension of human know^
ledge attained by examining the spectra of the celestial bodies^^ then of the
various phases of cooling in which these bodies exist at the present day)
of the conclusions which may thence bo drawn concerning the fornig,tion
of our solar system, and concerning that long and earliest period in the
existence of our planet, during which the conditions necessary for organidj
life were not yet present; then he hears how later water, air, and life
successively made their appearance, and how the period succeeding to
these events is divided into geological formations, into aeras, periods, and
stages.

Supposing our listener to have now reached this point, so that he stands
on the threshold of stratigraphical geology, and at the same time of the
history of life : he will find himself surrounded by an overwhelming mass
of details concerning the distribution, stratification, lithological character,
technical utility, and organic remains of each subdivision of the stratified
series. He stops to ask the question: what is a geological formation?
What conditions determine its beginning and its end ? How is it to bo
explained that the very earliest of them all, the Silurian formation, recurs
in parts of the earth so widely removed from one another — from Lake
Ladoga to the Argentine Andes, and from Arctic America to Australia —
always attended by such characteristic features, and how does it happen
that particular horizons of various ages may be compared to or distinguished
from other horizons over such large areas, that in fact these stratigraphical
subdivisions extend over the whole globe ?

This question is certainly obvious and justifiable, but if we could
assemble in one brilliant tribunal the most famous masters of our science,
and could lay this question of the student before them, I doubt whether
the reply would be unanimous, I do not even know if it would be definite.
Certain it is that in the course of the last few decades the answer Vrould
not always have been the same.

Let us glance over the period from 1849 to 1859. The doctrine of
successive creations reigns everywhere. Each larger subdivision of the
geological series is considered to denote an act of special creation. At the
same time wide divergences of opinion exist as to the causes which lead to
the extinction of a fauna. In Belgium and France this question is |agerly



STRATIGRAPHICAL CLASSIFICATION 9

discussed, slost commonly the elevation of mountain chains is assumed as
the cause of these cataclysms, and an attempt is made to establish a corre-»
spondence between the results of Palaeontology and the attempts of Mie de
Beaumont to prove that the distribution of mountain chains in time and
space is subject to a geometrical law.

Dumont maintains, in opposition to Koninck, that the present zonal
distribution of climates has always existed, that faunas such as those of
the Silurian, Devonian, and Carboniferous formations might easily have
lived at the same time, but in different latitudes, and have gradually
advanced one, after the other from the Poles to the Equator. At the same
time Dumont by no means denies the correctness and value of the views of
l^lie df Beaumont ; he takes into consideration, however, besides the sup-
posed rapid elevation of mountain ranges, the slow movement of the earth’s
crust, the advance or retreat of certain deposits over large areas, and makes
use of these phenomena to determine the subdivisions of the Tertiary
formation. One might say that Dumont endeavours to give prominence to
the transgressions as well as the discordances K

Barrande seeks to determine to what extent the elevation of mountains
is to be regarded as a local phenomenon ; but he adheres to Beaumont’s
statement, that every mountain system may extend over an arc, lying
between two great circles making between them an angle of twenty degrees
at the Equator, and expects further results from a comparison of the
chronological table furnished by Palaeontology with the chronology of
discordances

Not long after d’Archiac asserts positively the complete ineffectiveness
of great dislocations of the earth’s crust upon the law which determines
the succession of life **, and in 1859 Hubert proves that the fresh- water
deposits, which separate the Jurassic and Cretaceous formations, extend
from the Jura mountains to Hanover and England, and concludes from
this fact the dependence of these alternations on the oscillation of consider-
able areas, but not on the local elevation of mountains

While in France the older theory of the repeated and sudden destruction
of all organisms falls more and more into disrepute, in England Edward
Forbes has already shown how elements of different age may be distin-
guished within the present population of Europe ^ and in North Gennany,

' A. Dumont, Note sur Temploi des caracteres geometriques resultant des mouvementi
lents du *01, poijr etablir le synchronisme des formations geologiques ; Bull. Acad. Roy.
Belg., 1852, XIX b, pp. 514-518.

* Barrande, Observations sur les rapports do la stratigraphie et de la paleontologie ;
Bull. Soc. Geol. de Pr., 1854, 2« ser., XI, pp. 311 326.

* D’Archiac, Histoire des progres de la geologic, 1857, VH, Terr, jurass., p. 599:

* rinnocuite complete, si I’on peut s'exprimer ainsi. . . .'

* Hubert, Observations sur les phenom^nes qui se sont passes a la separation des
p^riodes geologiques ; Bull.*Soc. Geol. de Fr., 1859, 2® ser., XVI, pp. 596-605.

^ Edward Forbes, On the Connexion between the Distribution of the existing Fauna



10


INTRODUCTION


Beyrich, by means of a widely observed transgression, deiSnes the limits
of the Oligocene series of the Tertiary formation ^ At the same time
traces of an older theory, which originated with Brocchi, are still to be
met with, according to which each single species has, like an individual, its
appointed period of life, and there is no need to assume any exterior cause
for its decline '

Al)Out the year 1869, the majority of investigators attributed the
differences presented by successive sedimentary series and by their faunas
to the influence of slow and extensive oscillations of the continents, and to
repeated changes of climate, perhaps connected with these oscillations.

At this point Darwin’s hook on the Origin of Species made its
appearance : I

' But just in proportion as this process of extermination had acted on an
enormous scale,’ says the author, ‘ so must the number of intermediate
varieties, which have fonnerly existed on the earth, be truly enormous.
Why then is not every geological formation and every stratum full of such
intermediate links? Geology assuredly docs not reveal any such finely
graduated organic chain, and this perhaps is the most obvious and gravest
objection which can be urged against my theory. The explanation lies, as
I believe, in the extreme imperfection of the geological record.’

In a later passage Darwin says :

‘ I believe that the world has recently felt one of these great cycles of
change : and that on this view, combined with modification through natural
selection, a multitude of facts in the present distribution both of the same
and of allied forms of life can be explained

These wor<ls, although applying only to the geographical distribution
of forms of life at the present day, contain nevertheless the important
admission, that the development qf life has been, according to Darwin,
uninternipted^ but by m meana uniform; nay, it almost appears as though
the reader were to be introduced to a further problem, that of a great and
as yet unknown rhythm in the evolution of living beings— a rhythm
dependent on periodic changes in the inorganic environment.

Aristotle seems to be alluding to the same problem in the remarkable
passage: 'The distribution of land and sea in certain regions is not

and Flora of the Brit. Isles and the Geol. Changes, &c. ; Mem. Geol. Surv., vol. i.
p. 340. * •

' Beyrich, Ueb. d. Zusammenhang d. norddeutsch. Tertiarbildungen ; Abh. K. Akad.
WisB. Berlin, 1855, pp. 1-20, and map.

* Brocchi, Riflessioni sul perdimento delle specie, Conchol. foss. subapp., 1814, I,
pp. 219-240 ; cf. also H. v. Moyer, Nov. Act. Ac. Leop.-Carol., XVI. 2, p. 474 ; Zur Fauna
von Oeningen, p. 48; C. Darwin, Journal of Researches, p. 212 ; R. Owen, Brit. Fossil
Mammal., p. 270 ; Bafrande, Parall. entre les depdts silur. de BohSme et de Scand., p. 54.

* Darwin, On the Origin of Species, chap, ix. On the imperfection of Geological

Record ; chap, zii, Geographical Distribution, at the end. « •



CYCLES OP DEVELOPMENT


11


always the same, but that becomes sea which once was land, and that
land which once was sea, and there is reason to believe that this change
takes place according to a definite system and at definite intervals of
time

More than forty years have passed since the publication of Darwin’s
book. Since then observations have multiplied; we are now able with
much greater certainty to trace the genealogy of living beings among the
relics of the past, as, for instance, of the Carnivores, the Solipedes, the
Echinoids, and many other groups, and we are thus led to perceive that
variation tencils more or less constantly in the same direction, the result
so far being the existing range of forms. At the same time we occa-
sionalljt find that the vicarious relationship between two successive mam-
malian faunas of the Tertiary period may be quite as close as that which
now obtains between two existing terrestrial faunas of contiguous areas.

The continuity of life is thus more and more clearly illustrated by the
results of Palaeontology ; yet the fact remains that we do not find species
varying gradually within the limits of single families or genera, and at
different times, but that whole groups, entire animal and vegetable popula-
tions, or, if I may so express myself, complete economic unities of Nature
appear together, and together disappear. This is the more remarkable,
as the transformations effected in the pop\ilations of the sea and in those
of the laild by no means invariably coincide : a fact which has been proved
in the most convincing manner by a study of the various subdivisions of
the Tertiary fonnation in the Vienna biisin. From this we may conclude
with certainty that the determining factors in this case have been changes
in the external conditions of life.

It is true that the record is extremely incomplete. A certain proof of
this lies in the local i-ecurrence of some groups. The recurrence of certain
species of Ammonites in the Jurassic system of Central Eunjpe has already
been made use of by Neumayr to determine, in their main outlines, the
boundaries between the zoological provinces which existed during the several
subdivisions of the Jurassic period Communications have from time to
time been established between these provinces and again suppressed ; yet
not only may the synchronism of the subdivisions in one province and
another be determined in many cases with certainty, in spite of subsi<liary
differences, but throughout the whole earth we see the well-known general
type of *the Jurassic formation succeeded by the equally well-known type
of the Cretaceous; and from this we may conclude that changes must
have occurred which have exerted an influence over an area still more
extensive than that of these great provinces. ,

' Aristot, Meteor., XII.

* Neumayr, Ueber unvermittelt aufiretende Cephalodentypen im Jura Mittel-
Europa’t ;^ahrb. d. geol. Reichsanst., 1878, XXVIIl, pp. 37-80.



12 INTRODUCTION

On this fact depends the unity of stratigraphical tenninology. I^e
excellent work of English geologists in East Australia, the reports of th^
Geological Survey in India, the accounts of our explorers in China and in
the Arctic regions, the voluminous publications presented to us by North
America, as well as the works of German investigators on the Andes of
South America, the descriptions of the Cape, and the scantier but most
valuable accounts which we have received from the less easily accessible
parts of Africa — all these works, when they wish to designate the more
important parts of a stratified series, make unhesitating use of terms
which were originally chosen to describe the classification pf the deposits
in a limited portion of Europe. When it is a question of marine deposits
the geologist in New Zealand or Victoria knows as well as his collAigue in
North Russia or Spitzbergen whether he has Palaeozoic, Mesozoic, or still
younger deposits before him, and expressions such as ‘ Carboniferous Lime-
stone,’ * Jurassic,’ ^ Cretaceous ’ have now become naturalized in all parts of
the world visited by geologists.

The greater part of this nomenclature originated in England, and has
obtained general recognition in spite of the fact that certain vast marine
deposits occur in Central Europe, the chronological equivalents of which in
England bear an entirely different character, and are not immediately
recognizable. Such are the Trias formations of the Eastern Alps, and the
Tithonian series. At the same time Abich, in his works on Armenia, and
Waagen and Griesbach in India, are making known to us marine faunas,
by which the mighty gap occurring in Europe towards the close of the
Palaeozoic period is being steadily filled up. But more careful consideration
easily convinces us that it is not the completeness of the series of marine
formations in South-east and Central England, but rather, so to speak, that
mean frequency of gaps among them, which has facilitated the conception
of natural groups, in a manner which would never have been suggested by
other places where one marine deposit regularly follows another. In those
districts, however, where the incompleteness of the series is particularly
great, and where, for example, the encroachment of the Cenomanian is
apparent, there is a most striking correspondence over large areas and in
both hemispheres. It was this correspondence which led me long ago to
suppose that the so-called secular elevations and depressions of continents
are not sufficient to explain the more limited distribution of some and the
wider distribution of other foimations, a phenomenon of which tfie cause,
though unknown, must be general \

In like manner E. v. Mojsisovics has since designated as one of the most
remarkable phenomena known to us ‘ the precisely parallel development of
the chief features of the two great continental masses of the Northern


^ Die Entstehung der Alpen, Svo, 1875, pp. 115-120.



18


CYCLES OP DEPOSITION

9

hemisphere/ and the * concordant cycle of dynamic transformations on both
sides of the ocean ^/

Some years earlier eminent American geologists, following quite another
course of observation, thought that they recognized, within the stratified
series of their continent, a certain periodic return of those conditions under
which the deposition of sediments takes place. According to them every
great formation begins with a deposit of clay or sand in shallow water,
and is then followed by a calcareous marine deposit, whereupon the depth
of the sea again diminishes.

These seriesi were spoken of as ‘ cycles of deposition.*

Dawson has furnished a detailed account of the four cycles for lower
Siluriail upper Silurian, Devonian, and Carboniferous *^, and Newberry,
after he had recognized the Palaeozoic cycles in Ohio, applied the same
theory to the Mesozoic deposits of the south-west, in particular to the
Trias of New Mexico, and the Cretaceous of Colorado, Kansas, and Texas \

The processes of nature, says Newberry, are so multifarious that they
easily conceal an underlying simplicity. Thus in some formations, parti-
cularly in the Coal measures, we may discover smaller cycles within the
greater, that is, periods of rest or of regression within the general course of
movement.

But if we accept these conclusions, and consider the detailed succession
of a sedimentary series in its dependence on the great laws which govern
the conditions of deposit, then the mode of stratificiition, and even each
individual stratum, gain, as terms of a great rhythmical process, an
importance hitherto not attributed to thein^.

That reservation which I made, with regard to tlie clironology of terres-
trial faunas, holds good in so far as an alteration in the terrestrial fauna is
not necessarily contemporaneous with an alteration in the marine fauna ;
but the great works of Marsh and Cope show already clearly enough to
what a large extent the Tertiary land faunas of North America correspond
with those of Europe. This fact is particularly instructive, since it demon-
strates, even more forcibly than a consideration of the marine deposits,
the simultaneous appearance and disappearance over vast areas of whole
communities, of whole economic unities; the same phenomenon which
Heer long ago happily designated ‘ the periodical recoinage of organisms.'

In Europe the great local variations in the characters of the deposits

' £. Mojsisovics v. Mojsv&r, DiaDolomitriifo von Stidtirol und Veneticn, 8vo, 1879, p. 9.

* Dawson, Acadian Geology, 8vo, 1868, p. 137.

^ Newberry, On Circles of Deposition in Secondary Sedimentary Rocks, American and
Foreign ; Proc. Lyceum Nat. Hist., New York, 2nd ser.. No. 4, March 16, 1874, pp. 122-124.

* H. 0. Lang, Ueber Sedimentargesteine aus dcr Umgebung von Gottingen ; Zeitschr.
d. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1881, XXXIII, p. 273, Anm. : * The expression stratiBcation is . . .
used to designate a phenomenon which is regarded as the result of •periodicity in the
conditions qf formation.*



14


INTRODUCTION


which furnish the remains of terrestrial animals — far moi^ marked in this
continent than in the United States— obliges the investigator to trust
almost exclusively, certainly to a far greater extent than in the case of
marine deposits, to organic remains for his chronological and stratigraphieal
conclusions. But it is scarcely necessary to remark that, while the
characters of the terrestrial fauna afford a most valuable passive criterion,
yet it is the physical causes of faunal transformations which will, when
once they are recognized, form the only true basis for a delimitation of
chronological periods.

These physical causes are probably very different in ,kind. As our
brief account of the fluctuation of opinion in the last decennium or so has
shown, the cause of the changes in the organic world has l)eeil sought
mainly in movements of the earth’s crust. The advance which has been
made in our knowledge of the structure of the great mountain chains does
not, however, bring us any nearer an understanding of this supposed con-
nexion. The manner in which contraction of the earth’s crust manifests
itself on the surface of the planet, in the formation of folds and faults,
does not accord with the hypothesis of moving continental masses, which,
over wide areas, repeatedly ascend and descend in a slow and uniform
manner. The similar development of the sedimentary series on lx)th sides of
the Atlantic Ocean, and the correspondence in the gaps of this scries, cannot
be explained in this way. When, in some of the best accounts of the
structure of a mountain chain, we find, side by side with an exposition of
the formation of the folds and fractures, an appeal made to supposed
* elevations in mass,’ independent of the formation of the mountain chain,
to account for some incompleteness of the series, it cannot fail to strike us
that this is an assumption at variance with the rest of the explanations.
We are left with the impression that phenomena essentially different in
character have not been sufficiently (fistinguished from one another.

Let us consider the contrast between £)lie de Beaumont’s conception
of the limit of a formation, and the views on which Beyrich based his
classification of the middle Tertiary deposits. This contrast finds its
clearest expression when to the term didocation we oppose that of
tramgremon,

A dislocation, whether it consists in folding or faulting, is limited to
a definite mountain system, often even to a very small part of it ; a trans-
gression extends over a large part of the earth’s surface. The infensity of
a dislocation is subject to very rapid local variations ; in a transgression,
difference of intensity, within the limits of a single region, can hardly be
distinguished, and a transgression may often extend over large areas in
complete concordance with the underlying l)cds. The dislocated stratum
was already in existence before the occurrence of that event, into the
nature of which we are al)Out to inquire; the transgressive stig^^um was



INDEPENDENCE OP ANCIENT STRAND-LINES 16


formed after or during that ovcnt Investigations into the structui*6 of
great mountain chains have in recent times given us a continually deepen^r
ing insight into the causes of dislocations ; the question of transgressions
still forms the subject of opposing theories.

That dislocations are the result of true movements, that is, of relative
displacement of various parts of the planet, needs no explanation, the word
itself expresses it. But this is not true of transgressions, nor has die wonl
been chosen with this intent. •

Under various fonns the theory has long been maintained that along
with the movements of the earth’s ciiist, changes take place in the form
of the surface of the sea. The remarkable extension of certain trans-
gressions leads us tp return to this view. A close investigation of the
most recent events, such as are indicated by ancient shore-lines situated
above the existing sea-level, can alone lead to definite results. But even
a hasty consideration of such strand-lines suffices to show their complete
and absolute independence of the geological structure of the coast. In
Italy the lines of former sea-levels are met with on the various promon-
tories of the Apennines in undisturljed horizontality, here on limestone,
there on the ancient rocks of Calabria, here once more on tlie ash cone
of Aetna. The complete absence of any relation between the ancient
shore-lines and the structure of the mountains may Ikj proved by hundreds
of examples. But the supposition of a uniform elevation or depression of
a continent, so complicated, and divided into so many fragments, without
any mutual displacement of the parts— a supposition necessary to explain
the horizontal course of these lines on the separate portions of a mountain
complex — cannot be brought into harmony with our present knowledge of
the structure of the mountains themselves. Thus this circumstance, too,
leads us to infer independent movements of the sea, that is to say, changes
in the form of the hydrosphere. —

Finally, let us suppose that our imaginary observer, wanderer, and
listener should now leave the lecture room, and seek instruction as to the
true nature of a geological fonnation in our abundant literature. If he
thought it worth while to open the lx)ok which I now offer to publicity,
he would not find in it an answer to his question, 'ibis answer is the
great task of the next generation -of investigators. Here we will only
attempt by a critical synthesis of new observations to dissipate many
ancient errors and to prepare the way for an unprejudiccfl survey.

With this object the present work is divided into four parts. Tlie first
treats of the movements in the outer crust of the earth. It falls into
several chapters, more or less independent of each other. Thci first of
these discusses the Deluge, the greatest natural phenomenon of which we
have record. This affords an opportunity of comparing a number of
phenomena peculiar to the districts about the mouths of great rivers,



16


INTRODUCTION


misconceptions concerning which have led to a mistaken interpretation of
certain events, such, for example, as those which occurred in the Bann of
Catch. The next chapter deals with various seismic areas in the Eastern
Alps, South Italy, and the mainland of Central America; after this an
inquiry is made as to whether a really permanent elevation of the ground
occurred during the earthquakes in Chili. Then follows an attempt to
survey the various kinds of dislocations; next a chapter on volcanos;
finally rf brief discussion of the relations which may exist between the
sensible movements of the earth and the phenomena of dislocation.

The second part treats of the structure and history of a number of
Tnountain chains. It begins with the northern foreland of the Carpathians,
proceeds to the northern foreland of the Alps, and concludes witlf a long
series of particular descriptions from all parts of the world.

This purely descriptive section is followed by a general survey of the
structure of the surface of our globe and a more detailed exposition of
the difference which exists between the Pacific and Atlantic basins.

The third part discusses the changes of form in the surface of the sea.
k summary of the differences of opinion on this subject is first given.
Next we propose to speak of positive and negative displacements of the
shore-line, an expression free from theoretical implications; then in a
series of descriptive chapters the traces of these displacements are followed
around the continents and oceanic islands. A summary and discussion of
these observations conclude this part.

The fourth part bears the title : The Face of the Earth. It sums up
the contents of the preceding parts, and brings into relation the terrestrial
changes which are deduced from them, with the changes which have taken
place among the terrestrial faunas of the Northern hemisphere since the
beginning of the Tertiary aera.



17


PART I

THE MOVEMENTS IN THE OUTER CRUST
OF THE EARTH

%:• CHAPTER I

• THE DELUGE

Oceamc floods. In the biblical story two accounts combined. Berosus : the Izdubar
epic. Locality. Use of asphalt. Warnings. The catastrophe. Stranding. Conclusion
of the event. More recent events in the lower couises of the rivers of India. Indus.
Rann of Gutch. Ganges and Brahmaputra. Cyclones. Nature and extent of the Deluge.
Classification of accounts. Berosus and Izdubar epic. Biblical accounts. Egypt.
Hellenic-Syrian group. India. China. Conclusion.

Charles Lyell has shown more clearly than any previous writer how
Nature may attain great results by trifling means. But, as Ernst von Baer
has shown in pregnant words, the standard for small and great, as well as for
the duration and violence of a natural phenomenon, is in many cases derived
from the physical organization of man. The year is a measure of time
furnished by the planetary system; but when we speak of a thousand years
we introduce the decimal system, and this is based on the structure of
our extremities. We often measure mountains in feet, and we distinguish
long and short periods of time according to the average length of human
life, that is, according to the frailty of our bodies ; and in like manner we
unconsciously borrow the standard for the terms ‘ violent ' or * less violent *
from the sphere of our personal experience.

Thus our judgment is moulded by our physical constitution, and we
are prone to forget that the planet may be measured by man, but not
according to man.

The enthusiasm with which the little polyp building up the coral reef,
and the raindrop hollowing out the stone, have been contemplated, has,
I fear, introduced into the consideration of important questions con-
cerning the history of the earth a certain element of geological cpiietism —
derived 4rom tjie peaceable commonplaceness of everyday life — an element
which by no means contributes to a just conception of those phenomena
which have been, and still are, of the first consequence in fashioning
the present face of the earth.

The convulsions which have affected certain parts of thceai^th’s crust,
with a frequency far greater than was till quite recently supposed, show
clearly enough how one-sided this point of view is. The earthquakes of

HOLLA.S * n

3 45?^



18


THE DELUGE •


[part 1

the present day are certainly but faint reminiscences of those telluric
movements' to which the structure of almost every mountain range bears
witness. Numerous examples of great mountain chains suggest by their
structure the possibility, and in certain cases even the probability, of the
occasional intervention in the course of great geologic processes of
episodal disturbances, of such indescribable and overpowering violence,
that the imagination refuses to follow the understanding and to com-
plete the picture of which the outlines are furnished by observations
of fact.

Such catastrophes have not occurred since the existence of man, at least
not since the time of written records. The most stupendous natural
event for which we have human testimony is known as the Delugt. An
attempt will here be made to investigate the physical basis of the ancient
accounts. This attempt is founded on the cuneiform text, and owes much
to the valuable assistance which the distinguished authority on these
monuments of primitive culture. Dr. Paul Haupt in Gottingen, has so
kindly rendered me ; he has thrown light on many obscure points in the
ancient texts, and has furnished me with a new translation of several
important passages.

In the legends and holy books of antiquity there are numerous accounts
of great natural phenomena. In the traditions of Northern Europe
references to volcanic eruptions predominate; but stories of devastating
floods are extremely widespread both in the old and new world.

It must from the outset be clearly borne in mind that the part played
by rain in these great inundations is of necessity entirely subordinate.
Pluvial inundations by their very origin are restricted within certain
bounds; even in their most violent forms they are narrowly limited in
space, and they flow away following the slope of the valleys. Floods of
immeasurably greater violence are caused by hurricanes, and yet more
extensive are those occasioned by earthquakes.

On November 1, 1765, an earthquake occurred at Lisbon of such force
that the waves to which it gave rise in the Atlantic Ocean extended as
far as the Antilles. When, on December 23, 1854, Simoda in Japan was
devastated by an earthquake, great waves crossed the North Pacific Ocean
and broke on the coast of California \ A violent shock occurred near Arica
on the Peruvian coast on August 13, 1868. From accounts of this, collected
from far and wide, Hochstetter was able to show that the agitation it
caused in the sea was felt north and south along the west coast of
America, that the waves rose in turmoil about the Sandwich Islands
for several days, and broke on the Samoan Islands, the east coast of

' Bache, Am. Journ. Sci. Arts, 1856, 2nd sen, XXI, pp. 37-43. Here the first attempt
was made to determine the depth of the ocean from a study of the propagation of
the disturbance. . ,



OCEANIC FLOODS


1 »


CH. l]

Australia, New Zealand, and the Chatham Islands \ The French frigate
bound at the time for Cape Horn, encountered in latitude 51** S.
great packs of freshly-broken jagged icebergs, which the mighty flood had
set free as it penetrated beneath the Antarctic ice^. Eugen Geinitz has
shown how during the earthquake of Iquique in Peru on May 9, 1877, the
Pacific Ocean rose in great waves on the opposite coast from Japan down to
the Chatham Islands

Woe to the land in the vicinity of the shock which experiences such
a flood I Such a visitation befell Callao in Peru on October 28, 1746. An
observer who^ visited the place soon afterwards writes: ‘Not the faintest
trace of its previous appearance remains ; heaps of sand and boulders alone
mark \t8 former site ; it has become an extensive beach stretching along
the coast. Some towers did indeed, owing to the strength of their walls,
for a time withstand the force of the earthquake and the violence of the
concussions ; but hardly had the unfortunate inhabitants recovered from
the first shock of their terror, when the sea suddenly began to swell, and
continued to rise to such an extraordinary degree and with such tre-
mendous force, that — although Callao stood upon a hill, which insensibly
increasing in elevation extends as far as Lima — yet nevertheless the water,
hurling itself down from the lieight it had rejiched, rushed violently for-
wards far above the coast-line and covered everything in one immense
flood ; most of the ships which lay at anchor in the harbour were shattered,
the rest were raised alx)ve the level of the walls and towers, driven
forwards, and left stranded far away on the other side of the town. At
the same time all the houses and buildings covered l)y the flood were torn
away from their very foundations. . . ’

Of 5,000 inhabitants only about 200 survived.

Occurrences of this kind are by no means rare. The sea retires to a
distance, rises in a long towering ridge, and then plunges in a devastating
flood over the land ; the rivers are forced Iwickwards, the towns laid waste.
The extent of the disaster depends largely on the outline of the coast and
the height of the land. Particularly striking instances of such floods have
occurre*! of late years in South America, and Lyell was probably right when
he attempted some yeai-s ago to explain the flood legends of the Araucanian

’ F. V. Hochstetter, Ueber das Erdbeben in Peru am 13. August 1868, uiid die dadurch
veranlasiten Fluthwellen im pacif. Ocean; Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1868, Bd.
58 a, p. 837 ; 18(19, Bd. 59 b, p. 109.

* Lettre de M. Essarts, Bull. Soc. Gcogr., 1872, slt., IV, p. 316, and Comptea rend.,
1872, t. 74, p. 1126.

* E. Geinitz, Das Erdbeben von Iquique am 9. Mai 1877, und die durch dasselbe vcrursachtc
Erdbebenfluth im Grossen Ocean ; Nova Act. Leop. Car. 1878, XL, pp. 385-444, 2 pi.

* A True and Particular Relation of the dreadful Earthquake which happen'd at
Lima, Ac. Published at Lima by Command of the Vice Roy, &c., 8vo, 2nd ed., London,
1748, pp. 146-148.



20


THE DELUGE


[part I

Indians from this circumstance The inhabitants of the Fiji Islands tell of
a great flood, for many years after which they kept their boats in readiness,
fearing a repetition of the occurrence, and Lenormant, in his excellent
summary of the Deluge legends, remarks that this observation points
rather to a tidal wave of the sea than to a universal deluge That accounts
of great floods should be met with even on the most remote- islands is,
I think, rendered easily intelligible by the information concerning seismic
sea«waves which has been collected within the last decade or so. In some
of these traditions it is expressly stated that the flood was produced by
the sea. Such seismic floods are, according to our present knpwledge, only
likely to occur in the case of islands, of low-lying coast-land, and of the
lower parts of great river valleys. ^

For this reason it was found difficult to explain from natural causes the
received interpretation of the biblical text. There was hesitation in admitting
that a seismic wave could have carried Noah’s ark to the top of Ararat, and
the occurrence could not be explained by means of atmospheric precipitations.

In the biblical story the accounts of two independent writers are com-
bined; their versions to a large extent repeat one another, but differ in matters
of minor importance, and they are united in such a way as to bo easily
distinguishable. A most important point of difference lies in the desig-
nation of the divinity, the one writer making use of the name Jahveh, the
other of the plural form Elohim ; there is also a marked difference in the
style of narration. But the separation of the two accounts does not essen-
tially advance our knowledge of the true nature of the event, and although
an attempt has been made to show, by means of an ingenious method
of exposition, that the words ‘ the mountains of Ararat ’ (Qen. viii. 4) do not
indicate the mountain now known by this name, but the mountains of
a district which we have no means of localizing, yet this docs not appear to
lead us to results of any value.

The Izdvthar Eirk.

From the fragments still extant of the writings of Berosus, a Babylonian
priest who lived about 330-260 B.C., it has long been known that the
tradition of a great flood existed in the lowlands of the Euphrates, and
that in this tradition many of its features presented a striking resemblance
to the biblical account According to Berosus, who quotes the sacred
writings of Babylonia as his authority, this catastrophe occurred^ in the
reign of Xisuthros, son of Otiartes. Kronos informs Xisuthfbs in a dream
that on the fifteenth of the month Daisios all human beings will be destroyed
by a flood. He commands him to bury the sacred writings at Sippara,
the city of the Sun, then to build a vessel, furnish it with provisions, and
’ C. Lyell, Principles of Geology, llth ed., II, p. 154.

* F. Lenormant, Les originea de rhistoire d'apret la Bible, &c., I, Paris, 1880,
pp. 487, 488.


I '



THE IZDHBAB EPIC


21


CH. l]

enter it with his family and friends, taking with him as well four-footed
and winged creatures. Xisuthros follows these instructions, the flood
takes place, covers the country, and then abates; he sends forth birds
that he may discover the condition of the earth and finally leaves the
vessel, together with his family, and offers a sacrifice to the gods.
Xisuthros as a reward for his piety obtains a place among the gods,
and with him his wife, his daughter, and the steersman.

This is the substance of the account of Berosus as it is handed down
by Alexander Polyhistor. ‘ Of the ship of Xisuthros,* he concludes, ‘ which
finally stranc\ied in Armenia, a portion still exists in tlic Gordyaean moun-
tains in that country, and the people scrape off the pitch with which it
is coi^ered and use it as a charm against diseases. And when the
others had returned to Babylon, and had found the writings at Sippara
again, they built towns and erected temples, and thus Babylon was
again populated ^*

Within the last few years a series of most wonderful discoveries,
exceeding all expectation, have recovered for us much of the ancient
literature which flourished in the plain of the Euphrates, and among
this a new and detailed account of the Deluge has been found.

.The enthusiastic and successful efforts of English explorers such as
Layard, Loftus, and G. Smith, and in particular of Hormuzd Bassam,
have brought to light and restored to the scientific world the retnains
of the royal library of Nineveh. These consist of thousands of clay
tablets covere<l with cuneiform in.scriptions, which have been excavated
from the ruined mound of Kujuiidjik. The writings include not only
religious subjects, l)ut embrace the most various branches of human
knowledge. The greater part of tlie extant specimens of these ancient
works were copied in the reign of Asfirbanipal (670 b.c.) from originals
preserved in the libraries of Babylon, Kutha, Akka, Ur, Erech, Larsa,
Urpur, and other towns ; this is in particular tlie case with regard to the
tablets which we are alx)ut to discuss.

The account of the Deluge is, strange to say, not contained in those
tablets which treat of the creation of the world, the fall of man, and the
conflict of good and evil. It forms an episode in a great epic which tells
of the deeds of the hero Izdubar. ‘ Several copies of this epic are known ;
they were made at the command of Asflrbanipal from a much older
text, which was probably inscribed more than 2,000 years before our
aera, and which was preserved in the ecclesiastical library at Erech.
G. Smith describes it rightly as a great national work. It consists of

' The fragments of Berosus which relate to the Deluge are to be found 'in Alex. Polyhist.,
Apollodorus, and Abydenus; they have been collected by G. Smith, The Chaldaean
Account of Genesis, 8vo, London, 1876, pp. 37-47 ; in Lenormant, Origines, I, pp. 387-390,
and in ether places.



22


THE PELUOE


c


fpABTI


twelve cantos, which, from their leading features, Bawlinaon has ingeni-
ously compared with the twelve signs of the Zodiac. The career of the
hero Izdubar (probably identical with the biblical Nimrod), as related
in these twelve cantos, rests undoubtedly on an historical basis ;
but it receives from the comparison with the signs of the Zodiac an
allegorical similarity with the courae of the sun. The eleventh canto,
which according to the order of the Zodiac corresponds to the sign
Aquarius, contains tlie account of the Deluge. Izdubar has lost his friend
Eab&ni, he is ill, and wanders down the river to its mouth seeking liis fore-
father Hasis-Adra, who, having been rescued from the flood, has been
placed there by the gods to lead an immortal life untouched by the hand
of time. Izdubar finds his forefather and questions him as to his sWange
experiences, which the latter relates.

Of the narration of Hasis-Adra several translations have been mode.
I will only mention those of G. Smith', with notes by Fox Talbot ^ of
J. Oppert, F. Lenormant^, and Paul Haupt^. In the following pages
I have made use of Haupt’s latest translation, which he has supplemented
by much friendly infonnation. For the portion Col. II, lines 1-24, which
is unfortunately very incomplete and has not been rendered by Haupt,
I have made use of the translation by Lenormant.

I shall confine myself to the following summary of Hasis-Adra’s
narration, and refer the reader for the complete text, in so far as
I do not quote it literally, to the works [of the scholars already
mentioned.

Col. I, 8-10. Introductory speech addressed to Izdubar.

ll-17a. The great gods, in council in the ancient city of Surippak on
the Euphrates, determine to cause a deluge.

17b-19. The god £a, the lord of inscrutable wisdom, the god of the sea,
was in the council of the gods and informs Hasis-Adra of their resolve.

20-27. £a's warning and injunction to build a ship on dry land.

28-81, H-Adra ofFei's objections, he fcara the scorn of the people and
the elders.

32-45. fia's renewed and detailed instruction, prophecy of the deluge,
command to H-Adra to take with him com, property, family, servants
and maids, relations, cattle and wild beasts.


^ G. Smith, in Trans. Bibl. Archaeol. Soc., 1873, II, pp. 213 et seq^ and 1874, III,
pp. 534 et seq.; further, The Chaldaean Account of Genesis, pp. 263>272. ^

^ Fox Talbot, Trans. Bibl. Archaeol. Soc. 1875, IV, pp. 49-83.

^ Lenormant, Origiiies, I, Append, v, pp. 601-618, and II a, p. 9, note ; this transla-
tion is based on the previous works of Oppert.

* Paul Haupt, Der keilinschrifbliche Sintfluthbericht, eine Episode des babylonischen
Nimrod-Epos ; Habilit.-Yorl. geh. a. d. Univ. Gottingen, 1880, 8®, Leipzig, 1881 ; and by
the same, Excuraus : Der keilinschriftliche Sintfluthbericht, in Schrader, Keilinschriften
und Altes Testament. 2. Aufl., Giessen, 1883. i



THE CUNEIFORM ACCOUNT


CH. l]


28


46-52. H'Adra consents, although no one has built a ship in this
manner before; [here there are unfortunately many gaps].

CoL II, 1-24. [Unfortunately most incomplete.] The fragments pre*
serve<^ refer to the construction and equipment of the vesseL

25-29. H-Adra collects together all his possessions in silver and gold,
and idl the living seeds which he had; his household, the cattle, the wild
beasts, and his relations he brings up into the ship.

30-86. Final warning by a voice (1). H-Adra’s fear.

37-39. He enters the ship, closes it, and commits the great structure
with its freight to the pilot Buzurkurgal.

40-50. Description of the phenomenon.

Col. Ill, 1-8. The description continued [incomplete].

4. Brother looks no longer for brother. [The fragment communicated
by Fox Talbot, Trans. Bibl. Arch. Soc., IV, 129, which describes the terror
and flight of men and beasts, does not belong to the Deluge stoiy.]

5- 7. Fear of the gods themselves ; they fly up to the heaven of the
god Anu.

8- 18. Loud lament of the goddess Istar over the destruction of mam-
kind; lament of the gods over the water spirits of the deep.

19-23. Duration of the storm and flood; subsidence.

24-30. H-Adra sails through the flood ; corpses drift on the waters.
U-Adra looks out and breaks into tears.

V

31. First appearance of land.

32-36. The ship strands on [the, or a] mountain of the land of Nizir and
remains there six days.

37-44. Hasis-Adra sends forth a dove (?), then a swallow, then a raven.

45-48. He leaves the ship with all his companions and prepares a sacrifice.

49, 50. The gods draw nigh.

51-53. Istar raises the great bows (1) on high, and vows not to forget.

Col. IV, 1-5. these days. All the gods may come to the offering except
BSl, who caused the flood.

6- 9. Bfil's anger at H-Adra's escape.

9- 11. The god Adar refers him to £a.

12-22. £!a’s justification. The innocent shall not suffer with the guilty.
Beasts of prey, famine, and plague may destroy mankind, but never again
a deluge.

^ 23-30. Bol pacified, enters the ship, lays H-Adra's hand in his wife's,
faises both to the gods, and places them at the mouth of the rivers.

1. The flivee of m*igin. It is evident from our introductory remarks
that the character of the scene of action— the question as to whether it
was highland or lowland, the lower part of a great river valfey for example
— is of essential importance in a critical examination of this great natural
phenoingnon.



24


THE DELUGE


[parti

The eleventh canto of the Izdubar epic names two places definitely, the
town Surippak as the abode of Hasls-Adra, and the mountain of the
country of Nizir as the place of stranding. We have now to consider more
closely the place of origin of the catastrophe.

The first passage runs :

Col. I, 11. The city ofSurippak^ the city^ which as thoa knowesA^ lieth on
the bank of the Euphrates^

12. This [cityl was [already^ ancient^ when the gods within it^
18. their hearts prompted the gods [to] send a deluge . . . .

That the inhabitants of this town Surippak were a peqple skilled in
ship-building is clear from the further contents of this canto, and from
Hasis-Adra’s fear of their scorn. The town is placed by all writers* on the
lower portion of the river. Bawlinson seeks to show that it was situated
somewhere in the neighbourhood of the present Howeiza, and describes
it as. an inland town, in so far as no town has ever been built on the
sea-coast in the immediate neighbourhood of a big river such as the
Euphrates, because navigation would be endangered by silting up \

The sea-coast of that time can, however, hardly have been identical with
that of the present day. It is extremely probable that a considerable part
of the plain in the neighbourhood of the present estuaries has been formed
.in the course of the last few thousand years. Pliny had already remarked
(VI, cap. 26) that there was scarcely any other place where the formation
of land by a river proceeded so rapidly, Beke attempted many years ago
to determine the rate at which the coast advanced, from Arrian's account of
the journey of Nearchus, and from Pliny's statement as to the position of
Charax \ Loftus, Rawlinson, and all the more recent observers agree on
this point ; according to Loftus's description the only matter for doubt is
whether the new land has been produced solely by the mud deposited by
the river, or whether a slight retreat of the sea may not have contributed
some assistance. According to the statements of this trustworthy observer,
based on the evidence afforded by recent marine deposits which occur in
the country, the coast-line of the Persian Gulf extended in comparatively
modem times at least 400 kilometers further to the north-west than the
present mouth of the Schatt-el-Arfib, and 240 kilometers further inland
than the point of confluence of the Euphrates and Tigris at Korna \

^ H. Rawlinson, Notes on Capt, Durand’s Report upon the Islands of Bahi^ip, Journ.
Roy. Asiat. Sbc. 1880, XII, p. 205 ; also Lenormant, Orig., I, p. 393. *

’ G. T. Beke, On the former Extent of the Persian Gulf and on the comparatively
recent Union of the Tigris and Euphrates, Phil. Mag., 1834, new ser., IV, pp. 107-112 ;
Garter, Remarks, &c., op. cit., 1884, V, pp. 246-252 ; Beke, On the historical Evidence
of the Advance of the Land upon the Sea at the Head of the Persian Gulf, op. cit., 1835,
VI, pp. 401-408.

’ W. K. Loftus, On the Geol. of Portions of the Turko^Persian Frontier ; Quart. Journ.
Geol. Soc., 1855, XI, p. 251.



CH. 1] GROWTH OP LAND ON THE LOWER EUPHRATES 25

f

The activity of the two great rivers in the formation of land is at any rate
very considerable, and their fall in the whole of their lower course so slight
that the tide has been observed in the Tigris as far as the village Abdallah-
ibn-Ali, 280 kilometers, and in the Euphrates in the marshes of El-hammer,
298 kilometers inland from the sea \

Friedrich Delitzsch has collated all the historic texts which afford
evidence of change in the region of the river mouths, and has even
attempted to draw up a map showing its former condition He deduces
from the account of Sennacherib’s (705-681 b.c.) naval expedition against
Elam that the JBuphrates at that time possessed an independent mouth ; and
it seems to me that, in the case of the Tigris, yet more positive evidence
on this subject, though relating to a still earlier period, is afforded by
inscriptions which have been published by G. Smitli ; according to these
a cutting was made under King Rim-sin from the Tigris to the sea, clearly
in order to facilitate its discharge. We also possess a complete list of large
waterworks constructed on the Tigris under Hammuragas (circ. 1500 b.c.),
who succeeded Rim-sin on the throne; the inscriptions extol particularly
a mighty dyke, which was built along the stream after certain great
floods, and was called Kara-samas^. Such embankments must, however,
have hastened the silting up of the existing inlet. In addition to this,
the island of Dilmun lay opposite the estuaries, a fact to which Friedrich
Delitzsch has called attention. For all these reasons it is now impossible
to determine with any attempt at precision tlie rate of growth of the land.

These statements might perhaps lead us to assume that the rivers were
completely independent at the time of the Deluge, but F. Delitzsch rightly
calls attention to Hasis-Adra’s later dwelling-place, where Izdubar visits him.

Col. IV, 30. Then they took me, and afar off at the mouth of the rivere
they made me to dwdl.

‘ The mouth of the rivers ’ indicates clearly that the streams, if they were
still distinct, discharged themselves into the sea at no great distance from
each other.

The town of Surippak, even at that time extremely ancient, was
situated above this district, which was silting up, and on the Euphrates,
hence at some place which must now lie far inland in the plain.

2. d'he use of asyhalt In considering the question of locality a definite

^ A. S^hlafli, Zur physikalischen Geographic von Unter-Mesopotamien ; Schweiz.
Denkschr., 1864,\). 4.

* F. Delitzsch, Wo lag das Paradies? 8®, 1881, pp. 173-182; also Fr. Hommel, Die
vorsemitischen Culturen, 8^ 1883, p. 196. W. Ainsworth also treated this Hubject in great
detail many years ago, and found that at a period 4,200 years distant the alluvial land
must have been about 70 miles distant from the present coast; cf. by the same,
Researches in Assyria, Babylonia, and Chaldaea, 8vo, 1838, p. 194.

’ G. Smith, Early History of Babylonia, Trans. Bibl. Arch. Soc. 1872, 1, pp. 55, 59, 62 ;
F. MOrd^ei^ Kurzgefasste Geschichte Babylonians und Assyriens, 1882, p. 88.



26


THE DELUGE


[part I


indication must be mentioned, which is repeated in the narration of Hasis-
Adra, in the fragment of Berosus, and in the Elohistic account of Genesis ;
this, as Ainsworth and others long ago recognized, points to a definite
feature in the geological structure in the district of the Lower Euphrates^.
I refer to the employment of asphalt in the construction of the ark, a fact
which, it seems to me, has not been accorded its due share of importance.

In the first part of Col. II, which describes the construction of the
ship and its mode of partition, preserved unfortunately only in a fragmen-
tary condition, lines 9-11 run as follows ;

Col. II, 9. I saw clefts and added what was wanting ;

10. three measures of pitch I poured over the outside,

11. three measures of pitch I p&ared over ihje inside

Berosus relates how in much later times the bitumen was scraped
off the outside of the vessel and used as a curative.

Gen. vi. 14 reads as follows: Fojc Hbi arcam de lignis laevigatis:
mansiunculas in area facies^ et bitumine linies intrinsecus et extrinsecus\

A small fragment of a clay tablet relates the childhood of the great
King Sargon I, and begins thus : Sargon the mighty King^ the King of
Agade^ am L My mother was a prhicess, my father I never knew. My
father's brother dwelt on the mountain of the town Azurpiranu, which lies
on the banks of the Euphrates. My mother the princees conceived me ; in
secret she brought me forth. She placed me in a little basket of rushes, with
pitch she closed the door. She set me in the river ^ which did not drown ms*.

In like manner Exod. ii. 3 relates that the little basket of reeds in which
Moses was exposed was closed with pitch.

The valley of the Euphrates and Tigris is surrounded by hills of
Miocene strata, rich in asphalt. Loftus gives a list of numerous localities
where asphalt occurs.

Let us now compare the account of the pouring of pitch over the ark,
both within and without, as expressly stated both in Genesis and the


^ W. Ainsworth, Researches in Assyria, Babylonia, and Chaldaea, p. 89.

* Smith, Ghald. Genes., p. 26G ; Lenormant, Orig., I, p. 606 ; P. Haupt, Keilipschriftl.
Sintfluthbericht, p. 13. Dr. Haupt, in his glossary to the account of the Deluge (Schrader,
Keilinsch. und Altes Test., p. 516), is inclined to translate these passages : * Three measures
of pitch I used in calking, and three measures of petroleum I brought into the
interior.’ The translation of the word qlru, ’exterior,’ rests only on a coivjecture, and in
the first line the word kupru (pitch, asphalt), in the second iddu (pe|role urn,* naphtha)
is used ; the latter corresponds, according to Haupt (id. loc. p. 510), to the Accadian
iisir « glittering water (petroleum).

’ The biblical texts are quoted according to the edition Tischendorf. 1 have no
intention of entering here into the old controversy on the expression ’ de lignis laevi-
gatis’; on this point I refer the reader, among other works, to Beke and Garter, Phil.
Mag., now ser., Ill, p. 103 ; IV, pp. 178, 280, and Y, p. 244.

* Smith, Ghald. Genes., p. 299; Delitzsch, Riradies, p. 209; Jos. Halevy, Revue

critique, 1881, p. 482 ; Melanges de critique, &c., Paris, 1883, p. 162. « •



THE USE OP ASPHALT


27


CH. l]

Izdubar epic, with a description of the customs prevailing on the Euphrates
at the present day, as given by an impartial authority, the engineer Cernik,
who travelled through Mesopotamia some years ago in order to detennine
the course of a railway.

Cernik writes with regard to the transpoi*t of the naphtha obtained near
Hit on the Euphrates : ‘ It is considered sufficient to make a rude basket-
work, without a keel, and with mds of tamarisk-wood as ribs, the spaces
being filled with straw and reed- work, and the whole construction plastered
with a superabundant layer of asphalt both inside and out. Never-
theless these craft possess considerable relative strength. . . At Hit
on the Euphrates the same process is therefore in use to-day for the rapid
construction of strong and water-tight vessels as was employed thousands
of years ago by Hasis-Adra.

In this district pitch was used for many purposes in ancient times. In
the absence of quarry stones and lime, great buildings were erected of
brick, and bitumen was used as cement.

Thus the well-known passage concerning the building of the tower of
Babel reads as follows, Gen. xi. i3, Dixitque alter ad jn'oximxim mum: Venitet
faciamua lateres^ et coquamm eoi< iyuL IJabuermitque lateres 'pro saxU et
bitumen pro cuemento.

Herodotus describes in detail how the clay taken out of the ditch
surrounding the town of Babylon was made into bricks and baked, how
the wall was then built of these bricks, asphalt being used instead of
mortar. But the asphalt was brought from Is, a town on the Euphrates,
eight days’ journey distant from Babylon. This is the present Hit \

Such< brickwork is met with here and there amongst the ruins in great
quantities, and Cernik relates that in the districts where asphalt abounds
it is used in whole blocks for buildings.

The use of bitumen for the construction of the burning, perhaps
even explosive, missiles, which were employed throughout the whole
of Asia, was known in the very earliest times to which the cuneiform
inscriptions extend. This is proved by the account of the contest of the
god Merodach with the dragon Tiuinat, which seems to form a part of
the Babylonian legend of the Fall, and yet more clearly by the biblical
description in the apocryphal story of the dragon at Babel (Dan. xiv. 2(5).
This is also the significance of the thunderliolts, with which Merodach,
in the light with the dragon, is represented in the bas-reliefs^.

' Ingen. Jos. Cernik’s technische Studien-Expediiion durch die (febiete des Kuphrut
und Tigris, bearb. und herausg. v. Am. Freih. v. Schweiger-Lcrchenfeld ; Peturmann*H
Mittheil., ErganzuDgshefbe 44 and 45, 1875-1876, with 7 maps, i, p. 28.

* Herodotus, Clio, 179.

’ Smith, Ghald. Genes., pp. 62, 98 ; on the later development of the art of preparing
these missiles, cf., in particular, R. Maclagan, On Early Asiatic Fire-Weapons, Journ.
Asiat. Sot. Bengal, 1876, zlva, pp. 30-71.



28


THE DELUGE


[part I


Let us now return to the building of the ship.

As the development of the various branches of architecture has been
influenced by the nature of the stones at the command of the artist, so
in the art of ship-building the character of the materials provided by
nature has given rise to local peculiarities which, owing to the continued
employment of the same materials, have persisted for long periods. In an
instructive study Lane Fox has shown how slowly the advance has been
made from the hollowed-out tree to the stitched boat, and from this to the
use of pegs in boat-building, and, at the same time, how local peculiarities
have persisted from the earliest periods down to the preqpnt day. The
inhabitants of the island of K^, to the west of New Guinea, who have a great
reputation for their skill in ship-building, may afford us an example. They
construct their boats in the old manner, binding on the ribs with cord, and
only when these ribs, fixed according to ancient custom, have become
useless, do they fasten on new ribs with nails in European fashion. The
natives of the Samoan Islands and of Fiji calk their boats with the resin
of the bread-fruit tree, those of the Kingsmill Islands with strips of Pan-
danus leaves; in certain parts of Siam a porous wood which swells in water
is used for this purpose^.

On the Euphrates pitch is still employed to-day as it was so long ago.
But, besides vessels made with pitch, there are still used on the Euphrates
those skins filled with air, and the rafts fioated by skins, which are repre-
sented in Assyrian sculptures, and so fully described by Herodotus (I, 194).
Accoi’ding to Herodotus these vessels could be used only to descend the
rivers, and their chief freight was date wine. More than a century ago
Rennell was astonished to find how precisely the description of Herodotus
applied to the existing vessels still in daily use.

Hasls-Adra*s boat was black in colour, it was probably stitched; the
abundant use of pitch in ship-building is a custom in the strictest sense
of the word antediluvial, which has survived up to the present day.

8. The warnings. The information we derive from the text as to the
physical occurrences of the Deluge may be divided into three groups,
namely, the warnings, the event itself, and the conclusion. The difficulty
in arriving at a more exact apprehension of the facts lies in the extensive
personification of the forces of nature, but this difficulty is not, I think,
altogether insuperable.

All the warnings proceed, it is to be observed, from ]£a, the wise god of
the sea and the deep. He took part in the council when the gods deter-
mined to cause a deluge, and he foretold the impending judgment to his
faithful servant Hasis-Adra.


’ Lane Fox, On early Modes of Navigation; Joum. Anthropol. Inst, 1875, IV,
pp. 399-4.S5. • •



CH.I] ^ THE WABNINGS 29

Col. I, 20. ... Hear . • • avd give heed . . .

21. thovii man of Surippak, son of Obara^Tutv, (ObiaHes),

22. abandon thy houses build a ship; save aU that thou canst

find of living creatures ;

23. they wish to destroy the seed of life ; pi^eserve thou

24. and bring up living seed of every kind into the interior of

the ship ^

What can have been the nature of these warnings from the sea-god 1
It seems to me that they can have been none other than minor floods,
probably of seii^mic origin, repeated risings of the sea above its shores,
which at the same time checked the Euphrates, awakened fear in the city
of Surippak, situated at no great distance from the sea, and led to these
measures of precaution.

The last warning, which immediately precedes the embarkment, is
certainly of a somewhat different nature :

Col. II, 80. Now when the sun had made the appointed time,

31. a voice (?) spoke: in the evening the heavens will rain
destruction.

33. The appointed time is arrived,

34. spo/cs the voice (?), in the evening the heavens will rain

destruction.

It is remarkable that the otherwise universal personification of natural
forces is not carried out here, but a voice is introduced as speaking, as
though it were about to refer to a quite unusual phenomenon, perhaps
a seismic rumbling, a romlo. We must abstain from further conjectures
on this point. The lines quoted above are unfortunately preserved only on
one of the Deluge tablets, and the text is much obliterated in both places
where the word ‘ kukru/ which is here translated by ‘ voice,* occurs. The
word is not found in other texts.

4. The Catadrophe. The most important part of the description is that
dealing with the event itself; it is contained in the last lines of Col. II,
and the first of Col. Ill ; the latter are unfortunately much mutilated, and
are supplemented only to a slight extent by a newly discovered fragment.
After the passage describing how the ship is entrusted to the pilot Buzur<
kurgal (II, 39) a division line occurs, then follows :

Col. II, 40. Then arose MrX-s6H-ina-namAri

41. from the foundations of the heavens, black clouds

42. in the midst thereof Rammdn caused his thunder to roar,

43. while Nebo and Sarru advance against each other,

44. the ‘ thronebearers’ stride over mountain and 2 lain.

45. The mighty plague god unfetters the hurricanes (?).

46. Adar causes the canals (?) to overflow unceasingly.

^ 9a\}pt, in Schrader and other places, p. 61, and G6tt. Kachr. 188.3, p. 91.



30


THE DELUGE


[part I


47. The AnnnnaM cause floods to rise,

48. the earth they niake to trmhle through their power ^

49. Ramifiidn^s great billow ascends to the shy :

50. aU light is consuTiied in \^rkness\.

Col. Ill, 1. In one day .. .of the eaHh they lay \waste’\

2. raging blew (hantis iziqd-ma) . . . rrwuntmn (?) .'. .

3. tlte . . . they bring up po] battle against men.

4. Brother looks no nwre for brother, men trouble no longer

about each other. In heaven

5. the gods fear the deluge, and

6. they seek a retreat, they ascend to the heaven of the god Anu.

7. Like a dog on his litter, the gods crouch together at the

railings of heaven.

These lines may be divided into the following groups : (a) Col, II,
40-45 refer to atmospheric phenomena ; {b) 46-48 relate to the earth ;
(c) 49, 50 reflate to both ; {d) Col. Ill, 1-3 are unfortunately useless in their
present incomplete state ; {e) 4-7 describe the effect on men and gods.

This pragmatic arrangement works up the material in a forcible and
eflective manner to a climax, from the first appearance of a cloud on the
horizon to the flight of the terrified gods.

(a) The atnwspheve (Col. II, 40-45). Delitzsch interprets the expres-
sion in line 40 as, ‘ Water of the sunrise at dawn.' Bammd.n is the mighty
god of the storm. A thunderstorm succeeds to heavy clouds, then a
whirlwind. But what phenomenon of nature do the ‘ thronebearers '
striding over mountain and plain represent?

Let us glance at Lower Mesopotamia. 'Although,’ writes Schlafli,

' true storms are rare, whirlwinds are extremely frequent. Presenting in
form the most startling resemblance to a waterspout and diflering only in
appearance by its whitish colour, the column of sand and dust raised
by the wind sweeps majestically and lightly over the desert, losing itself
above in the blue cloudless ether. ... I remember counting eleven of these
pillars of dust in one moment on my journey from Mossul to Bagdad in
the middle of June of last year’ (1861 ?)^

These pillars certainly sweep along like supports of the sky. But
the dust-bearing storm may acquire stupendous power. An example of
this occurred in Bagdad on May 20, 1857, when, with a south-west wind,
the sun first became dim and then assumed the appearance of the moon.
Then at five o'clock in the afternoon, according to the account of
Dr. Dutheuil, a dark cloud of dust appeared; in one moment it had
enveloped the whole town, and penetrated into courtyards and rooms.
In less than a quarter of a minute the day was turned to the blackest
night. The effect was terrifying, everything was in confusion even in

^ Schlafli, Unt.-Me8opot., pp. 22, 23. • •



THE CATASTROPHE


81


CH. l]

the houses. This darkness, deeper than that of the darkest night, lasted
five minutes • . . the terrified inhabitants believed that the end of the
world had come. Indeed the noise of the raging winds and the whole
phenomenon were such as to inspire the minds of the stoutest with
the fear of some great cataclysm. The dust was brick-coloured. The
storm was felt in the most distant parts of the country. Schlafli calls it
a dust-spout ; Dutheuil does not think that it took the characteristic form
of a spout, but believes that the moving mass of dust was distributed
equally all over the country'.

(6) The earth (Col. II, 46-49). The overflowing of the canals is a
phenomenon which is readily explained by violent earthquake shocks,
but it may have been increased on this occasion by the storm and the
damming back of the rivers by the sea.

Line 47 appears to me to be of great importance. The Anunnaki are,
as Haupt has shown, the spirits of the deep, of the great subterranean
waters. It is they who convulse the earth, and ‘bring floods’ out of the
deep. This rising of waters from the deep corresponds to the often quoted
passages of the Elohistic account, Gen. vii. 11 Rupti mnt onines fontea
abyad magruie et cataraetae cadi apertae sunt (All the fountains of the
great deep were broken up and the windows of heaven were opened), and
viii. 2, after the occurrence, Et eland mnt fantes abyaai et prohihitae mnt
pluviae de cado {The fountains also of the deep ivere six>pped, and the rain
from the heaven was restrained).

Thus the Izdubar epic states expressly that water came out of the deep,
and in the biblical representation water from the deep is mentioned in
two places as opposed to rain from heaven. But this rising of great
quantities of water from the deep is a phenomenon which is a character-
istic accompaniment of earthquakes in the alluvial districts of great
rivers. The subterranean water is contained in the recent deposits of
the great plains on both sides of the stream, and its upper limit rises to
right and left above the mean level of the river, its elevation increasing
in proportion to the distance from the river. What lies beneath this limit
is saturated and mobile; the ground alM)ve it is dry and friable. When
seismic oscillations occur in a district of this kind the brittle upper layer
of the ground splits open in long clefts, and from these fissures the under-
ground water, either clear or as a muddy mass, is violently ejected, some-
times in* great volumes, sometimes in isolated jets several yards high.

This was the case on a comparatively small scale when on November 9,
1880, the alluvial plains of the Save near Agram were convulsed by a
shock; it also took place to a somewhat greater degree on October 10,
1879, when an earthquake occurred in the meadows of the Danube near
Holdowa; also on a much grander scale on the Lower Danube during
^ Dutheuil, in Schliifli, loc. cit., pp. 23, 24.


• •



82


THE DELUGE


[PABT I

(


the earthquake in Wallachia of January 11 (28), 1838, when the young
alluvial land from the Dimbowitza to beyond the river Sereth was inter^
sected by numerous fissures, from which the water gushed out in many
cases ‘ fathoms high

The same phenomenon was observed in the alluvial plain of the Mis-
sissippi, when on January 6, 1812, its valley was convulsed by an earth-
quake in the neighbourhood of the town New Madrid, situated a little
below the confiuence of the Ohiol We possess a graphic and instructive
account of the oscillation of the ground and the fractures thus caused
from the pen of an eye-witness, Bringier. The water that had filled the
lower cavities, in forcing its passage through, blew up the earth with loud
explosions. It rushed out in all quarters, bringing with it an enormous
quantity of carbonized wood mostly reduced to dust, which was ejected
to a height of from ten to fifteen feet. In the meantime the surface was
sinking and a black liquid rose up as high as the horse’s belly Thal^
a small standing lake. Lake Eulalie near New Madrid, was suddenly
drained by fissures caused by the same earthquake, is a fact by no
means contradictory to the statements made above®. The lake- lay,
as is often the case, on an impervious bed, and it flowed away into the
subterranean water beneath.

On January 12, 1862, a violent shock affected the whole region south
of Lake Baikal, and in particular the delta of the river Selenga which
flows into the lake. The steppe to the east of the Selenga, on which there
was a settlement of Buriats, sank over an area of twelve kilometers in
length and from 9*5-15 kilometers in breadth, water burst forth on all
sides, as well as from the springs, and finally the great depres-
sion which had been formed was filled completely by the waters of the
Baikal which flowed into it. In many places new springs made their
appearance, as for instance between the' village of Dubinin and the steppe
of Sagansk. In the town of Kudara the wooden lids of the fountains
were hurled into the air like corks from champagne bottles, and springs
of tepid water rose in places to a height of three ‘ sagenes ' (6*4 meters).
The earthquake extended southwards past Kjachta towards Urga, and the
Mongolians were so terrified by it that they caused the Lamas to perform
religious ceremonies, in order to appease the evil spirits which, as they
imagined, were shaking the earths


^ G. Schueler, Bericht an das fiiTstl. wallach. h. Ministerium, &c., n'ber die Erdspalt-
ungen und sonstigen Wirkungen des Erdbebens v. 11. (23.) Jan. 1838, fol., Bukarest, 1838.

^ L. Bringier, Notice of the Geol., &c., of the regions around the Mississippi and its
confluent waters ; Silliman, Am. Journ. 1821, 111, pp. 20-22.

’ C. Lyell, Principles of Geol., 2nd ed., II, p. 139.

* The detailed accounts of these remarkable phenomena by Lopatin, Semenof, Phitingof,
and others have been collected by Perrey, Note sur les tremblem. de terre en 1862,
p. Ill et seq. and 1^63, pp« 67-92.



33


CH. i] ^ INDICATIONS OP A CYCLONE

The earthquakes on the lower course of the Indus, Ganges, and Brahma-
putra have afforded numerous examples of the violent ejection of subter-
ranean water through the fissures arising in the alluvial ground. Some
of these will be referred to later.

These floods which the Anunnaki bring up from the depth?, the
fountains of the deep mentioned in Genesis, offer in my opinion a con-
clusive proof to the geologist that we are here dealing with a seismic
convulsion in a broad river valley. Such phenomena have never been
observed on any great scale except in extensive low-lying districts, where
subterranean water is present, nor would they be explicable under any
other conditions.

The interpretation of Col. II, 46-49, is therefore: fluctuation of the
water in the open channels, eruption of the subterranean water of the
^Euphrates, accompanied by trembling of the ground.

(c) Third grouj) (Col. II, 49, 60). It must be carefully noticed that
there has so far been no mention of a great flood, although the fluctuation
of the water in the canals and the spouting out of subterranean water
are only observed before an extensive inundation. This is first mentioned
in line 49, which reads:

49. Rammdn'a flood ascends to heaven.

In the very first allusion to the flood it already rises to heaven, and
it is not £a, the sea-god, who is named as instigator, but Kamm&n, the
weather-god. fia on the contrary offers friendly warning. The line
({uoted above can scarcely refer to the storm-lashed waves of an inun-
dation caused by seismic disturbances. From waves of this kind the gods
would hardly have fled to Anu’s heaven, or, as some cuneiform scholars
interpret, from the sphere of the planets to that of the fixed stars.

Sudden and terrible are the floods which are caused by cyclones.
They only occur in proximity to the sea, either on islands or over the plains
bordering the lower course of great rivers. With a breadth of hundreds of
miles the cyclonic wave approaches the mainland, and if it is checked
by the narrowing of the sea between convergent coasts, it rises to
a steadily increasing height until it finally precipitates itself over the
plain, carrying destruction before it. The havoc which such cyclones
have wrought in the West Indies, and at the mouths of tlie rivers of
India, has been terrible indeed. I shall quote examples later where tlie
loss of human* life in a single night was estimated at from oikj to two
hundred thousand souls. As a rule unusually heavy falls of rain, described
by observers in our own times as ‘deluges,* take place, particularly in
front of the advancing hurricane; at the same time violent thunderstorms
frequently occur.

In certain instances earthquakes have occurred simultaneously with
cyclones ; « this was the case near Calcutta in the fateful night of

•OLLA8 D



34


THE DELUGE


[part I

October 11-12, 1787, to which I shall refer again later. When the
‘ great hurricane * of October 10, 1780, raged over the West Indian
Islands, it raised the sea at St. Pierre in Martinique twenty-five feet high,
and drowned on this island 9,000, on St. Lucia 6,000 persons, besides
causing indescribable devastation: Sir G. Rodney expressed his firm
conviction that such complete destruction of the strongest buildings
could only be attributed to an earthquake, and that nothing but the
violence of the storm had prevented the inhabitants from noticing the
shocks K —

But to return to the text of the Izdubar epic.

Line 50 announces the setting in of darkness.

On September 2, 1860, the Prussian war-corvette ArJcorui fell in with
a hurricane on the east coast of Japan, which she weathered gallantly.
‘ At eight o’clock [in the morning],* runs the report, ‘ it became
so dark, that we could not see the end of the ship; sea and clouds
appeared to engulf each other. The waves stood up like walls, and the
storm lashed the foam through the air like close pelting rain; sea- water
and rain-water poured in streams over the deck and through every
aperture into the battery; wind and waves roared no longer, but every-
thing trembled and thundered. . . .* *

That is Ramm&n, who raises the waves to heaven, till the trembling
gods themselves fly to higher spheres, and who causes all light to
be swallowed up in darkness. The words in which his intervention,
following immediately upon the activity of the Anunnaki, is described,
render it probable that simultaneously with the earthquake a cyclone
from the Persian Gulf may have entered the Mesopotamian plain. In
the same way a violent earthquake, which occurred in Bagdad on
May 1, 1769, and which overthrew^ thousands of houses, was accompanied
by a terrible storm and a " deluge ^ of rain and hail

The most destructive phenomenon of the present day, the cyclone,
accompanied by an earthquake, is also that which corresponds most
exactly to Hasls-Adra’s description of the greatest natural event of
antiquity.

The next three lines. Col. Ill, 1-3, are, as we have said, unfortunately
too fragmentary to admit of a closer interpretation. We only perceive
from the single disconnected words, which are moreover differently
rendered by the various translators, that they continue the description
of the phenomenon. *

Col. Ill, 4 depicts the effect on terror-stricken man, 5-7 that on the

' H. W. Dove, Ueber das Gesetz der Starme; Poggendorff's Annal. d. Phys. u. Chem.,
2. Reihe, XXII, 1841, p. 40.

* T. Reye, Die Wirbelsttirme, Tornado’s und Wetters&ulen, 8vo, 1872, p. 115.

’ Richard, Hist, natur. de Pair et des m^t^ores, 12mo, 1771, VIII, p. 504. o •



CH. i] THE END OP THE CATASTROPHE 85

gods; to my previous remarks on these lines I have nothing more
to add.

6. Fu/rther cov/rse and coTiclusion of the catastrophe. Here follows the
lament of the mother of men, the majestic goddess Istar, over the deadly
war waged against mankind ; and the gods lament with her the deeds of
the Anunnaki ; hereupon :

Col. Ill, 19. Six days and seven nights

20. windy deluge {hurricane)^ and storm keep the upper handy

21. \hut'] at the dawn of the seventh day the storm abated, the
. dduge {hurricane), which a battle

22. had waged, like a [mightyl army,

23. was lulled; the sea subsided and storm and deluge

{hurricane) ceased.

24. I sailed through the sea lamenting

25. that the dwellings of men were reduced to mud ;

26. corpses drifted like trunks of trees.

27. I had opened a hatch, and as daylight fell on my face,

28. I shuddered, and sat down weeping,

29. over my face flowed my tears.

Lines 19-23 treat of the duration and final cessation of the great
catastrophe. The period of six days and seven nights is much shorter
than the period given in the biblical account, and corresponds more nearly
with the duration of similar events at the present day.

In line 20 the original text employs three substantives : sdru, aldhu, and
m^A'A. The first word is translated as identical with ‘ wind ' ; the third
signifies, according to Paul Haupt, most certainly ‘ storm ’ ; Lenormant says
‘ la pLuie diluvienne' The second word ahAbu has been interpreted in many
ways. In the Hebrew text, the word mabbAl is used as the character-
istic collective expression for the catastrophe of the Deluge, and this is no
doubt the case with the word ahAlm, e. g. I, 13; III, 20, 21, 23; and IV,
14, 17 et seq. G. Smith translates it * dduge! Lenormant *la trombe
dUuvienne'; Paul Haupt had employed the word ‘ stormflood,* or ‘ flood,* but
the translation * waterspout * is, as he kindly informs me, not impossible

' Dr. Haupt writes: ‘What the Hebrew nomen proprium of the Deluge, mahMl,
really means is not quite clear. The usual derivation from jahal, “to stream,** is
not free from exception. E. Schrader, in the first edition of Die Keilschriften
und das Alte Testament (1872), translated the Assyrian ahUhu by “heaps of ears,**
“heap,” and compared it with the Hebrew ahth, “ears.** Oppert and Lenormant had
previously translated the word by “ Eclair,’* /w^wien. Schrader took his translation from
Norris, Assyr. Diction., I, London, 1868. The frequently occurring phrase kima til aMbi
ashup, “like the hill of an ahdbu I cast down,” was rendered by Norris, whom Schrader
followed, as “ like a heap of corn I swept away.*’ The translation “ storm, whirlwind ** was
first employed by Smith (Assurbanipal, 56, 74). Praetorius adopted this rendering in the
Zeitschrififc d^r Deutschen morgenland. Gesellsch., Bd. 28, p 89, and compared it with the



36 THG D!ELUG!E ^ [part i

There is a similar doubt as to the word hdltu in line 22 ; it only occurs in
this passage, and was rendered by earlier translators as ‘ earthquake/ and
by Haupt as ' army/ on account of the verb ‘ fights ’ (Haupt, Exc., pp. 78, 74).
Haupt translates : ' . . . the flood, which had waged a battle, like a [mighty]
army, was lulled.* Lenormant, on the other hand, translates : La trombe
terrible, qui avail assaiUi conime un tremblement de terre, naTpaisa.

Line 23. The sea subsided; according to Haupt, Exc., p. 74, literally:
‘ he made the sea to withdraw into its basin.’ Dr. Haupt, to whom I am
indebted for so much kind help in these studies, confirms this literal
translation by two passages of the first tablet of the Izdubar epic. This
would again go to show that the flood came from the sea, and we shall
soon meet with further proof of this.

In lines 24-29 the raging of the storm has already ceased. With great
vividness these passages describe the state of the earth after the great
flood, the dwelling-places buried in mud, the drifting corpses, and the deep
impression made on the minds of the survivors. We have now reached
the stranding of the vessel.

6. The branding. In the passages referring to this portion I owe
some important alterations to the kindness of Dr. Haupt. The lines
then read as follows:

Col. Ill, 30. I looked towards the four cardinal points [or, wherever

I looked"], a terrible sea ;

31. towards the twelve houses of the heavens [i.e. in all direc-

tions of the compass], no land.

32. The ship drifted \at will] towards the country of Nisdr,

33. a mountain of the country of Nizir held the ship fast and

let it go no further towards the summit

34. On the first and on the second day the mountain of Nizir

hdd the ship fast, and did not let it, &c.

35. [afeo] on the third and fourth day the mountain hdd, &c.

36. [likewise] on the fifth and sixth day the mountain held, &c,

Arabic hahuh, “ strongly blowing, violent wind,” from habba, “to blow violently ” (whence
also hahhdb, “ fine dust ”). The expression kima til abUbi he understood as “ like a heap,
a ruin, which the storm has destroyed.” Pognon, L’inscription de Bavian, Paris, 1879,
p. 93, says, on the other hand, “ Quant a Texpression til ahubi que Ton rencontre souvent
dans les textes, jc crois qu’elle dcsigne un monticule inhabite et battu par le vent”; so
also in the Glossary, p. 178. In the same year I translated the word^in my Sumerische
Familiengesetze, p. 19, 7, as “storm wave.” Lotz, Tiglath-pilesar, 1880, p. 129, hesitates
between “ wave raised by the tempest” and “hill of quicksand.” In my Commentary to the
Deluge in Schrader's book I pointed out for the first time that ahufm, like the Hebrew
mahhiiU is the proper name for the Deluge. From all this it is clear that ahUhu can quite
well be rendered by Lenormant’s Uvmhe* This conception agrees so exactly with the
observations of storms at the mouth of the Ganges at the present day, that I should have
adopted Lenormant's view and used the word cyclone, had 1 not feared the objection
might be raised that the rotatory nature of great storms was unknown at thA.t time.



cH.i] ^ THE STRANDING 37

At the dawn of the seventh day Basis- Adra sends out a dove*

For line 81 Dr. Haupt follows the interpretation previously given by
J. Oppert.

An inscription which records a military expedition of King Asftr-
n&fir-pal gives us information as to the situation of the country of Nizir.
It lies east of the Tigris on the other side of the Lesser Zab, somewhere
between the thirty-fifth and thirty-sixth degrees of latitude. But the text,
as quoted above, does not seem to me to render it necessary to assume that
the stranding took place in the heart of the mountains, or even on a moun-
tain peak, nor indeed does it afford any support to such a supposition \

The mountains which separate Persia from the Mesopotamian plain
consist of a unilateral chain, the oldest members of which form the
Elwend in the north-east; these are succeeded by folded ranges of
Mesozoic and Nummulitic limestone ; folded and overfolded Miocene clays,
bearing gypsum, salt, and asphalt, form the outer zone of this great
mountain range in the south-west.

The whole lower course of the Lesser Zab falls, according to Ijoftus,
in the region of these Miocene foot-hills.

The passage in question in the inscription of Asftr-n&^ir-pal reads as
follows: In the month Tiechrit^ on the fifteenth day^ I left the town
Kalzn and entered the district of the town BahiU, I left Bahite and
apj)roach€d the land of Nizir ^ whUdi is also called Lullu-KiniiHi. I took
the town BuTiasi, its stronghold^ and thirty closed towns of its frontier.
The men were filled with fear and witJulrew to the inaccessible mountains.
But Asur-ndcir-jHily who marched first in their pursuit ^ went in guest of
them as though they were birds. He scattered their bodies abroad in the
mountains of the Land of Nizir. He cut in pieces three hundred and
twenty-six of their warriors; he took their horses. He killed the remainder
in the gorges and ravines of the mountain. ... So Lenormant, C)rig., II,
pt. i, pp. 10, 11. According to Oppert, Expend. Mdsop., this is followed by :
The majestic summits of these mountains stand up like a dagger. Concealed
from my warriors I ascended to their hiding-places. . . . And a later
passage reads: I left the town Kalzu; I crossed the Lesser Zab, and
I entered the country in the immediate neighbourhood of the town
Babiti.

Kalzu (Kakzi according to Oppert) is identified with Schamamek near
Erbil (Arbela), J.e. the province of Schemamlik at the foot of the Dehir
Dagh.

' Delitzsch, Parodies, p. 105 ; Lenormant, Orig., II, pt.i, p. 6. There seems to me to be
no reason to regard the Pic of Rowandiz, or indeed any mountain peak, as the place of
the stranding; cf. Sayce, Cuneiform Inscript, of Van, Journ. Asiatic Soc., 1882, new ser.,
XIV, p. 393, The expression “mountain*’ is also discussed by Diestel, Die Sintfluth,
2. Aufl., i87f, p, 13 (SammL wise. Vortr. v. Virchow und Holtzendorif, VI, p. 137j.



38 THE DELUGE ^ [part t

Comparing those statements with Cemik’s description, we arrive at the
following results :

The Assyrian king began his march at the same spot where, more than
five hundred years later, the great army of Darius Codomanus fled before
the victorious Alexander after the disastrous battle of Qaugamela. This
place is about 290-325 meters above the sea-level. The towji BabitS could
be reached in the same day, and must have been in the immediate neigh-
l)Ourhood of the Lessor Zab. The expedition was directed to the east-south-
east. The king had taken war-chariots with him, and must have crossed the
river near the present line of route, i. e. not far from Altyn-Kjoprii. By
the land of Nizir we must understand that country which is separated
from the plain of the Tigris by the Miocene hills of the Earatschok Dagh
and Baruw&n Dagh, and further south by the northern portion of the
Jebel Hamrin. Several rivers, among them the Lesser Zab, cross these
hills in narrow gorges, and the banks of Tertiary conglomerate form in
many places jagged cliffs of considerable height^.

The altitude of these mountains, which border on the land of Nizir,
is on an average 300 meters above the sea; the rivers flowing through
them lie much lower. But I see no reason to suppose that these mountains
were submerged.

The vessel drifts over the great plain, enters the low-lying region of
the Tigris, and strands on a declivity of one of these Miocene foot-hills
which border the plain on the north and north-east. It does not reach the
summit, but its living cargo, thus rescued, disembarks and ascends the
mountain, for in a later passage we read :

Col. Ill, 4f^. I raised an altar on the summit of the mountain , . . .

The fact that the vessel was driven inland from the sea against the
course of the rivers, seems to me decisive as to the character of the whole
catastrophe. If, as is generally supposed, the flood had been caused by rain, it
would certainly have carried the ship from the Lower Euphrates to the sea.

But this generally adopted conception of the biblical narrative can hardly
be justified even by tiie narrative itself. In the eighteenth century eminent
exponents had already asserted that in Gen. vi. 17 and vii. 6 ^mijam!
a onariy from the sea, w'^as to be read instead of ‘ majim,* aquae, waters (as
is well known the vowels were originally wanting in the Hebrew text).
More than a hundred years ago J. D. Michaelis, whom Bunsen describes as
one of the foundei’s of the new biblical criticism, mad^. the following
translation of the passages in question:

vi. 17. But I uill bring a flood over the earth from the sea, to destroy
all living souls under tjie whole heavens.

And further :

vii. 6. Noah was then six hundred years old, when the flood from the

' Cemik, Studien, I, pp. 37-48, and II, pp. 1-4. o •



CH. i] ^ DATE OF THE CATASTEOPHE ' 89

sea broke over the earth, and he went himsdfwith his eons, hie wife, and his
sons* wives into the ship, to escape from the water of the dduge.

On this he makes the very sensible observation : ' The Deluge must in
fact have been caused chiefly by the sea, for the air cannot hold nearly
as much water as would have been necessary, and consequently cannot send
it down as rain

To this interpretation, which several eminent expounders of the Bible
adopted in the eighteenth century, the objection is made that : ‘ the
alteration from majim to mijani is unnecessary and inadmissible, because
the rain also played an important part V But it is hardly necessary to
point out how much nearer this interpretation brings the biblical account
into harmony with observations of similar events in modem times,

7. Conclusion. Time of the occurrence. The remaining lines of Hasis-
Adra's narration are extremely interesting owing to their close similarity
with the corresponding parts of the biblical text, but they give us no
information of importance on the questions we have here discussed.

The episode of the sending forth of the birds has been dealt with by
Delitzsch and Eberhard Schrader, who lay stress on the greater originality
of the Chaldean account and the surprising resemblance to particular lines
of the biblical text. The great bows of Anu which the goddess Istar
raises on high before making her vow, the rainbow of Genesis, confirm the
rain. £a, the god of the sea, appears as peacemaker, and it is he who
demands of warlike Bel, that he shall never again cause a deluge —

According to what has gone before, we must consider the lower basin
of the rivers of Mesopotamia as the scene of these events, from the town
of Surippak, which lies on the Euphrates near the sea, to the flanks of
the mountains of Nizir on the other side of the Tigris. But against
this view the objection has lately been raised by an eminent authority,
that the whole colouring of the Chaldean account is specifically Babylonian,
and that this account is ‘localized in Babylonia’ by its very character.
It is further observed that in spite of this localization it yet seems to have
no clear connexion with the climatic conditions of the country ; and indeed
it must be observed, first, that the inundation stands in no relation to
the periodic flood-tides of the rivers in November and in spring ; secondly,
that it is not easy to understand why a ship steered by a pilot should

^ J. D. Michaelis, Deutsche Uebers. des Alien Testamentes mit Anmerkungen fUr
Ungelehrte, 2. Aitfl., II, Gottingen, 1775, pp. 15, 16, 41, 43 ; and by the same. Orient, und
exeget. Biblioth., IX. Bd., Frankfurt a. M., 1775, p. 183. There ar^ also observations by
other writers pointing out the possible overflowing of the sea, as for example Delitzsch,
Paradies, p. 212.

* A. Enobel, Die Genesis, 2. Aufl., 1860, p. 88 ; Aug. Dillmann, Die Genesis, 4. Aufl.,
1882, p. 133.

* E. Schrader, Die Keilschriften und das Alte Testament, 2. Aufl., 1888, pp. 50-52.
With tl\p ‘jfreat bows (?) of Anu ’ cf. Haupt in Schrader, op. cit. p. 517.



40


THE DELUGE


[PABTl


travel so far to the north. The matter ‘ only becomes comprehensible if
we suppose a belief in the northern origin of the new race of mankind to
have survived as a traditional feature in the Babylonian legend. But
that would be sufficient to prove that Babylon was not the original home
of the story of the Deluge*.

These objections seem to me to proceed from that, so to, speak, inland
conception natural to the inhabitants of the interior of a continent, which*
leads them to regard rain as the chief source of the flood, although, as we
have already observed in the case of such great inundations, rain only
appears as an accessoiy cause. The flood came, as do all great floods
of the present day, from the sea; earthquakes and cyclones have no
connexion with the periodic rising of rivers, and it was they which caused
the ship to drift so far to the north.

It is not my purpose to inquire here into the statements made by
Berosus, and in Qen. vii. 11, as to the day of the month on which the
flood commenced, nor can I discuss Bawlinson*s remarkable comparison of
the cantos of the Izdubar epic with the signs of the Zodiac. Bosanquet
believes that he has been able to determine the exact date of the Deluge
by means of the observations on eclipses of the sun recorded by the
ancients. This method places it in the year 2379 b.c. ; I mention these
flgures merely for the sake of completeness. There is every reason to
suppose that the catastrophe occurred at a much earlier date^.

I will here leave for a while the consideration of the Izdubar epic
and discuss events of our, own times similar to that of the Deluge.
The accounts of these in the last twenty or thirty years show that they
are much more frequent than we, owing to our European position, are
apt to assume. The inundations at the mouths of the Indus, and at that
of the united Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers, have been selected as
examples. We will afterwards rethm to the discussion of the catastrophe
described by Hasis-Adra, and then proceed to a brief examination of the
Dfeluge-legends of other nations, which have afforded material for an attempt
to show that the catastrophe embraced the whole surface of the planet.


B. Recerd everUa in the lower courses of the rivers of India-

Hasis-Adra offers up a sacrifice; the gods assemble like flies over it
and inhale the sweet savour. The mother of men, Istar, when she has
raised the great bows(1) on high, vows never to forget these days, and

* A. Dillmann, Ueber die Herkunft der urgeschichtlichen Sagen der HebrOer;
SitzungBber. der k. preuBs. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, XXI, 1882, pp. 436-499.

* Bosanquet, Synchron. History of Assyria and Judaea, Trans. Bibl. Arch. Soc., Ill,

1874, p. 19 ; and by the same, Ghronol. Remarks on the History of Esther and Ahasuerus,
op. cit. V, 1877, p. 264. On what untrustworthy premises these calculations rest may be
seen from the statements made here concerning the time of Sargon (p. 64). ^



I


FLOODS IN INDIA


41


CH. l]


the wise £a admonishes Bdl, exhorting him to visit on the sinner his
sin and on the transgressor his transgressions, but never again to cause
a deluge (a&46u). Lions may come, and hyenas, and famine, and plague
to diminish mankind, but the Deluge is not to return.

Noah, too, offers up his sacrifice, and Jahveh smells the sweet savour
thereof, and vows in his heart that he will never again cause universal
destruction.

The bow is placed in the sky by Elohim, and the bond of peace is
sealed for all time with man and with all living creatures.

And the valley of the Euphrates, although often visited by earth-
quakes, has indeed for thousands of years seen no recurrence of such
a flood. The niQuths of the river have silted up and advanced further
into the sea, the fertilizing channels are dry, the land is devastated;
Jeremiah’s frightful prophesies have been fulfilled in Babylon, the proud
cities of her kings have become shapeless heaps of ruins, but a deluge
has never again covered the land.

In the valleys of other great streams, however, we often see the
Anunnaki at work, and feel the wrath of terrible Ramm&n. We will now
leave the traditions of the past, and turn to the experiences of the present.

Springs have always been considered as favoured spots from the
earliest times, and by all nations, but in hot and arid countries this is
the case to a much greater extent than in the north. The processes of
evaporation and infiltration were however unknown, and the attempts to
explain the source of the supply were manifold. One of these imagined
the waters of the springs to lie beneath the plain. These are the ‘ waters
of the deep ’ which break forth and ascend during earthquakes ; by
discharging themselves over the surface of the ground they cause a
considerable part of this surface to sink into the space they vacate.
This was the origin, as we saw above, of the new sheet of water which
took the place of the settlement of Buriats near the Baikal.

This eruption of subterranean water, followed by subsidence of the
ground, has occurred on the largest scale in the valley of the Lower Indus,
which is frequently visited by earthquakes.

We will first consider this example.

The mouths of the Indus extend over the broad flat coastland between
Karachi on the north-west and Lakhpat in the south-west. This plain is
bordered on the^ right by the hills which run from the Khirthar mountains
to Cape Monze near Karachi. Even below Haidar4b&d, near Jerruck, and
between Tatta and Pirputta the rocky masses of these mountains run down
to the river, and hold it on the right side, while far above these places
great branches are sent off from its left side. Under these circumstances
the question as to where the head of the delta is situated may be answered
in variorajwrays: if we place it at Tatta we only include a relatively small



42 THE DELUGE , [pakti

part of the broad alluvial plain, which has been built up by this mighty
stream heavily charged with sediment.

The mouth of the main river is, as Tremenheere has shown ^ subject
to movements of the sea, which are mainly directed to the north-west,
so that a part of its sediments are carried into the immediate neighbour-
hood of Karachi. The mouth itself is turned in the jsame direction.
A number of dry channels between the Indus and the Narra, which
branches off much higher up, indicates that the united discharge, and
with it the formation of the delta, have advanced more and more to the
north-west.

Cunningham ascribes this deviation to the right which affects all the
channels of the Punj&b to the rotation of the earth, and fixes on the
year 680 A. D. as the date at which it abandoned the bed of the river Narra.
In the year 711 a.d. the main stream had already excavated its present
bed near Rohri, but it then fiowed to the east of Haidardbdd, and does not
appear to have passed to the west of this town before the year 1592

In the plain of the Indus great and populous cities have fallen a sacrifice
to natural phenomena. They were destroyed often in a few moments,
with thousands of their inhabitants, and the annihilation of the irrigation
works, or even the deviation of the river, prevented the survivors from
rebuilding them. The traveller who centuries later passes that way comes
upon extensive ruins, and the storied sculptures of an abandoned capital,
on the dry channel of the diverted river, and so lost to human knowledge
that the discovery even of its name may be a worthy object for the zeal of
the archaeologist.

* I travelled,’ writes Ibn Batuta in the year 13t33 of our era, ‘ through
Sind to the town of lAhari, which lies on the coast of the Indian Ocean
where the Sind (Indus) flows into it. It possesses a great harbour, where
ships from Persia, Yemen, and other countries anchor. A few miles from
this city are the ruins of another town, where stones in the form of
men and animals are met with in great quantities. The people of this
neighbourhood say that in the opinion of their historians a town once
stood on this spot, but its inhabitants for the greater part were so wicked
that God turned them, their animals, their plants, and even their seeds
into stone ; and indeed there are almost innumerable stones in the form
of seed.’ Fossils of Nummulitic limestone are here classed along with
sculptures. The p^sage probably refers to the remainScOf the famous
seaport of Debal, which lay between Karachi and Tatta.

The report of the existence of such towns is widely spread to the west

' E. W. Tremenheere, On the Lower Portion of the River Indus; Journ. Qeogr. Soc.,
1867, XXXVII, pp. 68-91.

* Cunningham, The Ancient Geography of India, I: The Buddhist Period, 8vo, 1871,
pp. 251, 280.


c •



43


CH. i] I THE BANN OF CUTCH

and north-west; and many points of correspondence between Zobelde’s
narration in the Arabian Nights and the local legends make it probable
that this story refers to one of the ruined cities of the delta of Indus,
perhaps to this very city of DebaP. Zobeide relates how they started
for Bussora by ship, and after twenty days reached the harbour of a great
town in India, where they landed and found the king, the queen, and
all the people turned to stone.

In 1854 Bellasis and Richardson visited the remains of Br&hmanfib&d,
which lies much further inland, north-east of Haidar&b&d, on the dry bed
of the Narra. It was once an extensive and populous town, built of
burnt bricks, but is now a heap of ruins, in the midst of which the lower
part of a mighty round 'tower still projects. Open places and the site
of the bazaar may be recognized, and the finst excavations revealed,
under the layer of rubbish nearly a hundred years old, skeletons of the
inhabitants in their houses, coins and cameos, sculptures which had escaped
the destructive fury of the Mohammedan iconoclasts, and even chessmen
skilfully and elaborately carved. The complete ruin of strong buildings,
the absence of any sign of conflagration, the remains of the inhabitants
themselves and of their property confirm the legend according to which the
town was suddenly destroyed by an earthquake K

Near the mouth of the Khori, the most eastern of the arms of the
Indus, lies the town of Lakhpat. Here terminate the hills of Cutch,
which stretch along the coast from the south-east, and separate the
Rann of Cutch, a south-easterly expansion of the plain about the river-
mouths, from the sea.

The immense plain of the Rann is covered, during a south-west monsoon
from Lakhpat, with salt water; during the floods of the Indus it is
inundated with fresh water, conveyed by the channels of the Banas or the
Luni ; at other times it is dry, and is then strewn with great patches of
salt of dazzling whiteness.

Wynne, who made the geological map of Cutch, describes vividly the
oppressive silence and solitude in the Rann, where, witli the rare exception
of a fugitive herd of wild asses, no living creature is to be seen, and the
air is filled with the most wonderful mirages

' Cunningham, Anc. Geogr. I, pp. 299-301. According to Vyse, Geol. Notes on the River
Indus, Joum. Roy. Asiatic. Soc., new ser., X, 1878, p. 323, the Narra is not to be regarded
as an ancient bed of the Indus.

^ A. F, Bellasis, An Account of the Ancient and Ruined City of Brahiiiinabad in Sind ;
Joum. Bombay Branch of the Roy. Asiat. Soc., 1857, V, pp. 413-425 and 467-477.

* A. B. Wynne, Mem. on the Geol. of Kutch ; Mem. Geol. Surv. of India, 1872, IX,
p. 15. It is the more necessaiy in what follows to base conclusions on fresh and
trustworthy observations of the facts, since a frequently quoted authority, General le
Grand-Jacob, declares that the statements of the natives on important points are
not to be«dm>ended upon. Trans. Bombay Geogr. Soc., 1866, XVI, p. 65.



44


THE DELUGE


I [part I

Its very name, which is borrowed from Sanskrit, proves its great age.
Kachcha denotes a marsh, and Irina (Bann), a salt desert. The great Chinese
traveller Hwen Tsang, who visited it in the year 641 A.D., describes the district
even at that time as low-lying and damp, and the ground as filled with salt \
The wonderful mirages of the Rann have been the source of many
legends and fairy talcs. The natives see in these the phantom possessions
of a pious king, who succeeded so completely in restoring a golden age of
virtue that his capital, freed from all impurity, gradually ascended to
heaven. But in an outlying house an impure animal, a wild ass, had been
forgotten. It betrayed its presence by braying, and this interrupted the
ascent of the city ; since then it hovers over the Rann between heaven and
earth

This Rann of Cutch was visited in 1819 by a violent earthquake,
accompanied by changes in the surface of the ground, which have since
been the subject of much discussion. In treating of these I follow literally
the account of the actual events given by Alexander Bumes; it is the
same account as that made use of by Lyell in his description^.

Previous to the battle of Jarra in the year 1762, says Burnes, in which
the inhabitants of Cutch defended themselves gallantly against an army
from Sind under Ghulain Shall Kulora, the eastern branch of the Indus,
commonly called the Pharaun, emptied itself into the sea by passing along
the western shores of Cutch ; and the country on its banks participated in
the advantages which this river bestows throughout its course. Its annual
inundations watered the soil, and aflforded a plentiful supply of rice, the
country on its banks being then known by the name of ‘ Sayra.*

These blessings, which nature had bestowed on this otherwise barren
region, perished with the battle of Jarra; for the Sindian chief, irritated
at the unsuccessful result of his expedition, returned to his country full
of vengeance and inflicted the deepest injury on the country which he had
failed to humble. At the village of Mora he threw up a mound of earth,
or as it is called, ‘ a bund,' across that branch of the Indus which fertilized
Cutch ; and by thus turning the stream which so much benefited its
inhabitants, to flow into other branches of the river, and by leading it
through canals to desert portions of his own dominions, he at once
destroyed a large and rich tract of irrigated land, and converted a pro-
ductive rice country, which had belonged to Cutch, into a sandy desert.

’ Cunningham, Ancient Geography, I, p. 304.

^ Bartle Frere, Notes on the Runn of Cutch and neighbouring Region; Journ. Geogr.
Soc., 1870, XL, p. 187.

® A. Burnes, A Memoir on the eastern Branch of the Indus, and the Run of Cutch,
containing an Account of the Alterations produced on them by an Earthquake in 1819 ;
also a Descript. of the Rann in Travels into Bokhara, 1834, III, p. 310 ; cf. also Baird Smith,
Memoir on Indian Earthquakes, II, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, 1843, XII, 6, pp. 1027-1033.
B. Smith supposes that there is a volcano in the neighbourhood, but this is ar ecror.



CH. i] I ACCOUNT BY BURNES 46

The mound which had been raised did not entirely exclude the water
of the Indus from Cutch, but so impeded the progress of the main stream,
that all agriculture depending on irrigation ceased. In process of time
this trivial remnant of prosperity disappeared, and the Talpoors, who suc-
ceeded the Kaloras in the government of Sind, threw up other mounds ;
and about the year 1802 the erection of one at Ali Bunder excluded the
waters of the Indus, even at flood-time, from the channel which had once
conveyed them through Cutch to the sea. Since then, the strip of land
which once formed the fertile district of Sayra ceased to yield a blade of
vegetation, and became a part of the Rann of Cutch, on which it had
formerly bordered. The channel of the river at the town of Lakhpat grew
shallow, and above Sindri filled with mud and dried up. Lower down it
changed into an arm of the sea, and was flooded at every tide.

There then occurred, as Bumes further relates, in June, 1819, a violent
earthquake, by which some hundreds of the inhabitants of Cutch perished,
and every fortified stronghold in the country was shaken to its founda-
tions. Numerous fissures were formed in the Rann, from which for three
days there issued immense quantities of black muddy water, and in the
district of Bunni which bordered on the Rann the water gushed out from
the springs until the surrounding country was flooded to a depth of six
or even of ten feet^.

At sunset the shock was felt at Sindri, the station at which the Cutch
Government levied their customs, situated on the high road from Cutch to
Sind, and on the banks of what had been once the western branch of the
Indus. The little brick fort of 150 feet square was overwhelmed by an
inundating torrent of water from the ocean, which spread on every side,
and in the course of a few hours converted the tract, which had before been
hard and dry, into an inland lake, which extended for seventeen [Bunics,
sixteen] miles on either side of Sindri. . . . But it was soon discovered that
this was not the only alteration in this memorable convulsion of nature,
as the inhabitants of Sindri observed, at a distance of five miles northward,
a mound of earth or sand in a place where the soil was previously low and
level. It extended east and west for a considerable distance, and passed
immediately across the channel of the Indus, separating as it were for ever
the Phurraun river from the sea. The natives called this mound by the
name of ^Allah-Bund* or the Mouwl of Gotl, in allusion to its not being,
like the other iIaius of the Indus, a work of man, but a dam thrown up by
nature. ...

These wonderful events passed unheeded by the inhabitants, for the
deep injury which had been inflicted on Cutch in 1762 hp,d so thoroughly
ruined that part of the country that it was a matter of indifference
whether it continued a desert or became an inland lake. A feeble and

* • ^ Bumes, Memoir, p. 324 ; also Bartle Frere, Notes, p. 192.



46 THE DELUGE [parti

unsuccessful attempt was made by Cutch to establish a custom-house on
the newly raised dam of Allah-Bund, but to this the Ameers of Sind
objected, and Sindri being no longer tenable, the officers were withdrawn
to the mainland of Cutch.

Matters continued in this state till the month of November, 1826, when
information was received that the Indus had burst its banks in Upper
Sind, and that an immense volume of water had spread over the desert
which bounds the country to the eastward, had likewise burst every
artificial dam on the river, and forced for itself a passage to the Run of
Cutch. In March, 1827, that is to say eight years after the earthquake,
Burnes travelled by water from Bhiij, the capital of Cutch, past Lakhpat,
to the vast sheet of water which surrounded the ruins of Sindri.

The most important part in the further account of Bumes is the
description of the Allah-Bund. To the eye it did not appear more elevated
in one place than another, and could be traced both east and west as far
as the eye could reach ; and the natives assigntid to it a total length of fifty
miles. * It must not however! Burnes expressly states, ^ he supposed to be a
narrow stripe like an artificial dam, as it extends inland to Raoma-ka-bazar,
perhaps to a breadth of sixteen miles, and appeared to be a great upheaving
of nature. Its surface was covered with saline soil, . . . and it consisted of
clay, shells, and sand. . .

So far Burnes. Since then the Allah-Bund has often been visited;
measurements of its height have given as the result 10, 15, 18, and even
20-| feet, but Wynne points out that the measurements were taken from the
level of the water at its foot, and this is variable. Observers agree on the
decisive point, that the Allah-Bund oidy presents the appearance of a dam
when viewed from the souiliy but has no fall, or scarcely any, to the north;
indeed one could hardly say that a northern side exists.

The Allah-Bund is therefore not a dam, but a step, a sudden drop, in the
level of the land.

The land situate<l above this step and asserted to have been raised
has, in reality, suffered no change. Wynne justly points out, that if
any considerable elevation of this area had taken place it would have
been impossible in 1826 for the flooded waters of the Indus to again follow
the bed of the Pharaun, which had been separated from the main stream
by a dike in 1762, and by crossing the Allah-Bund to reach the valley of
Sindri and the mouth below Lakhpat •

The country south of the Allah-Bund, therefore, together with the fort

* Wynne, Memoir, p. 43 ; also Blanford, Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., VI, p. 31, and Journ.
Asiat. Soc. Beni^l, 1876, XLV, pt. ii, p. 95, and Medlicott and Blanford, A Manual of the
Geology of India, 8vo, 1879, 1, p. 421, note. It did not appear to me necessary to discuss
here the report of a recent depression in the year 1845, since the author who records the
fact does not himself regard it as proved. Of. Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1840^ II, p. 103.



47


ca i ] The allah-bund not a dam

of Sindri, subsided during the earthquake of 1819 owing to a considerable
eruption of subterranean water; the Allah-Bund is a sharp step, like a
fault in the alluvial land, marking the limit of subsidence; above the
Allah-Bund ng change has taken place, as is clear from the unaltered
fall of the rivers.

This simple interpretation of the facts agrees fully with the plain
statement which Carless has given of them in the Memoir to accompany
the Survey of the Delta of the Indus, 1837. He merely observes that
the lower alluvial land is said, during the earthquake of 1819, to have
subsided in several places to a depth of some feet, and that a little fort
near the river in the upper portion of this plain was destroyed. He
adds that the district is at present covered with waters

Charles Lyell considered that the Allah-Bund wjis formed by an actual
eleV^ation of the ground. I can never forget the valuable inspiration
which in my earlier years I derived from intercourse with this remarkable
and genial man, who was ever ready to acknowledge and rectify any
errors of his own, yet I am compelled to express the opinion that his
interpretation of the changes which have occurred in tlie Rann of Cutch,
although it has found a place in many textl)Ooks, cannot be maintained
There is here no (juestion of elevation of the land, nor, as I was once
misled by other descriptions to suppose, of superficial folding, but it is
simply a case of the eruption of subterranean water and the consequent
subsidence of a sharply defined portion of the muddy ground

There is thus a complete correspondence between this and the events
which took place near New Madrid on the Mississippi and in the steppe
of the Buriats near Lake Baikal. —

Let us now turn to a country which is visited both by earthquakes
and by cyclones, and in which devastating floods from the sea have
occurred repeatedly in recent times, namely, the plain which stretches
along the northern coast of the Bay of Bengal. Here the Ganges and the
Brahmaputra flow by many branching channels into the sea, and I will
attempt to describe the main features of these estuaries in their present
state before passing on to their history, and to earthquakes and cyclones.
I shall follow, in the first place, the masterly description of this region
by J. Fergusson^ and supplement it from the account of Medlicott and
Blanf ord

’ CarlesB, Memoir to accompany the Survey of the Delta of the Indus, in 1837 ; Journ.
Geogr. Soc., 1838, VIII, pp. 328-366, particularly p. 364.

® C. Lyell, Princ. Geol., 11th ed., pp. 98-104.

’ Entstehung dcr Alpen, 8vo, 1875, p. 152. '

* J. Fergusson, On recent Changes in the Delta of the Ganges; Quart. Journ. Geol.
Soc., 1863, XIX, pp. 321-54.

^ Medlicott and Blanford, A Manual of the Geology of India, in part, I, pp. 391
and ff. • •



48


THE DELUGE


I [PABT I


At a considerable distance outside the littoral zone of the Sundarbans
runs the Five-fathom-line from the Balasore Roads, in the west, towards
Chittagong in the east. The coast sinks gradually to the sea-floor, with the
exception of a remarkable region lying nearly in the middle of the tract,
and somewhat to the south-west, outside the mouth of the Haringota,
in which great depths suddenly appear; this region is the ‘Swatch of no
ground,' in which, especially towards its western side, the sounding-line
finds no bottom even at a depth of 200 or even 800 fathoms.

Within the Sundarbans there is a network of water-courses, all of which
contribute to the formation of habitable land, and to the gradual filling up
of the numerous and extensive ‘ jhils.'

The Hindus have developed a terminology much more perfect than our
own to denote the superficial features of the ground, and it is a question
whether many of their designations might not with advantage be more
generally employed.

Bhdbar denotes among the Hindus an alluvial talus with a somewhat
steep slope, the region of fans at the foot of the mountains in which
the rivers descending from the Himalaya lose a part of their water or
are even drained dry; tardi is the richly vegetated zone where the
subterranean water of the BhS^bar reappears ; the term bhdngar is applied
to elevated plains of older alluvial formation, as opposed to khddar, the
low-lying alluvial plain properly so called, which is, as a rule, bordered by
scarps of trifling elevation.

The Ganges and Brahmaputra enter the vast plain of the delta with an
almost equal volume of water, yet the Brahmaputra carries an incom-
parably greater quantity of sediment, probably owing to its greater fall.
Notwithstanding this, in the delta of the Ganges, the formation of alluvial
deposits is much further advanced, and the greater part of the delta is
in the condition of habitable bhfingar, while the chief portion of the
plain of the Brahmaputra consists of frequently flooded khfidar. With
this fact is connected the interruption in the outline of the delta on its
eastern side.

Near R&jmah&l the Ganges doubles the extremity of the mountain
range, which is formed of older volcanic rocks, and this point, where the
stream lies about 20 meters above the sea level, is regarded as the head
of the delta. Fergusson rightly points out that since the time when
the sea extended to R^jmahfil and the formation of the delta began,
a considerable change must have taken place in the rate of deposition
near R&jmahdl itself, and that with the diminution in the fall of the
river the progress of sedimentation must have become extremely slow.
Between Rfijmah&l and the sea the formation of land is accompanied
by a continual alteration in the course of the channels, which are
constantly bifurcating into many branches. The Ganges itself has in



CH. I] I GANGES AND BRAHMAPUTKA 49

historical times abandoned its original channel, the Bhdgirathi, over moi*e
than half of this district; it is this, too, which the natives hold sacred,
not the Poddah branch in which the Ganges now flows.

The changes which the Brahmaputra has undergone are of much
greater importance.

To the north of Dacca there extends, over an area 112 kilometers in
length, with a maximum breadth of 56 kilometers, a large piece of elevated
bh^ngar, the Mddlmpur Jungle, with a steep slope on the west 40-50 feet
high, and on the east a gentle declivity.

To the east of the Mfidhupur Jungle and of Dacca, the group of Sylhet
streams flows down from Cachar, clear currents with but little sediment,
which during the months of the rainy period increase under the influence
of the monsoon to a prodigious volume; they are bordered near the
M&dhupur Jungle by the Sylhet-jhils, large quiet sheets of water, and
their union forms the MeghnA

When in 1785 Bennell attempted to make the first measurement of
the district, the immense and muddy stream of the Brahmaputra flowed
on the east of the M4dhupur Jungle, contributed to the silting up of the
Sylhet-jhils, received the Sylhet rivers, and finally discharged itself l)y
the Meghnd into the sea. Now the stream flows to the west of the higher
countiy of Madhupur, and the older branch is only indicated, at least for
the greater part of the year, by a chain of marshes and pools.

The Brahmaputra has thus approached the Ganges, and a struggle
takes place between them, by which the Ganges is constantly forced into
more western channels by the greater (quantity of sediment which its
adversary carries down.

Fergusson ascribes the diversion of the Brahmaputra to a local elevation
of the region to the north of Dacca, the Mfidhupur Jungle, and connects the
clarification of the Brahmaputra in the Sylhet-jhils with the slower growth
of the delta in the east. On the other hand, Medlicott and Blanford point
out that a subsidence of the Sylhet-jhils would have produced the same
result. On the whole they are inclined to assume that both the valley
of the Brahmaputra in Assam and the region of the Sylhet-jhils hav(^
subsided in comparatively recent times, that the Madhupur Jungle lias
alone escaped this depression, and that it repres(ints the original level of
the alluvial deposits of the Brahmaputra. They compare this case with
that of the Ranp of Cutch ^

There is no doubt that considerable changes have taken place in
historic times within this extensive plain, partly by an alteration in
the course of the rivers, partly by silting up, and perhaps also by
subsidence.

^ Loc. cit. p. 409. At the same time the authors concede the possibility of a slight
elevation 4;o4he north of Dacca.


50


THE DELUGE


I [PABT I

The historic investigations of Beveridge, which extend over the last
three hundred years, and which are based mainly on the accounts of
Jesuits at the close of the sixteenth century, do not prove that the
Sundarbans were then inhabited as has been supposed. But there were
at that time two royal residences in the eastern plains, one,. at Bakla,
which does not now appear to exist, and one at Ciandecan (Ch&nd Ehfin).
Large districts in Backergunge and Jessore may certainly have been
cultivated, again converted into jungle, and then restored once more to
cultivation \

Arabian writings show that during the last few hundred years changes
have occuiTed in tlie west of greater importance than those which took
place in the east, and returning to the time of the Chinese traveller Hwen-
Tsang, of whose descriptions we have made use in discussing the delta of
the Indus, we see that in the seventh century of our aera a large part of
the present delta did not exist. From the statements of this trustworthy
observer, Fergusson even concludes that the Sylhet-jhils may possibly have
been still salt and in direct communication with the sea. In any case
he considers it certain tliat the seaports of that time, Sonargaon and
Satgaon, were situated at the head of two bays or estuaries into which
the Brahmaputra and Ganges still flowed, and that tlic whole of the
present delta to the south of these places was then almost certainly a
great salt-water lagoon. He thinks it probable that the Sundarbans
then formed a sort of lido outside this lagoon, into which the Ganges
discharged itself independently, instead of flowing to the cast to unite with
the Brahmaputra-.

Yet earlier times are discussed in a treatise by Cameron, in which he
attempts to show that the more elevated district of Tipperah, bordering
the delta on the east, corresponds to the ancient Taprobane. I am not
in a position to express an opinion on this point •*.

Along the whole of the lower course of the Ganges and Brahmaputra
earthquakes are of frequent occurrence, and on April 2, 1762, a great part
of the plain from Chittagong in the east for a long distance westwards
and inland, and especially in the neighbourhood of Dacca, was convulsed
by violent shocks. The rivers poured from their channels like a raging
sea over the land ; far and wide the surface of the countiy was broken up
by fissures, masses of water spouted forth from the ground to a height of
many feet, while the surrounding land subsided; islands ^near the shore

' H. Beveridge, Were the Sunderbaiis inhabited in ancient times ? Journ. Roy. Asiat.
Soc., Bengal, 1876, XLV, pt. 1, pp. 71-76.

® J. Fergusson, On Hiouen-Thsang's Journey from Patna to Ballabhi ; Joum. Roy. Asiat.
Soc., new ser., VI, 1873, p. 256. On the present condition of Sunargaon cf. J. Wise, Notes
on Sunargaon, Journ. Roy. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, 1874, 1, 2 )t. 1, pp. 82-96 and map.

* A. M. Cameron, The Identity of Ophir and Taprobane, and their Site indicated ;
Tmns. Soc. Bibl. Arch.. 1873, II, pp. 267-288. « «



51


OB. I] EARTHQUAKE IN GACHAB

were completely engulfed, and some rivers diverted from tiieir course
to such on extent that the ships upon them were unable to continue their
voyage*.

On April 8, 1810, September 18, 1829, and November 11, 1842, earth-
quakes occurred at Calcutta. A few months before the last of these
a cyclone had passed over Calcutta.

On January 10, 1869, a violent shock occurred in the province of
Cachar, to the ^t of the Brahmaputra, and was the cause of great
changes in the configuration of the alluvial land. Here, according to



Fio. 1. Fiaaurds and ^nnelahaped aperiurea produced by the earthquake of Cachar on
January 10, 1869 (after Oldham).


Oldham, there extends over an area of many square miles a layer of
hard clay, thirty to forty feet deep, resting on a stratum of bluish silt
saturated with water. Fissures miles in length opened along the rivers,
and the upper stratum of the alluvial land glided on its watery substratum
down towards the rivers in masses miles in width. The silt forced its way
up through the gaping fissures ; first of all dry dust was, projected with
the violence of a cannon-shot, so that it looked like a cloud of smoke,

' An Account of an Earthquake at Chattigoan, trans. from the Persian by M. E.
Gulston, dtCfli and several other accounts in Phil. Trans, for 1763, LIII, pp. 251-269.

£ 2


THE DELUGE


52


[pact I


but this was at once followed by stiff mud, which formed a lip about the
opening and then flowed away.

When the earthquake was over the alluvial ground was seen to be
intersected by great fissures, which in many places became real faults
owing to the subsidence of one side of the surrounding land, jso that the
whole plain appeared to be covered with little escarpments, and between
or on these fissures round or elliptical apertures resembling craters were
formed, often surrounded by a wall of mud or sand. In the case of
many of the larger apertures, however, the sand and mud had poured
back into the opening after the eruption, and had torn away its borders
in their downward course so that only an irregular funnel-shaped opening
remained \

The lists which Colonel Keatinge has published regularly since 1874
show that the whole of Assam, and particularly the plain to the north
and south of the Khfl,si mountains, the valley of the Brahmaputra, and
the region of the Sylhet, were for years, and perhaps still are, the seat
of seismic disturbances^.

Yet more terrible than earthquakes are the cyclones which from time
to time come from the sea and rage over the plain lying about the mouths
of these rivers. Many of them arise near the Andaman Islands, whence
they travel to the north, north-west, or west, bringing destruction in their
train.. Sometimes they enter the mouths of the Meghnd or the Ganges,
bearing with them stupendous masses of water, and accompanied by
torrents of rain ; sometimes they descend on the cast coast of the mainland
as far down as Pondicherri, sometimes on the island of Ceylon.

In the night between October 11 and 12, 1737, one of these cyclones
entered the valley of the Ganges and travelled many miles up the river.
At the same time an earthquake occurred, and in Calcutta 200 houses were
destroyed. Ships of 60 tons burden were carried inland over the trees.
The water of the Ganges is said to have risen 40 feet above its usual level ;
the loss of human life was estimated at 300,000 souls \ This figure is an
exaggeration, but the catastrophe was doubtless terrible.

H. Blanford has published a list of the cyclones in the Bay of Bengal
from the year 1737 to the great cyclone of 1876, and shown that, in this


' Godwin Austen, Notes from Assaloo, N. Cachar, on the Great Earthquake of Jan. 10,
1869, Proc. Roy. Asiat. Soc., Bengal, 1869, pp. 91-103 ; Oldham, note, loc. cit. pp. 113-115,
and by the same : Notice of some of the secondary effects of the Earthquake of Jan. 10,
1869, in Cachar, with remarks by R. Mallet, Quart. Journ. Gcol. Soc., 1872, XXVIII,
pp. 255-270, and in particular Oldham, The Cachar Earthquake, &c., Mem. Geol. Surv,,
India, 1882, XIX, pp. 1-98, with map and plate,

* Col. Keatinge, Record of the occurrence of Earthquakes in Assam ; Journ. Roy. Asiat.
Soc., Bengal, 1877-81, passim,

* R. Baird Smith, Memoir on Indian Earthquakes, II ; Journ. Roy. Asiat. Soc., Bengal,

XII, 1843, p. 1,040. • •



OH.I] INSTANCES OF INDIAN CYCLONES 68

period of 139 years, 112 larger or smaller cyclones had agitated the sea
and descended on the coast

Without entering into any of the excellent descriptions of particular
cyclones which have been given by English investigators, I will select
a few examples from this list.

On May 19 and 20, 1787, a storm and storm- wave visited Coringa on
the delta of the GodAvari, and extended 32 kilometers inland; according
to an approximate estimate 20,000 persons and 500,000 head of cattle
were destroyed.

On October 19, 1800, a terrible hurricane and an earthquake occurred
simultaneously at Ongole and Masulipatam on both sides of the mouths
of the Kistna.

In June, 1822, a storm- wave swept over the eastern part of the
Sundarbans, over Burisal and Backergunge; the cyclone is said to have
advanced along its path only 85 kilometers in 24 hours ; 50,000 peraons
are said to have lost their lives.

On October 31, 1831, a similar storm-wave devastated the extreme
west of the plain of the Ganges, where it extends to the south from
Calcutta towards Cuttack; 300 villages were swept away, and at least
1 1 ,000 persons drowned ; it was followed by a famine, and the w^hole loss
of human life from this occurrence was estimated at 50,000 souls.

On May 21, 1832, from 8,000 to 10,000 persons were drowned in a similar
flood in the delta of the Ganges.

Between November 12 and 17, 1837, a storm and high sea advanced
from the Andaman Islands to Coringa; the wave was eight feet high;
700 persons lost their lives in ships ; 6,000 perished on the land.

For the description of the hurricane of October, 1842, which was more
remarkable for the length of its course than for the devastation it caused,
I follow the account given by Piddington

The hurricane proceeded, as is so often the case, from the Andaman
Islands; following a straight, due west course, it crossed the southern
portion of the Bay of Bengal on October 22, 23, and 24, and on the last-
named day, after five o'clock in the afternoon, its centre reached the east
coast somewhat to the north of Pondicherri. It then changed its course,
evidently diverted by the hills, and deviated a little to the south-west, and
at midday of the 25th the storm-centre crossed the Western Gh4ts
through the Bftlgautcherry pass between Salem and Paniany. Here a
division of the cyclone appears to have taken place. Two distinct cyclones
appeared in the Arabian Gulf.

I

^ H. F. Blanford, Catalogue of Cyclones in the Bay of Bengal ; Joum. Roy. Asiat. Soc.,.
Bengal, 1877, XLVI b, pp. 328-38.

* H. Piddington, Eighth Memoir on the Law of Storms in India ; Joum. Roy. Asiat^
Soc., Bengal, 1843, XII, pt. 1, pp. 339-399, two maps.



64 THE DELUGE [pakti

The eoutiiem branch proceeded to the west^north-west and overtook
on October 27 at mid-day, already far beyond the Laccadives, the ship.
Fultty Salam, in lat 11° 6' N., long. 69° O' E., and after traversing
nearly a sixth part of the earth’s circumference descended on October 81
in lat. 14° N., long. 61° K, not six degrees from the island of Spcotra, with
frightful violence on the ship Seaton, which it dismasted and left a helpless
wreck. From this point the storm assumed a more north-westerly direc-
tion. This is plain from the fact that ships travelling between Socotra



Fio. 2. The path of some Indian Cycbmes,

a, a', The Madras cyclone, October, 1842 ; m, m, region in which ships went ashore ;
a ?, supposed continuation of the path into the Persian Gulf (after Piddington) ; b, The
Vizagapaiam cyclone, October, 1876 (after Elliott) ; c. The Midnapore and Burdwan cyclone, October
15 to 16, 1874 (after Willron) ; d, The Backergunge cyclone, October 29 to November 1. 1876
(after Elliott).

and this point only experienced the more distant agitation caused by its
outer edges.

The northern branch seems to have travelled in a inore^ north-westerly
direction from the time it left the coast of India. Along the whole
coast, from the entrance of the Persian Gulf to the Gulf of Aden and
along the coast of the continent of Africa, even to the south of Cape
Guardafui, a large number of vessels suffered shipwreck ; an observer
residing at Aden, Dr. Malcolmson, even supposed that this cyclone had
crossed the Persian Gulf near the island of Bahi*ein. UnfprUmately


CH. i] THE CATASTROPHE OP BACKERGUNGE 86

we have no direct information concerning this the most northerly part
of its coursed

From October 2 to 5, 1864, a cyclone proceeded from the Andaman
Islands towards the north-west; in the Hughli the wave washed away
48^000 persons and 100,000 head of cattle. Two great mail steamera
were stranded in the fields, all the trees were deprived of foliage. •

Blanford’s gloomy list closes with the great Cyclone of Bcu^kergunye
of the year 1876. Elliott has described this catastrophe in a separate
report, from which we borrow the following account

On October 23, 1876, an area of low pressure began to form in the
south-east of the Bay of Bengal. The pressure continued to diminish
during the next few days, and on the 26th and 27th violent vorticose
winds were observed in this region. During the two following days the
depression moved towards the north ; on the evening of the 29th a violent
cyclone had already formed. On October 30, at midday, the centre lay
in lat. 14'' N. and long. 89® E. The storm was then diverted to tlic north-
north-east, while its rapidity and violence increased.

On November 1, towards three o’clock in the morning, it reached the
mouth of the Meghn& with a velocity of about 32 kilometers per hour.
The area of calms in the centre of the storm seems to liave been an ellipse
from 24 to 29 kilometers across, and with the major axis transverse to
the line of advance. Even at a distance of 300 kilometers from the
centre the violence of the storm was so great that ships were dismasted.
In the same night, during full moon, an unusually high tide entered the
Meghni shortly before the storm and forced its water's backy/ards. It
was not yet the time of full ebb when the I'etreating tide, surprised and
overpowered by the fiood caused by the cyclone and united with this
in one. stupendous wave, returned inland. The country to tlhe north and
north-west was flooded by the fresh watei- <lriven l)ack' by the sea,
that to the east by salt water. Within a short time 3,000 s<juare
miles (about 141 geographical square miles) of the plain and of the large
islands bordering it on the coast were coveu'ed with water to a depth
of three to fifteen feet, in places even of forty-five fc*.et. The centre of
the storm advanced meanwhile to the north-north-west, rejiched th(5 more
elevated region of Tipperah, broke on it and dispersed.

The numbe}' of persons drowned was estimated by the governor.
Sir Richard T<ynple, in his official report at 215,000 out of a total popu-
lation of 1,162,0(K). Blanford, writing later, believes .that about 100,000
persons were drowned. The groups of houses are as a rule surrounded by
trees, otherwise the loss would have been greater. ,

' II. Piddington, loc. cit. p. 379.

* J. Elliott, Report of the Vizagapatam and Backergunge Cyclones of October, 1870,
4to, Caloutlo, 1877 ; cf. also Ilann, Oesterr. Zeitschr. fiir Meteorol., XII, 1877, pp. 8P87.



56


THE rDELUGE


[part I

The descriptions given by the officials of the condition of the country
after the catastrophe are terrible indeed ; the houses were destroyed, the
trees deprived of branches and leaves, and the country covered with pools
of water and with the bodies of men and cattle .lying together in heaps
— a scene such as might indeed occur after a deluge had passed over the
land. The area devastated by this great cyclonic flood is identical with
that affected by the eai-thquake of 1762.

We have said above that the area of depression was broken up on the
heights of Tipperah. Elliott expressly points out that the dispersion or
deviation of a cyclone is brought about not by friction with the earth, but
by the direct resistance of a range of hills. And indeed at the beginning of
this same month, October, a smaller cyclone travelling from the Andamans
towards the north-west arrived at Yizagapatam on the east coast, whence
it turned northwards, diverted by the Eastern Ghats ; it continued on its
course following the eastern slope of the mountain chain, crossed the
Ganges between Patna and Monghyr, and even reached, although con-
siderably diminished in force, the foot-hills of the Himalaya, having thus
travelled through nearly eight degrees of latitude on dry land.

In the year 1737 at Calcutta, and in the year 1800 at the mouths of the
K^stna, cyclones and earthquakes occurred in conjunction. Although thes6
phenomena are distinct in their origin, and although the majority of
cyclones are not accompanied by perceptible earthquakes, nor the majority
of earthquakes by cyclones, yet the occurrence of earthquakes with a low
barometer is so frequent that the attention of investigatora could not fail to
be directed to the circumstance. I will mention only a few of the observers
who have pursued this branch of study. Julius Schmidt, for example, has
compared the contemporaneous reading of the barometer in the case of
many hundreds of earthquakes which have occurred in Greece of late
yeai-s\ Rossi has done the same for a number of Italian earthquakes ^
and George Darwin has even attempted to calculate the mechanical effect
of the fall o^ the barometric pressure on the earth’s surface**. Direct
observations on this point do not seem to have led to any definite result,
but the fall of the barometer in connexion with the earthquakes in Greece
and Italy was much less than has been observed in the case of cyclones.
According to our j^resent knowledge of the subject we may assume that
when that decrease of atmospheric pressure, which is the determining
cause of a cyclone, occurs in a district already in a j^ate of seismic

' J. Schmidt, Studien (iber Erdbeben, 2. Ausg., 1879, pp. 23-34.

* M. St. de Rossi, Mcteorologia Endogena, 8vo, 1882, II, pp. 383-393 ; also Grablowitz,
Sulla relaz. fra le altezze barom. ed i nioti microsismici. Boll. Vulc. Ital., VIII, 1881, p. 33;
Fagioli and Rossi, loc. cit. pp. 105-106.

* G. H. Darwin, On the Mechanical Effects of Barometric Pressure on the Earth's

Surface ; Phil. Mag., 1882, 5th ser., XIV, pp. 409-416. • •



OH. I] NATURE AND EXTENT OF THE DELUGE 67

disturbance, or in a condition about to terminate in an earthquake, then
this decrease of pressure does not indeed give rise to the earthquake, but
it hastens its appearance or even increases its violence.

C. Nature and extent of the Deluye,

Let us now return to the Izdubar epic.

The phenomena which accompanied the great catastrophe are such as
we only observe to-day on low-lying coasts and in the valleys of great
streams, especially about tlie mouths of the latter. The Deluge as a whole
can only have come from the sea; rain and subterranean water were
merely accessory elements.

In this circumstance and in the local significance of the employment of
asphalt lies a confirmation of the views of many distinguished archaeolo-
gists, who refuse to regard the account of the Deluge in the eleventh canto
of the Izdubar epic as a borrowed episode, assigned after the event to the
valley of the Euphrates, but who on the contrary see in it the reconl of
a catastrophe which really took place in the very region mentioned in the
text, at a time when the warping in the valley had not proceeded so far as
at present.

It further follows that in Gen. vi. 17 and vii. 6 it is better to read
than ^majim*

The mouths of the Euphrates present all tlie conditions necessary for
such an event, and to transfer it to the mouth of any other river is to
remove it from the region to which existing tradition assigns it. We might,
for example, relegate it to the united delta of the Ganges and Brahma-
putra, which is at present so often visited by earthquakes and cyclones.
But — apart from the fact that those who regard the traditional localization
as doubtful would no doubt raise even stronger objections to this proceed-
ing — the very frequency of great inundations in this region, true deluges
indeed, is an argument rather against than for such an assumption. The
accounts which we possess of the Deluge originated in districts in which
such an event was extremely rare, almost indeed unheard of, and it was for
this reason that it made so indelible an impression. The floods from the
sea poured.over richly populated regions, which had never before been, and,
according to divine assurance, should never again be the scene of such an
occurrence; this is an assurance which would certainly not be found in
a tradition which had arisen in the frequently flooded delta of the Ganges.

The seismic element in the catastrophe is clearly represented by the
warnings, the overflowing of the rivers, the breaking forth of the floods of
the deep and the trembling of the earth.

Since that time Mesopotamia has often been visited by earthquakes.
The most important seismic period begins in the year 768 b. c., the same
year in which the eclipse of the sun occurred, the date of which (June 14,



68 THE DELUGE , [part i

768) was first determined by Hind and Airy and afterwards by Lehmann
and by Oppolzer. It is on this date that the chronology of As83rrian
antiquity is based ^

^is enables us to determine the dates of the following events noted in
the administrative records of Assyria: 768 B.C., disturbances in libzu; in
the month of Sivan there is an eclipse of the sun ; 762, disturbances in
libzu; 761, disturbances in Arbacha; 759, disturbances in Gozan; 758,
tranquillity in the country. Later, in 746, disturbances are again men-
tioned, this time in Kalah, the biblical Kelach (Gen. x. 11), situated to the
south of Nineveh in the angle between the Upper Zab and the Tigris,
where the village of Nimrfid now lies*.

Bosanquet, following a suggestion of Rawlinson s, points out that by
‘disturbances* earthquakes are to be understood, not risings among the
people, and on this supposition he shows that the eclipse of the sun on
June 14, 763, is the same as that which vras foretold by the prophet Amos •*.

Earthquakes occurred at this period from Assyria to Palestine, and the
years succeeding 763 were remarkable not only for earthquakes but for
several eclipses of the sun. It is easy to recognize the effect which these
terrifying phenomena have had on the sublime language of the prophets,
who have mentioned or described them in several places, and invoked them
as the signs of God’s wrath. Even in the following century the recollection
of these events was still alive among the people of Jerusalem.

The prophet Amos dates his vision explicitly, i. 1, two years before the
earthquake, and he describes not only the shock, but the inundation from
the sea ; thus in v. 8 ; ix. 6 . . . qui vocat aquas maris^ et effundit eas super
faciem tei'rae. The prophet Sophonia, who wrote under Josias (616-586),
paints in l)is moving and inimitable description of the dies irae, the fall of
Sodom and Gomorrah, and all the horrors of a seismic catastrophe ; and
Zacharias says, xiv. 5 . . , ct ftigietis skut fugistis a facie terrae motus in
diehus OzUie regis luda, ... This is the earthejuake referred to hy
Amos.

But the great extension of this earthquake makes it improbable that
the seat of its origin was in the plain of Mesopotamia. The name Arbacha,
which corresponds to the Greek Arrhaptichitis, the Armenian Albak, would

^ P. Lehmann, in Eb. Schrader, Keilinschriften und GeschichtsforBchung, 8vo, 1878,
pp. 338 et seq. ; Oppolzer, Monatsber. k. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, 1880, p. 184.

* E. Schrader, Kcilinschriften und Altes Testament, 2. Aufl., p. l85. Hero we may
also refer to Justin, xviii, 3 Tt/riorum gens condita a Phoenicibtts fuiU terrae motu
vexatiy relicto patnae solo, Assyrmm stagnum pHmum, nwx mariptvximum liiuaincoluemnt,
condita ihi urhe, quam a piscium uhertate Stdona appellaverunt,

® Bosanquet, On the date of the fall of Nineveh ; Trans. Bibl. Arch. Soc., 1873, II, p. 155.
Since the preceding pages have gone to press 1 learn from Dr. Haupt that the most
recent investigations show the word sthn to mean only a political rising, not an
earthquake. This involves a modification of Bosiinquet’s theory. • •



CH. t] THE SEISMIC ZONES OP SYRIA 59

lead U8 to the mountainH on the Upper Zab, and hence bring us nearer the
district of lakes Van and Urmiah, which is at present so often convulsed

The Syrian desert is bordered on the north and west by two important
seismic zones in which earthquakes have been recorded for many centuries.

The first of these zones begins on the Mediterranean coast near Antioch.
This unfortunate town was the scene of the terrible catastrophe of December
13 , 116, at which the empeiw Trajan was present, and which has been
described by Dio Cassius ; it was again destroyed by a less violent earth-
quake in the month of May, 518, then on November 29, 528, again
reduced to ruins, and finally on October 31, 589, became once more the
grave of many thousands of people*. Since then it has often been the
seat of earthquakes. From Antioch the seismic zone proceeds towards
Aleppo and Mambedj (Hierapolis), crosses the Euphrates and is continued
from Urfa (Edessa), probably in the direction of Diarbekr towards the
mountain of Nemrfid or Sipan Dagh on the northern border of Lake Van.
Here the great disastei-s of the years 715, 995, 1003, 1091, 1114, 1156 A. D.,
and a number of other great earthquakes occurred; in the last century
I will only mention the destruction of Aleppo in the year 1822. In
a masterly study on the earthquakes of the Armenian tableland, lately
published, H. Abich represents this zone of seismic catastrophes as indi-
cating the existence of a coinplicate<l system of fractures concealed in the
depths of the earth's crust *.

In the neighbourhood of Aleppo this zone is crossed by a second seismic
zone trending to the south-south-west, which appears to be connected with
the fault of the Jordan, and also with the Syrian coast-line. It begins near
Malatiah on the Upper Euphrates and extends from Aleppo past Hamah
(Epiphania) to Homs (Emesa) further to the south, and thence, passing
through Baalbec and Damascus, it runs probably on both sides of the Anti-
Libanon. The northern part of this zone is mlmirably described by the
statements of the Arabian writer As-Soyiiti, who records a series of seismic
movements, which began with a tremendous disturbance in the year 552 of
the Hegira (1158 a.d., according to other accounts 551 of the Hegira) ^
Hoff has also collected accounts of these earthquakes and points out that
they occurred in an area extending over four degrees of latitude Accord-
ing to As-Soy6ti's statements the disturbances must have begun in the
north, later on advanced towards Damascus, and then returned to Aleppo
and Hamah.

' J. Schmidt, Studien ilber Erdbeben, 2. Aull., 8, 1879, pp. 144 et seq.

^ H. Abich, Geologische Forschungen in den kaubis. Liindem, 11, 188l2, pp. 390-449.

^ As^oyuti's Work on Earthquakes, transl. from the Arabic by A. Sprenger; Journ.
Asiat. Soc., Bengal, 1843, XII, pt. 2, pp. 746, 747.

* V. Hoff, Geschichte natiirlicher Vcnlnderungen, IV, 1840, p. 217.


60


THE DELUGE


[PABT I


From these two zones, which sun*ound the Syrian desert and intersect
one another in the neighbourhood of Aleppo, those phenomena probably
proceeded which in the year 763 B.C. and the following years agitated
Assyria and terrified Palestine, which are chronicled in the administrative
records of Assyria, and invoked in the books of the prophets.

But I do not think that the earthquakes which preceded the Deluge as
warnings, or those which accompanied it, originated in these regions.
Schlafli, during a visit to Mesopotamia which, it must be allowed, was brief,
only experienced such earthquakes as were communicated to tlie land from
a distance, either from the north or from the south, for example from the
frequently convulsed Schiras in Persia.

For the earthquakes of the Deluge we must assume a southern origin^
probably within the Persian Gulf.

Great atmospheric disturbances, vast falls of rain, storm, and darkness
accompanied the earthquake. The darkness was not such as occurs
temporarily, as for example during the earthquake of Lisbon, when the
rubbish and dust of the falling town filled the air. Nor does anything
justify us in assuming that the darkness was caused by the ash of a
volcanic eruption. It was the darkness of the cyclone which had broken
over the land.

The path of the cyclone of October, 1 842, of which the last doubtful
traces seem to have reached the island of Bahrein, does not entirely exclude
the possibility that such a disturbance, arising at the Andaman Islands, the
usual starting-point, might arrive in the Persian Gulf ^

The eleventh month, to which according to Rawlinson's theory the
eleventh canto corresponds, is not sacred to ^la, the god of the sea, nor to
the Anunnaki, the spirits beneath the earth, but to Ramman, the storm
god ; the literal translation of the Akkadic name is, ‘ month of the curse
of rain,* or briefly, ‘ month of the curse ^.*

The different impressions which such great natural phenomena produce
on the various classes and branches of the human race is a matter not
entirely without interest for the understanding of these phenomena.

On the Andaman Islands, which are so often visited by earthquakes,
and which as we have seen are the centre of origin for most Indian
hurricanes, the small remains of a primitive population have been preserved
in isolation from the rest of mankind. These people have not even advanced
to the worship of the sun. They know a demon of the wooejs, Eremchangala,


^ The Koran mentions devastation by a storm of wind as a punishment, e.g. Ixix. 6, 7 :
‘ and the people of Ad were destroyed hythe cold and violent windstorm which He sent against
them for seven days and eight nights without interruption. Thou mightst see the people thrown
down like fallen palmdree trunks^ and canst thou anywhere perceive survivors?' Likewise
li. 41, 42 ; liv. 19, 20.

* Lenormant, Orig., I, Append., tab. ii.


• •



OH. i] IMPRESSION PRODUCED ON THE HUMAN MIND 61

who causes earthquakes, and a demon of the sea, Juruwinde. Excessive
fear of these is the only feeling which possesses them during such cata-
strophes. Here we see the trembling, terrified, naked ci*eature when con-
fronted with the great forces of nature ^

Let us consider the attitude of a stage of civilization closely allied to
this. On July 10, 1862, Accra on the coast of Guinea and a considerable
part of the surrounding districts were convulsed by an earthquake. The
Dutch merchant Euschart was on that day at Abomey, the capital of
the kingdom of Dahomey. He was directed to the market-place. Here the
king was sitting on his throne, surrounded by armed Amazons, and he
explained that it was the spirit of his father who was convulsing the earth,
because the ancient customs were no longer observed. Three chieftains
captured in war were executed, that they might inform the spirit of the
deceased king that the customs would in futui'e be more strictly observed
In the higher stages of civilization the expression of feeling is deter-
mined^ by the special education and calling of the individual.

We will begin with the defiant warrior. On September 4, 1596, there
was a great eai-thquakc at Kiyoto and Osaka in Japan. The fortress of
Fushiini and many houses in Kiyoto, including the building in which the
statue of the god Daibuzu was pi'eserved, were overthrown. Then, as
E. Naurnann relates, Taiko Toyotomi Hideyoschi went to the temple of
Daibuzu, placed himself before the fallen image, and with angry voice
reproached the feeble god that so far from protecting the country he had
not even the power to preserve himself ; then he drew his bow and shot at
the idol with arrows

Very different is the attitude of the scholar. In the year 6‘i or 65 A.D.
Apollonius of Tyaiia was on the island of Crete. He was on that coast of
the island which is washed by the Libyan Sea, on a promontory in the
neighbourhood of Phastus, and was engaged in conversation with a number
of men who had come to do honour to the sanctuary on the promontory,
when suddenly an earthquake took place. The roar of the thunder, says
Philostratus, did not proceed from the clouds, but came from the depths of
the sea, and the sea retired at least seven stadia, so that the crowd were
afraid that in its retreat it would caiTy the temple with it, and wash them
all away. Apollonius however said: * Be comforted; the t^ea has brought
forth new land,' A few days later they heard that a new island had arisen
between Thera aud Crete

' M. y. Portman, On the Andaman Islands and the Andamese ; Journ. Roy. Asiat. Soc.,
new ser., XllI, 1881, pp. 475, 476. ,

* A. Perrey, Note sur Ics tremblements dc terre en 1862, p. 156.

^ £. Naurnann, Ueber Krdbeben und Vulcanausbriiche in Japan ; Mittheil. der
deutsch. Gesellsch. fiir Natur- und Vdlkerkundo Ost-Asiens, 15. Heft., 4to, Yokohama,
1878, p. 17.

* PhilostratiUB, Leben des Apollonius v. Tyana, IV, 34.



62


THE DELUGE


[part I

Different again is the attitude of the populace. Not only is defiance
and power of observation lost, but often too all presence of mind. Men
turn to the most injudicious expedients ; they take refuge, for example,
at the foot of pillara which are about to fall, as in the market-place of
Sillein in Hungary, on January 15, 1858, and in the earthquake of Calabria,
on February 5, 1783, when according to Hamilton's records 2,473 persons
last their lives owing to the hict that they sought refuge on the fiat sea-
sliore near Scylla. It has often happened after earthquakes in more recent
times, that tanks have been erected simply in order to make certain that
the oscillations of the earth had really cetised, since a continuance of the
oscillations seemed to be observed, and those who have read descriptions of
the dejection of the survivors after the great earthquake of Lisbon on
September 1, 1755, will fully understand Hasis-Adra's feelings after the
Deluge.

With the first ray of sunlight he opens a hatch and bursts into teai*s.
Rescued himself he at once offers a sacrifice to the gods. Remembering
how he had built his ship in defiance of the scorn of the populace the
repeated swellings of the sea which he had observed before the fiood appear
to him now as so many warnings from the kindly sea-god, while after such
darkness the many-coloured rainbow becomes a sign of peace in nature,
and of the propitiation of the gods.

All that is marvellous in this account disappears before the effect of
those feelings which might still move the heart of man in similar circum-
stances, and in recognizing this we perceive as well that since that remote
period, amidst the change of so many things, the human heart has remained
the same. And it is just in these touching passages that the simple story
of Basis- Adra bears the stamp of truth.

The ship’s captain who has been so fortunate as to escape a cyclone
with nothing worse than a dismasted vessel notes the rising barometer
and is reassured ; whatever his other feelings may be they arc not entered
in the records of the log-book. But when on October 10, 1780, during the
war between England and France, a great cyclone passed over the Antilles,
leaving a broad path of destruction in its train, dispersing and shattering
the fleets, and casting up two English ships on the coast of Martinique,
then the French commander, Marquis de Bouilld, sent the rescued English-
men back to the hostile governor of Santa Lucia with the remark that
he could not retain as his prisoners the victims of a geneyral catastrophe

' It is strange that this incident, which is foreign to the Bible and to all other
pre-Christian accounts with the exception of the Izdubar epic, recurs in the otherwise
incomplete account of the Koran, xi. 40, 41 : ‘ So he made the ark, and whenever the elders
of his people came by they mocked at him. He spoke : If ye mock at us, truly we will mock at
you as ye mock now, and ye shall know it certainly*

• H. W. Dove, Ueber das Gesetzder Stfirme; Poggendorffs Annul, d. Phys. und Chem.,

2. Reihe, XXII, 1841, p. 41. • •



COSMOGONIC MYTHS


63


OH. l]

It is this feeling of the effacement of all human strife, and the oppressive
consciousness of human insignificance in the face of the great forces of
nature, which constitutes the religious element of the legend of the Deluge.

This element is so entirely in accordance with human nature that the
tradition of this mighty phenomenon has readily found a place among
the sacred myths of the most various peoples, and it is precisely this
wide distribution of the legend which increases our difficulty in deter-
mining the actual extent of the occurrence.

In the great cycle of floo<l-legcnds traditions have also been included
which treat of the origin of the sea; they belong properly to the group
of cosmogonic myths and have no connexion with the Deluge. This is the
case, among the myths of the Old World, with the story of the great rain
by means of which, according to the seventh chapter of the Pehlevi
Bundehesch, the waters of the earth were produced. An example of
such a cosmogonic myth in the New World is found among the inhabitants
of the Antilles in the deluge-story of the brothers who find a gourd
bottle, from which after it is broken vast quantities of water pour forth.
In the original form of this myth, as given by Petinis Martyr, there is no
question of a deluge sent to punish and destroy; it is rather an explanation
of the origin of the seas which filled up the dry hollows of the earth so
that the mountains became islands ^

Among many American tribes we meet with deluge-myths in which the
precise details of the biblical account reappear, but as has been often
pointed out, and in particular by Waitz, the influence of the missionaries
IS here unmistakable

Another cycle of traditions is based on floods of seismic origin ; these
are found chiefly on the west coast of America, and on the oceanic islands
as far as Fiji. We have already mentioned traditions of this kind when
speaking of the oscillations of the ocean during great earthquakes. Reville
has lately made a collection of oceanic flood-legends **.

Putting all these traditions, which afibrd us no assistance in deter-
mining the extent of the Mesopotamian Deluge, on one side, there remain
a number of accounts in the Old World which can be divided into several
groups.

The first group, which is most closely related to the event we are
considering, consists of the Izdubar epic and the fragment of Beromis.

’ De orbe novo Petri Martyris ab Angleria Mediol. Proton. Decades ; Compl. ap. Mich.
d*Egnia. anno mdxxx, cap. ix, fol. 20.

* T. Waitz, Anthropologie der NaturvOlker, 1862, III, p. 187. Attempts have even
been made, with a great display of learning, to prove that all the deluge-myths originated
in America. Noah was said to have been saved on Cuba, &c. ; so e. g. Palaorama, Aus
dem Nachlasse eines amerikanischen Naturforachera, 8vo, Erlangen, 1868, p. 192, et
passim.

’ A. R^vUlOitLes religions des peoples non-civilises, 8vo, 1883, tom. II, passim.



64


THE DELUGE


[part 1

The account of Berosus mentions a ciitsumstance to which there is no
reference in the Izdubar epic, namely, the burial of the writings and their
rediscovery at Sippara, the town of the sun. Eusebius writes : . . . hlanda-
visse, ut libros (mines, 2 ^rivws nimhmm, medios et vltimos^ terrae infossos
in solis urbe SippaHs poneret It is difficult to say whether Berosus
drew from another and more complete source than the author of the
Izdubar epic, or whether we have to do with a later addition. The burial
of documents in the foundations of temples and palaces was customary
in Babylon from the most ancient times. As a newly found cylinder
of Naboned (circ. 550 B. o.), lately described by Pinches, informs us, King
Nebuchadnezzar (604-561) had looked in vain for old writings beneath the
temple of the sun E-bara at Sippara. Some time later his successor,
Naboned, found an extremely ancient cylinder at a depth of eighteen
yards: ‘The cylinder of Naram-Sin, the son of Sargon, which for 3,200
years no king who lived before me had ever seen, Samas revealed to
me the great lord at E-bam, the house, the seat of the joy of his
heart.’

This takes us back to the year 3750 and phices the ancient King
Sargon I, who as we have mentioned above was exposed in a basket
of reeds, approximately in the year 3800 B.c.

The second (frouj) is represented by the two accounts of Genesis, the
Jahvistic and the Elohistic, which are interwoven with each other. The
close correspondence between the statements of this group and those of
the first, from the warnings and the coating of the vessel with pitch to
the setting up of the rainl)ow, is obvious. In numerical statements con-
cerning the number of the animals and periods of time the two accounts
differ from the Izdubar epic and also from each other. The Jahvistic
account gives to the niimber seven the significances wdiich it so often has in
Assyrian narratives, including the Izdubar epic. Minor differences are also
not wanting, for instance as regards the sending forth of the birds, and
the statement that the Babylonian Noah, like Enoch in Gen. v. 24, is raised
to the gods.

But the essential and characteristic difference lies in the fact that the
whole description in Genesis has assumed that colouring which such
a tradition must assume among an inland people A want of intimacy
with the sea has often been pointed out. The pilot is absent, and the
ship becomes a chest or coffer, an "ark' There is naturally no mention
at all of the divinities which personify the forces of nature ; on the other
hand, prominence is given in the Jahvistic portions to the personal

* T. G. Pinches, Some recent Discoveries, &c., Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch., Nov. 7, 1882,
pp. 6'-12 ; Friedr. Delitzsch in Murdter, Kurzgef. Gesch., pp. 273 et seq. ; cf. also, among
others, Taylor in J. Oppert, Exped. scieniif. Mesopot., I, p. 273.

* I^noruiant, Grig., 1, 2nd ed., p. 408, is the author of this acute observatioci.



CH. i] ACCOUNT IN GENESIS 65

activity of the divinity, as for example in the closing of the ark (Gen.
vii. 16).

The council of the gods which precedes the flood, and £a's conciliatory
speech to BSl after the catastrophe, by which feelings of mercy are again
aroused, are here represented in a remarkable manner by two monologues
of Jahveh*s, which have long been a source of surprise to Bible com-
mentators. Even Tischendorf’s edition, which I have used for all other
references, does not here give the original text. The reading of this
edition is, viii. 21 odoratusque est Dominus odorem suavitatis et ait,
whereas the true reading according to St. Jerome is : et ait ad cor mum,
and in Luther’s translation accordingly: And the Lord smelled a sroeet
savour; and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground
any more^.

For us the account of Genesis is a borrowed description, but it
undoubtedly refers to the same event.

We proceed to the third group, that of the Egyptians. It is here
a matter of importance to determine whether an indigenous tradition
of the Deluge exists, since the event on the Lower Euphrates occurred
at a time when Egyptian civilization had long been flourishing, and the
absence of indigenous accounts might be regarded as a proof that the
catastrophe did not extend to the basin of the Mediterranean. And
indeed there is little in Egyptian traditions which can be cited in this
connexion, and that little departs so widely from the Chaldaean account
that we may either regard the few points of resemblance as cases of
accidental coincidence, or we must assume that a borrowed legend has
suffered complete transformation under the influence of the priests.

The most detailed record of Egyptian mythology which has any
bearing on the flood is the account of the destruction of men by the gods
which covers the four walls of an isolated chamber in the sepulchre of
Seti I (circ. 1360 b.c.) at Thebes.

According to Brugsch the chief contents are as follows ^ : Ra summons
a council of the gods. Ra is wroth with men and complains that they
speak against him. Their destruction is resolved on. The goddess Hathor
accomplishes the work. She returns and is praised by Ra; the country
is covered with blood as far as Herakleopolis.

^ The ed. Tischendorf gives the following note to Gen. viii. 21 et ait ad eum Mirum si hie
iranstulisset Hier. voces Hehraicas eldibbo, q.e. ad cor suunt, in animo^o; Sept. biavotiBeis.
Quare vel invitis Codd. Latinis Sixtini expunocerunt has voculas, nuUo sententiae detrimento.
Bellarminus earum loco malebat : ad se — animam viventem, animantem. Dillmann, Genes.,
p. 141, thinks the writer is interpreting the thoughts of God.

’ E. Naville, La destruction des hommes par les dieux, d'apres une inscript,
mjtholog. du tombeau de Seti I k Thebes, Trans. Bibl. Arch. Soc., 1876, IV, pp. 1-19 ; and
in particular H. Brugsch, Die neue Weltordnung nach Vernichtung des sttndigen Men-
schengeschlechtes, 8vo, Berlin, 1881, 41 pages and plates.

•OLLAS 7



66


THE DELUGE


[part I

Ba calls all his messengers together and sends them to fill vessels with
human blood and the fruit of the mandrake ; 7,000 vessels of this beverage
are prepared. Ra comes on the next morning to look at these vessels.
And none of mankind had been destroyed who had gone upwards at
the right time. Hereupon the majesty of Ra says : ‘ These are the good I
Therefore will I protect men.’

Ra orders the liquid to be poured out of the vessels in the night, and
the fields are covered with it. In the morning the goddess comes and sees
the flooded fields; she rejoices and drinks of it; her soul is gladdened and
she does not recognize men.

The further continuation of the myth — the birth of the priestesses, Ra’s
remorse;, the reappearance of men, their reconciliation with Ra, the assign-
ment of particular tasks to each of the divinities by Ra, and his own
retirement — has no connexion whatever with the Deluge.

We have rather to inquire whether in the preceding portion such a con-
nexion can be shown to exist. The council of the gods, the destruction of
men, the subsequent mercy of the gods, even the promise not to repeat the
disaster are present. But the catastrophe itself is of quite a different
nature. Hathor fulfils the judgment by shedding of blood. Afterwards
an inundation is mentioned, but this is evidently not to be regarded as
a punishment.

It has, however, been observed that to the Egyptian people any inunda-
tion was so closely connected with the ideas of riches and life that it was
necessary to alter the original tradition and to give Ra’s judgment another
fonn \ There is room for a difference of opinion on this point. From the
whole description it is evident that the great catastrophe did not occur in
Egy 2 )t itself, and that no recollection of such an event existed among the
Egyptian people, even though Chaldaean reports may have come to the
knowledge of the priests, traces of w^hich survive in this myth. Brugsch
denies all connexion with the Chaldaean myth.

The fo'urth group is composed of the Udlenic-Syrian accounts. In
comparing these we must bear in mind that the shores of the Eastern
Mediterranean, including the coast of Greece, have frequently been inun-
dated by floods of seismic origin, both in ancient and modem times.
A seismic agitation of the sea occurred in the year 479 B. c., when Arta-
l)azus was besieging the town of Potidaea, which cut off approach to the
peninsula of Pallena, the most westerly point of Chalcidyce, an incident
recalling the destruction of Pharaoh Menephtah. Herodotus relates how
one day the besiegers observed a very considerable reflux of the sea which
made the bay practicable, and how they were attempting to cross it in the
direction of Pallena when they were surprised by the returning tide We

^ Vigourouz ; cf. Lenormant, Orig., I, p. 454.

* Herodotus, Urania, 129. * *



CH. i] HELLENIC^YRIAN ACCOUNTS 67

know of many other floods in Greece of the same kind but extending
further inland; J. Schmidt enumerates several instances^.

Under these circumstances it will not surprise us t6 find that traditions
of repeated floods are to be met with in Greece, such, for ini^ance, as those
of Ogyges, of Deukalion, and of Dardanua ; in addition to these, isolated
traditions existed on the islands, as for example in Samothrace. It has been
sought to establish a connexion between these Greek traditions, especially
those referring to the flood of Deukalion, and the Chaldaean account, since
they present certain features in common, such as the rescue by means of
a floating chest, the presence of animals in the chest, and the sending forth
of birds, particularly of a dove. But that which is specially characteristic
of this group of traditions is its connexion with a ceremony which we have
not yet mentioned. This is the Feast of the Dead which took place annually
at Athens, on the 13th of the month Anthesterion, in memory of the flood
of Deukalion. The libation of water, Hydrophoria, and the offering of
honey and flour at the mouth of the chasm into which the waters of the
flood of Deukalion are said to have poured, formed, according to Mommsen,
part of this ceremony ^ The chasm is situated outside the district of
Leneum, but not far from it, close to the temple of Olympian Zeus.

In the book * of the Syrian Goddess ’ which has, rightly or wrongly, been
attributed to Lucian ® a complete and remarkable account of the ceremony
of the Hydrophoria is to bo found in connexion with the description of the
temple at Hierapolis on the Upper Euphrates.

The passages in question read as follows: ‘It is generally said that
Deukalion Sisythes ^ erected the temple, that Deukalion under whom the
great flood took place. In Greece I also heard the legend which the Greeks
tell of Deukalion, and the substance of which is as follows : “ The wicked-
ness of the first men is related ; as a punishment,” it continues, “ a great mis-
fortune fell upon them. The earth sent forth from her depths a great mass
of water, vast falls of rain occurred, the rivei-s swelled, and the stia poured
far and wide over the land, until everything was under water and every one
perished except Deukalion, who alone survived ...” for he had built a
chest, and his family and pairs of all kinds of animals had entered it. The
same chest contained them all as long as the water lasted. This is the
story which the Greeks tell of Deukalion.

‘The inhabitants of the town add to this a most remarkable tale, that
in their country a great opening had arisen in the earth, and this had

J. Schmidt, Studien fiber Erdbcben, 2. Aufl., 1879, pp. 138-165. ,

* A. Mommsen, Heortologie ; Antiquarische Untersuchungen fiber die stfidtischen
Feste der Athener, 8vo, 1864, p. 365.

’ I give the translation by Theod. Fischeh Lucian's Werke, 8vo, 1867, III, pp. 229, 230.

* For the name Sisythes, AcvicaX(<a>i/a roi^ Sccrv^ca, not Sicvil^ca, see Buttmann, My thole gus,
8vo, 1828,*p.n92.



68 THE DELHOlf [pjL«r x

received all the water ; bat Deakalion after this had happened had orected
altars, and beside the opening had built a temple in honourof Hera. I saw
the opening : there -is a veiy small one beneath the temple. Whether it was
large in ancient times and has now become thus 1 do not know : the one
I saw is very small As a token, and in recollection of this story, they
perform the following rite : twice a year water from the sea is brought uxto
the temple. This is not carried by the priests only, but from all S 3 nda
and Arabia, nay even from beyond the Euphrates, many men come down
to the sea, and they all cany water ; at first they pour it out in the temple,
whence it flows into the opening, and the little opening receives a great
quantity of water. And with regard to this ceremony they say that
Deukalion instituted it in the temple in remembrance of the disaster and
of the mercy shown him. This, is the ancient legend of the temple.’

A later passage relates that in the interior of the temple there stands an
image of Hera, and also one of that god ‘ whom, although it is really Zeus,
they call by another name.’ ‘ Between these stands another golden statue
. . . the Assyrians themselves call it the sign, but give it no particular name,
and con tell nothing concerning its origin or its form. Some believe it to
be Dionysos, others Deakalion, others again Semiromis. On its head is
a golden dove, and for this reason it is thought to be Semiramis. Twice
a year it is sent to the sea to fetch the water of which we have spoken.’

I have quoted this story in full, because it is k good example of the
confusion and transference of myths. But we must not forget that Lucian
lived in the second century of our era, and that the account is consequently
much later than all those we have hitherto mentioned. At the very
beginning the name Deukalion* is joined with the Hellenized Hasis-
Adra or Xisuthros, here Sisythes. Although the temple lies on the Upper
Euphrates, the first part is expressly quoted as a legend of the Greeks, and
yet this part conresponds in all essential features with the extremely ancient
Chaldaean tradition. Even the three forms of inundation, from the earth,
the heavens, and the sea, are mentioned.

In .the second part the Hydrophoria brings the temple, which lies far
inland, into connexion, with the sea ; we may see in this a Greek custom,
although the dove on the head of the divinity, which is said to have
journeyed twice a year to the sea, reminds us strongly of the Chaldoiean
accounts.

Thus the legend of the flood arrived by manifold routes in Greece, and
thence apparently travelled back to the Upper Euphrates; the question
now arises why absorptive fissures to cany off the water should be located
precisely at Hierapolis. Such fissures are in fact occasionally formed
daring earthquakes ; the draining of Lake Eulalie in the Mississippi valley.


’ dfv-xaXttfv. Lenormant, Orig., 11, 157, note*



OT. I] . INDIAK ACCOUNTS. 69

which we have already referred to, was caused in this way, and Hierapolis
(Mambedj) does aihtually lie in the great seismic zone of Antioch. But
the true cause appears to be simpler. Bey has seen the ruin of the temple
and published a plan of it; within the enclosure of the sanctuary, the
remains of a fishpond mentioned in the ancient legend are still preserved,
and Bey thinks it probable that the subterranean watercourses which exist
beneath the town gave rise to a repetition of the story concerning the chasm
which received the deluge, and also led to the erection of the temple^.

It is not my intention to proceed further in the comparison of these
different versions, which are derived wholly or in part from the Chaldaean
catastrophe.

We have now become acquainted with four groups of legends. The
first, consisting of the Izdubar epic and th^ fragments of Berosus, stands
in the closest relatij^nship to the event itself. The second, including the
two accounts of Genesis, follows the first closely, and differs from^it chiefly
in the ignorance of navigation displayed. The third is the flgyptian
group; we have only mentioned one account, but that the most impor-
tant. The destruction of mankind is accomplished, not by a flood, but
by the sanguinary Hathor ; the flood only appears as a subordinate feature
after the judgment. The connexion with the Chaldaean legend is very
vague, and may be doubted altogetl^er. The fourth group is the youngest
and embraces the Hellenic-Syrian traditions ; these include several floods,
probably of seismic origin, which affected parts of Greece, or its entire
coasts, and with which Chaldaean reminiscences and the ceremony of the
Hydrophoria have been associated.

From Tione of these dccovmU can it he shown that the catastrophe
extended from Surippak to the basin of the Mediten^anean,

On the contrary, the antiquity of Egyptian civilization and the
singular character of the myth in that country enable us to affirm with no
small degree of certainty that the flood did not extend to the basin of the
Mediterranean.

The sacred books of the Hindoos, the Big-Veda, as well as the more
recent writings, contain several stories of a great flood. Many circumstances
point to the fact that Satyavrata in the Bhd.gavata-Pur&na, to whom the
great flood is announced by Vishnu, and who is saved in virtue of his
character as guardian of the sacred writings, is the same personality
as Hasis-Adra; we also meet here with the episode of the sacred
writings which is found in Berosus, and with which we are already
acquainted. But all these reminiscences of the Chaldaean tradition, recog-
nizable in spite of their manifold trag^ormations, although they show
that the report of the great event had been carried hither, do not prove

^ £. G. Rey, Rapport sur une mission scientif. dans le nord de la Syrie ; Arch. d. miss,
scientif., €• s^r., Ill, 1867, p. 851, pi. z.



70 THE DELUGE [part i

that the flood itself extended so far. The fact that in the oldest of these,
the Big-Veda, the rescued Mann Vaivasvata fastens his ship to one of the
summits of the Himalaya proves that the legend has been introduced
from without, and has been localized in a completely unnatural manner.

The Chinese accounts appear to me to be of much greater importance.

The writings of the Chinese date from 3000 B. o., and are historical
records. While free from anything supernatural, and ma k i ng no claim to
a higher revelation, they relate events for the most part in prosaic and
definite language. The most important of these is the Schh-King, the
book of historical documents ; Legge’s excellent editions have rendered it
accessible to the European reader

From the SchfL we learn that in the reign of the Emperor Y&o a great
and devastating flood covered China. The date of the Emperor Yflo’s
accession we will place with Legge in the year 2357 B.C.; J. B. Biot,
basing his opinion on astronomical statements, considers this almost
universally received figure to be correct. YfU) rules seventy years. He
first summons Khw&n, and commands him to check, the ravages caused by
the flood.

In the Schfi, in the third canon of Yflo, the following passage occurs:
The Ti mye, Prince of the four mountaim, destructive in their overflow
are the waiters of the inundaJbion. Eodt&nding far and wide they surround
the mountains and cover the greed heights, threatening the heavens with
their floods, so that the lower people are HI content and murmur! Where is
there a man of ability whom I can command to put an end to this evil^P

For nine years KhwSn struggles in vain; then YU is summoned.
Within a space of eight years he accomplishes great works ; he clears the
forests, he regulates the course of the rivers, dams them in and opens up
their mouths, procures food for the population, and bringing order into
the whole kingdom becomes a great benefactor.

The third part of the Schii, which consists of the books of Hsi&,
presents in the first book, under the title * Ytt-King,’ or ‘ the tribute of Ytt,’
not only a detailed account of the works carried out by Yu, but a sketch
of the geography of the countiy, in which rivers, mountains, lakes, and
the resources of the provinces are enumerated. It is impossible to read
this remarkable monument of an ancient administration without feeling
the deepest respect for a nation whose records date from so early a period,
and which during many thousands of years accords the lyghest praise to
such deeds of peace and of public benefaction.

' James Legge, The Chinese Classics, III, pt. i, 8vo, Hongkong, 1865, and in Max
Miiller, The Sacred Books of the East, III, 8ro, Oxford, 1879.

’ Legge, Sacred Books, III, p. 34 ; according to Chinese Classics, III, pt. i, p. 25, note,
the commentator, Wu Ching, reads, instead of ‘the lower people,' ‘the people who dwell;
in the lowlands ’ ; but Legge does not adopt this view. • *



CmNESB ACCOUNT


71


CH. i]

The extensive knowledge of the country possessed by F. von Richthofen
enabled him to determine from the Yu-King the course of the rivers
four thousand years ago, and to show that the great plain has experienced
but few clianges since that time, with the exception of those caused
by human agency, by alterations in the course of the Yellow River, and
by the growth of the coast. Richthofen’s researches have at the same
time established with convincing thoroughness the correctness of the state-
ments concerning the great works of Yii, the exactitude of which had
• been doubted by Biot, and even to a certain extent by Legge himself

Missionaries have occasionally entertained the supposition that this
flood is a reminiscence, though a very distant one, of the biblical Deluge ;
Bunsen has opposed this theory with incisive arguments. In more recent
times there has been a tendency to ascribe the flood to the Ho, which
has since that time caused such devastations that it is called ‘ the scourge
of China.* Legge among others follows this view ^ ; indeed nothing seems
more natural than this explanation. Unfortunately, while Yii’s travels and
labours are described in great detail, the statements concerning the origin
of the flood are most incomplete. We are only sure that sheets of water
stood for a long time on the land, and that their disturbing effect on
the conditions of daily life was considerable

Our results may be summed up as follows : —

1. The event known as the Deluge took place in the region of the
Lower Euphrates, and was connected with an extensive and devastating
inundation of the Mesopotamian plain.

2. The chief cause was an earthquake of considerable violence in the
region of the Persian Gulf, or to the south of it, which was preceded
by several smaller concussions.

3. It is most probable that during the period of the most violent shocks
a cyclone came from the south out of the Persian Gulf.

4. The traditions of other races do not justify us in asserting that
the flood extended over the whole earth, or indeed beyond tlie lower
course of the Euphrates and Tigris.

It is this occurrence, after remaining impressed on the memory of man
for thousands of years, which has, under the influence of an entirely different
hypothesis and by a strange concatenation of circumstances, passed from
the sacred books of antiquity into the science of geology and given birth

•

' P. V. Richthofen, China, I, 1877, pp. 277-364, plates iv, v ; in particular p. 335, note.

^ Legge, Sacred Books, III, p. 18.

® In the representation of the state of affairs to be found in Mencius III. i. iv. 7
(Legge, Chinese Classics, Jl, pp. 126, 127), the passage does indeed occur : * In the time of
Y&o, when the world was not yet in a state of order, the rivers issuing from their beds caused
a universal deluge,* &c. But this does not seem to me to correspond entirely with the
much mo^e ^ustworthy statements of Yu-kung.



72


THE DELUGE


to sach terms as ‘ diluvium/ * diluvial formation/ and ' diluvial deposits.*
The flood was violent and destructive, but we have no proof that it was
widely distributed. Its main features as they present themselves to the
geologist are as follows : —

In the course of a seismic period of some duration the water of the
Persian Gulf was repeatedly driven by earthquake-shocks over the plain at
the mouths of the Euphrates. Warned by these floods, a prudent man,
Hasis-Adra, i. e. the god-fearing philosopher, builds a ship for the rescue of
his family, and calks it with pitch, as is still the custom on the Euphrates.
The movements of the earth increase ; he flees with his family to the ship ;
the subterranean water bursts forth from the Assured plain; a great
diminution in atmospheric pressure, indicated by fearful storm and
rain, probably a true cyclone, approaches from the Persian Gulf, and
accompanies the most violent manifestations of the seismic force. The
sea sweeps in a devastating flood over the plain, raises the rescuing vessel,
washes it far inland, and leaves it stranded on one of those Mi <v»pinft foot-
hills which bound the plain of the Tigris on the north and north-east
below the confluence of the Little Zab.



78


CHAPTER II

. I

SOME SEISMIC AKEAS

Various branches of research. The north-eastern Alps. South Italy. The continent
of Central America. Alleged spasmodic elevation of Chili. Rebounding of objects.
Movement of submarine sediment. Valparaiso, 1822. Concep 9 ion, 1835. Valdivia,
1837. Elevation of the land not proved.

There are probably few natural phenomena which have been made
the subject of traditions and writings so numerous and various as have
earthquakes. Accounts of them date, as the foregoing section has shown,
from the earliest times, and now each year still brings its contribution
of research. Unfortunately much of this investigation, though often of
great merit, is unsystematic and too variously directed.

The majority of the records, especially those of ancient date, describe
the premonitions of animals and the terror of men, enumerate the loss of
life and property, and present vivid colouring, but vague outline.

Other works, perfect models of patient industry, seek to prove a
periodicity in the recurrence of the phenomena. But there are two
circumstances which from the outset render fruitless all attempts of this
kind, however serious in intention they may be, as soon as comparatively
long periods of time and a large number of earthquakes are involved.
The first of these circumstances lies in the unequal value of the records,
which far exceeds the limits admissible in work of this kind. The value
of any particular tradition is directly dependent on the degree of civili-
zation attained by mankind at the time, and on the existing state of
knowledge of distant countries. Mallet drew up a little table in the year
1858 which shows how extraordinarily the number of observed earthquakes
increases as we approach modem times, and this he rightly ascribed to
an increasing completeness of the record ; for the same reason the number
of shocks in Europe attains a maximum in the nineteenth century \ It
is only within the last few years; through the labours of E. Naumann*
and J. Milne®, that opportunity has been afforded us of studying the
older records of earthquakes in Japan. The numerous accounts from
the seventh, eighth, and more particularly the ninth century are in

* R. Mallet and J. W. Mallet, The Earthquake Catalogue ; Rep. Brit. Assoc., 1858,

pp.28,51. .

* E. Naumann, Ueber Erdbeben und Vulcanausbriiche in Japan ; aus den Mittheil.
der deutsch. Gesellsch. f. Natur- und VOlkerkunde Ost-Asiens, 15. Heft, 4to, Yokohama,
1878, pp. 4, 5.

* J. Milne, Notes on the great Earthquakes of Japan ; Trans. Seismol. Soc. of Japan,
1881, HI. pp.i06-102.



74


SOME SEISMIC AEEAS [PAierr

accordance with the high degree of culture which Jhpan had at that time
ahready attuned; on the other hand, there is a scarcity of information
as regards the twelfth and sixteenth centuries, which Naumann ascribes to
the political revolutions and the warlike enterprises of those periods. And
for what a small portion of the earth’s surface do we possess any older
accounts whatever! While we search for traces of periodicity through
thousands of data we find in them only the proof of our ignorance.

The second difiiculty lies in the impossibility of arriving at a fixed rule
in the selection of individual shocks for record in the course of any dong
persistent seismic phase. The cases in which the seismic movement
exhausts itself for a long period by one violent shock, as in the last
earthquake of Casa Micciola on Ischia, are among the rare exceptions.
Much more frequent is the occurrence of a whole series of earthquakes,
of varying intensity, accompanied or not by subterranean rumbling. Some-
times indeed the maximum intensity moves from place to place along a
definite line ; thus, when attempting to investigate the possibility of a con-
nexion between concussions of the earth and the position of the sun and
moon at the time, the conscientious observer is left in doubt as to which,
among the numerous movements of the ground, some more and some less
violent, he should record for comparison.

Another branch of investigation, making use of geometrical principles,
attempts to determine, from the time of occurrence and direction of the
movements at the surface, the exact depth and position of the point
from which they proceed. But apart from the discrepancy which exists
between the great exactness of the methods employed and the want of
exactness in the observations on which the calculations must in most
cases be based, the fundamental assumption is made that the focus from
which the shocks proceed is a somewhat strictly circumscribed space in
the interior of the earth. This assumption is, however, not proved. On
the contrary it is much more probable that ruptures, or sudden displace-
ments within the crust, take place simultaneously over extensive surfaces.
In fact the data which point to a far-reaching synchronism of concussions
are becoming increasingly numerous. Whitney thinks there is conclusive
evidence to show that in the violent earthquake of Owen’s Valley, on the
east side of the Sierra Nevada in California, which took place on March 26,
1872, the chief shock was felt simultaneously over the whole region
between the 34th and 38th degrees of latitude parallel ta the direction of
the Sierra; while in a direction approximately at right angles to this
the undulation reached the middle of the Valley of San Joaquin in
2-3 minutes, and that of the Sacramento Valley in 3-4 minutes, and the
coast between San Francisco and Los Angelos in from 4 to 5 minutes ^

* J. D. Whitney, The Owen’s Valley Earthquake of March 26, 1872 ; Overland Monthly
for Aug. and Sept., 1872, p. 278. * *



6E. u] FBEQUEN07 OF EABTHQUAEES 75

In the earthquake which occurred on March 2, 1878, over the whole of
the Upper Punjab and the neighbouring districts, from Banun, Koh&t,
Pesh&war, and B&walpindi to Lahore and Ferozpur, and even beyond
Simla, Wynne was unable to distinguish appreciable differences in the
time of the shocks, although the distance between the extreme points of
observation measured 732 kilometers in a straight line, and the structure
of the ground over this large region is very varied ^

In the same way Heim has proved the simultaneous manifestation
of the shock over a great distance in the case of several Alpine earth-
quakea

The earthquake of July 4, 1880, extended from the valley of the Po
right across the Alps into the Schwarzwald. The major axis of the district
affected measured about 305 kilometers, and ran from north to south between
Vercelli and Lenzkirch; a line at right angles to this from Genoa or
Annecy to Poschiavo or Chur measured 230 kilometers. The following
table gives the times at which the arrival of the shock was observed : —

Zurich 9 h. 20' San Bernardino . . 9 h. 19' 30"

Wattwyl (Toggenburg) 9 h. 19' 40" Brieg (V alais) .. 9 h, 19' 40"

Einsiedeln . ... 9 20' 30" St. Leonard (nr. Sitten)

Andermatt . . . . 9 A 20' 47" (Valais) . . . . 9 A 20' 36"


Airolo 9 h. 21' 3" Geneva 9 A 20' 4"

Faido (Tessin) ... 9 A 20' 3" Lugano 9 A 19'


Heim concludes from this that the cause of the earthquake of July 4,
1880, could only lie in the synchronous and intermittent movement of
a very extensive fragment of the earth’s crust, not in a local and violent
impulse K

Thus three observers in different parts of the world have arrived
independently of each other at the same result.

The increased attention which has of late been directed to these
phenomena, the growth of education among the people, and the develop-
ment of the press, which has made observation possible over extensive
areas, have been followed by the discovery that in Central Europe seismic
movements of the earth are infinitely more frequent than has previously
been supposed. Since the systematic organization of observations in
Switzerland, Heim has shown that no less than sixty-nine earthquakes
were experience<^ in the Swiss Alps between November, 1879, and the end
of 1880, that is during fourteen months. Yet more numerous are the
earthquakes in other parts of the world, especially in Japan, where Milne

I

^ A. B. Wynne, Notes on the Earthquake in the Punjab of March 2 , 1878 ; Joum. Asiat.
Soc., Ben^l, 1878, XLVII, part 2, pp. 131-140.

' A. Heim, Die achweizerischen Erdbeben vom November 1879 bis Ende 1880 ; nach
den von der Evdbeben-Commission gesammelten Berichten, 4to, Bern, 1881, pp. 18-20.



76


SOME SEISMIC AHEAS


[PAKTI

counted thirty-six distinct earthquakes, which affected the region extend-
ing from Tokio to Eamaishi between October 19 and December 31, 1881,
that is in seventy-three days No doubt a similar state of disturbance
prevails in other volcanic regions. Moreover we are now considering not
transitory phases of exceptional seismic activity, but, so far as we are able to
judge, of a fairly normal state of affairs : and only such concussions are
taken into account as can be perceived without special instruments. Some
observers indeed even go so far as to maintain that in many regions the
apparent repose of the earth’s crust is deceptive, the result merely of
defective observation; with sufficiently sensitive instruments it can be
shown that these regions are in a condition of constant movement^.
Others again have even maintained that the effect of earthquakes in South
America could be recognized, through the whole mass of the planet, in the
oscillations of the instruments in the Observatory of Pulkowa \

In this, as in other branches of research, an increase of knowledge can
only be expected from as close an observation as possible of the pheno-
menon itself. Shocks of moderate intensity, causing damage and alarm
only to a comparatively small degree, or affecting only a very limited area,
may furnish results just as valuable to science as the most terrible cata-
strophes. It is necessary for their study that a sufficient number of com-
petent observers should be distributed throughout the country affected, the
structure of which must be known in its main features. It is further
necessary to compare as great a number of earthquakes as' possible within
a limited area, since the difference in the nature of the movements is not
small, and the sources of error are many. It is therefore a matter for
well-considered and carefully organized work.

Fortunately work of this kind has been in progress in several places
for some years. The Swiss Earthquake Commission gives promise of
important contributions, judging by the reports already published. In the
eastern Alps, in Italy, and in Japan a lively interest has been awakened
in these researches ; and in a few years we may certainly expect to be in
a much better position to discuss the question of the connexion between
the structure of the earth’s crust and its movements than we are at present,
and with a greater degree of certainty than can attend my attempt in the
following chapters.

Some de^ite results have, however, already been obtained. As
examples I have chosen four chief seismic areas, each distinct in type.

The first is the region of the north-eaetern Alps ; no volcano is present.
Although investigations have been in progress but a few years, yet the results

' J. Milne, Tlie Distribution of Seismic Activity in Japan ; Trans. Seismol. Soc. of
Japan, 1882, IV, p. 80.

* Rossi, Meteorologia Endogena, 8vo, vol. II, 1882, Microsismologia.

* Njrbn, Bull. Acad. Fdtexsb., 1877, XXIV, p. 667.


• •



OT. n] THE BOEDEE OP THE ALPS 77

are so singularly concordant as to render it possible to arrive at definite
conclusions.

The second example is S(mth Italy, Volcanos are present, but in this
limited area they are not arranged in lines; their connexion with the
earthquakes of the district may nevertheless be recognized.

The third example is the coTUinent of Central America, Earthquakes
are frequent, but have been little studied. The peculiar arrangement of
the volcanos, in default of information as to the movements, is sufficient
however to indicate the main lines of disturbance.

The fourth example bears upon certain events which have taken place
on the wed coast of South America, Under this head a particular theory,
maintained by many eminent authorities, to the effect that certain earth-
quakes were accompanied by a spasmodic elevation of the land, will be
examined.


A. The North-eastern Alps.

A steep and almost unbroken scarp, forhiing the western border of
the Bavarian Forest, runs towards Passau; there it crosses the Danube
to the south, appears again on the north side below Linz, once more
crosses over between Qrein and Krems, to extend on this side nearly as
far as St. Polten, whence it turns finally to the north-east, and proceeds
past Maissau and Znaim, towards Briinn. This is the sharply defined
boundary of the great mass of Bohemia. Above it lie the moist and
wooded tablelands of the northern part of Upper Austria, and the
Waldviertel of Lower Austria, the Mannhart, and the north-west of Moravia ;
they form the outer region of the plateau, which is continued through
a great part of southern Bohemia. These high-lying regions consist,
almost exclusively, of granite, gneiss, and ancient schist.

At the foot of the scarp lies the plain which separates the Bohemian
mass from the Alps; the Danube fiows through it except where it has
preferred to excavate its bed in the rocky masses jutting out to the south
from the old plateau. That part of the plain which lies in Bavaria is
broad ; it narrows down between Ybbs and St. Polten, widening out again
as it extends far into the north-east.

To the north of Briinn Devonian rocks extend from the Sudetes to the
outer margin of* the Bohemian mass; between Leipnik and Weisskirchen
they meet the outer zones of the Carpathians.

The outer margin of the Alps and the Carpathians describes a very
constant curve ; it is interrupted near Salzburg, and again for a long
interval between the Bisamberg, near Vienna, and the Marsgebirge in
Moravia — in this interval the outer zone is only represented by an isolated
remnant here and there. The curve runs from Laufen past Steyer, crosses



78


SOME SEISMIC AHEAS


[PABV r

the Danube to the west of S^lostemeuburg, and is continued to the east
from Nikolsburg towards Eremsier as far as the already mentioned point
of contact with the Devonian near Leipnik and Weisskirchen. The arc
then returns past Neutitschein and Kenty towards Wieliczka, where it
is faced by the heights of Cracow.

This border, where it is not interrupted by later subsidence, forms just
as striking a feature in the country as the edge of the plateau. Its slope
is not so steep as that of the ancient Bohemian mass ; it is more frequently
intersected by transverse valleys, and is even more thickly wooded : within
it the mountains rise step by step to far more considerable heights, and



Fio. 8. Recent earthquakes in the north-east qf the Alps and west of the Carpathians
A, B, Southern edge of the Bohemian mass and of the southern part of the Sudetes ;
c, D, North border of the Alps and the Carpathians ; Point of contact near Weisskirchen*


in forms incomparably more varied than those of the monotonous plateau
of Bohemia, '^e contrast between these two mountain systems, both in
their structure and in their stratified sequence, is extremely sharp, and the
narrow plain, which separates them, doubtless conceals one of the most
remarkable areas of disturbance in the continent of Europe.

The more violent earthquakes of the outer border of the .^ps, those
at least which have been studied in modem times, exhibit a peculiar
tendency to extend across this dividing zone into the plateau on the
other side. • •


79


CH.n] PEOPAGATION TO THE NORTH

The earthquake of SiUein on January 16, 1858, attained its maximum
force in the upper valley of the Waag, in an irregular elliptical area
stretching approximately north to south, into which the granite mass of
Mount Mindow projects. The area of concussion, gradually narrowing
away to the south, extended as far as Oran on the Danube. The shocks
were felt to the east as far as Tamow, and to the west as far as Briinn ;
they extended in an irregular manner through some parts of the
Biesengebirge and a great part of the Sudetes, and in the north they
reached Trebnitz to the north of Breslau ^

Although this shock had its seat in the interior of the Carpathians,
the concussion not only propagated itself across the opposing mountain
chain, over the plain and into the mountains on the other side, namely,
the Biesengebirge and the Sudetes; but a considerable part of the area
affected lay outside the Carpathians, and its major axis ran perpendicular
to the strike of the chain.

The earthquake of Neulengbach in Lower Austria, on January 3, 1873,
was felt most violently in the vicinity of the outer border of the Alps.
It attained its maximum in the neighbourhood of Hummelhof near
Neulengbach, quite close to the outer edge of the Flysch zone. The
outline of the area, within which the vertical movements and the more
serious concussions occurred, has the form of a cross. The two arms lie
between Eonigstetten and Pyhra, near the edge of the Flysch zone ; at right
angles to these one branch longer than the arms extends as far as Homstein
into the Alps, that is to the south-east, and the other, much longer still,
proceeds in the opposite direction or to the north-west, crosses the Danube
near Preuwitz, and runs up the valley of the Kamp in the granite region
as far as Wildberg near Messem. The extreme limit of the shaken area
does not extend much beyond Homstein in the direction of the Alps, but it
stretches much further to the north-west, as far as Meseritch and Trebitsch
in Moravia.

Here, again, the axis of the area of concussion is perpendicular to the
strike of the chain, but the greater part of the area lies outside the Alps,
and extends as a long tongue into the granite plateau. This case is typical
of those earthquakes which, proceeding from the border of the Alps, are
propagated into the confronting mass of Bohemia.

On June 12, 1874, another earthquake occurred in the same locality, but
with less intensi^ ; this time the shock was transmitted to the north-west
as far as Baabs, and to the south-east as far as Klausen-Leopoldsdorf ; thus

^ L. H. Jeitteles, Bericht Ub. d. Rrdbeben am 15. Januar 1858 in ^den Karpatben
und Sudeten, Sitzungsber. k. Akad. Wise. Wien, XXXV, 1858, pp. 511-592 und Karte ;
J. Schmidt, Untersuchungen ab. d. Erdbeben vom 15. Januar 1858, Mittheil. geogr.
Gesellsch. Wien, II, pp. 131-203 und Karte ; A. Kornhuber, Erdbeben vom 15. Januar
1858, besonders rticksichtlich seiner Verbreitung in Ungam, Ber. des Vereins f. Natuik.
in Presabuig, J.858.



80


SOME SEISMId ABEAS


[pABirt

again penetrating much farther into the granite on the other side of the
plain than into the Alps, where it did not even pass beyond the Flysdi zone.

But it appears t^t in earlier times also this same region has been
repeatedly convulsed by shocks which have followed the same line of
propagation, the point of seismic maximum lying sometimes -close to the
outer border of the Alps near Lengbach, and sometimes within the Alps
near Brunn, not far from Wiener-Neustadt, at the point of intersection of
this seismic line with the line of thermal springs, which in its coarse from
Neustadt to near Vienna marks the limit, of the Alpine subsidence. But the
seismic line has never yet been traced further south than this area of
subsidence, which is covered with Tertiary deposits and flat cones of
d^ris which have been pushed down from the Alps. On the other hand
the earthquakes which have occurred on this line have always been
propagated to the north-west into the mass of Bohemia, over distances
greater or less according to the violence of the shocks, but often passing
beyond Prague. In the direction of the Alps they travel over much
smaller distances, the disturbiuice frequently ending in the more recent
deposits which fill up the sunken area near Neustadt, where they manifest
themselves by violent local shocks which devastate the neighbouring towns
and villages.

The earthquake of June 29, 1590, on this line reached as far as Iglau.
The particularly violent earthquake of September 15, 1590, the most
violent which has occurred in the Alps since the existence of historical
records, attained its maximum force in the neighbourhood of Neuleng-
bach, passed Iglau, continued onwards with great intensity as far as
Prague, and was distinctly felt even in Leitmeritz. On February 27, 1768,
the principal shock occurred near Brilnn on the line of thermal springs,
causing damage in Neustadt ; it travelled along the previously mentioned
seismic line to the north-west, and was felt beyond Iglau.

These examples may suffice to give some idea of the importance and
fixity of this seismic line, and of the constancy in character of the earth-
quakes originating upon it. It is known as the Kamp line

When, on March 14, 1837, a violent shock occurred on the Kamp line
in Milrzzuaehlag and on the Semmering, on the south edge of the sunken
area of Neustadt, the behaviour of the shaken region remained the
same. Towards the south the movement was not perceptible further than
Brack on the Mur, while to the north it was observed beyond Prague as
far as Alt-Bunzlau

On July 17, 1876, a fairly violent earthquake occurred farther to the

’ Die Erdbeben NiederOesterreichs ; Denkschr. k. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1878, XXXIII,
pp. 1-38, and maps.

* The chief sonice of information for this earthquake is a note in Poggendorfre Annal.
Phya. Chem. 1837, 42. Bd., pp. 685-690. c >



BELLUNO


81


OH. n]

west in the neighbourhood of Scheibbs, in Lower Austria; the seismic
maximum lay, as in the earthquake of Lengbach, close to the outer border
of the Alps, and the concussion was very violent over a small and narrow
area, which extended from Scheibbs to the south-south-east as far as Kind-
berg in Styria, and to the north-north-west beyond Scheibbs as far as
Fersenberg, on the border of the Bohemian mass. The seismic area
as a whole presented the form of a pear or bottle; it extended in the
Alps only as far as Qratz, to the east as far ae Fressburg, to the west
up to the Mondsee and Fassau, while to the north it gradually narrowed
away till it reached Dresden. Bells were set ringing even in Lobositz on
the Elbe \

Thus this earthquake also occurred in a direction perpendicular to the
strike of the Alps, and it travelled through the whole breadth of the
Bohemian mass as far as Saxony.

In all these examples, that is, in the case of all earthquakes which
have had their origin in this part of the Alpine system, and have extended
over an area with which we are exactly acquainted, the concussion has
taken place, with the exception of some very secondary and locally limited
shocks, at right angles to the strike of the mountains. It has always
appeared to follow a more or less sharply defined line; concussions of
varying intensity have repeatedly occurred on the same line, and the shock
has always been transmitted further to the north, into the opposing mass
of the ancient plateau, than to the south, into the folding mountain chain
from which it proceeded.

The reason of this coincidence is not yet known; but I consider we
are justified in maintaining that all these earthquakes have a common
cause, and that the force which manifests itself, in them is always
present, but only occasionally obtains expression.

If we proceed further into the interior of the Alps we meet with
conditions which are extraordinarily complicated. The earthquake of
Bdluno on June 29, 1873, although it originated in the southern border
of the Alps, was also transmitted across their whole breadth, and passing
linz and Freistadt even entered the Archaean plateau ^

B. Hoernes has endeavoured to establish the existence of a seismic zone
at the south foot of the eastern Alps, extending from Lake Garda to
beyond Fiumc; this would be a peripheral seismic line, and from it
a number of transverse seismic lines are supposed to extend into the
Alps®. H. Hoefer, from a comparative study of the earthquakes of

^ According to a collection of as yet unpublished accounts. '

* Bittner, Beitr. aur Kenntniss des Erdbebens von Belluno vom 29. Juni 1873;
Sitzungsber. k. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1874, Bd. 69, p. 6.

* R. Hoernes, Erdbebenstudien ; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst. 1878, XXVIll, pp. 387-448,
and map. ^ ^


G



82


SOME SEISMIC ABEAS


[PABTI

Carinthia, has been led to suppose the existence of a network of long lines,
some of which follow the trend of the chain*. But it is precisely this
segment of the Alps which, as wc shall see later, is distinguished by a very
•complicated structure, and it will be the task of further investigations
to determine which of these two conceptions makes a nearer approach
to the truth.

There is a general agreement among recent observers that, in the case
of transversal earthquakes, a displacement of one mountain segment against
another takes place in a horizontal direction and by jerks. The nature of
the movement points to steeply inclined fractures, standing perpendicular
to the strike of the mountains ; a form of Alpine dislocation, which later
on will receive the name of ‘flaw* (Blatt). In the south Hoemes has
attempted to trace a direct connexion between the earthquake of Belluno
and visible faces of dislocation of this kind Bittner has pointed out the
parallelism between the numerous flaw faces of the north-eastern end of
the Alps, which strike N. 16 ° W., and the Kamp line But we need not,
therefore, conclude that these flaws are continued in the Archaean mass on
the other side : and if not, the remarkable elongation of the seismic area
to the north would then be only a phenomenon of propagation, marking
the direction of the shocks which proceed from within the Alps.

B. South Italy.

Looking from the volcanos of lipari towards the mainland, or to the
north coast of Sicily, masses of primitive rock with scarped faces are seen
on every side. Gneiss or granite form the greater part of these rocks,
and the succeeding zones of schist and younger rocks up to the Flysch
occur on that side of the range which faces away from the Lipari Isles.

Towards the north-east, Monte Cocuzzo turns its steep declivity to the
Tyrrhenian Sea; it is crowned by a remnant of transgressive limestone;
towards the interior the longitudinal valley of Crati separates Cocuzzo from
the great mountain core of the Sila. — ^To the east rise the gneiss-formed
heights of Cape Vaticano and the granite cliffs of Scylla, both of them
fragments faulted down from the Aspromonte, which rises abruptly above
them, and on its eastern side, looking towards the Ionian Sea, is mantled
with more recent deposits. — Finally on the south, along the Sicilian coast,
the borders of the ancient Feloritan mass face the Lipari Isles ; its oldest
granites are exposed in the north-eastern part of the island, while on the

* H. Hoefer, Die Erdbeben Karntens und deren Stosslinien ; Denkschr. k. Akad. Wira.
Wien, 1880, Bd. 42, 2. Abth. pp. 1-90, and maps.

* R. Hoernes, Das Erdbeben von Belluno am 29. Juni 1873 ; Mittheil. d. naturw.
Vereing f. Steiermark, 1877, and in other places.

* R. Bittner, Die.geol. Verh&ltnisse von Hemstein in NiederOsterreich. Mit Unterst.

Sr. k. Hob. des Erzh. Leopold herausgegeben von M. A. Becker, 1, 4to, 188^, 308.



OH. n] MABGINAL FRACTI^ OP ASPEOMONTE 88

opposite side, on the slopes tamed towards Aetna, the younger zones
of Aspromonte are continued with a change of direction.

Thus Ai^romonte, the hills of Vaticano, Scylla, and the Peloritan
ni ouTifai.inn represent the fragments of a once continuous mountain chain,
now cut through by the Straits of Messina. Its chief maiginal fracture,
situated on the west side of Aspromonte, faces the lapari Islands *.

This fracture wae the path along which seismic activity made its
appearance for some months in the year 1788, with repeated displacement
of the epicentre. This series of disturbances appears to have commenced.



Fig. 4. The peripheral line qf the Lipari Islands.

The volcanic rocks aro indicated by dark, the granite, gneiss, and schist by lighter

hatchi^^ fragments of the mass of Aspromonte (i a, Peloritan mountains ; i b and i c, Aspro-
monte, with a fragment of Scylla lying to the west ; i d, fragment of the Vaticano).

II. Mass of the Sila.

III. Mass of the Cocuzzo (faulted down towards the sea).

^ Die Erdbeben des sildlichen Italien, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, XXXIV, 1875,
pp. 1-82. An important supplement to the sketch of the geological structure given here
is to be found in L. Burgerstein and P. No6, Geolog. Beobachtungen im sddlichen
Calabrien, Sitzungsber. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1880, LXXXI, Pt. i, p. 154, with map and
section; in the detailed Monograph on the younger deposits by G. Seguenza, Le
formazioni terziarie nella prov. di Reggio, Atti della R. Accad. dei Lincei, 3. ser., VI,
1880; and in E. Cortese, Sulla formaz. dello Stretto di Mes&ina, Boll. com. geol., 1882.
XIII, pp. 4^32, Tav. i, ii.


84 SOME SEISMIC AEEAS [pabti

as early as 1780, with an eruption of Aetna, which was followed by violent
local shodcB near Ali and Fiumi di Niso, on the coast of Sicily; then an
eruption of Vulcano took place, and, on February 5, 1788, the first con-
siderable shock occurred along the fracture of Aspromonte, near Oppido
and Santa Cristina, when the younger Tertiary deposits were severed
from the marginal fracture by a long deep cleft. The concussion was
propagated to the south, west, and north, but only a short distance to the
east, that is, not far across the mar^nal fracture. Within a few weeks
there was an unmistakable change in the position of the centre, the
epicentre travelling past Soriano and Folia as far as Qirifalco, near
the northern extremity of the fracture, and then returning to Badicena,
near Oppido, that is, close to its point of departure. With the exception
of some extensive landslips in the port of Messina, no permanent alteration
took place in the sea-coast.

A comparison with other concussions which have occurred on the
southern shore of the Tyrrhenian Sea shows us that the line of 1783
forms part of a great curve, closely approximating to a circular arc, which
surrounds the lipari Isles on the east and south, and is characterized by
numerous earthquakes. The arc runs east from Monte Cocuzzo, through
the valley of Crati, passing through Luzzi, near Bisignano, Cosenza,
Donnici, and San Stefano, near Bogliano, to Qirifalco, thence along the
dislocation of Aspromonte through Pezzoni, Soriano, Terranova, Oppido,
and Santa Cristina, and finally on the other side of the Straits it passes
to the south of the Peloritan mass through Ali to Aetna, whence it is
continued through Bronte and Nicosia to the Montes Madonie.

In addition to this peripheral line, a number of other seismic lines are
known in this region, which radiate from the Lipari Isles, and along which
the concussions are, so far as has been observed, directed from the islands
outwards ; some of these lines cross the peripheral line and extend beyond
it, others, especially in the neighbourhood of Aspromonte, appear to end
on it. They run as follows: — to the north-east, from Amantea, across
the peripheral line and the whole peninsula as far as Bossano on the east
coast; to the east-north-east, into the Gulf of Santa Eufemia, and past
Catanzaro to the east coast ; to the south, from Vulcano to Aetna, and
from there south-south-west to Mineo, and then far to the south-west past
Palermo towards Favignana.

The arc has a radius of about 90-100 kilometers; Cocuzzo, Cape
Vaticano, Scylla, and the Peloritan mountains lie within it, Sila and
Aspromonte without it. The radial lines converge towards the lipari
Isles. F. Hofimann pointed out, as early as 1832 and the fact has lately

* F. Hoffmann, Ueber die geognostische BeBchaffenheit der liparischen Inaeln,
Scbreiben an Herrn L. von Buch; Poggendorf's Annal. Fhys. Chem., 1882, XXYI,



85


OB. ii] CONNEXION OF THE RADIAL LINES

hem confinnied by Judd ^ that within the lipari Isles, south of Stromboli,
at a place which may be regatded as the approximate centre of the
peripheral line, there lies a group of small islands and clids, the structure
of which did^ from that of the remaining islands. For while on the
others the centres of eruption are marked by craters of laiger or smaller
size, this whole group consists solely of the ruins of one mighty crater,
which Hofiinann describes as the central crater of the lipari Isles.

From this irregular ring-shaped group, consisting of the clid& and islands
of Fanaria, Basiluzzo, Dattilo, Lisca bianca with the submarine fumarole,
Bottaro, Fanarella, Formiche, and Lisca nera, there radiate, according to
Hoffmann and Judd, three lines on which lie the eruptive centres of the
Lipari Isles. The first of these runs to the west-south-west past Salina,
FiUcuri, and Alicuri ; the second starts to the south-south- west to Lipari,
but then turns to the south-east through Yulcano to the solfatara on Cape
Calava; while the third goes to the north-north-east, passing through
Stromboli.

If we compare these lines, the course of which may be seen on
Hofimann’s map, with the network of lines determined solely from the
evidence of seismic activity, we shall find it difficult to resist the conclu-
sion that these volcanic radial lines stand in some connexion with the
seismic radial lines. Several trustworthy observers have already perceived
a correspondence between an increase in activity of Stromboli and earth-
quake shocks in Calabria; it was noticed by A. Kircher in the year
1638 *, by Conte Ippolito Grimaldi *, and most of those who experienced
the great earthquake of 1783. Similarly, Ferrara, by means of numerous
examples, has endeavoured to prove the existence of a connexion between
eruptions in the Lipari Isles and concussions on the north coast of Sicily ^

We are thus led to the conclusion that within a space bounded by the
peripheral line of 1783, the crust of the earth has sunk down in the form
of a dish, and thus radial fractures have been produced, which converge
to the Lipari Isles. These converging lines are beset with volcanos near
their centre of origin. Any disturbance in the equilibrium of the several

’ J. W. Judd, Contributions to the Study of Volcanos, Oeol. Mag. Jan. 1875,
particularly p. 4 and p. 214, and the little map on p. 7. Cortese also has recently given
the lines of fracture as follows (1) East to west : Alicuri, Filicuri Saline ; (2) North-east
to south-west : Stromboli, Phnaria, north part of Lipari ; (3) North to south : Lipari,
Vulcano, Vulcanello. Cortese, Sulla cost. geol. dell’ Isola di Lipari;. Boll. com. geol.,
1881, 2. ser., II, p. 502.

* A. Kircheri, Mundus subterraneus, Praef. and p. 240.

* Cte. Ippolito in Hamilton's account, Phil. Tians., 1783, p. 213, et seq. '

* Grimaldi, Descrizionc de* tremuoti accad. nolle Calabrie nel 1783, 8vo, Naples,
1784, p. 46.

* Ferrara, Mem. sopra i tremuoti della Sicilia in Manso 1823, 8vo, Palermo, 1823, in
particular^pt 23, 82, et seq.



86 SOME SEISMIC AREAS [pabti

fra^ents of the crust gives rise to increased volcanic activity on the
islands, and to earthquakes on the mainland or in Sicily.

If this process of subsidence should pursue its course, then the low
gneissose hills of Cape Vaticano, the granite mountains of Scylla, and
a large part of the Peloritan mountains, with the Madonie,.will sink
beneath the Tyrrhenian Sea, which will then, after the complete demolition
of the Tertiary deposits now lying in front of it, wash against the
peripheral fracture on the west side of Aspromonte, as it now does on the
west side of Cocuzzo. The Straits of Messina will be broader, and all that
will be left of the curve described by the younger zones of the Apennines,
which may at present still be recognized from its remains, will be at
most an isolated fragment rising between Ali and Taormina, forming the
eastern promontory of a greatly diminished Trinacria, and presenting to
the geologist an almost insoluble problem.

It will be seen in a later chapter that the separation of Sicily from
North Africa may be attributed to similar processes. For the present
we may draw the following inferences from these observations: that radial
fissures play an important part in the subsidence of the western side of
the Apennines, and that the cause of the numerous centres of eruption
in the Lipari Isles is probably to be found in the convergence of these
radial lines and in their mutual intersection. The region of the Phlegraean
fields may perhaps be similarly constituted ; and the tendency to displace-
ment of the eruptive centres might be attributed to the greater mobility
of the thin ends of the orographic quoins. The great isolated and
persistent volcanos lie nearer to the marginal cleft, perhaps at the points
where this is intersected by the radial fissures ^

C. The continent of ^Central America.

The volcanos of Central America are equally independent of the volcanos
of Quito, of the crescentic arc of volcanos of the Lesser Antilles, and of the
chain of Mexican volcanos which extend across the continent from west
to east. They begin with the volcano of Chiriqui in lat. 8® 48^ N., pursue
a north-westerly course as far as the Bay of Fonseca, and from there

^ 1 have purposely omitted to quote the wonderful system of radial fissures which
Rossi has described as proceeding from the Albanian mountains. I willingly subscribe
in all essential points to the results obtained by this diligent observer as to the
movement on fissures, as well as to certain observations on faults, and in particular to
the proof produced by Fonzi of a fault in the Tiber valley situated in Rome itself. But
after Ponzi*8 work it seems to me hardly feasible to return to Breislak's opinion that
a volcano once stood on the site of the forum; still less would it be possible to distinguish
with any degree of certainty lines supposed to lie so near to one another, by means of
earthquakes, and especially not from a single concussion, affecting all the supposed lines
simultaneously. The radial lines in Calabria are widely separated from one another,
and have acted as independent lin^ of seismic shock at very different times. M. St. de
Rossi, Meteor. Endog., I, pp. 200*288, Atti Accad. Lincei, 1878. * '



CH. n] VOLCANOS OF CENTRAL AMERICA 87

extend along a line somewhat more to the west-north«west, as far as
Socomusco in Mexico*

We might therefore, perhaps, speak of two great chains, which meet
at an obtuse angle in the Bay of Fonseca, but both have this remarkable
fact in common that the volcanos rising from them, which are often
of gigantic dimensions, frequently stand on easily recognizable transverse
fractures. Sometimes an independent transverse line, some miles in
length, has been formed, as in the chain of Chiquiinula, in eastern
Guatemala ; at others again the displacement of the eruptive centre, which
takes place at right angles to the chief line, is only indicated by the
structure of the summit. This tendency to abandon the old eruptive
channel is universal.

The chief line, particularly to the west of the Bay of Fonseca, follows
the Pacific coast very closely; the transverse lines, on which the eruptive
activity ii^ displaced, are more or less perpendicular to it, and in almost
every case it is the crater lying farthest to the south-west, i. e. nearest
to the Pacific coast, which alone is active.

The dieplcuxnient thus takes place along longer or shorter transverse
fractures and is directed towards the Pacific Ocean, This is the more
remarkable since it stands in no perceptible relation to the structure of
those fragments of older mountains which exist in this region.

The most southerly centre of eruption. Mount Chiriqui, is succeeded
towards the north-west by Mount Robalo, which does not as yet seem to
have been closely examined. Here the main line of volcanos meets the
Cordillera of Talamanca, which is composed of granite and syenite.
Vertical and folded strata of Miocene age border the granite mountains
to the north, and on the line of volcanos Pico Blanco rises to a height
of 3,620 meters. This was long held to be a volcano, until Gabb ascended
it and showed that its summit consists of a dyke of ancient porphyry
rising out of the weathered granite ^

The line of volcanos is not, however, diverted by the line of granite
mountains ; on the contrary volcanos such as Monte Lyon, and probably
also the Ujum, arc seated on the latter these arc followed by the
volcanos Irazu and Turrialba, Zurqui, Barba, and Poas.

The summit of Turrialba is described by Seebach as a ridge running
from the east-north-east to the west-south- west, and thus perpendicular
to the main volcanic line. It may be regarded as a type of those volcanos

* W. M. Gabb, Notes on Costa Rica Geology; Am. Journ. Sc. Arts, 1875, 3rd ser., IX,
pp. 198-204, 320. Humboldt regarded tbe Pico Blanco as an ‘ unopened trachyte cone *
(Kosmos, iv, 1858, p. 307), M. Wagner as a volcano (Naturw. Reison *im tropischen
Amerika, 8vo, 1870, p. 323 et seq.).

* The relative position of Lyon and Ujum to the Pico Blanco may be clearly seen on the
map in Petermann’s geogr. Mittheil., 1877, XXIII, Taf. 18 ; for the more northerly district
ae far as BalA Nicaragua the map by Frantzius may be consulted, op. cit. 1869, XV, Taf. 5.



88 SOME . SEISMIC AREAS {pabii

t

which shift their centre of eruption in a definite direction. The most
recent crater, and at the same time the least elevated, i.e. if our com-
parisons ate made from the height of the crater floor, lies to the west-
south-west. It is still active Qabb gives the height as 8,461 meters.

‘In the Poas,’ says Seebach, ‘I have found the most complicated
volcano, of which I have ever heard : a twin volcano with axes of
activity advancing lineally. ... It is a remarkable feature, in the case
of all these volcanos, that when a main line of direction is present it
runs obliquely to the direction of the chain. The only exceptions are
Zurqui, Rincon, and Orosi’^.’

The line of volcanos now reaches the coast of the Pacific Ocean and
runs along it. Among the more important volcanos are Guipilapa (Mira-
valles), Rincon de la Vieja, Orosi, Omotepec (which rises from the midst of
Lake Nicaragua), Zupateca, and others, then Mombaco, the often-described
group of Masaya and Nindiri, and finally Mombotombo. In the plain of
Leon, which follows, a large number of volcanos occur. From Mombo-
tombo to Viejo there rise in a straight line, which coincides indeed with the
main line itself. Las Pilas, Orota, Santa Clara, and several other cones
without names.

The volcanos of Axusco and Telica stand a little nearer the sea and
appear to form part of a second zone, which runs parallel to the main line,
and consequently to the north-west ®.

The last-named volcano, Telica, is, according to Seebach, a transvci'se
ridge with five craters, the most westerly of which still emitted a small
amount of vapour at the time of his visit in the year 1864^.

On April 11 and 12 , 1849, subterranean rumbling was heard in the
town of Leon. On the morning of April 13 an opening was formed at
the foot of the long extinct volcano Pilas. Fragments of lava were
ejected and fell to earth like freshly molten iron. This irregular eruption
was followed by an abundant flow of lava during the remainder of the
day, and at this time there was hardly any trembling of the ground.
On April 14 the lava ceased to flow and a long series of explosive
eruptions began, with ejection of stones. Squier, from whom I borrow

* K. T. Seebach’s Besteigung des Vulcans Tunialba in Costa Rica ; Petermann's
geogr. Mittheil., 1865, XI, p. 822, Taf. ix. The foreland from the foot of the Tunialba
to the Oulf of Nicoya is described by Attwood as consisting solely of consolidated ashes
with dykes of augite-andesite ; it contains the gold and silver bearing lodes of the
Aguacate mountains. Attwood, On the geology of part of Costa Rica ; Quart. Joum.
Ceol. Soc., 1882, XXXVIII, pp. 828-839.

* K. T. Seebach, Petermann’s geogr. Mittheil., 1866, XII, p. 274.

* A. Dollfuss et E. de Mont-Serrat, Voy. geoL dans les Republ. de Ouatemala' et de
Salvador (Miss, scientif. au Mexiquo et dabs l'Am5r. centr., 0£ologie), 4to, Paris, 1868,
p. 827.

*. K. V. Seebach, Petermann’s geogr. Mittheil., 1866, XII, p. 273. i



OH. n] NEW VOLCANOS NEAR LEON 89

this information, visited the spot on April 22 and found the new cone
150 to 200 feet high^.

Since then, in November, 1867, a new volcano has been formed near
this place. Dickerson’s account of the event is so instructive that I will
extract some details from it^.

On November 14, 1867, towards one o’clock in the morning, the
eruption began with a series of explosions, which were distinctly per-
ceived in the town of Leon, situated about eight leagues to the west of
this place. A fissure opened up in the earth’s crust, about half a mile
in length, which diverged from the main volcanic line at a point nearly
equidistant from the two volcanos Pilas and Orota, and proceeded to the
south-west. Some time before sunrise on November 14, fire was seen
issuing from this fissure in several places. Explosions followed one
another at short intervals of about half an hour each, but the muffled
sound of subterranean rumbling was almost uninterrupted. After some
days two craters opened on the new cleft, which ran to the south-west,
at a distance of about 1,000 feet from each other; the one to the
south-we^t ejected volcanic material in a vertical direction, the other
to the north-east hurled it forth obliquely at an angle of 45”. On
November 22 these craters were visited by Dickerson: at that time the
main crater had already attained a height of about 200 feet, and the
aperture was about 60 feet in diameter. On the afternoon of November 27
the volcano, after a series of most violent explosions, began to eject great
quantities of black sand and masses of rocks. On the next morning the
country was covered far and wide with a layer of this fine black sand,
which was poured down like rain from a broad shining cloud. The rain
of sand continued until the morning of November 30, then the volcano
became inactive, apparently exhausted by its eruptions. The sand covered
the whole country within a radius of more than 80 kilometers. At Leon
the layer was a quarter of an inch thick. It grew thicker towards the
volcano, and the grains of sand became coarser. At the distance of a mile
from the crater the grains measured from three-eighths tp one-half of an
inch in diameter, and the deposit was a foot deep. At the foot of the cone
there was nothing but a pile of blocks from four to five feet in diameter.

At the close of the eruption, the cone itself measured 200 feet in lieight,
the diameter of the crater was 200 feet, and its depth also 200 feet.
A long band of scoria extended to the north-east. The eruption had lasted

' E. G. Squier, The Volcanos of Central America and the Geographical and Topo-
graphical Features of Nicaragua, Tenth Ann. Meeting of the Am. Assoc, at New Haven,
Aug. 22, 1850. From the New York Daily Tribune, 8vo, 1850, pp. 5, 6. *

^ A. B. Dickerson, On the Volcanic Eruption near the city of Leon, Amer. Journ. Sc.
Arts, 1868, 2 ser., xlv, pp. 131-133 ; reproduced in full in Al. Perrey, Note sur les tremble-
ments de terre en 1866 et 1867 (from the Bull. Acad. roy. Belg., 1868), pp. 197-200,
and in Dollfuai et Mont-Serrat, pp. 327-380.



90 SOME SEISMIC ABEAS [parti

sixteen days. The sand consisted of fragments of scoria, chrysolite, and
felspar.

Thus this new cone also stands on a transverse fracture; and again, its
chief centre of activity, the crater from which the ejections took place in
a vertical direction, lay to the south-west. The complete cone bears some
resemblance to Monte Nuovo near Fuzzuoli, since it only represents a ring
of ejected material and the bottom of the crater does not appear to lie
much al)Ove the surrounding plain. Judging by the volume of the masses
ejected, the space evacuated by them must have been extremely great, but
so small a fraction of these great masses of material accumulated about the
orifice that the resulting cone was only 200 feet in height.

Let us return, however, to the study of the main voleanic line.

Beyond Viejo, but nearer to the sea, and not within the course of the
main line, lies the most famous volcano of this region. Mount Cionseguina.
Its eruption of January 20, 1835, is considered, and perhaps with justice, to
have been the grandest and most terrible phenomenon of its kind for several
centuries past. Dollfuss and Mont-Serrat, of whose detailed description of
the mountains of Guatemala and Salvador I have frequently made use below,
. estimate that, according to the official reports, the area of the sea strewn
with ash and pumice must have extended for 2,000 kilometers from east to
west, so vast were the masses ejected from the interior of the earth. In
the whole neighbourhood, even in the town of San Miguel, which is 80-90
kilometers distant from Conseguina, the most complete darkness reigned
for two days and a half ; the branches of the trees broke beneath the rain
of sand and ash, and the birds fell dead to the ground. Even in the town of
Guatemala, nearly 350 kilometers from the centre of eruption, the sun was
obscured by a dark mist, and the fall of ash continued here until January 81.
The earthquakes were so violent that they were propagated with terrible
force towards the north-west through Guatemala to Chiapas, towards the
north-east to Jamaica, and towards the south-east as far as Bogota \

The question again arises as to the extent of the cavity which this
extraordinary eruption must have caused.

Conseguina forms, as it projects towards the sea, the southern boundary
of the Bay of Fonseca, behind which rises the inactive volcano of the island
of Tigr^. On the north shore of the bay. Mount Conchagua is situated,
which after a long pause broke forth into fresh activity on February 23,
1868. With Mount Conchagua begins the second part of the volcanic line
of Central America, which proceeds more to the west than the first.

The northern part of Guatemala consists, as will be shown later, of the
fragments of a unilateral mountain chain, which strikes to the east-north-
east almost transversely across the Central American continent, and is
continued into Jamaica and Haiti. The most northerly zone of this chain

^ Dollfuss et Mont-Serrat, op. cit. pp. 383-340.


• •



91


0H.ii3 SERIES OP TRANSVERSE LINES

is limestone, then follows a zone of ancient schists, which reaches the
Caribbean Sea at the end of the Bay of Amatice and to the east of it.
Further to the south a narrow zone of granite appears north of the town of
Quatemalai and runs* to the east-north-east, following for some distance the
longitudinal valley of the Rio Grande. From here to the south, nearly as
far as the Bay of Fonseca, and up to a great fracture which cuts obliquely
across the strike of the mountains, following approximately the coast line
of the Pacific, all the mountains are composed of a rock which Dollfuss and
Mont-Serrat call ‘ Porphyre trachytique/ On the edge and on the flank of
this oblique fracture, parallel to the Pacific coast, are situated the volcanos
of Salvador and Guatemala.

These volcanos are characterized by all the peculianties which distin-
guish those on the line from Chiriqui to Conseguina. ‘ It is quite clear,*
write Dollfuss and Mont-Serrat, Hhat we are not dealing with a series of
isolated volcanos, arranged in a more or less straight or broken line, but
with a succession of small systems^ which are fairly independent of each
other, and occur at distances which vary within comparatively narrow
limits. Each of these groups is formed of a more or less considerable
number of cones and craters, some extinct, some still active, arranged in
a straight line, the direction of which is nearly perpendicular to that of the
main volcanic axis.* * ... It seems therefore as though at each point of
eruption a fissure had been formed perpendicular to the main fissure ; on
this transverse fissure the volcanic funnels stand, formed one after the
other by an advancing course of eruptive activity. That this course has
always followed a fixed and unchanged direction wo cannot assert, but we
may observe in passing, and without for the moment attempting to draw
any conclusion, that in many cases, where one of the volcanos of a par-
ticular group is still active, it is situated at the southern extremity of the
system —

Conchagua is followed on the main line in a west-north-west direction
by the active volcano San Miguel, 2,163 meters in height; between it and
Conchagua a broad field of lava extends. Then follow, also on the main
line, the smaller eniptive centres of Chinameca and Tecapa, then San Vicente
(2,400 meters), and finally Lake Ilopango, in the midst of which, in
February, 1880, a new volcano appeared. This has been very exactly
described by Bockstroh^

The lake is surrounded by steep cliffs of ancient rocks. ' Inland to the
north-north-east lies the small extinct volcano of Cojutepeque.

Beyond Lake Ilopango rises the volcanic group of San Salvador, and

’ Dollfuss et Mont-Serrat, op. cit. pp. 296, 297.

* Edwin Rockstroh, Informe de la Gomision scientif. del Instit. Nacion. de Guatemala
nombr. p. el Sr. Ministro de Instrucc. Publ. para el estudio de los fendmenos volcdn. en
el Lago dello|»ango, 8vo, Guatemala, 1880, p. 61, and map.



92 SOME SEISMIC AREAS [pabti

then, projecting in a fairly marked manner towards the sea, the remarkable
volcano of IzotUco (Fig. 5, 21).

Earl von Seeboch, whose extensive work on this subject has hitherto
been published only in fragments, these, however, of the very highest value,
has furnished us with a highly instructive description of this volcano \

It arose, like the centres of eruption we have just describeil near Leon,
like Jorullo and Monte Nuovo, in late historic times ; its eruptions com-
menced on March 29, 1793. It lies to the south-west of the extinct volcano
Cerro Redondo, and has been continuously active, with rare intervals of
repose, since its appearance; for many years its eruptions have been as
regular and rhythmic as those of Stromboli. It rises, according to Seebach,
597 meters above the sea, and 292 meters above the floor of the church at
Izalco. From these measurements, Seebach estimates the volume of the
cone at 26-88 million cubic meters, and the ejection of material, assuming
a persistent uniform activity since 1793, at 0-7 cubic kilometer per minute.
As a matter of fact the rate of ejection must have been much greater, since
in the case of violent eruptions only a small proportion serves to build up
the cone, while the remainder is carried far away over land and sea.

A detailed comparison of the volcanos lying beyond Izalco will only be
possible after the publication of K. von Seebach^s investigations; mean-
while the accompanying sketch, Fig. 5, drawn from the map of Dollfuss and
Mont-Serrat, may serve to show how far the development of the transverse
fissures has proceeded. Furthest to the east stands the long series of the
Chiquimula volcanos (14-18), then that of Cerro Redondo (12, 13). All
the craters of these two groups are extinct. Then follow on the main
line the active Pacaya (11) and the lofty volcano d’Agua (10), so named on
account of the devastating eruption of water which took place in the year
1541, the result probably of the fracture and evacuation of a crater lake.
These are succeeded by the mighty transverse line of the volcano de Fuego
(7, 8, 9) with an active crater at the south-west end, then the equally
gigantic group of the volcano d’Atitlan (4, 5, 6) with the active chimney
again at the south-west end, the extinct volcano San Pedro (3), and finally
on the Mexican frontier the two eruptive centres of Quezaltenango (1, 2).
Of these, that which is in activity is, by exception, the one to the north-east
or furthest away from the sea.

We thus see on the whole line, from Chiriqui in the south-west, to the
Bay of Fonseca and the Mexican frontier in the northrwest, a frequent

‘ K. V. Seebach, Ueber den Vulcan Izalco und den Bau der central-americaniscben
Vulcane im Allgemeinen ; Nachr. v. d. kdn. Gesellsch. d. Wise. a. d. G. A. Univ. zu
Gottingen, 1865, pp. 521-547. Prof. v. Pritsch has had the great kindness to communicate
to me from Seebach's manuscripts a sketch of the neighbourhood of Izalco. Dollfuss and
Mont-Serrat, strange to say, were not aware of the fact that Seebach had ascended this
volcano but a short time previously. • *



OH. n] DISPLACEMENT TO THE SOUTH-WEST . 98

recarrenoe of the following facts : The volcanos stand either on long inde-
pendent transverse lines, which meet the main line at a right angle or less,
or else the individual volcanos themselves show a tendency to shift their
centre of eruption transversely across the main line, and — with the single
exception of the Cerro Quemado in the group of Quezaltenango in the
extreme north-west — this di^acenient is, it wovM appear, in emry case
effected in the direction of the Pacific Ocean.

The displacement is fairly rapid, and already within the last century
several new centres of eruption have opened up in this direction, not to


Fio. 5. The mstern part of the volcanoe of Central America (after Dollfuss and Moiit-Serrat).

1, y. Sta. Maria; 2, Cerro Quemado (3,109 m., active); 1 and 2 form the Group of
ijfiMzaiiiBnango ; 8, V. San Pedro ; 4, 6, 6, Group of AHUan (8,678 m. ; the cone 4, V. d'Atitlan, is
active) ; 7, 8, 9, Group qf the V, de Fuego, 7, V. de Fuego (4,001 m., active), 8, Acatenango
(4,160 m.) ; 10, Y. d'Agua (8,763 m.): 11, Pacaya (2,650 m.. active); 12, 13, Group qf Cerro
Bedondoi, 14-18, Series qf Chiguimula, 14, Amayo, 16, Ciima, 16, V. de Santa Catarina, 17, M. Rico,
18, Ipala ; 19, V. Chiiigo ; 20, Santa Anna, and 21, Izalco (active). To the west of these the
acUve hot springs and mud craters of Ahuachapam are situated.

The active volcanos are 2, 4, 7, 11, 21.

The dotted line marks the foot of the mountains. The volcanos are surrounded by tlieir
ashes and lavas, 12 and 18 by a great field of basalt.


speak of the numerous concussions of the ground and the eruptions from
already existing chimneys, which reveal, we might almost say, an unin-
terrupted movement of the earth’s crust in these regions. .

With regard to one of the more violent of recent earthquakes, that of
December 19, 1862, and the weeks following, P. Lizarzaburu made the
remarkable observation that it did not proceed from a single point, but
from a considerable length of the main line, and in particular from the


94


SOME SEISMIC AREAS


[part I

volcanos d’Atitlan, de Fuego, and Izalco. The greatest devastation was
caused in the neighbourhood of these three volcanos. At the magnetic
observatory in Guatemala the first and most violent concussion began on
December 19, 1862, 7 A. 25' p.m., with a shock from the south-west, and
this was followed immediately by a movement from the south-south-west,
that is, from the neighbourhood of Izalco. On December 20 further shocks
occurred, coming from the same direction. After an interval, which lasted
until December 26, the shocks were renewed from the south-west, and
these continued into the second half of the month of January^.

The concordance of these results with the observations which have
been made on the displacement of the seismic centres along the main line
of Calabria, show us above all that in both districts great and interdepen-
dent movements of the earth’s crust take place as it were beneath our very
eyes, and prepare the way for yet greater ones. But while in Calabria the
clearest signs of these processes are to be found on the peripheral fracture
itself, in Central America the tendency is to form further transverse clefts
in the direction of the Pacific Ocean, as is seen in numerous examples
throughout the whole of the long zone which extends from the Chiriqui
to the Mexican frontier, first obliquely across the continent and then along
the Pacific coast, from lat. 8** 48' to about 15° N. These transverse frac-
tures may be regarded possibly as radial cracks, dependent either on one
very large and continuous area of subsidence, or on two such areas, which
meet in the neighbourhood of the Bay of Fonseca. The process would
then consist in the opening up of radial cracks from without inwards.
The longest of the radial lines, that of Chiquimula, extends far beyond the
peripheral zone, which is otherwise very distinctly marked.

A very large part of the Pacific side of Central America is thus actually
in process of sinking. The subsidence takes place in a direction trans-
verse. to the strike of the mountain chain, formed of granite and stratified
rocks, which extends towards Jamaica and Haiti ; it does not appear to
stand in any relationship to the structure of the chain.

D. The statements concerning spasmodic elevation of the wed coast

of South America.

During violent earthquakes in Calabria, stones lying on the road were
projected into the air. During the earthquake of Chili, on November 7,
1837, a mast which was sunk with its lower end 10 meters deep in the
ground and made fast with iron cramps is said to have been jerked out
without any injury to the aperture in which it stood Alexander von

' J. A. Lizarzaburu, Observaciones meteorol. correspond, al ano de 1862, hechas en el
observat. del Scininario de Guatemala (from the Gaceta de Guatemala), 8vo, 17 pp.
I owe the communication of these observations to Herm E. Rockstroh in Guatemala.

Lettre de M. Gay a M. Arago ; Comptes rend. 1838, VI, p. 883. • •



CH. n] SUPPOSED ELEVATION OP SOUTH AMERICA 96

Humboldt relates even that, during the destruction of Riobamba, in the
year 1797, a vertical shock ' like the explosion of a mine ’ hurled the bodies
of many of the inhabitants on to the hill la Cullca, which is several hundred
feet high and lies on the other side of the rivulet of Lican

These phenomena have indeed very little resemblance to those move-
ments of the earth by which mountains are produced, and still less with
those supposed movements of the mass of the planet, which are said to be
extensive, uniform, and slow, and which are designated by the name of
cmtinental, secvlar oscillations. They point rather to a sudden local
upward jerk, perhaps a rebound due to unloading. That a permanent
though trifling change of position may take place in an upward direction
is a priori not at all improbable, but it is the more remarkable that
although such a change has been often alleged it has, so far, nowhere been
proved with any degree of certainty.

The best known example, that which is most frequently cited in text-
books and is supposed to be the best established, is the alleged repeated
elevation of the west coast of South America during great earthquakes.
I will attempt to examine this case according to the existing reports.

I must preface my remarks by stating that the attendant cii*cumstances
of this case are particularly calculated to produce an impression favourable
to the hypothesis of repeated spasmodic elevations.

In the first place one of the greatest lines of volcanos in the world runs
parallel to this coast, which extends in an almost straight line through many
degrees of latitude, and this fact alone could not fail to influence opinion
at a time when theories were maintained as to the connexion between
volcanic force and elevation which differed from those of the present day.

In the next place this coast is bordered for long distances by a fringe
of talus, deposited in terraces, in which sea-shells are found above the
existing level of the sea. These terraces certainly show that considerable
changes have taken place in the position of the strand, but they do not
indicate any connexion with the earthquakes of the present day ; they belong
to a remote period, and will be discussed later as part of a phenomenon,
which is manifested far beyond the area shaken by these earth(][uakes.

Finally ‘ kitchen middens ’ occur' at many localities along the margin
of the coast, and at several places are still in process of accumulation.

When Darwin visited these coasts in 1835 little was known as to the
wide distribution of such remains. It must therefore have filled him with
the greatest astonishment to meet with a thread, pieces of wicker-work,
and other traces of human activity in a deposit of sea-shells qn the island
of San Lorenzo, near Callao, at a height of 85 feet above the sea, and
he may well, according to the state of knowledge at that time, have


• •


^ Humboldt, Eosmos, I, p. 210.



96 SOME SEISMIC AEEAS [fabti

regarded it as a proof of recent elevation \ Dana, who visited the place
some years later, has already explained the circu m sta n ce

Before proceeding to examine the accounts from South America, let us
call to minfl the fact that the seismic waves of the ocean, while they roll
over the mainland destroying and rending up all before them, also raise
and carry away extraordinaiy quantities of loose sediment from the sea
bottom. After the great inundation of Callao on October 28, 1746, large
heaps of sea-sand and pebbles were left on the ruins of the devastated city K
In this way, when an island divides the seismic waves, or when any two
currents of seismic origin meet, new land may easily be formed. The East
Indies afford a striking example of this process. On the coast of Malabar,
north of Cochin, the island of Vaypi was upheaved during a great earth-
quake in the year 1341. It consists of sea-sand and of the some sediments
as at the present day are carried down from the Gh&ts to the plains of
Malabar. At the same time the country around the mouth of the river
Cochin was completely transformed, and so powerful an impression did
this phenomenon make on the Hindoos, that they dated from it a new era,

‘ Puduvepa

Let us now return to South America, and first of all devote our atten-
tion to the observations collected by Tschudi regarding the supposed
repeated elevation and depression of the countiy round CaUao.

We have already mentioned the ‘ kitchen middens ’ of Callao. Inde-
pendently of these it is asserted that the island San Lorenzo, which is
now two nautical miles distant from the continent, has sometimes
been nearer to the land, sometimes more remote. In the year 1742 the
distance was about the same as at present ; during the great earthquake of
1746 a subsidence of the town is said to have taken place ; by a supposed
elevation of the coast in 1760 the island was again brought so near the
land that boys could throw stones across to it. Between the island and the
mainland lay a shallow called ‘ Camotal,’ because previously when it was
dry, ‘ camote,’ that is potatos, had been grown on it *.

The place in question is a tongue of land lying between San Lorenzo
and the mainland ; at one time it is in existence and grows larger either by
slow silting-up or by a sudden deposition of sediment, at another it is tom
up and destroyed, perhaps by the breaking over it of a seismic wave. We
cannot deduce from this an oscillation of the mainland. Nor do the accounts

’ C. Darwin, Journal of Researches, 8vo, 1839, p. 451, etpaasim.

’ C. Wilkes, U. S. Exploring Expedition, X, Geology, by J. D. Dana, 4to, 1849, p. 591.

’ A True and Particular Relation of the dreadful Earthquake which happened at Lima,
&c., p. 146. In this detailed account no mention is made of an elevation of the land.

* Newbold, Summary of the Geology of South India ; Joum. Roy. Asiat. Soc., 1846,
VIII, in particular p. 280 et seq., quotes Thomson, Madras Joum. litt. Science, Jan.
1837, pp. 176, 177,

* Von Tschudi, Peru, Reiseskizzen, 8vo, 1846, 1, pp. 48-49. , ,



cb; ii] VALPARAISO, 1822 97

of 1746 speak of the subsidence of the town; on the contrary, they
describe clearly the rising of the sea-wave and its final plunge over
the land.

The accounts which have become most widely known relate to the
earthquakes in certain parts of South America in the years 1822, 1885,
and 1887.

The earthquake of November 19, 1822, seems to have had its origin
to the north-east of Valparaiso. The most authoritative account of the
asserted simultaneous elevation of the land is a letter from Mrs. Maria
Graham, which was published by the Geological Society of London.
According to this letter the whole coast appeared on the following
morning to have been raised above its former level over a distance of
more than one hundred miles. In Valparaiso the elevation amounted to
three feet or -so, in Quintero to about four feet. At high tide part of the
bed of the sea was seen to be dry, with oysters and other shell-fish clinging
to the rocks on which they had grown, now however dead and diflusing
evil odours

I pass by the later observations of Drs. Meyen and Anderen, as they
were not made until some years after the event, and liardly add any-
thing new.

But the definite statements of Mrs. Graham are opposed by other
statements equally exact, the most important of which however were not
published until 1835 ; these are contained in the letters of Captain Belcher,
Lieutenant Bower, and the well-known malacologist Cuming, and are also
addressed to the Geological Society 2 .

Captain Belcher doubts whether any alteration in level took place
which could have influenced the soundings, because no statement to this
effect was sent in to the ships of the British Navy stationed on the. coast
of Chili, as it certainly would have been if the matter had appeared
of any importance to the English residing in those parts. Lieutenant
Bower was in Valparaiso in February, 1823, and found everything in the

^ Ml'S. Maria Gmliam, An Account of some Effects of the late Earthquakes in Chili,
extract from a letter to H. Warburton, Esq. ; Trans. Geol. Soc., 1822, 2nd ser., T, pp. 413-415.
Greenoiigh, as president of this distinguished society, had in his annual address on June 4,
1834, expressed serious doubts on the subject of these statements ; Mrs. Calcott (for>
inerly Mrs. Graham) replied in a separate communication, which however adduced no
new facts. Letter to the President and Members of the Geol. Soc., &c., 8vo, London, 1834.

* Proc. Geol. Soc., 1838, II, p. 213 ; Captain Belcher’s and Mr. Cuming’s letters were
communicated at the meeting of Dec. 2, 1835. At a later date E. Chevalier (in the
Voyage of the Bonite and in a Note sur la constit. geol. des envir. de Valparaiso et sur
le soul^vement du sol de la c6te du Chili, Bull. soc. geol. de Fr., 1843, XIV, pp. 396-401),
after a comparison of the soundings made by Dlloa, 1744, and by Dupetit-'rhours, 1837,
also denied that any important alteration had occurred in the neighbourhood of Val>
paraiso, but attempted to show that all the shelLbeanng terraces along the coast had
been produ^ec^ by waves of seismic ongin.

SOLl-AB


H



98 SOME SEISMIC ABEAS [pakti

same condition as in the previous year, but since the earthquake the
water had gradually retired from the landing-place and the market-place,
and a number of buildings had been erected where previously the sea.
had jflowed.

Mr. Cuming was in Valparaiso from January, 1822, to 1827, and with
a few inten-uptions until 1831. He witnessed the earthquake, and his
house was destroyed. He heard that the sea had retired, and had
returned with great force. On going down to the shore the next morning
he observed the effect of the wave, but with regard to the sea he perceived
nothing, except that the tide was high. Nor did he hear anything of
the elevation of the coast or of isolated rocks ; neither he nor his friends
could agree with Mrs. Graham’s statements. He had, both before and
after the earthquake, and up to the close of his stay, collected seaweeds,
limpets, barnacles, and the like on the reefs of the bay, but had on no occa-
sion perceived any change of level. The idea that the land had risen may
have been caused by the fact that, since the earthquake, an accumulation
of detritus had been formed at a place which had previously been reached
by the tide, and on which houses and even little streets had now been
built. The greater part of this alluvial land only dates, however, from
June, 1827, that is, five yeara after the earthquake, and was produced by
heavy rain which carried down the loose granite soil of the neighbouring
hills.

After the preceding remarks I consider the discussion of the first case,
that of the earthquake of 1822, as closed.

The next is that of the earthquake of Conception on February 20, 1835.

Let us first glance at the scene of the most important events. Its
geological structure has lately been described by Enrique Concha i Toro.
The coast here, between 36° 30' and 37" 30' S., consists of the ancient rocks
of the littoral Cordillera of Chili, on which lie patches of Cretaceous,
Tertiary, and Quaternary deposits ^

To the north of the town of Concepcion lies the Bahia de Talcahuano,
also called the Bay of Concepcion, on the south-east shore of which Penco,
the ancient capital, is situated ; towards the north-east lies the green
sandstone of Tomfe, rich in Baculites. The island of Quinquina extends
transversely across a great part of the bay.

To the south-east of Concepcion lies the much more extensiv^e Bahia
de Arauco, bounded on the west by Punta Lavapifes, and its pro-
longation the island of Santa Maria. The sea-coast as far as Point
Lavapies is formed of Cretaceous beds, and these arc continued into
the middle of the island of Santa Maria ; to the west of this Cretaceous

^ Don Enrique Concha i Toro, Estudio sobre cl carbon fdsil que se explota en Chile,
Anal. Univ. Chile, 1876, pp. 337-423 and two plates; also Sieveking, Petennann's geogr.
Mittheil., 1883, XXIX, pp. 57-61. • •



CONCEPCION, 1836


.99^


OH. n]


band the island is composed of Tertiary beds, to the east of Quaternary,
or even still younger deposits. East of Point Lavapite the Rio Tubul
enters into the sea.

Captain Fitzroy, in whose company, as is well known, Charles Darwin



Fio. 6. Seme of the earthquake of February 20, 1835 (after Concha i Toro).
cr ■■ Cretaceous system ; te = Tertiary ; g— more recent deposits.

The parts without hatching are occupied by the older rocks of the coast Cordillera.

made his voyage in the Beagle, happened to be in Concepcion on the
momentous day, and has furnished a graphic account of the occurrence

^ R. Fitzroy, Sketch of the Surveying Voyages of H.M. Ships Adventure and Beagle ;
Joum. Roy*. G^ogr. Soc., 1836, VI, pp. 319-331. Still further to the south the island of

H a


100 SOME SEISMIC ABEAS [paeti

He begins by mentioning that on February 20, 1835, at ten o’clock in
the morning, the population were surprised to see large flocks of sea-birds
flying inland, a quite unusual occurrence. At twenty minutes to
twelve the first shock took place at Concepcion, and was immediately
followed by general devastation. The earthquake appeared to come from
the south-west. The low-lying and loose ground suffered most, and
seemed to detach itself from the more solid mountains. At Talcahuano
and Penco the same phenomena occurred.

Half an hour after the principal shock the sea had retired so far that
vessels which anchored in seven fathoms of water lay dry. All the reefs,
shallows, and sandbanks in the Bay of Talcahuano were exposed to
view. Then a monstrous wave forced its way through the western channel
between Quinquina and the mainland, and rising to a level thirty feet
above high tide swept all before it. This was followed by a second yet
greater and more tempestuous wave, and finally, after some minutes, by the
third and most powerful. Then the sea appeared to be exhausted. Earth
and water trembled. For three days the sea continued to ebb and flow
irregularly and frequently. Some horn’s after the occurrence it rose and
fell two or three times an hour.

East of Quinquina a less violent wave rolled in. At the same time,
at several places beyond Quiriquina and in the Bay of San Vincent,
smoke-like eruptions appeared to take place in the sea. These were
followed by a whirlpool, as though the sea were about to pour into
a cavity.

For some days after the ruin, Fitzroy continues, the sea did not
rise to the usual marks hy four or five feet vertically. Some thought the
land, had been elevated, hut the common and lyrevaiiing idea was that
the sea had retired. This difference gradually diminished, till in the
middle of April there was a difference of only tv:o feet between the existing
and former high-ivater marks.

The jyroof that the land had been raised exists in the fact that the
island of Santa Maria teas upheaved nine feet.

The elevation of the south end of this island amounted to eight feet,
of the middle to nine feet, and of the north end to ten feet. The island
was twice visited, at the end of March and at the beginning of April.
On the first occasion the elevation of eight feet was observed; later on,
doubt having arisen, the visit was repeated, and the first observation was
confirmed in various ways. Near Tubul, on the mainland, the elevation
amounted to six feet.

So far the most important statements of Fitzroy : Darwin was at this
time in Valdivia.

Mocha (38® 12') is said to have been raised two feet, but the accounts are wanting in
precision. c %



OR it] alleged EETURN TO ORIGINAL LEVEL 101

We see from this that on a line starting from Tubul on the mainland,
and proceeding northwards along the island of Santa Maria, changes of
level were produced, which amounted to six feet in Tubul and increased
to eight, nine, or ten feet on Santa Maria; while near Talcahuana the
difference was at first four to five feet and had decreased by the middle
of April to two feet. In a later account Darwin says : —

It appears from the investigations of Captain Fitzroy that both the
idand of Santa Maria and the dty of Concepcion sunk in the course of
a few weeks, and lost a part of their omginal elevation

Caldcleugh, who was also an eye-witness of these events, writes : —

Both Captain Fitzroy, and Captain Simpson of the Chilian Navy,
were of opinion that the uprising of the strata, both in this island and
in Concepcion, was considerahly greater, and that many subsequent minor
oscillations may have caused a subsidence to the levd before recorded
{S-IO fiety.

On May 3, 1835, not long after Fitzroy, Captain Coste anchored near
Santa Maria; he too found nine feet less anchoring ground than in the
previous year. He saw on the shore the same traces of change as
Fitzroy had observed, but unfortunately made no exact measure-
ments

Simultaneously with the reports of the observers of the Beagle an
account by Don Mariano Rivero and a letter from Colonel Walpole were
laid before the Geological Society; l)oth pronounced against any change
of level in Chili during this earthquake

Even Charles Lyell, himself the keenest champion of the view that the
mainland had risen, found occasion to remark later that the trifling elevation
of the old buildings of Penco above the sea might easily lead to the supposition
of a permanent elevation of the coast, and might throw light on the
opinion, expressed of late years, that after every elevation the coast of

' C. Darwin, Geological Observations on the volcanic Islands, &c., 2nd ed., 1876, p. 237 ;
likewise Doraeyko, ‘ Sin embargo, por las noticias rccibidas postcriormentc por Fitzroy,
pareceque desde entdnccs el mencionado puerto de la isla ha ganado multo en profundidad,
i que toda esta parte de la costa de Chile, que el terremoto de 1835 habia levantado, ha
vuelto a bajar i hundirse en el mar * ; Solevantamiento dc la Costa de Chile, Anal. Univ.
Chile, 1860, p. 576.

* A. Caldcleugh, An Account of the great Earthquake experienced in Chile, Feb. 20,
1835 ; Phil. Trans., 1836, p. 24.

’ Captain Coste, Comptes rend., 1838, VII, p. 706.

* In the meeting of January 4, 1837. We find in the Proc. Geol. Soc., II, p. 179,
a note by Lieut. Freyer on apparent elevation of land with reference tq the shell-beds
of Arica and the island of St. Lorenzo near Callao; p. 209, Fitzroy's first report on
Santa Maria and a communication by R. E. Alison on this subject ; p. 444, a letter by
Caldcleugh, and p. 446, another by Darwin ; then the essay by Rivero in the newspaper
* El Araucano,* and finally Col. Walpole's letter to Palmerston. The last two observers,
as we havg said, dispute any elevation or subsidence of the ground.



102 SOME SEISMIC AREAS [babs i

nhili eOiowed a tendency to gradually subside, and to return to ita previoua
levels

Under these circumstances all the conclusions which the defenders of
the elevation theory have drawn from this occurrence are worthless, and
the question presents itself whether, for this temporaiy ^nd inconsiderable
in level, a much simpler explanation may not be found in the
excessively violent disturbance of the sea. An important current flows at
present between Point Lavapibs and Santa Maria into the Gulf of Arauco,
which it leaves in a northerly direction ; and the question arises whether
this might not have been diverted for a time, and, if so, whether a
temporaiy emeigence of the land might not have followed as a natural
consequence.

The statements concerning a farther elevation of land during the earth-
quake of Valdivia on November 7, 1837, are confined to a communication
from Captain Coste regarding the island of Lemus in the Archipelago of
Chonos. On his visit to the island on December 11 of the same year, he
found that the sea bottom had risen more than eight feet, rocks which
were formerly constantly covered by the sea were now laid bare, a great
quantity of decomposing material, sea-shells, and fishes covered the strand,
which was surrounded by a great number of uprooted trees washed thither
by the sea. Captain Coste saw in this traces of a sudden elevation of the
land or of the oscillation of the sea

This last alternative seems to me to be the decisive question ; it must
first of all be definitely stated whether it was really rocks or whether it
was sand-banks which were laid bare, and also to what extent the sea
which had transported the trees might not have diminished its depth by
means of the accumulation of sediment. The movement of the ocean
during the earthquake was so violent that floods were caused by the waves
on the Gambler Islands, and on some of the islands of Tonga and Samoa.
On Wawau [Vavao] in the Tonga group the unusual agitation of the
sea was observed for thirty-six hours

But at several points on the west coast of South America somewhat
ancient buildings exist which by their position contradict the hj^thesis
of any considerable elevation of the ground. Bibra, on finding at Algodon
Bay burial-mounds and traces of old buildings forty to fifty feet above the
sea-level, was led to this conclusion so was David Forbes, when he saw on
the coast of Bolivia a laige number of Indian tumuli scarcely twenty feet

* Lyell, Principles of Geology, XI, ed. 1872, II, p. 156.

’ Comptes rend., 1838, VII, p. 707.

* Dumoulin, Lettre It M. Arago; Coincidence de date de quelques mouTements
extraordinaires de la mer, observe dans I’Oc^anie, avec le treniblement de teire qui en
1837 renversa la ville de Valdivia an Chili ; Comptes rend., 1840, X, pp. 835-887.

* V. Bibra, Die Algodon-Bai; Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1852, rV,q)pf 75-116.



OPINION OP PHILIPPI


108


CHi l/|

above the sea \ As to Valparaiso itself, Darwin has shown that the
buildings on the island prove that the greatest possible elevation could not
have exceeded fifteen feet for the last 200 years K

The most competent authority on this question, Professor R. Philippi, of
Santiago, in his. description of the so-called desert of Atacama, some years
ago, laid particular emphasis on the fact that he had found no evidence which
would point to an elevation of this district in recent or even in historical
times, and he has since then expressly stated that after the mighty earth-
quake of Arica on August 18, 1868, no reports concerning elevation or sub-
sidence of the ground were received either from the Peruvian or Chilian
coast®. At my request he had the kindness to again institute inquiries,
and wrote me on June 12, 1882, ‘My investigations on this subject have
unfortunately produced no result. There are at present but few persons in
Chili who are interested in scientific questions, and in 1836 there were yet
fewer ; the captains of harbours and the sailors of that time are long since
dead. I can only repeat that no recent elevations of the coast of Chili are
known to me, but I have often heard it stated in Talcahuano and Corral
that the earthquake of 1835 had caused changes in the sea-bottom, and that
in certain shallow places, which are well known to fishermen, the depth
of the water had diminished. The assertions of the fishermen are in my
opinion not sufiicient evidence; these people do not pay much attention
to precise dates, and in the Bay of Corral, for example, it is quite possible
that the deposits of the river Valdivia may have gradually diminished the
depth of the sea, and that when this had become very noticeable, it was
ascribed to the earthquake in question. There are a large number even of
educated people who never adopt the most simple and natural method of
explanation.

‘It is also generally reported that the earthquake of 1835 caused an
alteration of depth in the harbour of Ancud ; I have heard nothing of an
elevation of the whole coast. That is, it is true, no proof to the contrary,
for a trifling elevation of a few feet might easily have escaped the notice of
the inhabitants . . .’

After a detailed account of kitchen debris and relict strand-lines, which
will be quoted later. Professor Philippi adds : ‘ I must frankly confess that
my observation and experience do not incline me to believe that the Andes
and other high mountains have arisen simply as the result of many thousands
of such earthquakes, any single one of which would have raised the ground
a few inches or a few feet at the very most.*

* D. Forbes, On the Geology of Bolivia and S. Peru ; Quart. Joum. Geol.,Soc., 1861, XVII,
p. 10.

‘ G. Darwin, Joum. Res., p. 452 ; Proc. Geol. Soc., II, p. 488. The Church of St. Augustin
in Valparaiso furnishes an argument against elevation.

® Philippi, Die sogenannte Waste Atacama, Petermann's geogr. Mittheil., 1856, p. 56,
and in Idttef form in Hochstetter, Erdbeben von Peru und seine Fluthwellen.



104 SOME SEISMIC AREAS [pakti

This leads us to the important conclusions which were drawn some years
ago from the observations in Chili.

The earthquake of Febi-uary 20, 1835, gave rise to one of the most
important works on the elevation of mountains, indeed I may say to the
only attempt, based on direct observation, of nature, to establish more
exactly the older theories concerning the force which is supposed to have
raised up mountain chains. The author of this work is Charles Darwin K
'Since that time no second attempt, or at least no attempt of equal importance,
has been made in this direction. To-day, more than half a century later,
it is possible to hold other opinions on these questions and yet to recognize
the boldness of the generalizations, which even then revealed the master.

Darwin saw the awakening activity of the volcanos during and after
the earthquake ; he believed he saw elevation, although not uniform eleva-
tion of the solid ground ; in addition he saw the terraces along the coast.
But he also knew that similar terraces occur on the east coast of South
America, where there are no volcanos and no earthquakes. The cartli-
quakes must therefore have appeared to his eyes as the local expression of
a universal force. The secular contraction of the earth, a theory already
eagerly advocated by several investigators, Darwin justly held to be entirely
unsuited to explain those intermittent elevations which the terraces betrayed,
and thus he reached the conclusion: —

That the fomi of the Jluid surface of the nucleus of the earth is subject
to same change^ the cause of which is entirely unknoiun and the effect of
ivhich is slain, iniermittent, but irresistible.

Let us now glance at a map of South America, and let us imagine the
great continent divided into four unequal parts by lines following its greatest
length from north to south and its greatest breadth from cast to’w^cst. Let
us also anticipate a later chapter by stating here the fact that the terraces
attain their greatest development towards the south and decrease both on
the east and west coasts towards the north until they finally disappear.

We see that the south-western part of South America, which includes
Chili and specially concerns us here, presents volcanos, earthquakes, and
terraces ; the south-eastern part show\s terraces, but no volcanos and seldom
earthquakes ; the north-western has volcanos and earthquakes, but no ter-
races ; the north-eastern has earthquakes, but no volcanos and no terraces.

A closer examination shows, as already pointed out, that the terraces
diminish as we approach the equator and are altogether absent in the north,
while the earthquakes on the other hand follow the course of the great
mountain chains. As these swerve round into the north-east, so does the
seismic zone, and earthquakes occur in the north-eastern part of South

' C. Darwin, On the Connexion of certain Volcanic Phenomena in South America and
the formation of Mountain Chains and Volcanos as the Effect of the same Power by
which Continents are elevated ; Trans. Geol. Soc., V, 1838, pp. 601-631, pi. xlin.



cH.li] RESULT OF INQUIRY 106

America. The terrible earthquakes of Caracas occurred far outside the
region of volcanos and terraces.

The collocation of these phenomena in Chili is then an argument of no
great weight as i*egards their causal connexion, and in the north of South
America other opinions as to the nature of earthquakes have arisen. In
the same year, 1835, Boussingault declared that the greatest earthquakes
of the New World have no connexion whatever with eruptions. Their
origin must be ascribed to an actual subsidence {un viritahle tassemeiit) in
the interior of the Cordilleras. ‘ This subsidence of the Cordilleras, which
must have been so frequent, immediately after their elevation, still continues
in our time. I do not hesitate to ascribe to this cause most of the great
movements which so often convulse the mountains

K, Fuchs remarks that ' among thousands of earthquakes, not a single
cam of mhsfidence has occurred, since the time when eartluiuakcs have really
been scientifically observed and their accompanying phenomena, as well as
their effects, examined It is certainly remarkable that in spite of the
continually increasing attention which is paid to this subject, for many
years past no fresh evidence as to the elevation of the land in South America
has been forthcoming, and the supposition of Fonck, that the reason for
this may lie in the greater distance of the centres of shock from the coast,
does not seem to me to be sufficiently supported by the existing evidence \

The following summary gives in my opinion a correct account of the
often alleged spasmodic elevation of the west of Soutli America : —

1. In Callao the presence of kitchen ddbris gave rise to erroneous
theories; here we are really dealing with the repeated deposition and
destruction of a bank on the lamhvard side of the island of San Lorenzo.

2. In the case of ValparaisOy 1822, the most competent eye-witnesses,
such as Cuming, have emphatically denied that the coast-line experienced
any alteration.

3. During the earthquake of Concepcion, 1835, the movement of the
water of the Pacific Ocean was so violent, that soon after the shock some few
feet of land on the coast were laid dry, but not permanently ; it was how-
ever several weeks before the equilibrium of the sea was again restored.

4. With regard to Valdivia, 1837,* no definite evidence whatever exists.

5. In none of the numerous earthquakes which have since occurred in
the west of South America has an elevation of the land been observed.

^ Boussingault, Sur les tremblements de terre des Andes ; Ann. chitn. phys., 1835,
t. 58, pp. 81, 85. The examples quoted refer, it is true, only to the collapse of mountain
summits ; but the views expressed on the elevation of mountains in a solid state and
the composition of the chains from segments of various size are vciy remarkable for that
time ; cf. also Humboldt, Kosmos, IV, pp. 219, 490.

* K. Fuchs, Vulcane und Erdbeben, 8vo, 1875, p. 178 ; likewise the anonymous work,
Scepticism in Geology and the Reasons for it, 8vo, London, 1877, p. 10 ct seq.

’ F. Fonc^, l^as agitaciones oceanicas causad. en las costas del Pacifico por el terreni.
d. 13. agosto 1868 ; Anal. Univ. Chile, 1871, pp. 302, 303.



106


CHAPTER III
DISLOCATIONS

Resolution of sti-esses. Dislocation by tangential movement. Folding. Imbricated
structure. Overthrusts or WechaeL Dislocation on flaw {Blatt) planes. Torsion.
Dislocation by radial movement. Subsidence on a yielding base. Flexures and faults.
Networks of fi’acture. Caldron subsidences. Dislocation by combined mdial and Utnr.
gential movement. Backfolding and squeezing in. Forefolding.

A comi)lete revolution of opinion has of late years taken place as re**
gards the formation^ of mountain chains. Apart from the excellent but older
work of Favre, important material has been contributed by many investi-
gators to a more correct conception of their structure, based on wider
knowledge of the facts ; we might mention in Europe alone Heirn, Baltzer,
Mojsisovics, and other investigators in the Alps, Paul in the Carpathians,
Credner in the Erzgebirge, Lessen in the Harz, MTherson in Spain, and
many others. It would thus be superfluous to attempt a refutation of the
older views on this subject. On the other hand, we must confess that
the more recent theories as to the formation of mountain ranges by means
of universal movements, in relation to which all rocks are equally passive,
are as yet only established in their most elementary principles. To
determine the details of the process by exact investigation and com-
parison of particular cases is the task of the next few years. This goal
endows with heightened interest every careful investigation into the nature
of a well-marked dislocation, every conscientious representation of a great
artificial section, such as the section of the Gotthard by StapfT, or that
of the Botzberg by Moesch, nor is it without gratitude that we turn anew
to the treasure-house of older observations. I should thus like to acknow-
ledge here the manifold inspiration I have derived from von CamalFs
treatise on the fissures in the Carboniferous group, a work now more than
half a century old. Nor do I hesitate to confess that, in spite of the
interest attaching to the numerous attempts to produce the phenomena
of faulting and folding by artificial means, yet the investigation of decisive
points in Nature herself seems to me to be for the moment of much greater
importance. The transverse section of a single fragment of folded schist,
or the exact representation of a section laid bare in a mine, as for example
Kohler’s sketches in the Carboniferous basin of Westphalia, lead us to
a direct understanding of a number of mechanical processes which have
hitherto seldom met with the attention they deserved

^ G. Kfihler, Ueber die StCrungen im westpbaiischen Steinkohlengebirge und deren
Entsteburig, Zeitschr. f. Berg-, Hfltten- u. Salinenwesen, 1880, XXVIft, pp. 195-210,



107


EESOLUnOlN OF THE STRESSES

The didocoMons vidMe in the rocky erwst of the earth are the ree/uU
of movemente which are produced by a decrease in the volume of our
plcmet. The tensions resulting from this process show a tendency to
resolve themselves into tangential and rad/M components, and thus into
horizontal (i.e. timisting and folding), and into vertical (i.e. sinking)
movements. Dislocations may therefore be divided into two main groups,
of which one is produced by the more or less horizontal, the other by the
more or less vertical relative displacement of larger or smaller portions
of the earth’s crust.

. There are large areas in which the first, and others in which the
second group predominates, and there are also regions in which both groups
appear together, and in which an intimate connexion may be recognized
between them, the resolution of the movements in space .having in these
cases been less complete. This essential difierence in the movements of
the lithosphere may be clearly perceived from a comparative study of the
structure of the Old World; nor has it escaped the notice of American

‘ The geological province of the Great Basin,’ remarks Clarence King,
‘ has suffered two different types of dynamic action : one in which the chief
factor was evidently tangential compression, which resulted in contraction
and plication, presumably in post- Jurassic time: the other of strictly
vertical action, presumably within the Tertiaiy, in which there are few
evidences or traces of tangential compression*.’

Our colleagues on the other side of the ocean have even gone a great
deal further. After a comparison of the folded Appalachian mountains
with the depressed Basin Banges, Gilbert had in 1875 already suggested
the possibility that in the Appalachians the causes of movement were
mpetfidal, in the Basin Banges deep-seatedK We shall have an
opportunity, when discussing the relation of the Alps to their northern
foreland, of determining to what extent this supposition finds confirmation
in Europe. We may however state at once that as a rule it is only the
dislocations of the second group which are accompanied by volcanic
eruptions.

, These general considerations show clearly on what principles the
terminology of orogenetic disturbances is based.

2 pi. ; B. Lotti, Sopra una piega con rovesciamento degli strati paleoz., &c., Boll. Comit.
geoL 1881, XII, pp. 85-96, pi. iii ; by the same, La doppia piega d’Arni e la sezione
trasvers. delle Alpe Apnane, loc. dt. pp. 419-428, pi. ix.

' Clarence King, U. S. Geological Exploration 40tb Parallel, 4to, 1, 1878^ p. 744.

’ G. K. Gilbert, in Wheeler, Report of Geological and Geographical Exploration and
Surveys West of 100* Merid., 4to, III, 1875, p. 62.


108


DISLOCATIONS


[past I


A. Didocation by tangenUal mwemeTU.

We will begin with those movements which are the result of tnn ganfinl
stress.

The simplest and most direct i-esult of an approximately horizontal
movement of the upper portions of the earth is the development of long
folds, the crests of which extend for some distance, then gradually flatten
out and are replaced by others whicli lie parallel to, and more or less



Pxo, 7. Folded menOite shalee. Wolfagiaben near Nikolschitz, Moravia.

alternating with them. Sometimes indeed a ridge bifurcates, its branches
forming an acute angle. Tiie folds are checked by opposing obstacles,
ami their .stnke then describes a curve with its convexity turned in the
direction of the general movement. The central portion of the Jura is
a long known and excellent example of this case.

Folding appears in the most diverse forms, in rocks of the most
ditterent kinds, and at various altitudes. In the banded mesilite-bearing


FOLDING


109


CH. m]

shales which in Moravia accompany the outer border of the western end of
the Carpathians, the folds present the regularity of a diagrammatic model.
Those who have seen the cliffs of the Axenberg on the Lake of Lucerne
will have viewed with astonishment the inextricable entanglement of the
limestone beds. In the Himalaya, at heights whicli far exceed the highest
peaks of the Alps, mighty folds also occur. In America the folded
structure of the Appalachians, in its magnificent simplicity, gave rise to


A


Fio. 8. lieversed fold on ths summit of the Mamrang Pass, JTimnlayn, llcpro<lucccl from
a photograph communicatod by F. Stoliezka.

important treatises on mountain tectonics at-a time wlien in Europe every
considerable anticlinal ridge was regarded as an independent axis of
elevation.

If the folding mass is bent back upon itself it rises in hrolcen anti^
ciincUsy which may also be inclined one towards another. The examples
described by Kauifmann on Pilatus, Escher on the Santis, von Richthofen
on Lake Pormarin in the Vorarlberg, and by Lotti in the Apuan Alps,
show various modifications of this structure.

It is ^ui^e true, as Heim remarks, that the same movement may give



110


DISLOCATTONS


riae to folds which are inclined in opposite directions — ^that in a chain in
which the movement is towards the north, for instance, folds may occur,
some of which are inclined to the north and others to the south; and it
is no doubt equally true that the determining cause of the inclination
of an anticlinal is the relative height of its two basest But observa-
tion shows, as was pointed out by Thurmann years ago in the Jura,
and confirmed by Heim in many passages of his suggestive work, that
the vast majority of inverted folds take one and the same direction,
so that the top of the fold is directed outwards, the succeeding trough
inwards ; in the greater part of the Alps therefore the anticlinal is directed
to the north, the synclinal to the south. This circumstance, too, explains
the rule formulated by B. Studer, that the strata in the Swiss Alps, which



Flo. 9. Summit cf fht GsUUi-Hoi'n^ mass q/ the Finster-Aarhom, seen from the Laucherli.
Two bands of gnoiss, one of which forms the summit of the Horn, and two bands of Jurassic
limestone included in Trias.

are bent in a C-like form, turn the concave side outwards. The most
imposing and most remarkable example of infolding and overfolding is
afforded by the relations, so carefully described by Heim and Baltzer,
of the Trias and the Jurassic limestone to the gneiss, on the northern
slope of the Finster-Aarhorn mass^

The summit of the Jungfrau is composed for a height of 800 meters
of overthrust gneiss; below this the precipitous cliffs on the northern side
are formed of Jurassic limestone, which is squeezed into the gneiss in two
great synclinal folds; below the cliffs of Jurassic limestone the gneiss
again appears. The upper of the two Jurassic wedges penetrates, con-

^ A. Heim, Der Mechaniamus der Gebirgsbildung, 4to, 1878, 1, p. 233, II, p. 207.

Heim, loc. cit., and A, Baltzer, Der mechaniache Contact von Gneiaa und Kalk im
Berner Oberland; Beitr. zur geol. Karte der Schweiz, XX, 4to, Bern, 1880? atfd Atlas.


MARMOEIZATION 111

tmtudly narrowing away, three kilometers deep into the mass of the gneiss ;
the lower wedge ends abruptly. This overfolding is continued eastwards
with various modifications along the whole northern slope of this great
mountain mass. Herr Baltzer had the kindness to conduct me from
Hof, near Meyringen, to the Urbachsattel, beneath the Qstelli-Horn, where
five inverted folds of gneiss, partly surrounded by the Trias, penetrate
like wedges into the Jurassic limestone. The steep Qstelli-Hom, isolated
by erosion, consists of a capping of gneiss, which forms part of the fifth
or highest wedge; below. this comes an infolded mass of Jurassic limestone,
forming precipitous cliffs, and on the upper and lower limits of this
Baltzer has found traces of Trias; then, beneath the cliffs, it is again
composed of gneiss, which belongs to the fourth wedge. This section is
wonderfully clear, and Baltzer’s representation of it furnishes an excellent
picture of the kneading together of the most resistant rocks, here pre-
sented to the eye in all its grandeur.

At the extremities of the long narrow folds of limestone, which are
rightly regarded as ‘rolled out’ synclinals, the pressure exerted on the
Jurassic limestone, together with the horizontal displacement, has attained
the maximum degree. In such places it often happens that fragments of
limestone, squeezed off from the main mass, may be met with isolated
in the gneiss ; and in the same way fragments of gneiss find their way
into the limestone.

Here too, where the mechanical effect attains its maximum, we meet
with that remarkable transformation of Jurassic limestone into marble,
of which the mountain-making movements themselves are held to be the
cause. The end of one of these limestone folds descends from the Laubstock
to the Grimsel pass, and is there easily accessible to any one visiting the
valley of the Hash.

In all these extraordinary phenomena, especially in the rolling out of
the limestone wedges, the forward movement of the arch-limb appears to
have played the principal part.

Many years ago careful observers of the folding in the Jura
mountains, such as Grossly, had perceived that in strongly inclined folds
a tendency was present to divide along a plane corresponding to the axis
of the saddle, and that when such a surface of division is produced, the
upper limb is driven along over it. Similarly, H. D. Rogei’s, from an
examination of the Appalachians, had succeeded in formulating the rule
that in the case of a reversed fold the arched limb is shoved over the
trough limb, that is to say, the uninverted side over the inverted side
If the original fold is inclined to the north and the movement of the

^ H. D. Rogera, On the Laws of Structure of the more Disturbed Zones of the Earth’s
Crust ; Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb., 1856, XXI, p. 442, Uninverted side of Wave usually
pushed ovej thg Inverted.



DISLOCATIONS


112


[parti


whole region is directed towards the north, then the surface of separation
dips to the south.

It thus appeal’s that in cei-tain mountain regions this phenomenon
occurs not merely in isolated instances, but is repeated in a whole series of
parallel folds. The result is a very peculiar general structure. In the
original, inclined, anticlinal fold the underlying portion showed the reversed,
the overlying the normal succession of strata. But when, owing to over-
thrusting, the underlying, that is, the inverted flank, is completely
concealed from observation, then only the uninverted flanks remain
visible, lying in a series one behind the other and formed of beds dipping
towards the interior of the chain — that is, in the case of a northern
movement, towards the south — but in normal succession, so that, to make
use of the method of symbolization employed by Albrecht Muller of Basel,
we meet as we proceed towards the interior of the chain the following
series of strata : a b c d c, a b c d e, a b c d e. A simply folded region would
present the following series : abcdedcbabcdedcba, &c.

This phenomenon we shall speak of as ImbHcated structure (Schuppen-
structur).

Imbricated structure, as Bittner has shown, is developed with remark-
able clearness in the eastern portions of the calcareous zone of the Alps,
in Lower Austria. The long lines of strike have already assumed the
north-easterly direction of the Ccaipathians, and the same succession of
strata is repeated again and again, always with a dip to the south or
south-east. ‘Tlie successive repetitions of the strata,’ says Bittner, ‘must
l)e regarded as so many upper limbs of inclined or inverted folds, of which
the anticlinal axes have been broken by the progressive development of
the folds, in such a manner that the upper limbs have been shoved one
over another, while the lower limbs each and all have been suppressed

The same structure, more or less clearly expressed, is to be met with
in other parts of the eastern Alps, and it is repeated under peculiar
conditions in the eastern Jura, precisely at that place where the resistance
of the mass of the Black Forest was greatest. Tlie regular folds of the
Jura describe a broad crescent starting from the west and south-west.
According to Albrecht Muller the influence of the Black Forest becomes
evident on tlie east of a line drawn from the west side of its southern end
piist Kandern and Lorracli to the south, then from Basel eastwards, along
the Birs, and following the western escarpment of the Gempen plateau
towards Nunningen. To the east of this line there lies a zone of Jurassic
deposits free from folding, which dip gently to the south and form as it
were the southern shoulder of the Black Forest : this is the table- Jura.
To the south of this table- Jura strikes the folded cltain-^Jura.

From Nunningen past Bretzwyl and Reigoldtswyl the northern part of
* A. Bittner, Die geolog. VerhSLltnisse von Hemstoin, p. 305.^ «



113


0H.m] TABLE JURA AND CHAINJURA

the choin-Jura, according to the same observer, is thrust over the table-
jura for a distance of from one to one and a half kilometers, and in par-
ticular the oolitic limestone of the middle Jurassic on to the upper Jurassic,
which dips gently to the south, while to the south of this overthrusting,
especially in the neighbourhood of the great tunnel of Hauenstein, three
to four ridges of Muschelkalk appear, one after another, with a constant
dip to the south

The excellent works which Moesch has published on this part of the
Jura mountains show very distinctly the gradual change of structure
which takes place in the direction of the strike, that is, to the north-east.
At Saalhofen, below the Gaisfiuh, to the east of Oltingon, and thence
past Densbiiren and as far as the Aare, the northern border of the chain-
Jura everywhere appears as an anticlinal overfolded from south to
north, and consequently lying with inverted strata on the margin of
the table-Jura. The Miocene Molasse is thus wedged in as a long belt



Fio. 10. The Bbtsherg Tunnel (after Moesch). Pinching in of tlio Miocene beds between
the overfolded chain- Jura and the flat table-Jura, which dips gently to the south.

« Trias formation ; p «= Jurassic formation ; te, te — infolded beds of

Miocene.

between the anticlinal overfolded towards the north and the table-Jura
which dips gently to the south.

The Botzberg Tunnel traverses from the south the whole of the reversed
folds of Trias and Jurassic, then enters the infolded zone of Miocene
deposits, and through these finally reaches the fiat-lying upper Jurassic
beds of the table region^.

^ A. Miiller, Ueber die anormalen Lagerungsverhaltnisse im westlichen Basler Jura,
pp. 428-462, and plate ; cf. Studer, Geologie der Schweiz, 11, p. 330; Moesch, Dcr siidl.
Aargauer Jura, Beitr. zur geol. Karte der Schweiz, X, 1874, pi. ii, fig. 3.

* C. Moesch, Der Aargauer Jura und die nordlichen Gebieto des Cantons Zurich ;
Beitr. zur geol. Karte der Schweiz, IV, 4io, 1867, in particular p. 266 et seq. ; twenty
sections on the border of the table and chain Jura; section of the Botzberg Tunnel in
the same supplement to Beitr. Heft IV (appeared with Heft X, 1874). Miiller thought
it necessary, in order to explain the imbricated structure, to assume in addition to
pressure from the south, and resistance by the Schwarzwald, special parallel fmetures,
and in particular for the Wiesenberg-Mont Terrible chain and the Hascnhubel range,
* repeated shocks and rending open from below.’ (In this matter, however, I adhere
to the older view, represented at present in the most efficient manner by Moesch,
according te which all these phenomena may be referred to overthrust folds.)


114


DISLOCATIONS


The overfolding of the northern border of the chain-Jura is continued
beyond the Aare. The beds of Moschelkalk dipping to the south cross
the river near Bad Schinzbach (if*, Fig. 11), and then extend upwards to the
summit of the WUlpelsberg, where their vertical edges bear the venerable
ruins of the Habsburg. They contain Placodus and Myophoria; the tower
of the ancient fortress stands on their highest ridge. Below the Muschel-
kalk, separated from it by a steep wooded slope, are some gypsum quarries
in the Keuper {t^. Fig. 11); this rests on dark lower Lias limestone. In
the meadow-land below, loose blocks of Oolite are often met with, and still
lower down, at the foot of the mountain, beds of upper Jurassic are dis-
closed to view, which, dipping sixty degrees to the south, support the
whole of this series of strata'.

While the overfolding of the northern margin thus persists, the folds
in the interior of the chain- Jura gradually resume their normal position;
this the innermost and most southern zone had not ceased to retain



Fio. 11. The Habsburg, ** Muschelkalk ; = Keuper ; == Jurassio formation.


even in that region where the imbricated structure was most strongly
developed.

Thus, where the long folds of the Jura chains most closely approach
the Black Forest, they show for a short interval the overthrusting of
the upper limb, which is characteristic of imbricated structure; while
beyond the obstructing region this phenomenon at once ceases. The
northern border of the chain- Jura, however, still remains overthrust,
while the inner does not quite abandon its regular folding even in the
region of imbricated structure.

We shall again meet with this imbricated structure in South Tyrol and
other places.

On comparing these phenomena with those observed by miners we
see that they are none other than those cases of overthrusting which are


' This section has been repeatedly described, quite recently, for instance, in the
Verhandl. Schweiz. Naturf.-Ges. zu Aarau, 1881, pp. 70, 71. I have not found the brown
Jura and insect-marl in aiH.



OH ni] OVEBTHBUSTS 116

distinguished from faults under the name of Wechsd or Schldchten in
Qermany, and known in England as creeps.

It is to Kohler that we owe the application of modern views on
the structure of mountains to explain the disturbances in the Carboni-
ferous basin of . Westphalia. The Coal measures of Westphalia have
been folded by a horizontal force acting from south to north.

• By Wechsd or overthrusting* says Kohler, ‘ we understand generally
a disturbance where a seam lies higher on the hanging than on the
lying side [of the fault].* ... In Westphalia overthrusts always occur
along the strike^ and dip in the same direction as the displaced seams,
but a little more strongly. The extent of the change in level of the
seam amounts in one case to 500 meters. The thrust planes dip to
the south, but there are exceptions which dip to the north. Over-
thrusts are nothing else than the * highest power of a folding.*

Kohler then compares Wechsd with Heim’s representations of over-
thrust mountain folds ^

The united observations of Wimmer, Groddeck, Stelzner, and Kohler
have established the fact that the famous ore deposit of the Rammelsberg
near Goslar rests on a thrust plane of this kind, the Spirifer sandstone
of the lower Devonian having been thrust over middle Devonian slates,
and further that the peculiar form of the deposit is owing to the
participation of the ore itself in the orogenetic movements. The dis-
position of the folds, the squeezing in and milling out of the bed of ore,
which is sometimes reduced to a mere film, recall in every respect the
imposing phenomena of the Finster-Aarhom mass

In some cases horizontal thrusting is so far developed, that fairly
large masses of older beds, often even isolated by later erosion, are met
with on younger formations. Among the greatest of such deviations
from the normal position would appear to be the disturbances described
by M. Bertrand on the outer border of the Jura between Besan^on and
Salins

The regular strike of the mountain folds is sometimes interrupted
by a sudden S-shaped curvature, and by the greater advance of one
segment as compared with the others. Still more frequently a more
or less vertical fracture occurs separating two portions of a chain at
right angles to the strike. This dislocation of mountain segments
relatively to one another is doubtless produced by an unequal move-
ment of the contiguous masses, and it sometimes happens that the folds

' Kohler, loc. cit., pp. 199, 200.

^ Kohler, Die StOrungen im Bammelsberger Erzlager bei Goslar ; Zeitschr. fdr Berg-,
HOtten- u. Salinenwesen, 1882, XXX, pp. 81-43 and 278 ; 4 pi.

* M. Bertrand, Failles de lalisibre du Jura entre Be 8 an 9 on et Salins; Bull. Soc. gdol.
de Fr., 1888, 8» s^r., X, pp. 114-126.



DISLOCATIONS


116


[part r


on one side of the dividing plane are more crowded together, and show
a greater tendency to form overfolds than those on the other.

These surfaces of separation have a most important bearing on the
origin of folded mountain chains.

Escher, of noble and undying memory, when explaining to me in
1854 the folded structure of the Santis, pointed with particular
emphasis to a little face of rock in the neighbourhood of Wildkirchli,
which appeared to form part of a fissure cutting transversely across
the folds. When in 1857 he described the six folds of the Santis before
the Helvetian Society of Natural Sciences at Trogen he said: ‘Whereas
in the longitudinal direction of this chain no faults occur, on the other
hand fissures transverse to it may be observed, which often traverse
the whole mountain chain, as for instance that from Wildkirchlein to the
valley of the Rhine. In these transverse clefts the polishing of the
fractured surfaces, as well as their dislocation, may be observed.'

Escher also made the following entry in his notebook when visiting
the Rasenauli : * The Valangien (near the Bogarten-Furkeli), as well as
the Neocomian, presents a number of horizontal glide-surfaces ; and it
is extremely probable that this ridge, with its slickensides, is merely
a part of a long fault running north and south, on the course of which
the Wildkirchlein-Bommer fault, the little Stifelpass, and the Krinnenpass
(Fahlen-Saxerweg) also lie^.'

Let us emphasize the following points in this first example : the strike
towards the north (slightly to the west), at right angles to the direction
of all the folds, the great length of the line and the horizontal striation
of the slickensides; these are the three fundamental characters of all
surfaces of this kind.

Jaccard's works on the Jura of the Vaud and NeuchS^tel reveal the
presence of a much more important transverse line in this region.
From the southern border of the chain, passing close to the north-
eastern end of the Lac dc Joux and thence northwards through Hdpitaux
nearly as far as Pontarlier, a disturbance is visible in the course of the
folds of the Jura; this is most violent in the south, and seems to
disappear towards the north. It is characterized in the south by the
occurrence of short chains running north and south: Jaccard, in 1869,
was uncertain whether these were to be regarded as independent chains,
or merely as the deflected extremities of the folds lying to the west of
the disturbance. Further observation has established the latter view
as correct; on this great line of dislocation, therefore, which runs north
and south, the inner folds of the Jura have been dragged along at right
avgleti to the strike.

^ A. Escher V. d. Linth, Geologiscbe Besebreibung d. Sentis-Gruppe (edited by Moesch) ;
Beitr. zur geol. Karte der Schweiz, 1878, XIII, pp. 71, 231. c c



cH.in] FLAWS IN THE EASTERN ALPS 117

The eastern portion of the chain has advanced further to the north
than the western.

At Santis the folds strike to the north-east, the transverse fissure
to the north and slightly west ; here too the folds strike to the north-
east, the transverse line to the north. A second long line is said to
occur to the west of the preceding, running from Les Tuffes and La Chaille
(south of the little Lac des Rousses) a long distance in the direction
of Salins, that is to say, more towards the north-north- west, but I possess
no further information regarding it^

Studer’s observations on the dislocation which occurs perpendicularly
to the direction of the chains in the neighbourhood of the upper part
of the Lake of Thun I have already mentioned elsewhere, as well as the
relative dislocation of several portions of the Molasse, which Kauftinann
has pointed out between the Lakes of Thun and Zurich®.

In the eastern Alps numerous surfaces of dislocation occur, which,
whatever may be the strike of the chain in question, are always directed
towards the north or north-east, or more generally to the north-north-
east. These surfaces are steeply inclined, and their dip appears to l)i?
as variable as their strike is constant, since it easily passes from west-
north-west to east-south-east. The surfaces themselves are often embossed,
yet smoothly polished, and not infrequently covered with striations or
furrows, which run horizontally or nearly so; at the same time there
is a tendency, so often observed in the formation of ‘ mirrors ' of this
kind, to the detachment of little wedge-shaped or lentiform fragments. In
limestones the walls are sometimes entirely composed of loosely connected
polyhedral fragments produced by the complete crushing of the rock
during the movement ; the polished face extends over all these fragments.
In shales and hard marls the crushing of the rock or the devoloi)ment
of a network of polished and striated surfaces within its mass is carried
still further, and that peculiar form of brecciation is produced which
is known in the Harz by the name of ‘ Verruschelung.*

Let us now proceed from Berchtesgaden to the south, and visit first
the Konigssee. At the point where the Falkensteiner Wand projects
furthest into the lake, a large smooth perpendicular wall of limestone
occurs, running north-north-east, with a number of parallel fissures in
the mass of the rock. If on the other side of the lake we ascend tln^
mighty limestone mass of the Steineme Meer, we shall repeatedly meet
during the ascent with surfaces striking to the north-noi^th-cast, as for
example near the spring in the Saugasse, and again on the, plateau of
the Steinerne Meer itself, in the narrow pass above the Funtensee Alp.

^ A. Jaccard, Jura Vaudois et Neuchatelois; Bcitr. zur geol. Kartc der Schweiz, 1869,
VI, pp. 263, 264.

® Entstehung der Alpen, p. 61 et seq.



118


DISLOCATIONS


[part I


The whole mass of the Schonfeldspitze, with its upturned beds, gives the
impression of a segment of a fold compressed between the north and
north-north-eastern clefts. At the Buchlauer Scharte we reach the edge
of the southern scarp, and at the same time the southern limit of the
limestone belt. The eastern side of the Scharte is formed by large faces,
constantly directed to the north-north-east, which break up the mighty
precipice into a number of great subdivisions, projecting like buttresses
or the side wings of a theatre, in precisely the same fashion as in the case of
the southern scarp of the Dachstein mountains, in the valley of the Enns.

On the Buchlauer Scharte we are surrounded by sheer walls of
greyish-white limestone; far below them spreads an undulating fertile
region of hills. This is the schistose Palaeozoic region of the Mitter-
Pinzgau ; it extends to a great distance in the direction of Zell and
Taxenbach before it rises to heights of any importance; behind these
appears the jagged crest of the Tauern.

Let us cross this region of schists.

In the gneiss of the Tauern those gold-bearing veins (‘ Gangstreichen *)
occur from which the ‘ Gold of the Taurisci * was derived, and which for
many centuries supported rich and famous mines. These gold-bearing
fissures or flaws are very numerous and with rare exceptions strike to
the north-north-east, or north-east ; sometimes they cross each other like
the meshes of a net. Two zones or sheaves of these flaws are particu-
larly worthy of note, one on the line of the llathhausberg, which is 1,700
meters long and strikes to the north-north-east, and another on the line
Erzweise-Bockhardt-Siglitz, which strikes slightly more to the east, and
with its southern continuation on the other side of the glacier may
be followed for a distance of seven kilometers. In a vertical direction
these flaws have been traced over a distance of 1,500 meters.

A most detailed description of them has lately been given by F. Posepny.
This observer regards flaws as the result of local inequalities in the
horizontal movement of the different parts of the mass: ‘This process
tended not so much to produce a fissure or a rent, as a displacement of the
solid medium.' The fissures generated in this way are neither precisely
rectilinear nor quite plane, but crooked or with undulating surfaces. At
the places where they bulge out the horizontal movement gives rise to
the friction-breccias which accompany the flaws, and fill in the space
between their slickenslided surfaces. In the neighbourhood of the Bock-
hardt the flaws extend also into the limestone ^

Let us leave this region, instructive though it is in detail, and proceed
further south to the mountains which lie near Baibl. An imposing and
clearly marked series of Trias deposits occurs here. It inclines regularly

' F. Posepny, Die Goldbergbaue der Hohen Tauern (aus dem Archiv f. prakt. Geol., I),
1879, pp. 21, 92, 218, et passim. t ^



FLAWS NEAR RAIBL


119


CH. Ill]

towards the south. One of its stages, the ore-bearing limestone, which
forms the entire mass of the Eonigsberg, contains deposits of galena
and calamine ; black shales, containing fish remains, cover the ore-bearing
limestone.

Posepny has also published a monograph on this locality, in which
he shows that the galena occurs in a series of flaws or clefts, which
strike almost directly northwards, and are united in zones. These
fractures, says Posepny, may be compared to delicate incisions in the
rock ; and it is but seldom that they develop into actual fissures, which
are in part open, in part filled with the debris resulting from friction.
The walls are as a rule smooth, but are sometimes covered with parallel
grooves, sometimes by intersecting systems of striae. The dip varies,
being now directed to the east, now again to the west ; but where to the
south these fissures cross the limit of the superposed shales, it is plain
that these shales have been dragged, and that the whole district has been
displaced along the flaws. The ore-bearing limestone thus advances
towards the shales by jerks as it were, and from the exposures in the
mines as well as at the surface, Posepny has been able to show that on
the west side of the valley the sum of the successive displacements,
towards the shales, amounts to about 420 meters, but on the eastern side,
where the conditions are not so clear, to about 760 meters. The displace-
ments occur in such a way that at the bottom of the valley, which likewise
runs north and south, the limestone advances furthest towards the south,
but on the two sides it retreats with each dislocation further to the north

Let us now leave llaibl and visit the valley of the Lahn, which lies
parallel to it on the east. Here we find a much more important horizontal
displacement. The west side of the valley corresponds very nearly to
the prolongation of the mountains of llaibl; then follows a line of dis-
continuity, running to the north or north-north-east, which corresponds
to the main valley, and to the left main branch of its fork to the south,
with a possible continuation thence through the deep defile to the east
of the Mittagskogel into the valley of the Coritenza ; all that lies to the
east of this line, the mass of the Prinza, of the Mangart, the Jelouz, and
others, is shifted about three to four kilometers towards the north

A number of examples might be quoted from the eastern Alps, but it
will suffice to recall the line of dislocation of Belluno, which likewise

^ F. Poaepny, Die Blei- und Galmei-Erzlagerstatten von Raibl in EM.rnten ; Jahrb.
geol. Reichsanst., 1873, XXIII, p. 325 et seq. The undulating surface of the * Morgen-
blatt ’ is, as the director of this mine. Hr. GrOger, infoims me, known for 500 meters in
a vertical .direction ; the three chief groups of flaws, Josefi, Struggl, and Morgenblatt,
strike north to north-north-east, and the ore-bearing flaws are accompanied by a number
of * dead * flaws. The calamine beds are distinct and end suddenly in the Galmei-Kluft
which strikes to the north-north-west.

^ Jahrtb getf>l. Reichsanst., 1867, XVII, p. 576.



120 DISLOCATIONS [parti

strikes to the north-north-east^ and which we considered when discussing
the earthquake of Belluno.

In the north-eastern portion of the Alps these flaws, which have
hitherto been so constantly directed to the north, north-north-east, or
north-east, experience a deflection. At the Hohe-Wand, near Wiener-
Neustadt, where the Trias limestone overlies Cretaceous beds, both,
as Bittner has shown, are intersected by planes striking to the north-
north- west, along which they are shifted^. This instructive intersection
of disturbances will be discussed later.

In the eastern Alps the effects of these vertical planes of dislocation
on mountain structure may be followed in every stage, from the dislo-
cation of great mountain segments on both sides of a transverse valley
down to the displacement along an ore-bearing flaw, only a few meters
in amount, or finally to divisional planes in the limestone, which appeal*
as simple cracks no wider than a hair; and these last appear to play
a similar part in the mountains to that of the far smaller glide planes
which the microscope reveals in contorted rocks

Examples are not wanting in other regions ; the Medina fault along
which one half of the Isle of Wight has been displaced against the other
is an instructive case. That these surfaces, as well as the thrust planes,
are the result of tangential stress, needs no further proof ; they possess
no distinctive name.

Kohler has also observed dislocations of this kind in the Coal-measures
and classes them with Carnairs Uehersprunge, I shall in speaking of them
employ the term Blatt, an expression borrowed from the miners in the Alps

The tangential movement in the earth’s surface thus produces two
distinct types of surfaces of discontinuity. The first group corresponds
to overthrud pla'nes, * Wechsel ’ or ‘ Schlachten,’ the repetition of which
gives rise to imbricated structure, and the second group comprises shift
planeSy * Blatter’ [fiaws] or * Ueberspriinge.’

The strike of the overthrusts coincides with the strike of the folds
and is defiected along with them. The strike of the flaws is more or less,
but not always precisely, at right angles to the strike of the folds; it
is not subject to deflection like that of the overthrusts, and probably
indicates more correctly the general movements of the mass.

Every thrust plane has its definite dip, which is continued in the same
direction downwards. The inclination of the flaws is almost always very
steep, but may change from one direction to its opposite and return again
to the first in following the same downward course.

' Bittner, Hernstein, p. 245 et eeq.

^ A. Heim, Mechanismus der Gebirgsbildung, pi. xv, fig. 8.

’ [This has been rendered * flaw ’ in the translation, a word which, like the feature
itself, has some fellowship with ‘ fault .’ — Note htf Editor,]



CH. ni] TOESION 121

Flaws far more than overthrusts contribute to the formation of valleys.
Flaws are sometimes metalliferous, overthrusts much more rarely so.

In their normal form flaws are produced by a movement of two adjacent
portions of the earth’s crust in the same direction, but to an unequal extent.
The parallelism of the movement of the two parts is often only present
as regards direction, the dip of the beds being much steeper on one side
than on the other. This is particularly the case when, as the result
of a more violent movement, the portion in advance is more intensely
folded. Considerable differences in level may thus occur in a flaw without
subsidence of either of the two wings or the formation of a fault in the
proper sense of the term, and it is characteristic that in this case no vertical
striations are visible on the slickensides, but that the lines on the latter
are only gently inclined to the horizon ; or else two systems of lines are
visible, one over the other, of different but gentle inclination.

An incomparably greater complication of all these relations, as well
as of flaws and of overthrusts, occurs when two folding movements in
different directions succeed one another in the same region.

In the greater part of Europe, north of the Alps, the mountain
chains show folding towards the north, as in the Alpine system itself.
This however does not exclude the existence in Central Europe of two
different directions, which have produced folds and mountain chains
striking more to the north-east in the one case, in the other more to the
north-west. The former is known as the direction of the Netherlands,
the latter as the Hercynian direction.

In regions where only one of these two directions finds expression,
as in the south-west of Ireland, where in the mountains around the Lake
of Killamey the Devonian is thrust high over the Carboniferous limestone
or in the coal-flelds of Belgium, or in the Erzgebirge, the connexion of
the dislocations and the movement of the earth’s crust is more easily
recognizable, however the relations may otherwise be complicated. The
task is incomparably more difficult when two folding movements of
different directions have exerted their influence on the same mountain
chain. —

According to Lossen’s extremely- instructive description, the Harz
must be regarded as a mountain knot, the result of a unilateral folding,
which however took place first in the direction of the Netherlands, then
in the Hercynian direction. We must thus assume first the action of
a force from the south-east, under the influence of which the funda-
mental lines of the structure were produced ; later on, when these main
lines, which may still be recognized in the strike of a large portion of the
chain, were already present, and when in particular the granite mass of
the Brocken already lay with its broad undulating surface beneath the
^ £. HulLThs Physical Geology and Geography of Ireland, Svo, 1878, p. 135, fig. 17.



122


DISLOOATIGNS


[PAB!I! i

Palaeozoic schist and quartzite, a force in the Hercynian direction, i. e. from
the south-west, was exerted on this mountain range, the strike of which
was already more or less to the north-east^.

The axes of the folds and the thrust planes were frequently bent in
a torsional curve by this second movement. The development of that
great and remarkable system of veins which originates in the neighbour-
hood of St. Andreasberg, thus not far from the southern extremity of the
granite mass of the Brocken, and the radial arrangement of which has
i^en pointed out by Groddeck, is held by Lossen to be connected with
these processes of mountain formation and to result from the torsion of
the mountain mass^.

Daubr^ has experimented by subjecting ribbon-shaped strips of strong
glass, with their narrow ends fixed in cheek-pieces, to a spiral torsion
amounting to 20°. Radial sheaves of fissures were then seen to have been
produced at regular intervals from the right and left edges of the plate ^

The fissures in the Harz, some of which attain a length of 14 kilo-
meters, have arisen under quite different conditions. The edges of the
plate, which in Daubrde’s experiment determine the arrangement of the
fissures in the glass, are not present in nature; moreover, and this is an
essential point, while Daubr^ subjected his plates to actual spiral torsion,
in nature the two movements at right angles to one another took place,
one earlier, the other later, and neither of these was in itself torsional.
Nevertheless, there is in fact a certain resemblance between the system of
veins radiating from St. Andreasbei^ and the sheaves of torsional fissures
produced by artificial means.

Kayser’s investigations have completed our knowledge of this system of
fissures in more than one essential point. He shows that each of the larger
fissures is accompanied by a dislocation in a horizontal and in a vertical
direction, and that these dislocations afiect also the granite, which is
displaced along the fractures in the same way as the other rocks.

The principal lines of fracture are : the fissure of the Oder, that of the
Acker, and the sheaf of fissures of St. Andreasberg.

The fissure of the Oder, about 14 kilometers long, runs to the north-
north-west, starting from a point to the east of St. Andreasberg and
intersecting at right angles the strike of the folds which follow the
direction of the Netherlands: its plane is inclined to the east, and its
eastern side is moved towards the north and downwards. To the east of
this great line a number of fissures occur, striking to the north-west and

' E. A Lessen, Ueber den Zusammenhang zwischen Falten, Spalten, and Eruptiv-
gesteinen im Harz ; Jahrb. k. pieuss. geol. Landesanstalt, II, 1882, pp. 1-50.

* A. V. G^roddeck, Beitr. znr Geogn. des Oberbarzes, Zeitschr. deutsoh. geol. Gea, 1877,
XXIX, p. 440 et seq. ; Lossen, loc. oit., p. 88.

’ A. Daabr4e, Etudes synthdt. de gdol. exp4rimentale, 8vo, 1879, in paiticnlar pi. ii.



OH. in] FRACTURES OP SAINT ANDREASBERG 123

tenninating on the' line in an acute angle; the eastern side of the most
southerly of these is displaced considerably towards the north (Fig. 12, 4).

The fissure of the Acker begins near the point of origin of the Oder
fissure, and its course is at first directed to the north-west ; later on its
strike turns more and more to the west-north-west, so that its distance
-from the Oder fissure increases. Along this line, as well as on another
fissure running parallel to it on the north, a very obvious displacement
occurs of the eastern side towards the north, and further on and correspond-
ing to this, of the northern side towards the west: owing to the alteration



Fio. 12. The system offraebires of SU Andreasberg (after Lessen and Kaysor).

T -s Grauwacke of Tann ; w = Schists of Wiede ; Sp. S => Spirifer Sandstone ; k «= Culm ;
o « Granite ; d = Diabase. 1. Edelleuter Ruschel ; 2. Keufanger Ruschel ; S. Acker
fissure ; 4. Oder fissure.

of its strike this fissure constantly approaches the direction of the long and
numerous Clausthal fissures, which lie in the open space between the fissure
of the Oder and that of the Acker (Fig. 1 2, 3).

A little vein, near the Acker fissure on the south, over which the mines
‘ Segen Qottes ' and ‘ Neues QlUckauf ’ occur, trends towards the point from
which the great veins radiate, and this, together with the Acker fissure,
divides a long narrow strip of granite from the grauwacke, which lies to
the north of the Acker fissure and to the south of the vein itself. I con-
sider thia line important, because along it, no longer the northern but the


124


DISLOCATIONS


[part I

southern side is thrown down, and because, according to Eayser, the cleft
probably dips steeply to the south. Since the group of fissures (Ruscheln)
which succeeds to the south is characterized by a southern hade and
subsidence on the southern side, it would seem, according to the descriptions
hitherto published, as though the narrow band of granite mentioned above
really represented a 'horst,* from which the country descended on both
sides in successive steps.

The * Ruscheln * are broad fissures filled with crushed fragments which
border on the north, west, and south, a wedge-shaped area in which the
silver-bearing veins of Andreasberg occur. The productive veins do not
extend beyond the ‘ Ruscheln * ; their position with regard to the point of
radiation may be seen from Fig. 12.

The north Neufanger Ruschel hades to the south, and its southern side
is let down together with the ore-bearing region. The southern Ruscheln
also dip steeply to the south, but there seems to be a difference of opinion
as to whether the southern wing of the most southerly of the great
Edelleuter Ruscheln is thrown down still further or whether it is a case
of thrusting \

It is a very fortunate circumstance that such a delightful task, as the
solution of the questions in terrestrial dynamics raised by the double folding
and the radial arrangement of the fractures, may be undertaken in a region
like the Harz, which is easily accessible, where important mines occur,
conscientious and distinguished observers are at work, and all requisite
apparatus at hand ; liere we may indeed hope that essential progress will
be made towards the comprehension of mountain structure in general.
For the present it may well suffice to recognize in the observations made to
the east of the Acker fissure the indications of a great torsional structure,
and we may certainly, as we have already said, find some resemblance
between the radiation of the veins and Daubr^e's sheaves of fractures. The
predominance of a southern hade in the case of the fissures situated to the
south of the Acker line is more difficult to reconcile with this comparison.
If the Oder fissure occurred in the Alps isolated from its companions, it
would probably be regarded as a normal flaw of the older system of the
Netherlands. The constancy in the strike of the Alpine flaws stands in
remarkable contrast to the behaviour of the other fractures. It may be
regarded as certainly demonstrated that in the formation of fractures
the granite of the Harz plays a perfectly passive part.

B. Didocation by mbaidence.

The stresses produced by the contraction of the terrestrial mass shoW;
as we have said, a tendency to resolve themselves into movements ir

^ E. Kayser, Ueber das Spaltensystem am Siidwestabfalle des Brockenmassivs ; Jabrb
k. preuse. geol. Landesanstalt, 1882, II, pp. 412-454, pi. x, xi. e ©



PASSIVE SUBSIDENCE


125


OH. m]

two different directions, one more or less tangential or horizontal, producing
folding, splitting, or overthrusting, the other vertical, producing subsidence.
We have, it is true, spoken above of flaws in which the striae on the
slickensides produced by gliding were directed downwards, and along
which considerable vertical dislocation may have taken place, yet the
exciting and determining cause lay even in these cases in the horizontal
component. It now seems expedient for the sake of clearness to interrupt
the series of examples which we have hitherto discussed, in order to
become acquainted with the extreme cases in the second group of disloca-
tions, and from these to return gradually to those complicated disturbances
in which both components were, or still are, active.

Observation teaches us not to speak of a radial tension, in so far as
we are referring to those disturbances, which only affect the structure
of the outer crust of the earth. There is, in the whole of the extensive
group of dislocations which I will now attempt to discuss, no trace of an
active imjmlee from above downwards. When tangential movement is
absent, the existing dislocations may easily be explained by the yielding
of the foundation and by the force of gravity. The phenomena we observe
are only various forms of passive subsidence and collapse. The impression
produced is that the radial component acts at a great depth, and that
in this way spaces are created beneath an outer shell which permit large
portions of the latter to subside into them.

This point of view is not now; we meet it under various forms in
many of the more recent works on mountain structure; it is of great
importance for the comprehension of the structure of the outer portion of
the planet, but I cannot enter into a further explanation of it here,
where my object is simply to determine the more definite grouping and
terminology of dislocations.

The investigation of a single sunken area or of a single line of sub-
sidence does not lead us far. So long as each fold in a mountain chain
was considered separately and every anticlinal of the Jura mountains was
regarded as though it were the result of an independent linear elevation,
further insight into the nature of folding generally was impossible. Just
as the folds of a great chain arc arranged according to universal laws, and
as each of these is dependent on the neighbouring folds and on the general
structure of the chain, so in large areas we see lines of subsidence arranged
in nets or systems which, taken together, indicate the position of a field
of subsidence, and, like the folds of a mountain chain, are the effects of
a common cause.

We may distinguish in a normal field of subsidence two* principal
directions followed by the faults, on which we base their division into
peHpher(d and radial faults, designations introduced many years ago
by Deffngr ^r the faults in the Swabian Jura. In addition to these



126 DISLOCATIONS |paot*

there ore diagonal fanlis, which are independent of any general law,
and shorter subordinate transverse faults, which connect the main faults
at right angles.

The most important group is that of the peripheral faults. They not
only bound the area of subsidence in a broad curve or, polygon, but they
are repeated within this area in a more or less concentric fashion, some-
times indeed taking the direction of the chord of an arc, or intersecting
the angles of the polygon, and not infrequently an extremely curious
regularity may be observed in the horizontal intervals between the several
successive zones of peripheral faults, as these are traced from the margin
towards the middle of the field of subsidence.

Along each of these peripheral faults the side lying nearer the centre
of the field is, with a very few exceptions, let down, so that the sum
of the subsidences increases towards the centre, which is thus the lowest
point of the area of subsidence. It may however sometimes happen that
between any two peripheral faults a strip of country has sunk too deep, so
that the outer side of the succeeding fault then appears as the upthrown
side, and a slight compensation is effected. These strips which have sunk
too deep we will call troughs or trough-subsidences (Graben or Qraben-
senkungen, after an old expression used by miners). It sometimes happens
that along a peripheral fault the extent of the subsidence gradually
decreases, and at the same time at no great distance from it a second
peripheral fracture begins parallel to the first and is continued with
increasing subsidence, so that one fault replaces another, in the same way
as the folds replace one another in the' chain-Jura. An intermediate piece
of country then remains suspended as it were between the two faults,
and forms what Mojsisovics, in the great subsidence faults in the southern
Alps, calls a bridge.

If the outer borders of two fields of subsidence approach each other
so that a ridge is left between them, on both sides of which the two areas
of depression descend more or less in the form of steps, then we have
what we shall distinguish, making use again of a common mining word,
as a Juyrst, in this case a horst of the first order, as opposed to the subsidiary
horsts which occur here and there between networks of fracture. As
hoists of the first order we may mention for example the Schwarzwald,
the Vosges, Morvan, and the Kaibab Plateau in Colorado. That subsidiary
horsts may occur even on faults in folded ranges, so soon as these also
are accompanied by vertical movement, has already been shown by the
example of the Acker fissure near St. Andreasberg.

The radial faults are not nearly so regular in their mode of occurrence
as the peripheral. They are developed best in subsided areas of moderate
extent, where they intersect the peripheral faults, and thus produce
trapeziform blocks which occasionally bear witness to an^ independent



127


oH-ni] SUBSIDENCE IN BOHEMIA

oblique and abnormal movement, by which the regularity of the field
of subsidence* is locally disturbed. Towards the centre, where the radial
lines begin to be crowded together, smaller wedge-shaped blocks are
formed, and this» general parcelling up of the ground produces in places
fields of subsidence which are peculiar and differ locally ; they may have
now a round, now an irregularly indented outline, and their size may
viry greatly within the same field of depression. As examples of such
a collapse towards the middle of a subsiding area we may mention the
Bieskessel, the Hohgau, and the Lipari Islands.

We have already pointed out how easily even very great faults of this
kind, connected with vertical dislocations of thousands of feet, may remain
concealed from observation, and how often artificial cuttings may reveal
such disturbances in places where their presence had been previously
unsuspected. It is consequently not surprising that our knowledge of
a network of faults is usually very incomplete. Bohemia, which has been
so thoroughly studied in other respects, is a striking example of this fact.
No indication on the surface of the monotonous undulating land of
Priibram betrays the existence of the ‘ Lettenkluf t,' that mighty plane
of disturbance now exposed down to a depth of more than a thousand
meters, which intersects the silver veins, and at the bottom of the mine
again brings into view, beneath the azoic divisions of the Silurian, the
foundation of granite on which they rest. The Lettenkluft strikes to
the north-east, and it is the south-eastern side which must be regarded
as having been let down\

It is furthermore extremely likely that the boundary between the
granite and the azoic deposits, which a little to the south of the Lettenkluft
runs along the surface almost in a straight line in a north-east direction,
corresponds to a second and similar fault, and that the Lettenkluft and
this granite boundary are only parts of a great group of faults striking
to the north-east, some of which have lately been determined between
Beraun and Prague by the valuable researches of Krejci and Helmhacker

These faults lie parallel to the strike of the Silurian basin of Bohemia,
which, according to the investigations of these observers, assumes more
and more the appearance of a broad and complicated trough subsidence,
rather than that of a simple synclinal as was previously held. This group
of north-easterly faults is again only part of that great system of faults
which traverses the whole of the Bohemian mass, and includes the

^ F. Posepny, Ueber Dislocationen im Piiibramer Erzrevier ; Jabrb. geol. Reicbsanst.,
1872, XII, pp. 229-234.

* J. Krejci and R. Helmhacker, Erlaut. zur geol. Karte der Umgebungen von Prag;
Archiv f. d. naturw. Landesdurchforschung von Btfhmen, 1879, IV, in particular pp. 82-90 ;
the same authors* Erlftut. zur geol. Karte des Eisengebirges, op. cit., 1882, V, passim, adds
essentially |o opr knowledge of the network of fissures in the south-east of Bohemia.



128


DISLGO ATIONB


[ftAWl

feralts at the foot of the Erzgebirge> the succeasive parallel lines of
subsidence at the foot of the Isergebirge and Biesengebirge, the sharply
defined line running from Elbe-Teinitz towards the south-east, the line
of the valley of the Moldau, running to the south from Prague, and many
others. Professor Erejci has had the kindness to communicate to me
a provisional sketch of these faults; their more exact determination is
the grateful task reserved to our colleagues at Prague. Even at present
* however we already perceive that a very large portion of Bohemia, in
particular the west, north, and east of the country, has been the scene
of extensive subsidence, which has taken place along numerous surfaces'
of rupture owing to the yielding of the substratum. The theoretical
distinction between peripheral and radial faults cannot, it is true, be applied
in this case. The Archaean region of the south, although also traversed
by faults, yet rises, in a tectonic rather than in an orographic sense, above
the rest of tiie country; on the north-east and north-west the slopes of
the Biesengebirge and of the Erzgebirge mark its limits.

The conceptions to which the more restricted areas of central Europe
have given rise, cannot however be generally maintained in those regions
in other parts of the world, where horizontally stratified plateaux are'
traversed by great faults for extraordinary distances ; here the conception
of peripheral lines seldom admits of application, that of radial lines more
seldom still; intersection of the lines is rare and local collapse is con-
sequently not known. Owing to the extraordinary length of these
fractures not only does the subsidence vary in amount, but it occurs now
on one side, now on the other of the same fault.

In order to show this contrast I choose the most remarkable example,
namely, that system of faults which traverses the high tablelands of
western Utah, of which Dutton has given so clear and instructive a
description ^

The Wahsatch mountains, which stretch along the eastern side of
the great Salt Lake and of Lake Utah, do not extend nearly so far to
the south as is generally represented on our maps, but terminate in the
neighbourhood of Mount Nebo at about latitude 39° 45' N.

The Wahsatch mountains are separated from the Salt Lake by a great
fault running north and south, with a downthrow on the west. Towards
the south this fault passes into two step-faults. Opposite the southern
extremity of the range rises the mass of Mount Nebo, which is traversed
by a fault running north and south, with a downthrow to the east. This
may be regarded as a continuation of the faults, or of the parallel faults,
by which the western side of the Wahsatch mountains is down-
thrown.

* C. E. Dutton, Report on the Geology of the High Plateaus of Utah, 4to, 1880, with
Atlas, in particular pp. 25-54. c .



FAULT OF THE WAHSATCH


129


CH#ni]

Between Mount Nebo and the Grand Caiion of Colorado lies a region
formed of vast horizontally stratified masses which constitute the westem
border of the great Plateau of Colorado. The strata are for the greater part
marine deposits^ which extend from the Carboniferous to the Cretaceous,
but in the latter the intercalation of leaf-bearing layers and even of true
lacustrine beds becomes more and more noticeable towards the summit;
then follow Tertiary lacustrine sediments, and finally extensive sheets of
volcanic rock. The surface of these great masses lies, in many cases,
11,000 feet above the sea; they are bounded and traversed by great linear
faults.

The disposition of the fault-lines is shown in Fig. 18, after Dutton^,
who has embodied in its southern portion the results of Powell and
Gilbert. This arrangement may be compared to the resolution of the
principal fault of the Wahsatch and Nebo into divergent branches ; and
as a consequence the Kaibab Plateau in the south assumes as a whole
the position of a horst situated between the eastern and western Kaibab
faults (6 and 7 on Fig. 13). The eastern linos may then be regarded as
connected with the westem portion of those peripheral lines along which,
as will be seen later, the Colorado Plateau has subsided, while the westem
lines stand in the most complex relations to the chains of the Great Basin.

Great orographic blocks are, as we have said, bounded by these faults.
The first of these blocks, the Wahsatch Plateau, rises to the south-east of
Mount Nebo and the end of the Wahsatch mountains, between lat. 89° 30'
and 39® N. It is from the westem side of this mass that the other lines
of disturbance proceed, which diverge towards the south ; the accession of
fresh lines similarly disposed gives rise to that great sheaf of fissures
which on the north trend more or less towards the westem side of the
Wahsatch Plateau; diverging from one another as they proceed south-
wards, they cross the Canons of Colorado and are prolonged still further
to the south. Their course nearly as far as the parallel of 85° 40' is shown
in Fig. 13.

For long distances these lines of disturbance are more or less sharply
defined shaped bends in the strata, and are designated by American
geologists, in contrast to the foldsy that is to say the trae folds of
Alpine type, as moTioclinal fleasures. Since our nomenclature contains no
equally convenient term for this form of disturbance I shall also call them
fl^omres, as opposed to folds. In many places these flexures die away in
continually flattening curves, in others they pass into a steeply inclined
fracture with considerable subsidence of one side. Just as the fracture of
an anticlinal fold gives rise to a thrast plane, so the broken fle(cnre gives
rise to a favZt with flexed wings, the ends of the beds on the downthrown
side being dragged upwards, on the upthrown side downwards.

• • ' C. E. Dutton, op. cit., Atlas pi. iv.

K


HOLLAS



180


DISLOCATIONS


Flexures and faults therefore are not to be regarded as essentially
diflferent phenomena. Both occur alternately along the same line of move*
ment, according to the variation in the degree of the disturbance, and it may
even happen that in the same place a disturbance appears at a higher level
as a flexure, at a lower level as a fault. Furthermore, along these long



Fza. 18. The faults of the High Plateaux of Utah (after Dutton).

1. Grand Wash Fault. 6. West Kaibab Fault. 11. West Musinia Fault.

2. Hurricane „ 7. East Kaibab ,, 12. East Musinia „

3. Toroweap „ 8. Paunsagunt „ IS. Echo Cliff „

4. Tushar ,, 9. Hayfield „ 14. Thousand Lake ,,

5. Sevier ,, 10. Awapa „ 15. Waterpocket Flexures.

lines not only does l^e amount of the depression vary, but the direction
of its throw, sometimes the east, sometimes the west side being depressed,
as we saw in the case of the principal fault of the Wahsatch mountains,
and of Mount Nebo. This fact was pointed out many years ago by Flie de
Beaumont, in his description of the fault of Saveme in the Yceges.


FAULT OP THE SEVIER


181


OH. m]

The following example will illustrate this point.

Let us follow from south to north the line of the Sevier, as represented
by Dutton (Fig. 13, 6). It starts thirty-five miles to the north of the
Grand Cailon. At first the dropped side is bent downwards^ that is to
say in an opposite dir^tion to that usual in dragging, and the other side
is horizontal. At a distance of five miles from the disturbance, the bending
of the strata disappears ; they become horizontal, and lie at the same height
as in the other limb. Further to the north the disturbance splits up into
two step-faults. Still further, on the border of the Paunsagunt Plateau,
the downthrown west side is bent upwards, the other side is horizontal.
Still further to the north two secondary faults arise on the downthrown
side, producing an arrangement in steps. The fault again becomes single,
but has lost in throw.

The extent of the depression near Hillsdale, still on the border of the
Paunsagunt Plateau, in about 87® 40' N., amounts only to 800 feet. This
continues for about ten miles ; over the next sixty miles a gradual increase
occurs. In Panquitch Cafion, through which the river Sevier fiows, lies
a great eruptive centre, which renders the disturbance more difficult to
trace; the main fault however forms the great cliff, which borders the
plateau on the east.

In Circle Valley a branch is given off and returns again to the fault.
Still further north, near East Fork Cafion (38® 5'-38® 10' N.), the downthrown
strata are bent upwards towards the fault, but broken off near the top,
with a throw of 3,000 feet. The maximum of dislocation is reached near
the Mormon village Monroe (38® 38' N.), and thence the throw diminishes.
Between Glenwood and Salina (between 88® 46' and 38® 55' N.) it appears
to fall to zero, and then a complete reversal occurs. Throughout the whole
distance it has hitherto been the western side which was thrown, now the
depression takes place on the east. The fault then forms the eastern
border of the San Pete Plateau and continues to increase in importance
until it reaches the neighbourhood of Mount Nebo.

Dutton believes that in this northern part of the fault the older move-
ment was succeeded by a more recent one.

It has seemed to me necessary to enter into some detail in order to
render more clearly intelligible the variations which occur along the
length of this fault. Particular emphasis must be laid on the bending up
of the strata contrary to the usual direction, at the southern end of the
line of the Sevier. This behaviour is not uncommon, and may be explained
by the fact that at the same place successive dislocations have been pro-
duced in opposite directions, so that first the eastern side, for exaifiple, and
then the western was thrown down.

The amount of the vertical throw increases up to about 7,000 feet on
some of iihege lines. As to the nature of the movement, i. e. whether the



132


DISLOCATIONS


[rabt I

lower side was depressed or the other elevated, American investigators
without exception speak with the greatest reserve, and even expressly
disclaim responsibility, should any more definite conclusion be drawn
from the expressions they employ. In some special cases, however, as
for instance those where trough subsidences, which are coimected with
secondary fragmentation, are concerned, Dutton expressly and emphatically
points out that the orographic blocks have been let down. A striking
example of this is presented by that strip of land which is described by
Powell as ‘ the Musinia zone of diverse displacement,’ and which is situated
near the south-west edge of the Wahsatch Plateau between the West
Musinia and East Musinia faults (Fig. 18, 11 and 12)

The American geologists mention as a distinctive, indeed as the
determining factor, in this form of structure the complete absence of thai


North.



Fio. 14. Stereogram of a part of the * Musinia 3one of diverse dispULcemmi* according to
Gilbert and Powell (see Fig. 13, lines 11 and 12). The lowest horizontal line represents
the sea-level ; the double line corresponds to the upper parts of the Cretaceous system.

force or pvesewre which acts in a horizontal direction and gives rise to
mounJtain chains with Alpine characters. Dutton even believes that- the
Musinia zone has been let down between two orographic blocks which
were drawn away from one another . —

All these faults are of very recent date, some probably post-Quatemary :
they all cut through the older Tertiary deposits of the r^on. Dutton
has, however, found in a few places traces of an older S 3 rstem of fiexures,
which strike from the south-east beneath the Aquarius Plateau and which
are younger than the Cretaceous and older than the Tertiary period

These long faults which traverse regions composed of horizontal strata,

' J. W. Powell, Rep. on the GeoL of the East portion ofllie Uinta Mountains, 4to, 1876,
p. 16 : Dutton, High Plateaus, p. 84. * Dutton, op. cit.,cp. 44.


ca m] ^ CALDBON SUBSIDENOE 183

are derived from flexures and present a variable throw, may be termed
tahdarfavlta (Tafelbrttchd).

In addition to these typical tabular faults, there is a number of very
important fractures, presenting very various characters, for each particular
ease of which it does not seem to me necessary to introduce special names.
Examples of this kind are the Erythraean fractures, that is to say those of
the Red Sea, the Jordan, and the coast-line of Syria, and then the volcanic
lines of the west of South America. Each of these will be described later
in such detail as the present state of our knowledge permits.

All the forms of subsidence which we have hitherto discussed have
been connected with a system of linear flexures or fractures, along which
the dislocation has been effected. There is, however, still another very
important class of depressions, in which the subsidence appears to take
place without any visible formation of linear fissures. A piece of the
earth’s crust, having irregular, sometimes rounded, sometimes elongated
outlines, gives way and falls in ; steep walls surround the resulting
cavity, but no linear fissures appear to be formed. In certain cases
indeed a straight line forms part of the contour; but this is owing to
the subsidence having made use as it were of an older fissure; the
separation has taken place along a cleft which already existed, and
was not produced by the subsidence. Sometimes a cavity of this kind
occurs isolated, and has a likeness to a caldron ; sometimes it is too large
and irregular for this designation to be applicable. The periphery of these
regions of collapse may be elongated parallel to the strike of the beds,
but the inbreak takes place independently of the nature of the ground.
Finally it veiy often happens that a larger or smaller number of col-
lapsed areas are grouped side by side, separated imperfectly by spurs, like
horsts; or they may even be united together to form a single vast
depression.

The inbreaks present also this peculiarity, that they appear in folded
regions, that is to say in regions where those horizontal stresses are
indicated, the absence of which is so striking in the Colorado Plateau;
and we may further observe that they rarely occur towards the outer
margin of the folded region, but are very frequent towards its inner side.
Such at least is the case in the Alpine system.

The granite mass of the Schneekoppe and the Isergebirge occupies
a similar position in the Riesengebirge to that of the so-called Central
Masses in the Alps. If we ascend the mountains from the Bohemian
side we first meet with a mantle of schist and gneiss, with a clearly
defined outcrop. After crossing the granite we suddenly find our-
selves at the edge of the steeply walled caldron of the Hirschberg.
Dykes of porphyry intersect the mass of the Schneekoppe at right angles
to the strili^ ; at the edge of the caldron these also are broken off, and at



DISLOCATIONS


134


[PABIl


the bottom we find their downthrown prolongations. All observers agree
in regarding the caldron of the Hirschbetg aS a sunken area. Its com-
paratively recent age has been demonstrated by Beyrich \

The most externally situated example of such a sunken area in the
Alps is afforded by the Elysch zone near Salzburg. An easily .recognizable
band of richly fossiliferous greensand and ferruginous oolite of Eocene
age, accompanied by Lithothamnium limestone, also Eocene, having some-
times a reef-like outcrop, strikes along the outermost margin of the
mountains from Bavaria to the east-north-east; it then breaks off and
reappears with the same strike on the other side of the Salzach near
St. Fankraz, by the Wartburg near the Mattsee, and in other .places.
Within this extreme outer bqrder the Flysch zone over its whole breadth,
and most of the border along with it, is thrown down over an area
extending as far as Salzach on the east, and up to the limestone walls of
the Untersbeig on the south. Thus this region is deprived of the wooded
foot-hills, which elsewhere furnish the transition from the green plain to
the abrupt scarps of the mountains; but it is this very contrast, so
unexpected and unusual, which confers upon the site of Salzburg its
incomparable charm, and produces at the same time that effect of imposing
grandeur which is associated with the heights of the Stauffenberg and
Untersberg.

A second example is the curious sunken area of the Prattigau, of which
I shall have to speak in detail directly.

The subsidence of Laibach, with its extraordinarily irregular outline,
interrupted and divided by a number of projecting cliffs, forms a third case.

A fourth example is the depression of Vieniia. This advances almost
as far towards the exterior as that of Salzburg, but affects, in addition to
the Flysch, the whole breadth of the limestone zone. Its length in the
direction of the strike of the mountains which here run to the north-east
is much more considerable than its breadth.

The line of the thermal springs of Baden and Yoslau forms its boundary
on the south-west, but several isolated hot springs also occur on its eastern
border.

A renewed examination of the eadem margin of the Alps, where they
meet the Hungarian plain, has confirmed me in the opinion that a
coimexion exists between this feature and the depression of the Vienna
basin.

The Alps do not end here along a rectilinear fracture, nor do they die
away in folds which are continued for a long distance beneath the plain,
as is the case further to the south. On the contrary, the mountain-margin

* E. Beyrich, Ueber die La^erang der Ereideformation im schles. Gebirge, AbhandL
Borl. Akad. ‘Wisg., 1854, p. 69 ; also Eunth, Ueber die Ereidemnlde bei L&hn in Nieder-
scblesien, Zeitschr. deutsch. geoL Gee., 1868, XV, p. 748. • *



0H.ra] . EASTERN END OP THE ALPS 186

presents two great arc-shaped excisions which correspond to two areas of
subsidence.

The boundary of the first of these depressions commences near the
southern end of the Neusiedler-See with low hills of gneiss, and continues
past Eobersdorf and Landsee towards Guns. Near Landsee a fairly large
mass of basalt rises along the edge ; basalt also occurs in the interior of the
depression near PuUendorf.

The second area of subsidence is far more extensive. It stretches
from the southern border of the mountain chain of Giins, formed of
slate probably Devonian, in a wide curve as far as Graz, and from there
to Marburg at the eastern end of the Bacher mountains. If coming from
Giins, after crossing those numerous valleys, excavated in soft Tertiary beds,
which run down from the Styrian mountains to the river Baab, the
traveller arrives close to the western boundary of Hungary, then, if
from the heights between Grobendorf and Ulbemdorf above Stegers-
bach, for example, he turns his gaze to the south-west, a scene will meet
his eye such as is seldom to be found in Alpine regions.

On the right the lofty and sombre Devonian mountains of Graz
sweep backwards in a broad curve; behind them rise still higher ridges,
composed of gneiss and ancient schist, which gradually disappear from
view as they pursue their way to the south in the direction of the Kor
Alp. In front of the mountains of Graz lies a bit of green plain, and then,
in the very centre of the landscape and quite isolated, the great cubical
mass of the Riegersberg, the remnant of a once much more extensive
sheet of basaltic breccia and tuff. A little to the left of the perpendicular
cliffs of the Riegersberg the contours of the trachytic mountains of
Gleichenberg are visible. Still further to the left the landscape melts into
the mist which broadens over the vast plain of Hungary.

Thus ends the main body of the Alps. There is no gradual sloping
away, but a sudden breaking off, or rather an in-sinking along two circular
arcs accompanied by volcanic eruptions ; and there is no causal connexion
at all to be perceived between the structure of the mountains and the
course of the in-sinkings. The mountain chain of Guns rises like a horst
between the two fields of subsidence.

The connexion between these two depressions and that of Vienna is
revealed by the circumstance that the members of the middle Tertiary
group which lie along the edges of the fracture are the same from Vienna
as far as the Bacher. The first Mediterranean stage, to which' the marine
Molasse of Switzerland also belongs, extends from Bavaria along the
margin of the Bohemian mass past Linz, Melk, Horn, &c. ; it lias never
yet been found within the just-mentioned depressions, but it reappears,
developed to a conspicuous extent, to the south of the Bacher mountains.
The oldest etage which is represented within these depressions is that of



1*86


DISLOCATIONS


[pAieri

the lignite beds of Pittau and Eibiswald with the fauna of MaMiom.
anguatidens. On these follow the marine deposits of the seoond
M^terranean stage with OerUhvum ligmtarvm, Pyruht corrmtct, and
the' West Afrienn Tugonia anaiina, and these are finally succeeded by the
whole manifold series of the younger Tertiary.

Thus the age of the three depressions of Vienna, Landsee, and Qraz is
known with a fair degree of precision, and we shall see that extensive
areas of depression in Central Europe lying outside the Alps must also
be assigned to approximately the same period of the Tertiary aera.

These subsidences indicate a yielding of the substratum beneath certain
parts of the already folded Alps.

Still more striking than in the Alps is the caldron-like form of the
in-sinkings on the inner side of the Apennines. Since I described, many
years ago, the somewhat circular excision of these fractures in the folded
region, I have had repeated opportunities of visiting several of them again.
The result has been to confirm me in the views I originally held. The
contour of the Gulf of Genoa must also be mentioned here ; the Tuscan
depression, more or less elongated in the direction of the strike of the
chain and extending as far as the inner border of the eastern Flysch zone,
presents many points of resemblance to the depression of Vienna. Just as,
when coming from the west by rail — from Munich, for example — we find
ourselves, after crossing the Flysch zone in Vienna, at the bottom of the
Alpine depression, so when travelling by the railway between Bologna
and Pistoja we find ourselves, after crossing the Flysch, in Florence,
which lies in a depression of the Apennines, as Vienna in a depression
of the Alps.

The circular form of these depressions becomes still clearer towards
the south, as, for example, on the southern coast of the Bay of Naples to
beyond Capri, in the Gulf of Salerno between Capri and Punta della Licosa,
in the Gulf of Santa Eufemia between Cape Suvero and Cape Vaticano,
finally in the Gulf of Gioja between Capo Vaticano and Scylla. The horsts
run out into the sea in the form of promontories. What may be the
depth of these subsidences we cannot tell, but we know that at least
1,500 feet of ash and tuff lie beneath the town of Naples. Naturally, in
considering these subsidences, it is not the fiattened curve of the coast-line
which we must take into account, but the arc-like line described by the
foot of the mountain slopes, which in its course from cape to cape
runs to a greater or less extent inland. The peripheral seismic line
of Calabria would appear to be nothing else than the first sketch of
a fresh great subsidence of the same kind, which is in gradual course of
preparation. Such may also have been the origin of the great arc-shaped
cliff which encircles the Piano di Catania and Aetna, and extends from
Monte Cieri above Taormina past Monte Sordo and Monte GbHiaa above



iOH. m] . THE OBIMEA 137

Nicosia, Castro Giovanni, Piazza, Caltagirone, and Vizzini as far as the
coast between Syracuse and Noto.

The west of Italy is thus the seat of a long series of subsidences,
which together produce the irregular gouging out of the Apennines,
and the varied outline of the coast, so strangely in contrast to that
on the east. Local subsidence of this kind can alone produce horsts,
projecting transversely across the strike of the mountains like the long
limestone ridge of Sorrento and Capri.

Similar inbreaks may, however, attain to far greater dimensions still.
This is shown by the structure of many coasts which are steeply broken
across the strike.

Let us consider, for example, the mountains of the Crimea. Pallas
has already described the northern portion of the Black Sea as an area
of subsidence. Many later observers, including Spratt, have adopted this
view, basing it on the sudden descent of the sea bottom and the nature
of the broken edges of the Tauride mountains. The depth of the sea to
the north of a line from Cape Emineh to Cape Saritsch is in fact only
70-80 meters, while to the south of this line it suddenly increases to
1,000-1,800 meters, and in the middle of the western half of the Pontus
Spratt has even found depths of more than 2,100 meters, or nearly double
the height of the Tauride mountains of the Crimea *.

In the same way £mil Favre, basing his conclusions on Albich’s work,
as well as on his own observations in the Caucasus and the Crimea, has
proved the original continuity of these regions on the eastern side

We may consider the Caucasus as composed of two unilateral
chains, which have been pushed one against the other from the south-
west. Great volcanos, Elbruz and Kasbeck, stand here, contrary to the
usual rule, in the very heart of the mountains, but the great fractures and
disturbances occur on the southern slope. In the northern chain Jurassic*
Neocomian, and younger deposits dip conformably towards the north, while
in the southern chain complete unconformity may be observed between
the Jurassic and Neocomian; in the northern chain, moreover, the older
Tertiary stage is, as it seems, wholly wanting.

According to Favre it is to the southern zone of the Caucasus that the
Tauride mountains belong, and, indeed, in this fragment, which likewise
dips to the north, the stratigraphical peculiarities of the Caucasus are
repeated.

The Tauride mountains, a southward-pointing wedge-shaped fragment
of the outer ranges of a great mountain chain, thus represent a portion of

t

^ Spratt, Geology of Varna, Quart. Journ. Geol Soc., 1856, XIll, p, 80.

, * E. Favre, Rech. g6ol. dans la partie centr. de la chaine du Gaucase, 4to, 1875, p. 106 ;
Etude stratigr. de la partie sud-ouest de la Crim4e, 4to, 1877, pp. 66-72 (from the M4m. de
la Soc. de Physf et d’Hist. nat. de Geneve).



188


DISLOCATIONS


[PAIEF I

the Caucasus, which has subsided on its inner side. Its wedge-shaped
form is in accordance with its position as a horst standing between the
eastern and the western in-sinkings of the Fontus.

I shall have occasion later to quote examples of such sunken areas on
even a far grander scale.

C. Didocationa 'produced hy mbeidence and tangential moveme'nt

comhi/ned.

In those cases in which both subsidence and tangential movement have
occurred, we have first to determine the relation of the strike of the main
line of fracture to the direction of the force which has produced the
folding. If the fracture is nearly at right angles to the direction of the
folds — in other words, if it forms a transverse fault— the disturbance will
probably, owing to the difference in the intensity of the folding of the two
sides, resemble a more or leas oblique movement along a flaw plane. If on
the other hand the fracture is longitudinal, as is much more frequently the
case, then we must determine whether the sunken portion lies towards the
interior or exterior, as regards the direction of the folding force ; whether,
for example, in a chain folded towards the north, the southern or the'
northern portion has subsided.

If a folded chain is traversed by a longitudinal fracture of which the
i'nner wing is depressed, then a tendency is frequently observed to overfold
the fracture in a direction entirely oppoebd to that of the normal folding,
and, as a consequence, the strata are not only turned up along the fracture,
but may even be wedged in or overturned. This phenomenon we call
folding backwards or backfolding (Riickfaltung).

Several excellent examples of backfolding occur in Central Europe.

The great mass of the Rimengebirge and laergebirge, including the
Heuscheuer, and the inner parts of the Sudetes, has been subjected to
a movement directed from between north-east and east. On its inner side
it is traversed for a long distance by a fracture striking to the north-west,
and on this line granite and other Archaean rocks are driven to the south-
west over Jurassic and Cretaceous, in a direction opposed to the normal
structure of the chain. Yon Dechen has lately collected data relative to
this fracture in its course from Oberan near Meissen to Zittau, a distance
of 127 kilometers. In some places the Cretaceous is simply turned up
against the granite, in others there is genuine ovorthrusting of the Jurassic
and Cretaceous on to the granite \

The same phenomenon recurs on the south-eastern border of the
Bohemian mass, facing the Alps. Near Voglar, not far from Ortenbuig
in Bavaria, Egger and Qumbel have found the gneiss thrust over

‘ V. Dechen, Ueber grosse Dislocationen ; Sitzungsber. niederrhein. Oes. f. Natur- nnd
Heilkunde, 1881 . ‘ *



PRiTTIGAtJ


189


oa in]

a symmetrical synclinal of upper Jurassic, and Ammon has shown that in
this basin the Cretaceous formation also is pinched in. Thus the over-
thrust took place after the deposition of the Cretaceous \

The same is time with regard to the southern border of the Teuto-
hiirger Wald. In such cases, however, there is no doubt some difficulty in
determining whether true faults or flexures have been overthrust ; judging
by the great extent of the throw the former seems much more probable.

The same phenomenon of backfolding is also met with in the sunken
areas of the Alps.

E. von Mojsisovics has had the kindness to represent in Fig. 16 the
collapsed area of the Prattigau, as it appears according to existing
observations.

From this we see that the western extremity of the Cretaceous zone
of the eastern Alps ends in the Rhaeticon, that the folds and thrust
planes are bent at right angles and give rise to true imbricated structure,
so that they finally strike north and south, as though a great horizontal
dislocation had occurred between the eastern and western Alps, along
the line of the Rhine, and as though the Rhaeticon had been dragged
along horizontally. If we now ascend the Rhaeticon to the north and
approach from its highest point the Scesa Plana, its precipitous escarp-
ment on the south, we do not see, as is the case somewhat further to the
east, mountains of older schist and above them crests covered with
glaciers or crowned by peaks of gneiss ; far below lies the fertile hill-land
of the Prattigau, at first composed of Jurassic or Cretaceous formations
of Helvetian type, just as they occur on the surface of the Santis on the
other side of the Rhine; then follows a great expanse of Flysch. To
the east the fracture is also sharply defined, and a narrow selvage
of Trias separates it from the mass of the Silvretta, which is composed
of gneiss.

Thus in the Rhaeticon, where the folding towards the north or north-
west has been so intense as to give rise to thrust planes and imbricated
structure, we find nevertheless distinct backfolding on the southern border
of the chain and partly also on the western border of the Silvretta, so
that on the north and east the area of subsidence is surrounded in a more
or less marked manner by this form of dislocation.

The Hohe-Wand near Wiener-Neustadt is a similar example of back-
folding in an Alpine area of subsidence. We have already referred to
the flaw plane which occurs in it, on page 120. This wall runs parallel
with the line of thermal springs, in its immediate neighbourhood, and
represents the most marked rupture of the eastern wing of the limestone
Alps. Although, as has been shown by Bittner, the whole of this region

^ L. V. Ammon, Die Jura-Ablagerungen zwxschen Regensburg und Passau ; Abhandl.
zool.-miner.«Verf, Regensburg, 1875, X, pp. 94-97,



140 DISLOCATIONS [PAiiri

is forced towards the north-west in clearly defined imbricated stractnre,
yet we see the Trias riding along this internal fracture over the Cretaceous
formation, in the opposite direction, namely to the south-east, and thus the
formation of a great thrust plane is brought about.

That, however, which renders this spot particularly instructive is the
circumstance, also pointed out by Bittner, that the whole mass, which
is folded back and overthrust to the south-east, is cut through by flaws



Jurassic and Creta- Kast Alpine region Pre-Triassic Schist of unde-

ceous with Helvetian of Jurassic formations. termined age.

characters. and Trias.

The part left white to the east of the Rhine is covered by Eocene Flysch.

Fio. 16. PriiUigau and Rhaetkon (according to a sketch very kindly communicated by

E. V. Mojsisovics).


of more recent date, its displacement along these producing step-faults
in very much the same way as in the limestone clifiFs which form the
southern limit of the Dachstein mountains, or the Steineme Meer; and
furthermore these flaws have the same direction as the not far distant
Kamp-line — the existence of which was discovered by the observation
of earthquakes. If now, however, in a folded region subi^ldeiice occurs


POEEFOLDING


141


oa. m]

along longitudinal fractures, in such a way that an area situated on the
outer border sinks down, so that, for example, in a r^on folding north-
wards the country lying to the north of the main ragion of folding
subsides along east to west fractures, then the horiaovtal movememt becomes
fur greater, as ^ it had been assisted by the subsidence. This we will
call folding forwards or forefolding.



Fio. 16. Foot of the Heiligcnstein at the Hoh^-Wand near WUmr-Nmstadt (Lower Austria).

Tr » Trias limestone; gk ^ Gosau limestone ; go ~ Gosau conglomerate ; gs » Gosau
sandstone ; nn,n* v! thrust plane between Trias and inverted Cretaceous ; mmm line of
dislocation on the flaw plane a a a ; bb sheet of friction breccia on the face of the flaw.

Such appears to have been the process which has led to the complicated
structure of the coal-fidds of Belgium.

From the neighbourhood of Boulogne, to as far as Aix-la-Chapelle, the
country is overfolded towards the north, so that in many places, in the
Pas de Calais and near Li^ge for example, the Coal-measures are worked
beneath the Devonian ; and near Namur a downwards sloping fragment
of a great anticlinal fold, consisting of Silurian and Devonian beds,
rests on the Carboniferous, which also is bent downwards in the same
direction.

These extraordinary disturbances lie hidden beneath the surface of
a low hilly country, covered with Cretaceous beds, and their *presence
has only heen revealed by extensive mining. By this we are enabled
in the light of our present knowledge to make an analysis of the
phenomeiuL •



142


DISLOCATIONS


[PAJEF X


According to Comet and Briart we have to distinguish near Namur :
first, the formation by folding from the south of the Silurian Cr4te dn
Condroz, which gave rise to the difference between the Devonian deposits
to the north and to the south of this ancient ridge ; on this followed pqst>
Carboniferous folding from the south, causing the first overfolding of the
Coal-measures on to the ancient anticlinal ; then the formation of a great
east to west fracture, hading to the north, with downthrow of the northern
side; this is the *faiUe de Bov^am' {a a a, Fig. 17) which traverses the
northern part of the folds along the strike, and throws down their northern
sida Then follows a second fracture, the ‘ cran de retmr d^Aimn ’ (bbb.
Fig. 17), nearly parallel to the strike of the first, but cutting it crosswise



Fio. 17. Pi‘oce8$98 in the Belgian coal-fidds (after Cornet and Briart). aaa^ fault with
downthrown northern side (/aiUe de Beuesu) ; bbBj fault with downthrown southern side
(eran de retonr d^Ansin) ; o a v, great thrust plane (jgrande faille du Uid%) ; mm, existing surface
and overlying Cretaceous.

with a hade to the south, and producing the downthrow of a very large
part of the southern side, and a simultaneous throw of both sides of the
‘faitte de Bousm.’ These principal downthrows, which are accompanied
by subsidiary movements, were followed by the thrusting of the whole of
the southern complex towards the north, above the earlier fractures, and
along a great thrust plane which traverses the whole extent of the coal-
field; this is the ‘grande faiUe du Midi’ or the ‘faille Eifelienne’
(cco, Fig. 17) ^

The extraordinary exteht of this movement is best seen from the

^ F. L. Cornet et A. Briart, Sar le relief du sol en Belgfique apres les temps pal^ozoiques;
Annal. Soc. geol. belg., 1877, IV, pp. 71-115, pi. vi~xi. k V



OH. in] OYEKEHRUSTING OF THE SUBSIDENCE 148

fact that the thickness of what remains of the Coal-measures, already
diminished by denudation, is estimated at 2,100 meters ; of the Carboni-
ferous limestone and Devonian at about 2,500 meters; and that the
overthrusting was already known in 1877 to extend over a distance of
about 200 kilometers. Comet and Briart have attempted to give an ideal
reconstruction of the overthrust wing, shown in Fig. 17, in order to obtain
some conception of the extent of the destruction and denudation which has
taken place, no doubt simultaneously with the thrusting, and they estimate
the height of the mass removed near Namur at 5,000-6,000 meters.

Gosselet, a most competent judge in these matters, says: ^The cause
of the folding lies in the subsidence of the central parts of the basin and
the relative elevation of the margin, accompanied by the gliding of the
beds one over another. The subsidence itself is a consequence of the con-
stant retreat of the earth's crust'.'

In this general survey of dislocations, the distinction between the tan-
gential and radial, or, in other words, between the folding and sinking move-
ments, served us as a point of departure. Our last examples, and pairticularly
the striking furtherance which the tangential movement receives from the
simultaneous subsidence of the foreland, bring us back to an examination
of the causal connexion existing between these two classes of movement.
This inquiry can, however, only be founded on the comparison of very
large portions of the earth’s surface. We perceive from the examples
already adduced, that in all these cases a certain tendency is present to
overthrvAit the subsidence. This overthrusting takes place on a large
scale where the subsidence lies in front of the normal direction of the
folds, as in Belgium, where the subsidence lies in front of the folded region
of the Ardennes ; but neither is it absent when the subsidence lies towards
the interior, in which case the movement may be locally reversed, as on
the southern border of the Riesengebirge, or on the south-western border
of the Bohemian mass near Voglarn, or in the Prattigau, or finally at the
Hohe-Wand near Wiener-Neustadt.

' Gosselet, Sur la structure generale du bassin houiller franco>belge ; Bull. Soc. geol.
de Pr., 187^1880, 3« s^r., VIII, p. 505.



144


CHAPTER IV
VOLCANOS

Stages of denudation. Vesuvius and Monte Nuovo. Monte Venda. Laccolites.
Palandocan and Dary-dagh. The Whin Sill. The Hebiides. Predazzo. The Fissure
of the Banat. Syenite cicatrice of Briinn. Elk mountains and the Harz. Batholites ;
Drammen granite; Vosges; Erzgebirge. Maculae. Invagination. The denudation
series.

The eruptions, tlie ash cones, and the lava flows of our volcanos are
only slight and superficial indications of great processes which take place
in the depths of the earth : of the nature of these processes, however, we
have even now, in spite of the unwearied activity of so many investi-
gatora, no precise knowledge. To trace the various directions in which
research has been prosecuted does not lie within our present task: but,
taking the best known volcanos of the present day as a starting-point, we
may at least attempt to follow as far as possible, by means of a series of
appropriate examples, the gradual denudation and destniction of a volcanic"
mountain. This is one of the methods which, it was conceived, would
lead to a knowledge of the lower part of the volcanic vent and of the
abyssal phenomena; and many points have certainly been elucidated in
this way. It is thus a denudation aeries, if I may so express myself,
which I propose to determine.

I hav(i already described in some detail (p. 52) the funnel or sand
cones which are produced during earthquakes on clefts in alluvial ground.
The sand cones formed on November 9, 1880, during the earthquake of
Agram, in the district of the Save, were not much more than three deci-
meters in height. Many of these small cones were isolated, others stood on
a common basis or were arranged together on a little linear fissured

As regarrls the mechanical process of their formation these minute
cones have a closer resemblance to our great volcanic mountains than at
first sight we might be inclined to admit. Fissures are formed, and at
certain points the stiff or fluid mass wells up from below; if the edges
give way the flow is increased.

This train of events is repeated in the history of volcanos. A fissure
is pix)duccd by subsidence or some other means; at some place where
this widens out, or where it is crossed by a transverse cleft, the
lava, tense with water-vapour, finds a way of escape, and wells forth.

' G. Pexidr, Beitr. zur Kenntniss der darch das Erdbeben vom 9. November 1880
bervorgebrachten SandschlammauswUrfe, 8vo, 1880. »



STRUCTURE OP VESUVIUS


145


This is followed by explosion and the emission of ashes and dust. An
ash cone is piled up ; the side of the cone is tom open, its lips give way,
and a stream of molten rock spreads out at its foot ; but in many cases this
stream is absent. As a rule that is all. But it has already been observed,
and Geikie has recently emphasized the point afresh, that the great sheets
of lava, which are occasionally met with over areas of many square miles,
have not been formed in this way, but by escape from fissures which were
probably open throughout their length'. Such eruptions may doubtless
have been increased by the subsidence of considerable portions of the
earth’s crust; as has been supposed in the case of the great outfiows
from the fissures of the high tablelands of Utah.

A comparison of the cones produced by the heaping up of ashes enables
us to distinguish among them various types of formation, such as those of
Vesuvius and Monte Nuovo ; but if we are to obtain results of any value
in this branch of study we must bear in mind that all attempts at too
exact a classification must prove fallacious.

Mountains with a Somina and atrium, such as Vesuvius, form and
consolidate in a peculiar manner. The framework of lava, which is
concealed by the ash, has no doubt a most complicated structure. Every
great lateral eruption in such a mountain gives rise first to a vertical
eruptive dyke, which extends like a wall from the funnel to the exterior
surface of the inner cone, that is to say, to the atrium; next to short
flows which stream over the outer covering of tlie inner cone, and
proceed directly from a series of mouths ranged along the eruptive
dyke ; then to a more or less closcjd atrial ring, which is produced by the
spreading out of these flows in the valley of the atrium, and finally to
the great free lava stream which issues from the fissure of the Somilna
and flows down the slope of the outer cone.

Since the great eruption which produced the funnel of the Somma
other eruptions of a similar nature have often occurred in Vesuvius.
During this interval the atrium, owing to the constant growth of
the central cone, has been advancing further and further upwards
along the walls of the Somma. More violent eruptions and temporary
destruction have often interrupted this process, but nevertheless the
final result has been the elevation of the atrium, and at the same time
an increase of its diameter. The outflows, which have solidified in the
atrium, have formed a series of rings growing successively larger, and
these atrial rings, superposed on one another, form at present in the
interior of the mountain a great conical basin, broadening upwards, which
separates the central from the outer cone, and encloses all the later
eruptive dykes of the central cone. These stand with their lower part

^ A. Geikie, The Lava Fields of North-western Europe; Nature, Nov. 4, 1880,
XXIII, pp.^-5.«


BOLLA8


L



146 VOLCANOS , [part i

in tho basin, vertical to the central funnel, and at the same time radiating
from it.

Such a structure can of course only arise when frequent eruptions
succeed each other from one and the same funnel. There is nothing
similar to be seen in Monte Nuovo, or, indeed, anywhere in the Phlegraean
Fields. A few lava flows are present in this region, and many centres of
eruption: the tendency to displacement of the eruptive centres is most
clearly marked. Monte Nuovo is only a ring-shaped heap of cinders
and some scoria, with an exceedingly deep crater, extending downwards
almost to the level of its outer foot, and thus not far above the level of
the sea.

The contrast between Vesuvius and the Phlegraean Fields is thus very
great, and is generally recognized. It lies not only in the different
nature of the lava, but above all in the persistence of the funnel in
Vesuvius, as opposed to the mobility of the centres of eruption in the
Phlegraean Fields.

Tho cause of this must be sought in the nature of the fissures, and
a comparison with the Lipari Islands may, as we shall see directly, throw
some light on the subject. —

Let us see what takes place when a volcanic cone, such as we have
just described, is exposed to the ravages of denudation. The ash is
washed away; the rocky skeleton may be preserved in so far as it
consists of vertical dykes ; but the flows, wliich rest on ash, are destroyed.
On the summit of the mountain the eruptive dykes stand out in relief
radially arranged; while around its foot the foundation of tho volcano
is laid bare.

The remains of the crown and a portion of the base are now to be
seen, but not the funnel. Such is the condition of Monte Venda in the
Euganacan mountains near Padua.

Its structure and its rocks have often been described; the most
complete account is by E. Reyer^

Let us first consider the foundation.

The lowest rock visible is a mass of oligoclase-trachyte exposed at
its foot on the western side near Fontana Fredda. Above this and in
immediate contact with it follow Tithonian beds with Phylloceras and
Terehratvla diphya^ dipping gently to the north-west; for a distance
(jf two to three feet from the trachyte they are converted into a pale
granular marble, eight feet further up they are of a light bluish-grey

' E. Reyer, Die Eugan&en, Bau und Geschichtc eines Vulcans, 8vo, 1877 ; in addition
particularly G. v. Bath, Geognostische Mittheil. tiber die euganflischen Berge bei Padua,
Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1864, XVI, pp. 461-529, pi. xv, xvi; in this work, p. 520
et seq., there is a reprint of de Zigno's work on the same subject, in which the Jurassic
and Ncocomian deposits of Fontana Fredda are discussed. i <



CH. IV


MONTE VENDA


147


colour, less marmorized, and contain fossils which may still be recognized ;
still higher up they display the usual knotty fibrous structure of the
Tithonian deposits, but even at this distance the calcareous nodules are
more or less marmorized. The oligoclase-trachyte has thus caused altera-
tion from the surface of contact upwards^ and must have been intruded
laterally between the strata.

Above the Tithonian lie thick beds of Biancone with the characteristic
fossils of the Neocomian, then a mass of quartz-trachyte, and above this
probably Neocomian again; then follows the whole thickness of the
Scaglia, representing the upper part of the Cretaceous system. The
Scaglia includes at least two masses of trachyte, the larger lying towards
the north-west. Immediately above the Scaglia, trachyte occurs again
(Monte Madonna, Monte Grande, and others). The next formation is light-
coloured Tertiary marl, in places resembling tuff; it contains fossil leaves.
In this marl lies the trachyte of Schivanoja. Above it comes the principal
mass of Nummulitic limestone with fragments of Conoclypeus conoideus
and large Nummulites. An intercalation of dolerite occurs above this
(Teolo, Monte Oliveto, below San Antonio, and other places). Small quan-
tities of dark basic lavas are also present ; the dark tuffs which accompany
them contain Orbitoides, and may be placed approximately on the horizon
of Priabona ; these dark tuffs extend somewhat far up on the central cone
of the Venda and are penetrated by its eruptive veins. With regard to
the doleritic tuff I am still doubtful as to whether it may not be a pro-
longation of the great mass of basic tuff and lava which occurs in the
neighbouring district of the Viccntin; above it trachyte again appears
(Monte Altorre, Monte Cuin, and others). This trachyte is the last ; the
isolated summits which it crowns represent portions of streams, which
are at present separated from the central cone by erosion ; their formation
was contemporaneous with that of the largest of the radial dykes (Pendise,
Forche, Rua, and others). The trachytic is followed by the rhyolitic phase,
ejectainenta of white tuff and flows of rhyolite. At the foot of the Sieve
the white tuff contains fossils, and its age, as shown by these, is that of the
Bryozoan beds of Val di Lonte, at the base of the Oligocene deposits of
the Vicentin. The last member of this* long series is formed by the black
lavas (Sievite of vom Rath), which lie like a sheet on Monte Sieve and
the neighbouring heights, and send dykes with glassy margins into the
white tuff.

In this succession of rocks I regard, as I have said above, the lower
masses of trachyte as laterally intruded sheets. It was long ago
shown that a great volume of oligoclase- trachyte, penetrating* laterally
between the stratified Jurassic limestones, liad torn away a considerable
block of them, had carried it along as if floating, and altered it on the
lower side. This is the Tithonian fragment of Fontana Fredda, altered by



148


VOLCANOS


[PABT I

contact. At the same time it was also pointed out that large masses of
trachyte had penetrated laterally like wedges into the spaces between the
beds of the Scaglia, and that great fragments of Scaglia had thus formed
actual breccias, cemented together by trachyte-like substance \

The other trachytic volcanos of Europe either do not possess a foun-
dation formed by such a variety of strata, or else they have not been
exposed in the same fortunate manner. To obtain analogous cases of
lateral intrusion we must turn to America.

In the last few years a series of remarkable exposures of lavas interca-
lated with sediments have been described by our fellow workers in North
America as indicating a particular type of eruptive mountain : as regards the
actual facts there has been a most happy concordance among the observers.
General descriptions are furnished by Peale ^ Gilbert Endlich and ex-
cellent works on special localities are not wanting. From these it appears
that isolated mountain masses exist in which post-Cretaceous volcanic rocks
are intruded between sediments, at various horizons, from the Carboniferous
to the upper Cretaceous. This intrusion generally occurs in the less re-,
sistant shales and marls of the Cretaceous system. The intrusive masses
are sometimes small, sometimes they swell to a vast size, taking the form of
a plano-convex lens, or of great cake-like masses ; it is to these that Gilbert
has given the name of ^laccolites* As a rule they are associated in groups, side
by side, or one above the other ; or they may occur singly. The sedimentary
strata arch over the laccolite from its edges, and very often considerable por-
tions of the dome so formed are preserved. Occasionally the dome is traversed
by a network of radial fissures, now represented by a stellate system of dykes
which stand out above the remains of the denuded beds. Most of the ex-
posed laccolites have been revealed by the denudation of a thick covering
of lacustrine Tertiary beds which once covered the country far and wide
They consist of a rock distinguished by Endlich as ‘ porphyritic trachyte/
by others termed simply trachyte ; only in a few cases are they formed of
rhyolite. Laccolites formed of basic lavas have not yet been met with.

The most important examples are : the mountains around Park View
mountain, on the continental watershed between North Park and Middle
Park; the Spanish Peaks, facing the eastern declivity of the Rocky
mountains, and, to the north-west of these, the volcanic mountains of the
Huerfano region ; then, on the other side of the Rocky mountains, on the


* Der Vulcan Venda ; Sitzungsber. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1875, LXXI, p. 12.

’ A. G. Peale, On a peculiar Type of Eruptive Mountains in Colorado ; Hayden, Bull.
U.S. Geol. and Geogr. Surv. Territ., 1877, III, pp. 551-564.

* G. K. Gilbert, Rep. on the Geol. of the Henry Mountains, 4to, 1877 (U. S. Geogr. and
Geol. Surv., J. W, Powell).

* F. M. Endlich, On the Erupted Rocks of Colorado ; Hayden, X. Ann. Rep. of the

U.S. Surv. for 1876, 1878, pp. 199-272. ' ‘



LACOOLITES


149


CH. iv]

Colorado Plateau, the isolated masses of the Sierras of la Plata, San Miguel,
el Late, Carriso, Abajo, la Sal, and, to the west of these, the chain of the
Henry mountains which lies a little east of the Waterpocket Flexure
(Fig. 18, p. 128) on the western border of the Great Plateau. Many of these
mountain masses are very high. The base of the San Miguel mountains is
at a level of 2,400 meters ; the highest summit, Mount Wilson, which is not,
however, a laccolite, rises from this base to a height of 4,852 meters. The
summit of the Spanish Peaks rises from the much lower foreland of the
Rocky mountains to a height of 4,152 meters.

The intrusion of the eruptive masses into stratified deposits manifests
itself under very various forms. Holmes has given a very instruc-
tive sketch of the slopes of Mount Hesperus in the Sierra la Plata
(south-western Colorado), which shows clearly the intrusion of the edge of
a plano-convex laccolite between the Cretaceous shales ; in this case, how-
ever, the Cretaceous shales, confonnably arched over the rounded summit
of the laccolite, contain a number of smaller intrusions of trachyte The
same observer has described with great clearness how in the Sierra el
Late (to the south-west of the Sierra la Plata) the molten miisses which
have invaded the Cretaceous shales are crowded with fragments of the
latter, but that no fragments of deeper lying sediments are present, a proof
that the cleft is sharply defined on the lower side. There is no complete
arch visible here, and the lower horizon of the shale is so intimately
mingled with the volcanic rock that it may be said to have been absorbed
by it.

Still further to the south-west, in the Sierra Carriso, the upper portions
of the Cretaceous beds have been completely removed, and the masses
of trachyte may be seen intruded into strata ranging from the lower
Cretaceous down to the Trias

The Spanish Peaks, far to the east, arc particularly characterized by
the radial dykes on their surface. They have been described by Endlich.
There are two peaks, the imposing height of which we have already
mentioned, as well as their position close to the eastern foot of the Rocky
mountains, or rather of the Sangue de Cristo chain. The more easterly
of the two peaks consists of volcanic rock, the western principally of
sedimentary strata, in particular of sandstone and shale of Carboniferous
age. These shales have been driven asunder along the joints, great
wedges of eruptive material have been forced in, the overlying arch has
been broken, and a network of dykes has been formed in it, which extend
upwards as far as the Cretaceous beds. Probably these dykes did not all

I

* M. H. Holmes, Geol. Rep. on the San Juaw District; IX. Ann. Rep. U.S. Surv. for
1875, 1877, p. 268, pi. xlv, fig. 1.

* Holmes, tern, cit., pp. 273, 274.



150


VOLCANOS


[part 1

reach the surface of the ground during the formation of the mountain, but
from some of them the lava seems to have escaped to the light of day^.

The most detailed description we possess is given in Gilbert’s Monograph
of the Henry mountains. These are five masses situated at almost equal
distances from the great Waterpocket Flexure; they rise out of the plateau,
itself here 1,500 meters high, and attain in the case of the highest peaks
an altitude of 3,429 meters (Mount Ellen) and 8,398 meters (Mount
Pennell). The Waterpocket Flexure is dropped on the eastern side to the
extent of 7,000 feet (2,134 meters), and the Henry mountains stand on the
horizontally stratified sunken area.

The laccolites lie in groups above and beside one another, and form the
core of these mountains. Mount Ellen contains about thirty of them.
Mount Holmes two. Mount Ellsworth one, Mount Pennell and Mount
Hillers a large one each, and several smaller ones. They extend, according
to the height at which they occur, from the Carboniferous to the Cretaceous,



Fio, 18. The Mount Millers group of laceciites (after Gilbert;.

a, Hillers* laccolito, and b, Pulpit Laoe, surrounded by smaller intrusive masses.

The lowest lino represents the sea- level, the second line the upper limit of the
Carboniferous, the highest line the upper limit of the Jurassic.


but the period of their formation is invariably post-Cretaceous. In Mount
Ellsworth and Mount Holmes complete arches of sedimentary strata are
present. The Mount Hillers laccolite is the largest, and half of it is
exposed ; its height is estimated at over 2,000 meters, the diameters of its
base measure 6-4 and 5-6 kilometers. From this there is a passage down
to the smallest intrusive sills. In every case where the volcanic arc in
contact with the sedimentary rocks the latter are altered. The laccolites
lie here without exception in the less resistant deposits of shale, never in
the harder beds of sandstone which separate them. The diagram (Fig. 18)
shows the large laccolite of Mount Hillers, with the smaller ones accom-
panying it ; the lowest of these rests on the surface of the Carboniferous,
the highest about 300 meters above the base of the Cretaceous formation.

We are accustomed to find volcanic eruptions in connexion with areas
of subsidence. This is also the case in the vast region of the Basin Ranges,
west of the Colorado Plateau. In this region, which we have not yet had

^ Endlicb, Geol. Rep. on the South-eastern District, tom. cit., p. 127 et pi. xvi.


CH.iv] COMPAEISON WITH THE EUGANAEAN 161

occasion to discuss, folded strata are thrown down by extensive faults
running almost parallel to the meridian.

* Single ranges/ says Clarence King, ‘ were divided into three or four
blocks, of which some sank thousands of feet below the level of others.
The greatest rhyolitic eruptions accompanied these loci of subsidence.
Where a great mountain block has been detached from its direct con-
nexions and dropped below the surrounding levels, there the rhyolites
have overflowed it and built up great accumulations of ejecta. . . . There
are a few instances in which hill masses were riven by dykes from which
there was a limited outflow over the high summits ; but the general law
was that the great ejections took place in subsided regions. Quantita-
tively, these rhyolitic ejections were of enormous volume, building up
mountain groups 3,000 to 6,000 feet in thickness, in blocks seventy or
eighty miles (113 to 129 kilometers) in length h'

The same rule applies also to the great eniptions which accompany the
main faults of the Colorado Plateau, and it is not possible to regard the
process of eruption by which mighty sheets issue from fissuriis as of a
different nature from that by which laccolites have been intrude<l in
isolated places independently of these main faults. This fact has been
rightly recognized by Dutton. The series of events which so long pre-
ceded and determined the emptions of Vesuvius on April 1 and 17, 1871,
have confirmed me in the opinion that there is a tendency to over-estimate
the force which is ascribed to water vapour in the lava. The outflow
of the latter from clefts often many miles long results most likely from
the simple hiws of hydrostatics, the subsidence of the mountain blocks
itself playing an essential part in the welling up of the molten sub-
stratum. The question remains whether the pressure, exerted by sinking
areas on such masses of lava as do not find an outlet, is capable of
producing the intrusions we have just discussed^.

Let us now return to the Euganaean mountains near Padua.

The difference between the phenomena met with here and those in
America lies first in the incomparably smaller dimensions of the intrusive
masses in the Euganaeans, next in the absence of yielding strata in tin;
foundation, which is composed entirely of stratified limestone, and finally
in the fact that the radial dykes on the summit of the Venda have not
proceeded, like those on the mighty Spanish Peaks, from the fragmentation
of a sedimentary cupola, but from successive emptions within an ash
cone. But the nature of the processes which led to the lateral intrusion
is evidently perfectly similar, and it is therefore quite permissible in
the case of the Euganaeans to speak of laccolites in the TiMionian, the

* Clarence King, U. S. Geol. Explor. of the 40th Parallel, 1878, 1, p. 694.

I Dutton, High Plateaus, pp. 129-131.



VOLCANOS


152


{fasti


Biancone, and the Scaglia, even if at the same time they are not very far
removed from the old notion of horizontal dykes or sills.

The conception of the elevation of the sedimentaiy covering as a direct
result of volcanic intrusion easily leads to a train of thought which seems
to run parallel to the old idea of a certain elevating activity, of lavas and
the formation of so-called craters of devotion,

^ One cannot consider the Canaries/ says L. v. Buch, * otherwise than as
a gi'oup of islands which have been raised gradually and singly from the
sea bottom. The force which is capable of producing so important an
effect must be accumulated and augmented for a long time in the interior
of the earth before it can overcome the resistance of the masses above it.
Then it breaks up the beds of basalt and conglomerate which have been
formed at the bottom of the sea, and for a certain thickness deeper
down, raises them above the surface of the sea, and makes its escape
through the mighty elevation-crater. But a mass so huge as this falls
back again on itself and soon closes up the opening, which only served as
an outlet for the volcanic force. A volcano is not formed. The Peak
rises from the centre of one of these elevation craters as a lofty dome of
trachyte ; a constant communication of the interior with the atmosphere is
now established. , .

L. V, Buch thus distinguishes: distension of the ground, collapse ac-
companied by closing of the orifice, then eruption in the centre of the
sunken area. This conception owes its origin to the magnificent crater
rings of the Somma ; it is only in the firat of these three phases that
a locally circumscribed, active, elevating force is ascribed to the volcanic
mass.

H. Abich, in the admirable description of the Armenian Plateau, with
which he has lately enriched our science, has again brought forward this
older conception, but only in a restricted sense, i. e. so far as local eleva-
tion and subsequent collapse are in question, without any reference to the
main features of the configuration of mountain chains and faults, which
are regarded as previously existing \

Abich illustrates his theory by means of two mountain masses: the
Palandocan to the south of Erzerum, and the Dary-dagh near Djoulfa.

The mountains to the south of Erzerum are foimed of Cretaceous lime-
stone, gabbro, and serpentine, over which Tertiary volcanic rocks are widely
extended. Of these the mighty Palandocan (2,947 meters) is also composed,
and below its summit on the western side a great crater occurs, the major
axis of which measures 9-10 kilometers. In the interior of this vast


' L. V. Buch, Phjsikal. Beschreibung der canarischen Inseln, 1825 ; Ges. Schriften
herausgeg. von Ewald, Roth und Dames, 111, 1877, p. 510.

* H. Abich, Geol. Forschungen in den J^ukasusiandern, 11 ; Geol. des armenischen
Hochlandes, I, Westh&lfte, 4to, 1882, Atl., pp. 73, 78, 329, et passim. • •



m^rr\ ' PALANDOOAN AND DARY-DAGH 163

crater, however, and surrounded hy the volcanic masses of its precipitous
walls, cliff-like masses of marmorized limestone and alabaster occur in
connexion with serpentine, greenish chloritic schist, and rocks of the gabbro
family rich in silica; it is of precisely these rocks that the foundation
of the mountain is also composed. They form an essential part in the
structure of the crater and have been * overwhelmed by the volcanic masses,
which have apparently heaved up the foundation of the mountain, have
rent it asunder and forced its parts to the north and south

The second example differs essentially from the first.

In the valley of the Araxcs, to the south of Nachitschevan there occurs,
above the dislocated Palaeozoic formations, a series which begins with the
Nummulitic limestone and has for its youngest member salt-bearing
deposits of Miocene age. Red conglomerates, formed almost exclusively
of trachyte, are intercalated with this Tertiary scries and serve as a means
of determining the age of the neighbouring trachyte mountains. Three
pillar-shaped mountains of trachyte succeeding each other from the north-
north- west to the south-south-east, rise to the east of Nachitschevan above
the Tertiary country : these are Nagajir, Asabkew-dagh, and Ingatasch ;
they stand together on a common elongated ridge of ground. Tliese are
followed on the east and south-east by two similar mountains, Ylanly- and
Alanja-dagh. Succeeding the first series to the south-south-east, and
evidently continuing it, the Dai^-dagh (1,943 meters) rises to the east of
Djoulfa. Its structure is, however, completely different from that of the
trachyte pillars, of which it appears to be the continuation. It consists
entirely of the strata of the tmnsgressive series, namely, of Nummulitic
limestone and trachytic conglomerate ; these are bent upwards in a mighty
arch, which is traversed by a fault running north and south, with a throw
to the west. Volcanic rock does not appear on the lino of fault, but
argillaceous marl with gypsum and arsenical compounds^.

Since the strata of trachytic conglomerate also help to form the arch
of Dary-dagh, this must bo more recent than the whole or at least
a part of the trachytic eruptions, and we are thus led to assume that
repeated dislocations have taken place along the same line, that is to say,
along the older faults on which Nagajir and its companions arose, the
trachytic conglomerates and breccias of Dary-dagh being formed at the
expense of the latter; then followed the arching upwards of these con-
glomerates, next the collapse of the arch, and finally the emission of
arsenical products.

Palandocan thus exhibits the phenomena of transport, injection, and
extensive contact alteration of the sediments; we shall soon meet with
them again in the volcanic fissure of the Banat, The case of Dary-dagh


' H. Abich, tom. cit., p. 76.

* H. Abich, tom, cit., p. 78 et seq.



154


VOLCANOS


[pABt r

is different: it reveals repeated movements of the ground before and
after the eruptions, but there is no necessity to assume, or at least so it
seems to me, that the lava has exerted an active force in the distension of
the beds.

After this digression let us now return to the consideration, of intm-
sions, and examine first those which are produced by basic rocks.

Phenomena of this kind, although not yet described in America, are
known in Europe. In coal-mines basaltic intrusions are not rarely met
with ; they do not as a rule, however, assume the form of huge cakes or
lenses, like trachytic laccolites ; on the contrary, while of much less thick-
ness they extend over far wider areas, so that they have frequently been
taken for contemporary formations, their later intercalation not having
been recognized. The relation of basic to trachytic intrusions is thus
similar, as far as their form is concerned, to that of the basic and acid lavas
flowing above ground, and this circumstance is probably owing to the well-
known greater mobility of the basic magma.

It may sufiice to mention here a single remarkable example. This is
the extensive sheet of basalt, known as the Wfdn SUl, which is intercalated
in the lower Carboniferous beds, in Northumberland. For a long time
it was a matter for doubt whether the Whin Sill was to be regarded as
an eruptive flow contemporaneous with the Carboniferous limestone, and
spread over it like a mantle, or as a horizontal dyke of unusual dimensions,
until a more exact survey of the country by Topley and Lebour established
the truth of the latter view.

The Whin Sill has been traced with trifling interruptions for a distance
of 120-130 kilometers. It attains a thickness of 23 meters and over, and
thins out in a wedge-shaped form to the west. The intercalation occurs, as a
very extensive sheet between the bedding planes of the Carboniferous lime-
stone and the accompanying beds of sandstone and shale ; contact alteration
occurs not only below but also above, and smaller veins are also given off
in an upward direction. But the Whin Sill does not, as was once supposed,
remain in the same stratigraphical horizon ; it ascends in the thick beds of
the Carboniferous system, and then sinks deeper again, so that the extremes
of vertical deviation which it undergoes amount to not less than about
620 meters K

* W. Topley and G. A. Lebour, On the intrusive character of the Whin Sill of
Northumberland ; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1877, XXXIII, pp. 406-421. I should like to
mention here that an attempt has lately been made to refer the numerous basalt flows
of the Vicentin mountains to a single horizon, and to describe them for the most part
as intrusive. I do not share this view. Only in the neighbourhood of Ronca do I know
of a small twisted true intrusive vein, occurring in the horizon of the tuff with Stfvmbus
Fortisi. The difference in age of the basalts is proved beyond all doubt by the variety of
fossils in the tuffs. For examples cf. A. Geikie, On the Carbonif. Volcanic Rocks of the
Basin of the Firth of Forth ; Trans. Roy. Soc., Edinb., 1880, XXIX, p. 4T6. •



WHIN SILL


165


CH. IV]

TI>e extraordinary extension of the Whin Sill, however, seems to me
to suggest the question whether, at so great a distance from the seat of
eruption, a force exists capable of elevating strata thousands of feet thick
and yet vested in a mass of lava of no considerable bulk. Here too it
seems to me more probable that the Whin Sill indicates the course
of an oblique fault which followed for long distances the dip of the strata,
but with repeated ‘jumps' to other horizons, and that this was filled
by inflowing basalt. Such ‘jumps' may easily arise along the edges of
faults as a consequence of dragging. Whether the designation ‘ intrusion '
can be justly applied in cases of this kind need not at present be discussed ;
I should prefer the word ‘ injection * —

All these intrusions or injections, in whatever form they occur, proceed
laterally from the pipe ; the latter we will now examine.

There is no volcano known which is eroded to such an extent that its
pipe is visible, and at the same time crowned by radial eruptive dykes
like those* of Monte Venda. There are, it is true, cases where, after the
destruction of the ash cone and its dykes, and the exposure of the pipe, the
connexion with the surrounding lava flows may still be recognized. These
cases may serve us as a point of departure.

In the Inner Hebrides^ especially in Skye and Mull, great basaltic flows
occur ; the basalts in the north-east of Ireland are probably a continuation
of them. Under these flows the remains of Mesozoic deposits are preserved,
which without this protective covering would have been swept away from
the Palaeozoic floor. The neighbouring west coast of Scotland consists
almost entirely of ancient rocks exposed by denudation.

Judd has shown that four granitic masses rise out of these volcanic
outflows on a line running approximately north and south, and that
they represent the cores of so many great volcanoa These are: the
volcano of the Island of Mull, that of the peninsula Ardnamurchan, those
of the Islands of Rum and Skye. The distance between the centres of
the most northern and southern of these four eruptive areas amounts
to about 88 kilometers; this is the length of that part of a great
volcanic line which it is here possible to recognize. The line, however, is
probably continued to the north and -south. Each of these granitic cores
stands in relation to basic rocks of more recent date, especially to those of
the gabbro group; the mass of Mull is intersected by these rocks in all
directions ; in those masses situated further north the basic core is juxta-
posed to the granite, into which it sends off veins. In the neighbourhood
of these points of eruption the sedimentaiy rocks are very much altered
and the basaltic dykes crowded together. A period of rest and 'denudation
seems to have followed the formation of the granitic masses before the
basic eruptions occurred. These took place on dry land; buried forests
and depoi^ts «with Miocene plants occurring at their base bear witness to



VOLCANOS


166


the fach The largest ash cones, those of Mull and Skye, must have
reached a height of over 4,000 meters^.


Fia. 19. The vckanos qf the Inner Hebrides (after Judd).

1, Volcanic tuffs and agglomerates; 2, Most recent erup-
tive rocks ; S, Basic lavas ; 4c, Basic intrusive rocks ;
5, Acid lavas ; 6, Acid intrusive rocks (chiefly the eastern
centre of eruption on Ardnamurchan) ; 7, Mesozoic and
Carboniferous bods; 8, Ancient rocks.


From these granitic
masses actual laccolites
are sent off ^ into the
Mesozoic beds.

As early as 1871, before
Judd had pointed out the
significance of the granite
cores, Geikie had here
recognized * amorphous '
intrusive masses consist-
ing of syenite, felsite, or
quartz porphyry which,
penetrating irregular fis-
sures, are bounded by no
parallel limiting surfaces.
Such masses are mentioned
as occurring on the island
of Baasay, to the north of
the volcano of Skye, on
Skye itself, and on Eigg,
and between the volcanos
of Bum and of Ardnamur-
chan. On Eigg in parti-
cular three such felsite
masses are described, ris-
ing above the surround-
ing basalts. The largest,
60-70 meters high, forms
the northern end of the
island and ‘ appears to
have risen approximately
along the bedding of the
oolitic strata, and thus to
form of itself a large rude
bedV

Judd has confirmed
the intercalation of these


' J. W. Judd, The secondaiy Bocks of Scotland, 2nd paper. On the ancient Volcanos
of the Hebrides and the Relations of their Products to the Mesoz. Strata; Quart. Joum.
Geol. Soc., 1874, XXX, pp. 220-800, pi. zxii, zziii, and map in 1878, XXXIV, pi. zxxi.

^ A. Geikie, On the Tertiary Volcanic Rocks of the British Islands, lit paper ; Quart.



PBEDAZZO


167


OH. nr]

masses in the Mesozoic series and showed, as early as the year 1874, that the
add rocks here form thick, lens-shaped intrusive masses, which are confined
to areas at a moderate distance from the eruptive centre, while the basaltic
lavas may follow the bedding planes for great distances.

The acid rocks consist of different varieties of felsite, more or less quartz-
bearing, frequently of porphyritic structure, passing with the development
of hornblende into syenitic granite. The basic intrusions are almost
always doleritic, containing much olivine, and with transitions on the one
hand to fine-grained gabbro, on the other to basalt.

We have seen that the basic lavas of these volcanos rest on Tertiaxy
plant-bearing deposits; in the same way deposits containing brown coal
may be seen in the Faroe Islands intercalated between basaltic lavas, and
it is generally known that similar facts are met with in Iceland. These
formations bear witness to an extensive continent which in the latter half
of the Tertiary period stretched from Scotland far away to the north ^

Near Predazzo in South Tyrol the pipe of a volcano of Trias
Age is exposed to view by the valley of the Avisio running north and
south, and the Val Travignolo, which opens into the former on the east.
It is a wonderful spot. Since Marzari - Pencati furnished the first
description of it, in 1828, it has been the theatre of constantly renewed
investigations, and the manifold phenomena it presents are still far from
sufficiently explained

Here we can only mention a few of the main features of its structure.
In the following discussion the chief interest lies in the circumstance
that we should be able definitely to determine the age of an eruptive
centre of granite and syenite situated in the midst of the Alps.

The Avisio meets the Val Travignolo quite close to the little town of
Predazzo. The main ridge to the west of the Avisio is formed by. the
Dosso Capella, with the slopes of Ai Canzocoli turned towards Predazzo ;
to the south of the Val Travignolo rises the Malgola, to the north
of it the Mulatto. Fig. 20 was drawn from the eastern side in Val
Travignolo ; on the left stands the Malgola, on the right the Mulatto, with
Ai Canzocoli and the Dosso Capella in the centre. Only three chief types
of eruptive rocks are distinguished. in this little sketch, namely, granite,

Joum. Geol. Soc., 1871, XXVII, p. 294. These masses could not be represented on the
little map, fig. 19, on account of its small scale.

^ J. Geikie, On the Geology of the FarCe Islands ; Trans. Roy. Soc., Edinb., 1880-1881,

XXX, p. 240.

• From the abundant literature on this subject I will only mention F. v. Richthofen,
Geogn. Beschreib. der Umgebung von Predazzo, S. Cassian u. s. w., 4to, 1860; C. Doelter,
Ueber die Eruptivgebilde von Fleims, nebst einigen Bemerkungen fiber den Bau alterer
Vulcane, Sitzungsber. k. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1876, Bd. 74, pp- 857-878, map of the
neighbourhood of Predazzo; E. v. Mojsisovics, Die Dolomitriffe von Sfidtirol und
Yenetien, 8vo, 1879, pp. 344-393 ; £. Reyer, Predazzo, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1881,

XXXI, ppr 1-06 and map.



168


VOLCANOS


fPABT'I

syenite (Monzonite), and melaphyre. This is not the place to describe the
numerous dykes and the secondary modifications of the rocks. The left
side of the Mulatto is formed up to the summit of lower Trias de«
posits; its slope facing Predazzo consists of eruptive syenite; the line
of contact and of the marmoiization of the Trias limestone, that is, the
outer limit of the eruptive mass, crosses the mountain obliquely. The
syenite on this declivity includes one larger and several smaller masses
of marmorized Trias limestone, and numerous steeply ascending dykes of
flesh-coloured orthoclase porphyry, which look as though they proceeded
from the granite mass which we shall meet directly on the other side of
the valley.

The boundary of the eruptive mass may be seen, just as sharply
defined, on the Dosso Capella, which appears in the middle of the sketch



Pro, 20. iVerfafflfo^South Tyrol).

View from the Boscampo bridge (Val Travignolo), noar the middle of the ancient centre
of eruption. On the left : Malgdaf syenite and Trias limestone (left whited ; on the right ;
Mtdatto, syenite, granite (closely dotted), and dark augite rocks ; in the middle : Dosso Capella,
contact of Trias limestone and syenite on the Ganzocoli ; above the syenite melaphyre ; in
the background : melaphyre overlying Trias limestone.

in the background behind Predazzo. It ascends the mountain obliquely.
In the lower portion of the slope eruptive syenite occurs in contact with the
limestone, and the place called Ai Ganzocoli is the locality long famous
for the silicates of the zone of contact ; further up the limestone comes into
contact with melaphyre. Behind Dosso Capella, on the hills to the right,
melaphyre may be seen resting on limestone ; this is a portion of the lava
streams which issued from the volcano. At the bottom of the valley of
the Avisio a projecting granite mass appears beneath the syenite ; in the
sketch it is concealed by the foot of the Mulatto.

To the right, on the summit of the Mulatto, are augitic rocks which
form striking dark walls of no great height. They are continued from


ADAMELLO


169


CH.IV]

the projecting ridge of the Mulatto to the bottom of the valley near
Predazzo^ as a long dyke which intersects all the deeper rocks. The latter
consist of tourmaline-bearing granite and syenite; they are continued
on the other side of the mountain towards the foot of the Dosso Capella
and the Sforzella. The whole Mulatto is of volcanic origin ; its junction
with the Trias limestone lies close to the right, outside the sketch, in
a ravine descending from Monte Viezzena.

The distribution of the rocks, the silicates at the points of contact, the
numerous dykes, and the intercalation of melaphyre lavas and tuffs in
the Trias beds leave no doubt as to the volcanic origin, the genetic con-
nexion, and the age of these remarkable features. They are repeated
immediately to the north-east, as on Monte Monzoni, with a magnificent
development of lateral dykes, though no granite is there visible. lACColites
are not known to exist in this region.

As the example of the mass of the Finster-Aarhom has shown, the
conversion of stratified fossiliferous limestones into white marble, at their
junction with granite masses, may be effected by pressure alone ; conse-
quently, it is the presence of the crystallized silicates in the zone of contact
which furnishes the most conclusive testimony to the eruptive and volcanic
nature of the syenite mass of Predazzo. The same characteristic, however,
recurs in a portion of the margin of the mighty mass of Adamello.

The mass of the Adamello rises between Val Camonica and the
valley of the Judicaria on the borders of Lombardy and the south-western
Tyit)!. Its longest side strikes to the north-north-east, and follows closely
the great fracture-line of the Judiairia which lies to the east. The most
remarkable rock of this mountain mass may be easily recognized by its
numerous short thick columns of dark hornblende and black mica flakes
set in a white ground-mass ; 0. v. Rath has named it tonalite, Zirkel regards
it as most nearly related to quartz-diorite

Where the tonalite mass of the Adamello meets the Trias limestone to
the south-east, the contact phenomena of Predazzo reappear. The sketches
'which Lepsius has published of the Val Bona and the Val Bondol leave no
doubt as to the correspondence between the phenomena in these two regions.
For instance, on the southern declivity of the Cima Bruffione in the Val
Bondol we see the tonalite meet the nodular Trias limestone in an almost
vertical junction; the Trias, which dips steeply towards the tonalite, is
converted into marble and impregnated with contact silicates

In discussing the southern Alps we shall again touch upon this
remarkable circumstance.

In the volcanos of the Hebrides both the position of the pipes and the

' G. V. Rath, Beitr. zur Kenntniss der erupt. Gestcine der Alpen, Zeitzchr. deutach.
geol. Ges., 1864, p. 249; Zirkel, Lehrb. der Petrog., 1866, II, p, 22.

* R. Lep^us, J)a8 weatliche SCdtirol, 4to, 1878, pp. 208, 222.



16 ft VOLCANOS [pAwi

remains of the ejected lavas may still be recognized ; their activity extended
into the Miocene, or even to a later period. In the volcanos of Fredazzo
and Monzoni the pipes may also be recognized, and although they are
of incomparably greater age than those of the Hebrides, the lavas and
tuffs pertaining to them may still be seen intercalated with the Trias
limestones.

The eruptive centre of B4zhanya in the south-east of Hungary, which
is described by Peters and Posepny, is in a similar stage of denudation ;
here for the first time we meet with metalliferous deposits in immediate
connexion with an eruptive mass, within the aureole of volcanic contact.
Rocks which Peters terms syenite and syenite-porphyry alter the sur-
rounding beds and produce in the Neocomian limestone a mixture of
wollastonite, garnet, and blue calcite.

The long thin veins of volcanic rock, which penetrate into the fissures of
the surrounding country and enclose pointed wedges of it, Posepny regards
as a fresh proof that these eruptive masses are not impeUing but impdled.
He considers the subsidence of a neighbouring area as the cause of these
eruptions ; the eruptive magma is forced into the veins by the pressure
of the sinking mass ^

To the south of the river Temes, which flows down from Transylvania,
a mountain chain runs through the BanoA down to the Danube, of which
the loftiest point, Muntje Semenik, is 1,460 meters high, while its mean
height is about 800 meters. The strike of its strata is from the north-east
or north-north-east to the south-south-west, and in this direction the chain
is continued across the Danube to Servia. The great river in its winding
course crosses both this chain and those parallel to it on the east, and thus
gives rise, between Moldowa and the Iron Gates, to a series of great rapids.
We are only concerned here with the western portion of the chain, and
more particularly with its eastern slope.

This chain consists of long folds of mica-schist with some gneiss, then
Coal-measures, red Permian sandstone, Jurassic and Cretaceous limestone.
A very important fault, running north and south, traverses the mountains ;
it meets the folds which strike to the south-west and south-south-west
at an acute angle, and cuts off the Mesozoic strata on the west so that
on the other side, west of the fault, only low hills of mica-schist or the
open plain are to be seen. That part of the fault which lies on the-
northem side of the Danube in the mountains of the Banat, that is, from
Deutsch-Bokschan in the north to Moldowa on the Danube in the south,
is occupied for a distance of 78 kilometers by a series of amcient centres

' C. Peters, 6eoL u. mineral. Studlen aus dem stldOstliclien Ungam, Sitznngsber.
k. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1861, XLIII, pp. 885-463, and XLIV, pp. 81-187, map and plate ;
F. Posepny, Geol.-montan. Studie der Erzlagerstfttten Ton R^zbAnya, from FOltdani
KOzl., IV, 1874, 8vo, Budapest, 198 pp., map and plate, in particular p. 190. .



CH, iv] FISSURES OF THE BANAT 161

of eruption, as is shown in Fig. 21. But the fault crosses the Danube and
is accompanied further to the south by similar centres of eruption.

The chief source of information on this folded region is a work by
Johann Kudematsch, published in 1857, describing its most important parts.
Many views on the structure and formation of mountains find expression
here which were not generally accepted until a much later period. For
the western portion of the fault represented in Fig. 21 I must refer in
particular to the special geological maps published by the State Railway
Company of Austria in 1860, on which the map published by Cotta in
1865 is also based

The most important outcrops of volcanic rock in this area are, pro-
ceeding from south to north, those of Moldowa, Kohldorf and Szfiszka,
Cziklowa and Oravicza, Dognd.cska, and finally the great irregular mass
north of Bokschan. With the exception of the last, each of tliese
takes an extremely elongated form in the direction of the fault, so that,
on the length of 78 kilometers here represented, the volcanic rock is
actually visible for a distance of about 47 kilometers, and there is no
reason to doubt that further denudation of the surface would reveal,
instead of these isolated patches, a single connected zone of volcanic rock.

These eruptive rocks were originally described as syenite or granite ;
Cotta gave them a new name, Banatite ; they are, as later investigations
of Niedzwiezki Szab(5 and others have shown, of diverse composition,
and should be described as syenite proper, or quartz-bearing diorite,
diorite, andesite, and andesine-quartz-trachyte. G. v. Rath, in agreement
with Niedzwiezki, calls the most common type among them quartz-
diorite, and compares it, as Cotta does also, with the metalliferous
propylite, which occurs in so many places in Hungary and Pennsylvania,
and with the tonalite of the Adamello*. Near Moldowa an imposing
dyke of basalt also occurs.

Wherever the syenitic or dioritic rock comes in contact with the
Mesozoic limestone, the latter is altered; garnet, wollastonite, idocrase,
mica, blue calcite, and a whole series of minerals characteristic of volcanic
contact are produced. The numerous metalliferous deposits of this chain
also lie within the zone of contact; they contain magnetic iron ore, lead

^ J. Kudernatsch, Geol. des Banater Gebirgszuges, Sitzungsber. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien,
XXIII, 1857, pp. 39-148, map and plate ; B. v. Cotta, Erzlagerstlitten im Banat und in
Serbien, 8vo, 1865, 108 pp. and pi. L. Loezi does not accept the northern prolongation
of the fissure assumed by Gotta (A Hegyes Droesa-hegyadg Asvany-Lelhelyei, 8vo,
Budapest, 1877, p. 10).

^ J. Niedzwiezki, Zur Kenntniss der Banater Eruptivgesteine, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst.,
1873, XXIIl ; Tschermak, Miner. Mitth., pp. 255-262.

• Szab<5, in Foldt. KOzl., VI, 1876, pp. 112-132, et passim ; also F. v. Hauer, Die
Geologie und ihre Anwendung, &c., 2. Aufl., 8vo, 1878, 540 pp.

* This remarkable locality was described in detail by G. Marka, Einige Notizen fiber
das Banater Gebirge ; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1869, XIX, p. 318 et seq., pi. viii, ix.

SOLIiAB M



Fio. 21. The vol-
canic line of the Banal
(from the Surveys
of the Imp. Royal
State Railway Com-
pany of Austria).


CICATRICES


163


OH. iv]


and copper ores, silver and gold. The individual eruptive centres are
surrounded wholly or in part, according to their position with regard to
the limestone, by an aureole of metamorphism. The eruptive area of
Morawica lies in mica-schist, but crosses a band of limestone which it
alters and impregnates with ores \

Cotta has expressed the opinion that no actual eruptions at the surface
occurred along the Banat cleft, but the almost complete absence of lateral
lava flows cannot be regarded as a sufficient proof of this. Tlie degra-
dation of the country necessary for the exposure of the fissure in its
present form must have been so considerable that ejected lavas would liave
succumbed to it over a large area.

Notwithstanding this enormous amount of denudation, we cannot
assign a higher age to the quartz-diorite of the fissure than that of the
Tertiary period, since the Cretaceous limestones have been altered along
the contact. It is possibly contemporaneous with the propylite of the
Carpathians, where the eruptions must be placed in the Oligocene, or in
the first half of the Miocene perio<i ^

The denudation which has taken place since about the middle of the
Tertiary period appears then to have been sufficient to lay bare the contents
of the fissure for over more than a half of its course of 78 kilometers-
If the demolition were further advanced wo should see a single zone of
quartz-diorite. But this demolition might easily proceed so far that the
neighbouring Mesozoic limestones, and with them the contact formations
and ore deposits, would disappear, and instead of the present diversified
structure of the mountains nothing would remain but a belt of diorite
or syenite, imbedded in mica-schist and gneiss, to which many an observer
would straightway assign an Archaean age.

Having thus considered the ash cones of the present day and presented
in their natural order the pictures afforded by denudation, we come gradu-
ally to the manifold products of abyssal processes, such as may be seen in
the ancient eroded mountain masses of Bohemia or Norway, as well as here


‘ G. V. Rath, Sitzungsber. Niederrhein. Ges. fQr Natur- ttnd Heilkunde zu Bonn, 13.
Januar 1879.

* In the same region, but further to the east, there is a second similar, but less
generally known line of eruptive centres. This runs northwards from the town of
Maidanpek, in Servia, crosses the Danube, and in the Ljubkowa valley, immediately to
the north of the river, contains ores in the coxi’esponding contact formations (Zcpharovich,
Berg- und Iliittenm.-Zeitschrift, V, p. 12 ; also J. BOckh, Geol. Notiz. iiber d. siidl, Theil
des Comit. SzOreny, from FOldt. KOzl., 1879, p. 29, note for similar emptive centres ;
also op. cit., 1880, and in particular Hugo Szterenyi, op. cit., 1883, p. 142) .« Kudernatsch
even believed that he had observed contact phenomena in the limestone on the western
border of the great granite ridge of Puschkasch which lies to the east of Steyerdorf
(Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1855, VI, p. 228), but the statement, according to Tietze’s
observations, requires further investigation (op. cit., 1872, XXII, p. 43).



164


VOLCANOS


[part I


and there in the younger folded chains. It was in this way that the
remarkable syenitic, and in its southern portion granitic, ridge was formed,
which, near Briinn, follows the eastern border of the Bohemian mass and
separates it from the Sudetes. The diagram on page 186 (Fig. 24) indicates


its position in rough out-
line, and shows how it
separates two great masses
of the earth's crust wholly
different in structure
Denuded volcanic ranges
of this description we shall
here term cicatrices.

Denudation exposes to
view, however, not only
cicatrices but old sheets of
lava, abyssal dykes and
injections of many kinds,
perhaps also intrusive
masses or true laccolites
formed at a great depth.
It was from a considera-
tion of such facts that
Judd, after examining the
eruptive centres of the
Hebrides, was led to desig-
nate extensive masses of
granite, such as that of the
province of Leinster, as ex-
posed reservoirs.

Before turning to the
difficult question of the
origin of such granite
masses some further exam-
ples may be quoted.

In America the term
laecolite includes, besides
Fia. 22. Sectiofns to correspond to Fig. 23, the already mentioned len-

ticular masses of trachyte,
the massive rocks of the Elk mountains in Colorado. This chain, situated
in the Rocky mountains, strikes from the western side of the great



* The closer relations of this ridge to the neighbouring mountains have already been
discussed, Entstehung der Alpen, pp. 67-71.


ELK MOUNTAINS


CH. IV]


165


Sawatch chain to the north-east ; several peaks exceed a height of 4,200
meters. Its structure has been described by Holmes K

From the north-west to the south-east three larger granite masses
arise, Sopris Peak, Snow
Mass Group, and White
Rock Group, which runs
out in a small spur to
the south-west. Endlich
describes the granite of
these mountains as a mix-
ture of orthoclase, oligo-
clase, quartz, and musco-
vite, with a little biotite;
it is generally white or
grey in colour; porphyry
and diorite sometimes ac-
company it The sedimen-
tary series which surrounds
the granite masses begins
with unfossiliferous quartz-
ite, some hundreds of feet
thick, followed by Carboni-
ferous limestone and a fur-
ther series of great thick-
ness, which extends up-
wards as far as the upper
part of the Cretaceous
system. The Cretaceous
series contains intrusive
masses of rhyolite and
tracliyte.

As regards their tectonic
relations, we see that the
two largest granite masses,

Snow Mass Group and
White Rock Group, stand
on a common line of dis-
turbance, which is termed
a fault-fold, and is accompanied by a distinct lateral movement of the
mass directed from the north-east to the south-west at right a'ngles to the

' W. H. Holmes, Report on the Geology of the N.W. Portion of the Elk Range ;
Hayden, 8th Ann. Rep. U. S. Survey for 1874, 8vo, 1876, p. 58 et seq.

* Endlich,’ On the Erupted Rocks of Colorado; Hayden, Ann. Rep. for 1876, 8vo, 1878,
pp.210-2fl. •



Pio. 28. Arrangement the lowest parts of the Cretaceous
formation around Srwvo Mass and White Rock in the Elk
mountaifts (after Holmos).


166 VOLCANOS [pabti

strike. This later movement was so considerable that on the south-west
border the granite is thrust over the sediments, while in the interval
between the two masses the sedimentary beds are folded in.

The extent of the lateral movement and the occurrence of trachytic
masses in the outer Cretaceous zone appear to explain why these two
great granite masses, which are certainly connected at some distance below
the surface, have been regarded as true laccolites of post-Cretaceous age,
while some investigators have even been inclined to bring the intrusion of
the granite into causal connexion with the formation of the chain itself.

Holmes expresses himself with great caution on this point; it would
not be hard to imagine, he says, that while the lateral displacement and
folding were in process, the plastic mass beneath followed the movement,
and so gave rise to the existing structure, and at the same time intruded
itself, or was intruded, through the line of fault as the two great masses of
the Snow Mass and White Rock Groups \

This point of view recognizes the folding force as the prime agent in
producing the structure of the country, but other authors consider the Elk
mountains to have been raised and folded by the intrusion of post-Cretaceous
granite. The granite, however, appears to lie always in the same strati-
graphical horizon, in this respect, as in others, perfectly resembling the
passively overfolded masses of the Cima d* Asta or the Jungfrau.

The opinion expressed by Holmes accords more or less with the views
propounded by Lessen on the granite of the Harz mountains. Lessen
thinks ' that the unilateral (heteroclinal) fold might, with increasing pres-
sure, bo rent across along the strike ; its upper limb would then be driven
upwards, and with a continued increase in pressure a fissure might be
produced up which the eruptive rock would be forced.’ In his latest work
Lossen calls the Harz * a twisted elliptical orographic mass, forming a moun-
tain-knot, with eruptive magma squeezed out at the dynamic foci.’ From
certain passages we even perceive that Lossen pictures the granite as a
plastic mass subjected to the influence of the lateral movement, and of the
step-like arrangement of the folds he says : ‘ The steps are the solidified
waves of the granitic magma, which have shared in the fold-producing
movements of the solid crust

This granite has produced contact alteration in the grauwacke of Tann,
which in some places still covers it; the granite has therefore, like the
American laccolites, exercised a metamorphic influence from below upwards.

We may again emphasize the point that the older theory of the eleva-
tion of mountains by means of granite finds, according to Holmes, no
confirmation in the Elk mountains, nor according to Lossen in the Harz,
but that both observers consider the folding of the mountains as the first

^ Holmes, op. cit. p. 68.

* Lossen, Geologische und petrographisohe Beitrftge, pp. 4, 21, « 43.*



CH.iv] INTERCALATED GRANITE MASSES 167

and decisive event, and the extrusion of granitic magma merely as an
accompanying phenomenon determined by the folding.

A number of granite masses are known, which have the following
characters in common: —

(а) They lie imbedded in older stratified rocks, most frequently in schist,
they are revealed by denudation, and their form, as far as it can l)c recog-
nized, is that of large, irregular loaves or cakes.

(б) They have produced contact metamorphism, not only in a lateral
direction, but also from below upw-ards, and are therefore younger than the
overlying strata.

(c) In many cases they send off apophytes laterally or from below
upwards; these apophyses are injected into fissures, the formation of which
must have immediately preceded the injection.

The Drammen granite in the neighbourhood of Christiania is, according
to Kjerulf, covered for considerable distances by various horizontally-lying
members of the Silurian system, all of which it alters along the plane of
contact, enclosing fragments of them and injecting them with dykes h

The two granite masses of Barr-Andlau and of Hohwald in the Vosges,
which have produced the alteration in the Steiger schists so admirably
investigated by Rosenbusch, are enclosed in these schists and send oft*
apophyses into them 2 .

The great granite masses of the Erzgebirge present similar relations,
and are still partly overarched by the mass of schist into which they have
been intruded and which they have altered. These masses, it must be
admitted, stand in no perceptible connexion with the strike of the Erzge-
birge; the great Neudeck mass extends in a direction more or less at
right angles to the chain and is cut off in the south by a great terminal
fracture, in precisely the same way as the masses of the Vosges are
traversed by the faults which play so important a part in the sha 2 )ing of
that chain.

It cannot be denied that the most important characteristics of these
granite masses, and in particular the contact metamorphosis produced in
the overlying strata, reappear in the trachytic laccolites of North America.
They are, however, of much more imposing dimensions, and the question
arises how such extraordinarily large cake-shaped masses, with a uiajor
axis measuring 10 or 20 kilometers or even more, can have been subse-
quently intercalated at a definite horizon, as, for example, in a jiarticular

' T. Kjerulf, Die Geologie des siidlichen und mittlercn Norwegen (German translation
by A. Gurlt), 8vo, 1880, in particular pp. 73 and 242, fig. 195 ; E. Reyer, Yier Ausfliige in
die Erui^tivmassen bei Christiania, Jahrb. geol. Rcichsanst., 1880, XXX, pp. 27 42.

* H. Rosenbusch, Die Steiger Schiefer und ihre Contaetzone an den Granititen von
Barr-Andlau und Hohwald; Abhandl. zur geol. Specialkarte von Elsass-Lothringen, Bd. I,
Heft II, 1877.#



VOLCANOS


168


[PAET r


zone of schist, or even, as near Christiania, in a group of stratified rocks
lying fairly close together.

It is absolutely necessary that the injection of a granitic mass, possessing
so high a temperature as to be capable of altering the surrounding rocks,
^hcmld he j)receded by the formation of a correspondmg cavity.

The tangential or folding movement of the outer portions of the planet
has been sometimes called a ‘ movement of the crust,' but the conception
of the ‘ earth’s crust ' involves many obscurities. Processes such as have
occurred along the Belgian ‘faille du Midi’ show that it is passible for
some parts to be lifted off and thrust over others. This lifting-off is pro-
bably not uncommon below ground, especially with an unequal tangential
pressure or unequal resistance. It is likely to occur most frequently in the
deep-lying zones of schist, which would lend themselves most readily to it ;
and in this vray very large, more or less lenticular spaces might be formed,
which the granitic mass would enter, altering the overlying strata, and
sending off dykes into the fissures. There is often nothing to indicate that
the whole mass of younger sedimentary rocks which overlie the lifted-off or
pushed-off surface has been broken through, or that a volcanic eruption,
producing the comminuted materials which accompany an explosion, occurred
at the surface of the ground. The magma simply filled the space as far as
it extended, and consolidated in it, forming a cake of rock or true batholite,
which would never be capable of giving rise to any further mountain
building, but might in certain cases, in consequence of its great bulk, its
rigidity, and configuration, passively influence this process as regards certain
subordinate features.

The granite masses of the Pyrenees are^ as Zirkel has clearly shown, of
widely <lifferent ages. The same is true of the granite cores of the Alps.
Sevei'al of these lie, probably as true batholites, in beds of Carboniferous
age, others occur at much deeper horizons, some again are far younger ;
we have already described how thase near Predazzo are associated with
true volcanic phenomena.

High above the Bernina Hospice there are superposed upon the granite
masses of white limestone, half converted into marble, either by pressure or
volcanic contact, which contain numerous fossils, apparently of Bhaetic age.
Far below, in the Val Trompia, the workings of the Amaldo mine have
revealed a mass of green granite, the bossy surface of which is at one spot
intimately united with the superposed (apparently Carboniferous) micaceous
slate, while at another place close by it is immediately covered by red
Permian sandstone.

The Alpine mountains, however, which afford us such clear insight into
tliese phenomena, also reveal other and quite unexpected occurrences. While
syenitic and dioritic rocks are met with in the pipes of Tertiary volcanos,
Stache and John make us familiar with other volcanic rocks^. which bear



BATHOLITES


169


CH. iv]

no small resemblance to recent andesites and propylites, and which near
the sources of the Adige and the Adda are intercalated at the base of the
whole thickness of the Mesozoic series \ —

Let us now return to the formation of large cavities in the interior of
the earth. The detachment of a considerable mass of strata may be suffi-
cient to explain the intrusion of the now consolidated lenticular granite
masses which alter the overlying strata. But independently of this fact,
and for quite other reasons, a theory was propounded many years ago that
in the interior of the earth no connected pyrosphere exists, but that the
lavas rest in large isolated cavities, in subt^Tanean lakes, so to speak.
Hopkins considered these lava-lakes as the r^^ains of the original molten
mass of the planet and designated them ‘residual lakes.' A fact, very
remarkable in spite of all exceptions, has recalled attention to this older
theory. I refer to the strikingly constant repetition of eruptive rocks in
the same chronological order, known as Richthofen's series, which occurs
in regions so remote from one another as Hungary and West America for
example. The order of this remarkable series, which Richthofen's keen
glance first perceived, is propylite, andesite, trachyte, rhyolite, basalt. Its
constancy has often been denied, but its recurrence in the vast regions of
western America has now been placed beyond doubt, while according to
Godfrey it is likewise the rule in Japan The confirmation of the existence
of the series in the great faulted areas of the high plateaiix of Utah has led
Dutton to theoretical discussions, in which the local and limited nature of
the subterranean lava-reservoirs is emphasized, but Hopkins's conception
of them as residues surviving from a once general condition of molten
fluidity is denied. According to Dutton such reservoirs, wliich he names
maculae, are supposed to be formed afresh in the interior of the earth,
and he connects this supposition with the theory of liquefaction through
decrease of pressure, lately put forward by Clarence King —

In the preceding chapter we stated that the dislocations of the earth
manifest a tendency to resolve themselves into radial and tangential
stresses, but that direct results of the radial tension, an active attraction
as it were towards the centre of the globe, would be difficult to prove : on
the other hand a passive descent of large portions of the earth's crust is of

^ J. Siache and C. v. John, Geol. und petrogr. Bcitr. zur Kenntniss der ulieren
Eruptiv- und Massengesteine der Mittel- und Ostalpen ; Jahrb. geol. ReichHanst., 1877,
XXVII, pp. 143-242, and 1879, XXIX, pp. 317-404, plate. Teller and John have
recently added to our knowledge of the remarkable eruptive district of Klausc, which is
formed principally of diorite. It lies between the granite mass of Brixen and the great
Permian porphyry sheet of Bozen. Op. cit., XXXIl, 1882, pp. 589 684, anU plate.

* F. Baron Richthofen, The natural system of Volcanic Rocks, Mem. California Acad.
Sc., 1868, I, pp. 39-133, in 2 )articular p. 67 ; J. G. H. Godfrey, Notes on the Geology
of Japan, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1878, XXXIV, p. 542.

’ Dutton^ High Plateaus, pp. 116, 128, et passim.



frequent occurrence. This passive subsidence also presupposes lai^ cavitieia.
It is in such regions that the extnunon of lavas is most frequent. The
conception which results from a comparison of these observations is approzi*
mately the following : — ?

The upper peripheral portions of the globe ate held fast like an. arch by
tangential pressure. Either radial tension or tangential thrust serves to
separate a portion of the globe from the interior, and a large cavity, a
macnlfl^ more or less parallel to the surface of the earth, is formed, which in
the case of radial rupture is of great lateral extension, in the case of thrust
more lenticular in form; tiiis fills with lava. If at the surf^ the
tangential pressure finds expression in folding, or overthrusting, then the
arch sinks into the macula behind the fold or overthmst, and lava wells
forth along the fissures or faults.

How far this conception is supported by facts is a question that will be
discussed in a later chapter.

In conclusion, another phenomenon may be mentioned which appears to
be common to many centres of eruption. This is the limited local subsi-
dence, or, to use Beyer’s expression, the invagination of the volcano and the
surrounding country. I do not refer to the often quoted examples from
the immediate neighbourhood of recent volcanos, for example of Signal
Post Hill on Santiago (Cape Verd Islands) or of the smaller eruptive centre
near Auckland (New Zealand), because in these cases the occurrences are
only of small extent ^ I speaJk of the whole mass of the volcano. We have
the concordant testimony of Judd in the case of the volcano of Mull,
Mojsisovics in that of the eruptive area of Predazzo, and Beyer in that
of the mass of the Vends, that subsidence has taken place K

‘One receives an impression,’ saye ^Mojsisovics, ‘as though on the peri-
phery of the eruptive area the fractured mountain had been plunged into
cavities formed beneath.’ We have already had occasion to remark on the
tendency to underestimate the volume of the material ejected during a
great eruption, and on the comparatively small size of the resulting cone
as compared with the mass of finely divided material, which in such cata-
strophes darkens the sun over wide areas.

In order to obtain a comprehensive view of Ihe denudation series in its
main features we will return to the most recent volcanos of Central
America.

The series begins with the modem volcano near Leon, with the eruptive
centre in the Lake of Hopango, and Izalco; not one of these is a century
old ; in addition we may mention JoruUo and Monte Nuovo.

' Scrape, Volcanoa, p. 273 ; Darwin, GeoL Observ., 2nd ed., p. 12 ; Heaphy, Qnarb
Joura. GeoL Soc., 1860, XVI, p. 245.

* Judd, Quart. Jdum. Geol. Soc., 1874, p. 256; UojsiaoTios, Dolomitriffe, pp. 877,
878 ; Beyer, Eugan., pp. 75-78. • •



- i)ENIinATK^ 'l^BEBiS ■ ^

' ^eee are doedy rdated to those which are in a state of uninterrupted
activity, and which bear witness to it by visible glowing lava, such as
Strom^li, and, under a very different form, Eilauea. The already men>
tioned Lsalco iha also not long ago in a condition similar to that of
, StromboE

Then follow those which are subject to frequent eruptions, such as
Vesuvius or Aetna, or to less frequent eruptions, such as Ischia. Their
number is very great, and still more numerous are those of which there
is no certain record of eruptions since the dawn of history, and which
have yet preserved their ash cones intact, such as the Fays of Auvergne
or Bo^ Monfina.

. Then follow those which are so far advanced in a state of ruin that the
skeleton of the partially destroyed ash cone is visible ; to these belong, for
ezomplej Monte Venda in the Euganaean mountains, at the denuded base
of which the lateral intrusions are revealed ; and, according to Doelter’s
observations, certain eruptive centres on the Ponza Islands. Here the lava
flows are already cut off from their place of issue.

I know of no basic volcanos with a visible skeleton, but there are
numerous cases of the isolation of basic lava flows, which are associated
with volcanos reduced to this or the following stage.

The erosion proceeds farther, and the lateral intrusion or injection of
lenticular masses of acid lava, visible at the foot of the Venda only on
a small scale, is exhibited on a veiy large one, as in the Henry mountains,
Sierra el Late, San Carriso, and other cases in Central North America.

The demolition still continues; in Predazzo, for example, it reveals above,
on the summit of the mountains, lavas interstratified with Trias deposits,
and below in the valley the lower portions of the funnel, which is filled
with granitic and syenitic rocks, while on the walls the zones of contact are
accompanied by the characteristic silicates. This exposure of the rocks far
beneath the surface may occur on a line connecting several centres of erup-
tion, as in the Hebrides, or it may extend so far that the continuity of the
common fissure becomes manifest as in the Banat. Finally, the erosion
maybe so extreme that it leaves nothing but a cicatrice, such as the syenite
belt of Briinn.

All the stages so far mentioned present either ejectamentaon the surface
of the planet, caused by eruptions, which have forced them out from its
interior, or the remains of the vents and fissures, through which these
ejectamenta have made their escape. The destruction of the emrth, however,
proceeds farther; denudation exposes to view masses which, at least in the
msyority of cases, did not reach the exterior in a molten incandescent state,
but solidified beneath the surface as batholites, as mighty cakes of rock,
a fact often brought home to us by afragmentof the ancienWault preserved
on their summits as a mass of altered schist.



172


VOLCANOS


The ash cones of the present day thus bring us to the granite masses
of the Erzgebirge, to the Drammen granite of Norway, and to a know-
ledge of the manifold variety in the mode of origin of the granite of the
Alps.

Finally, this series of phenomena leads to the conception of subterranean
cavities, formed by tangential pressure or by radial rupture ; we have now
to determine to what extent the actual structure of the mountains is in
accordance with this hypothesis.



173


CHAPTER V

DIVEESITY OF THE MOVEMENTS

Attempts to classify earthquakes. Earthquakes of volcanic origin, and those caused
by dislocation. Earthquakes associated with flaws. Earthquakes associated with
over*riding. Earthquakes caused by subsidence. Aetna, 1780, and 1874 to 1883.
Different nature of volcanic earthquakes. The denudation series.

Precise investigation shows us that a measurable displacement of any
fragment of the rocky crust of the earth, with regard to another, whether
it takes the form of elevation, subsidence, or horizontal displacement, Has
not yet been convincingly established. Two prominent examples, the
formation of the Allah-Bund in the Rann of Cutch and the alleged repeated
elevations of the west coast of South America, which are frequently cited
in proof of such alterations, have already been discussed ; and others, as we
shall show later, will lead us to similar results. But if movements do not
actually take place before our eyes, yet numerous dislocations show that
they have often occurred on the grandest scale, and frequent earthquakes
prove that they are not yet at an end.

The diversity of seismic movements in kind is very great ; the pheno-
menon is, of its very nature, difficult to subject to the methods of exact
observation, and the amount of systematic work devoted to it up to the
present is very small. In treating of the nature of earthquakes it is there-
fore necessary to observe an unusual degree of reticence.

Of late years many attempts have been made to classify earthquakes
according to their origin. R. Hoemes distinguishes earthquakes produced
by mh&idence, volcanic earthquakes, and tectonic earthquakes^. Toula
adopts this classification, but proposes to call the two latter dislocation or
structural earthquakes*. Lasaulx distinguishes between volcanic and
non- volcanic earthquakes, and then divides the latter group into subsideTice
and fracture earthquakes. As a secondary phenomenon, Lasaulx mentions
the group of rdais earthquakes, that is, secondary concussions, which
occur outside the immediate seismic area of a shock, and are, started by its
excitation in other seismic regions

These are first and, as it were, tentative efforts to distinguish between

^ R. Hoemes, Erdbebenstudien, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1878, XXVIII, p. 387 et seq.

* F. Toula, Ueber den gegenwflrtigen Stand der Erdbebenfrage, 8vo, Wien, 1881, p. 54.

’ A. V. Lasaulx, Die Erdbeben, in A. Kenngott, HandwCrterbuch d. Mineralog., Geol.
nnd Palaedhtof, I, 1883, pp. 358-364.



174


DIVERSITY OF THE MOVEMENTS [pabti

the multifarious forms of the phenomenon, and if possible to more exactly
define them. In these attempts, the essential point appears to me the
separation from all others of those earthquakes, whether called dislocation
or tectonic earthquakes, which accompany or precede an actual displace-
ment of individual parts of the lithosphere.

On the supposition, which may be readily conceded, that no dislocation
takes place without an earthquake, there must be as many kinds of
dislocation earthquakes as there are of dislocations, and the same principles
of division must obtain in both cases. According to this wo should have
to distinguish, at least in those typical cases in which the resolution of the
telluric stresses is fairly complete, two main groups of dislocation earth-
quakes, namely, those which result from tangential forces and those which
are caused by subsidence.

All those earthquakes which have been already described in the north
part of the eastern Alps, as well as the earthquake of Sillein on January 15,
1858, in the region adjacent to the Carpathians, agree in presenting a
major axis directed at right angles to the strike of the mountains. The
movement produced, which in many cases has its epicentre close to the
outer edge of the mountains, always travels in a straight line far into
the mass of Bohemia, which lies across its course, and it is not seldom
continued to Prague or Lcitmeritz, while it may even reaeh Meissen in
Saxony. This is true of all the shocks which have occurred along the
Karnp-line since the year 1590, and also of the earthquake of Scheibbs of
July 11, 1876. The analogy of the seismic lines with the class of disloca-
tions which we call fiaws, and Bittner’s remark on the precise parallelism
between the flaws and the Kamp-line, have already been mentioned. All
these earthquakes must accordingly be regarded as flaw-shocks (Blatt-
beben).

The analogous earthquake of Belluno on June 29, 1873, will be discussed
later.

If the Belgian earthquake of February 23, 1828, which though of
moderate intensity was distinguished by the large area it affected, and by
the fact that it followed closely the strike of the coal-field, did, indeed, as
Lasaulx supposes, proceed from the faille du Midi (Fig. 17, p. 142), it
might be regarded as an example of an overthiULst or over-riding shock
(Wechsel- oder Vorschubbeben) \

Generally speaking the seismic area of an overthrust shock is less
sharply defined on the surface than that of a flaw-shock, which is charac-
terized by the radial direction in which the seismic line proceeds from the
mountain chain.

It is probable that the greater number of the earthquakes in the

' The references to this remarkable earthquake have been collected by Hoif, Gesch.
der natilrl. Yeranderungen der Erdoberfltlche, V, 1841, pp. 286-293. • *



OH, v] CLASSIFICATION OF EAETHQUAKES 175

northern half of the Alps are the result of tangential movements. Such
earthquakes, as we have already said, appear to be very rarely accompanied
by volcanic eruptions.

It was observed, when discussing the second group of dislocations, that
the second component resulting from the contraction of the globe, the pull
from above downwards, finds no expression in the nature of the dis-
turbances which occur in the crust of the earth, but that the dislocations
included in this group appear simply as manifestations of the force of
gravity, and produce an impression as though parts of the earth’s crust had
collapsed by reason of their own weight and sunk into cavities, already
existing beneath them, or as though the surface had sunk on a yielding
substratum.

But here we enter upon a number of open questions, for this series of
phenomena, especially the subsidence of large fragments of the earth’s
crust, brings us back to the as yet but ill defined, altliough well founded,
hypothesis of the formation of large shallow cavities in the interior of the
earth, to which Dutton has given the name of maculae : and it is precisely
here, along lines of dislocation in these sunken areas, that together with
earthquakes the majority of volcanic outbreaks occur.

The question then at once arises as to where the line must be drawn
between earthquakes of dislocation and volcanic earthquakes; in tlieory
the answer is easy, since explosive phenomena may be regarded as the
characteristic sign of volcanic earthquakes, but it is not so easy in fact ;
an eruption pursues its course in a succession of stages, the movements in
one stage may not resemble those in another, and over long extended lines
earthquakes occur, which might easily be taken for dislocation earthciuakes,
but which merely characterize one phase of the volcanic eruption.

The great Calabrian earthquake of 1783, in which the seisnne centres
appeared first on one, and then on the other side of a peripheral fault-line,
was a dislocation earthquake, and may be termed a periiylieral mlmidence-
eaHhquakCy as distinguished from the radial earthquakes of the same
region : earthquakes which proceed from the region where the radial lines
intersect one another, as in the Lipari Isles, we may speak of as ventral
subsidence-earthquakes, Tlie various fragments of a sunken area, moreover,
may also experience shocks simultaneously, but in diflerent directions. In
any case the eruption of the volcano in dislocation earthquakes is a
secondary phenomenon.

It is much more difficult to apply these distinctions to the continent of
Central America. For although the subsidence of the Pacific region is
clearly evident, and although the presence of a great volcanic* zone is un-
mistakable, yet this region differs essentially from the south of Italy ; it is
distinguished, except at its north-west extremity, by the general and
constant .displacement of the volcanic activity along transverse lines,



176


DIVEESITY OP THE MOyBMENTS [paot i

towards the sunken area, while in the more restricted, plate-shaped area of
subsidence in South Italy the phenomena do not manifest themselves along
the radial lines in the same regular manner. In order to make clear the
difference between the volcanic phenomena of Italy and those which occur
along a radial line, we will cast a glance on the lino which* runs from
Vulcano to Patemd and Mineo, passing through Aetna in an almost north-
north-east to south-south-west direction.

For some time previous to the Calabrian earthquake of 1783, this line
had given signs of unrest.

After a period of inactivity, which had lasted fourteen years, Aetna
became the seat of repeated eruptions in the first half of the year 1780 ; on
May 18, local shocks of great violence, which were compared with explosions,
occurred on the coast between Taormina and Messina; in the month of
June, Vulcano broke out with a deafening noise; on September 14, Patti,
situated on the north coast, between Vulcano and Aetna, was convulsed by
a violent shock of earthquake; on February 13, 1781, there was an earth-
quake in Messina; on May 4, while Aetna was still in activity, another
shock occurred, directed from north to south, from Vulcano past Patti
towards Aetna ; later, on February 6, 1788, the great Calabrian earthquake
commenced.

This line has been in activity since the year 1878. We possess accounts
of the course of events in Vulcano by Mercalli and Piscone; the pheno-
mena which presented themselves in Aetna and Sicily have been in-
vestigated in the most detailed manner by Orazio Silvestri

Vulcano had been inactive since 1780, when in the month of July, 1873,
it began to emit a continually increasing quantity of vapour. On Sep-
tember 7, a lofty column of steam and ash rose up, then followed rhyth-
mical Strombolian eruptions which continued up to October 20 ; four great
openings were formed in the northern part of the crater. Vulcano then
remained moderately active until the middle of the following year, 1874.

On August 29, 1874, Aetna broke out. The summit of the mountain
was cleft from the Cratere dliptico towards the north-north-east for a
length of 6 kilometers. A vast column of smoke poured forth; ashes
and scoria were ejected; for seven hours, as Silvestri says, the peculiar
roaring was heard which accompanies the welling up of lava. Then in
a completely unexpected manner the signs of the approaching eruption

* 0. Silvestri, Ueber die Eruption des Aetna am 29. August 1874, transl. by G. v. Rath,
Neues Jahrb. Mineral., 1875, p. 36, and by the same, Sulla doppia eruzione e i terre-
moti deir Etna nel 1879, 2* ed., ampliata del 1® rapporto present, al B. Governo, 8vo,
Catania, 1879, 46 pp., tav. ; by the same, Lettera all* ill. Prof. L. Palmieri, in Boll.
Vulc. ital., VII, 1880, pp. 9-12 and pp. 82-86; further; Sulla eruzione delP Etna scopp.
il di 22 Marzo 1883; rapporto al R. Governo, 8vo, Catania, 1883; for the behaviour
of Vulcano during IMs time: G. Mercalli, Contribuz. alia geol. delle Isole Lipari, Attid.
Soc. Ital. di Sc. nat., Milano, 1879, XXII, pp. 367-880. *



CH. v] ? VULOAIfO, AETNA, MINEO 177

began to diminish, and on the next day, August 30, the paroxysm appeared
to be at an end. For a considerable period violent earthquakes continued
at the northern foot of the mountain.

We now reach the next phase. This began on October 4, 1878, with
a violent earthquake at Mineo, at the southern extremity of the radial line.
Further shocks followed; early in December eruptions of gas and mud,
lasting a long time, took place from the mud-volcanos of Patemd, which
lie on a straight line between Mineo and the summit of Aetna. The
activity of Vulcano, which had not entirely ceased since 1878, increased
from January 6, 1879. On May 26, repeated earthquake shocks were felt
at the southern foot of Aetna, and towards evening black columns of steam
and ash were seen to ascend from the summit of the mountain, both from
south-south-west and north-north-east, while white vapour rose from the
main crater. The whole upper region of the volcano was cleft across in
the direction of the radial line from south-south-west to north-north-east
for a distance of 10 kilometers ; the cleft opened up with a slight S-shaped
curve right through the middle of the main crater, following the course of
the fissure of 1874. Silvestri made a detailed study of the eruption, which
he followed with admirable courage and sagacity.

Between June 6 and 7 the eruption might be considered to have come
to an end. Quite outside the scene of these events, far below, at the eastern
foot of the mountain, near the threshold of the Val del Bove on the seaward
side, a slight shock had been felt on June 1. Although the eruption was
over, the shocks continued to succeed each other here until, on June 17, an
extremely violent vertical concussion affected this apparently outlying
region. Persons in the open country felt as though they had made a leap.
Several towns were seriously damaged. The mAin axis of the area of con-
cussion, about seven kilometers long, was directed from east-south-east
towards the summit of Aetna \

The eruptions at Paternd increased; on December 13, 1879, a violent
earthquake again occurred in the south near Mineo.

Silvestri had already concluded from these facts that a fissure must exist
in the interior of the earth, traversing Aetna from north^north-east to south-
south-west and that its course is marked out by the most northerly of
the parasitic cones situated near the village of Mojo, by the main crater, and
the mud- volcanos of Patem<5 and Mineo. This supposition received additional
confirmation when, on March 22, 1883, the mountain opened up along a
fissure five kilometers long, situated beneath Monte Concilio, further to the
south, and lower down than on previous occasions, but again directed from
south-south- west to north-north-east ; this time also the quantity of lava

' * II movimento del suolo fu come una spinta cosi veemente, che la genie che era per
le 8trade e per le campagne ebbe la coscienza di aver faito in quel momento come un
Balto da terra.’ •Silvestri, Bapporto, p. 39.

N


BOLLAfl



178


DIVERSITY OP THE MOVEMENTS [pAsri

which escaped was by no means great. The activity of Vulcano and its
situation suggest that this cleft may be a continuation of the southern
radial line of the Lipari Isles. —

These details make clear the great difference between a dislocation earth-
quake due to tangential stress, such as the flaw-shocks of the UOTthem Alps,
and the phenomena which manifest themselves on the radial fissure of a
sinking area.

In the later eruptions of Vesuvius it was always possible to distinguish a
longer or shorter period of preparation. Silvestri lays particular emphasis on
the fact that the last great eruptions of Aetna have invariably been preceded
by a longer or shorter period of Strombolian, i.e. rhythmical activity. This
seems to indicate that it is not a question of the relative movement of great
fragments of the earth’s crust, but of the gradual and temporary reopening
of the canals, choked with scoria, which extend along the volcanic fractures.

In other volcanos, however, cases have been observed of a more tranquil
discharge and outflow of great quantities of lava, and Dutton has described
a remarkable example of this kind in Mauna Loa. Here the outbreak of
lava takes place suddenly from radial clefts, the glowing stream spouts up
at first to a considerable height, and then flows away ; one of the three
streams of 1881-1882 attained a length of eighty kilometers; but no
earthquake, no violent tremblings of the mountain, no outburst of clouds
of water vapour, not even the formation of ash cones as on Kilauea,
accompanied the phenomenon*. If then we have reason to believe that
dislocations are always accompanied by earthquakes, this is by no means
the case with eruptions. A closer comparison of Silvestri’s description,
particularly as regards the behaviour of the mud-volcanos of Paternd, with
Dutton’s statements, lends support to the opinion that the noise of the
eruption, the ejection of scoriae, and even certain earthquakes are mainly
to be ascribed to water vapour.

Of particular importance appear to me the earthquakes which some-
times occur after the eruption, in regions lying at a distance from the
main area of shock, such as those which were felt at the eastern foot of
Aetna in June, 1879, following upon a temporarily suspended eruption.

The disturbances move on a long line, from Vulcano to Mineo; only at
one spot, on the flanks of Aetna, high above Vulcano, and above the other
convulsed regions, lava pours out and explosions en>jue. But far below, at
the foot of the mountain, shocks of earthquake take place after the con-
clusion of the explosions. All the concussions on this long line might be
regarded as preparatory to the eruptions ; but this conception will not apply
to these later shocks.

’ C. E. Dutton, Recent Exploration of the Volcanic Phenomena of the Hawaiian
Islands ; Am. Joum. Science, 1883, 3rd ser., XXV, p. 222. The whole of the mighty
cone of Mauna Loa is built up, not of ashes, but of vesicular lava.



CONCLUSION


179


tJH. v]

There is yet another group of earthquakes, sometimes very violent,
sometimes sharply circumscribed in space, which have their origin in some
cases in the neighbourhood of active volcanos, such as the earthquake of
Ali, not far from Taormina in Sicily, May 18, 1780, or that of Casa Micciola
on Ischia, March 4, 1881 ; in others in volcanos recently extinct, as the
numerous earthquakes which have proceeded from the Albanian mountains
or Monte Vulturo ; or in yet others in long extinct eruptive masses, such as
that of May 21, 1882, from the Kaiserstuhl in the Breisgau \

These phenomena have a number of characters in common, and I do not
know whether to class them as explosive shocks or as subsidpnco earth-
quakes. Further observations are requisite for a satisfactory solution of
this question. —

We attempted in an earlier chapter to determine a denudation series of
volcanos. Starting from the youngest ash cones of the present day we
arrived at those in which the skeleton is exposed to view (Venda, Ponza
islands), and traces of lateral acid intrusions are perhaps already visible in
the basal structure (Venda); these invite comparison with the great
American laccolites (Henry mountains and others). We saw that in the
eruptive centres, which had been more deeply eroded, rocks of ancient type
(syenite, quartz-diorite, granite) are to be observed, within the flows envelop-
ing them, in the lower part of the pipe (Hebrides, South Tyrol) ; the remains
of the flows then disappear, the section of the eruptive centre grows longer,
and the volcanic cleft becomes more and more continuous (Banat).

It is this phase which furnishes material for comparison with the obser-
vations of Silvestri on the activities associated with the great cleft that
traverses Aetna.

At length,, as the destruction of the outer envelope of the earth extends
deeper, there stand revealed the elongated cicatrices, and those great swollen
cake-like masses of intrusive granite or syenite, which bring about the
metamorphosis of the sedimentary beds forming their roof ; and by these
we are put upon the trail of a series of great abyssal phenomena.

These phenomena seem to stand in some causal connexion with the
absence of the tangential component in the dislocations of our mountains—
with the passive subsidence of extensive plates and great fragments of the
crust into the profound depths below.

In the next part we will briefly survey, in the light of our present
knowledge, the structure of the most important mountain chains of the
earth, and so proceed to inquire to what extent the resolution of the
stresses in space, which result from a diminution in the volume of
the planet, finds expression in its outer aspect.

* A. Knop, Das Erdbeben im Kaiserstuhl im Breisgau am 21. Mai 1882 ; Beitr.
z. naturwiss. Ohronik des Grossh. Baden, 1881-1882 ; from the Verb. Earlsruh. naturwiss.
Vereines, 1883, pp. 1-6, and plate.


N 2



PART II

THE MOUNTAIN RANGES OF THE EARTH

CHAPTER I

THE NORTHERN FORELAND OP THE ALPINE SYSTEM

The Russian Platform. The Sudetes. The Franconian-Swabian area of subsidence.
Ries and Hohgau. The horsts. Quartz dykes in the horsta Zigzag outlines. Jurassic
relicts of the Sudetes. Relation of the Alpine system to its foreland.

The earthquakes which are propagated from the northern border of the
Alps to the granite mountains of Bohemia travel from one fragment of the
earth’s crust to another (p. 7%, Fig. 3). The difference in the structure
and stratification of the two regions is extraordinarily great. The uniform
structure of the outer border of the Alps and of the Carpathians, from
Switzerland through Bavaria, Austria, Moravia, Silesia, and Qalicia, is just
as striking as the diversified' outline of the masses bounding it on the.
north. Nevertheless the contour of the Alpine system and the fold on its
outer border evidently stand in a certain relation to this northern foreland.

In order to understand the structure of the Alpine system it is therefore
necessary to know that of this northern foreland as well, and if, on the one
hand, it has hitherto been admitted that the contour of the Alpine system
has been determined by the foreland, it remains, on the other, an open
question whether the formation of the Alps may not also have exerted
an influence on the structure of the foreland.

The northern foreland of the Alps falls into three parts, differing widely
from one another. These are, proceeding from east to west : the Russian
Platform, the Sudetes, and the mountain-edre of Central Europe. Under
the last term I include the mass of Bohemia and all the ancient masses
occurring to the west of it in the foreland of the Alps : namely, the Schwarz-
wald, the Vosges, the small mass near Ddle, the Central Plateau qf France,
and the Iberian Meseta.

A. The Ruesian Platfgrm.

The most singular portion of the foreland is the Russian Platform. To
find a starting-point for its description we must proceed far to the north.
Let \is examine Grewingk’s map of the Baltic provinces. Granite and gneiss
form the whole of Finland and the north coast of the Gulf of Bothnia.
On the south coast the lower divisions of the Silurian appear, horizontally


The System of the Alp



THE RUSSIAN PLATFORM


181


stratified ; the upper stages follow to the south and include the northern
part of Lake Peipus and, towards the west, the island of Oesel. Then
follows likewise, with almost horizontal bedding, the Old Bed sandstone of
the Devonian system ; this extends as far as the southern end of Lake
Peipus and forms almost the whole coast of the Qulf of Riga. Still further
to the south lie the middle and upper divisions of the Devonian, extending
over wide areas, while towards the north-west of the province of Kovno
the Zechstein and the Jurassic beds of Popilany rest in transgression on
the horizontal platform of the Silurian and Devonian strata \

No mountain slopes, comparable to the border of the Bohemian plateau,
face the eastern Carpathians ; the plain formed of loess, of different deposits
of the younger Tertiary period, and of the middle and upper Cretaceous,
stretches away far and wide. The course of the Dniestr and its tributaries
reveals, however, beneath this mantle of younger rocks the continuation
of the Palaeozoic platform, which we observed far in the north. The red
sandstone masses of the Devonian, the remarkable fish remains, the marine
mollusca of the Silurian, and the horizontal stratification have long since
placed the correspondence of this basement with the great Russian Platform
beyond all doubt. The beds are never folded and dip only very gently to
tiie south-west. Malinski and Barbot de Mamy have recently traced the
continuation of these strata in the adjacent parts of south-western Russia,
and Alth has combined all the older and more recent observations, both
Austrian and Russian, in a most instructive study This has been supple-
mented and completed by the works of Paul® and the palaeontological
observations of F. Schmidt^. Finally Alth himself has since established
the remarkable fact that towards the west an upper Jurassic limestone
formation is intercalated between the Old Red sandstone and the Ceno-
manian, a transgression of western character

The exposure of ancient rocks is, it is true, confined to the river- valleys,
but a combination of observations makes it possible nevertheless to recognize
the distribution of the various formations in its main outlines. The granite
plateau which extends over large areas at the Bug and continues into the
government of Kherson forms the foundation ; it is visible on the Dniestr

^ G. Grewingk, Geogn. Earte der Ostseeprovinzen, Liv-, Esth- und Kurland ; Archiv fur
Naturkunde, Dorpat, 1879, Bd. VIII.

‘ A. V. Alth, Ueber die palaeozoischen Gebilde Podolien's und deren Yersteinerungen,
Abhandl. geol. Beichsanst., 1874, VII, in particular pp. 1-21, and supplemented by Die
Gegend von Nizniow und das Thai von der Zlota Lipa in Ostgalizien,- Jahrb. geol.
Beichsanst., 1877, XXVII, pp. 319-340.

^ Paul, GrundzQge der Geol. der Bukowina; Jahrb. geol. Beichsanst., ljB76, XXVI,
pp. 328-330.

^ F. Schmidt, Einige Bemerkungen Cber die Podolisch-galizische Silurformation und
deren Petrefacten ; Bull. Acad. St. Petersb., 1875.

® A. V. Alth, Die Yersteinerungen des Nizniover Kalksteines ; Beitr. zur Palaeont. von
Oesterr.-Ung. van Mojsisovics und Neumayr, 1881, 1, p. 183 et seq.



182 NOETHEBN FOEELAND OF THE’ ALPS [pamU

as far as Jampol lielow Mohilew, while the extreme limit within whieh*
granite occurs runs from this point in a north-westerly direction towards
Froskurow on the Upper Bug, and then to the north-north-e^ towards
Novgorod-Yoljmsk in Volhynia. West of this line we encounter Palaeozoic
beds almost horizontally stratified, and more and more recent subdivisions
appear as we proceed towards the west * . Near Jampol, sandstone, represent-
ing the oldest member of the Silurian, lies on the granite ; this is followed
by higher members of the series, which occur near Mohilew, Kamenetz-
Podolsk, on the Austrian frontier, northwards as far as Tamaruda; and
within the frontier, on the Dniestr to above Zalescyki. Along the tributaries
of the Dniestr, which all come from the north, the exposure of these strata
depends on the extent of the erosion. The highest divisions of the Silurian
are followed towards the west by the red Devonian sandstone ; it is visible
on the Dniestr to above Nieznow, on the Zlotalipa and in the valley of the
Sereth to within eight kilometers below Tamopol; then it disappears
beneath much younger deposits. —

There thus lies, beneath the plain of eastern Galicia, a part of that
remarkable platform which from the most distant times has preserved its
horizontal stratification over an area extending from the south of Sweden
through northern and central Russia and far away to the east, and which
here too in the bed of the Dniestr shows no appreciable displacement of its
strata.

Between the Dniestr near Zalescyki and the outer border of the
Carpathians, which is formed of folded Neocomian beds, flows an impor-
tant river, the Truth, but its valley, although eroded to about the same
level as that of the Dniestr, reveals nothing but Tertiary sand and clay.

The continuation of the Palaeozoic deposits is sought in vain, and not
even Cretaceous is to be seen.

Alth supposes that a great subsidence must have taken place on the
eastern border of the Carpathians, in consequence of which a broad gulf
many miles in length was formed, and subsequently filled by Tertiary
deposits ^ Paul even thought it not impossible that we might ^d in the
crystalline schists of the Carpathians the metamorphosed equivalents of the
Silurian deposits of Fodolia^

However this may be, so much is certain, that this whole series of thick

* I am not yet clear as to the arrangement of the beds in Volhynia. Ossovski'g'
beautiful geologioad map of Volhynia (fob, Paris, 1880) gives Cretaceous and Tertiary
towards the west ; but towards the east, on the other side of the river Sluez and in the
region of its springs, azoic quartzite, and then limestone and shales. The quartzite,
however, rests directly on granite.

* A. V. Alth, Palaeoz. Geb., p. 4 ; a section from the Pmth to the Dniestr, but chiefly
with reference to the Tertiary formations, is given by Petrino, VerhandL geoL Beichsanst.,
1875, p. 218.

* Paul, Geol. Bukow., p. 880. * *



' THE SUDETES 183

deposits, which extends so for to the north and north-west, is here suddenly
lost to view.

In the same latitude as the Silurian basin of Bohemia, and even still
further to the south, Euryptems Fiacheri, lUaenna Barrienais, Phacopa
Downingiaa, and other fossils characteristic of the north, may be collected
on the Dniestr. Yet more striking is the presence of the Old Bed sandstone,
which may be followed for more than thirty d^rees of latitude towards
the north, Nathorst having lately pointed out its equivalent in Spitsbergen \
From Spitsbergen it is continued across the Orkneys to Scotland and Wales.
Certain patches of old sandstone in Norway may possibly be referred here.
The most southerly districts in which Old Bed sandstone occurs are those
facing the Carpathians, and from here we must again travel far to the
north in order to find the continuation of the Scandinavian strata on the
Gulf of Biga. Thence it is further continued to the east and north<east
towards the White Sea, as though the Scandinavian Finnish mass wore
surrounded by a great girdle of Old Bed sandstone

If, from the border of the Carpathians near Kutty, we travel to the
north-north-east, we reach, at a distance of about 34*5 kilometers, the middle
of the Pruth valley, above Sniatyn, and after another 25 kilometers
the Palaeozoic deposits near Zalescyki. Over these 25 kilometers this
portion of the Bussian platform, owing either to a continuance of a gentle
inclination to the south-west (which it already possessed in places) or to a
flexure or fracture, must have been sunk so deep that it is no longer visible
in the valley of the Pruth, and the subsidence is probably continued still
further towards the Carpathians, and even beneath them.

All these circumstances lead us to the conclusion that a part of the
Busaian Platform has been overthruat by the folds of the Carpathiana.

B. The Sudetea. '

The horizontal stages of the Bussian^ Platform disappear towards the
west beneath the plain ; it is doubtful whether they cross the Bug under
a covering of younger deposits, but it is certain that to the east of this
they do not reach the river San.

At a considerable distance to the east of this river, near the town of
Lubaezow, Hilber has observed in two places an outcrop of steeply up-
turned beds of grey slate ®.

* A. G. Nathorst, Ueber die wissenschaftl. Resultate der letzten schwodischen Ezped.
nach Spitsbergen (trans. by 'Th- Fuchs) ; Yerhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1883, p. 25.

* Godwin-Austen, Jones, Ramsay, Geikie deny the marine origin of the Old Bed, and
regard Scandinavia, with its continuation to the Hebrides, as a very ancidnt continent :
Geikie, On the Old Bed Sandstone of Western Eufope, Trans. Roy. Soc., Edinb., 1878,
XYIII, pp. 846, 850.

* Y. Hilber, Geol. Aufhahmen um Lubaezow und Sieniawa in Galizien ; Yerhandl.
geol. Beichsar^.', 1882, p. 807.



184 NORTHEEN FORELAND OP THE ALPS [parth

In the south of Badom, near Sandomir, Eielce, and Chiencing, there
rises a small independent mountain chain, which we will call, with Pusch,
the Sandomir mountains. It is composed, as F. Roemer and Hempel have
shown, of a number of folds striking to the east or east-south-east, and is
continued, according to Tietze*s observations, into Austrian territory, near
Gorzyee ^ The whole series of the Trias and a part of the Jurassic forma-
tion are present, and have been involved in the folding of the chain. The
lowest member is, according to Zeuschner, Silurian slate containing Orapto-
lites, for the mighty masses of quartzite which project in the anticlinals
appear to belong to the lower Devonian. Zeuschner has also found a rich
middle Devonian fauna, corresponding to that of the Eifel limestone®,
and F. Roemer has recognized besides an upper Devonian fauna which
coincides with that of the Goniatite schiefer of Budesheim and the
Cypridina schiefer of Nassau K The Carboniferous system does not seem
to be represented, since Zechstein, with Froductus horridus, and then the
Trias, succeed the Devonian.

Here we have no longer the stratification and structure of the Russian
Platform, and although in the extreme north the schists of Domanik con-
stitute an equivalent to the Goniatite schiefer of Budesheim and Devonian
limestone with Stringocephalus Burtini still occurs in the Ural, yet what
is known of the Sandomir mountains accords so completely with the struc-
ture in the west as far as the Sudetes, that the boundary line must be
sought to the east of the river San.

In this region, which extends far to the west, ancient stratified systems
do indeed now and again appear; for instance, middle Devonian and
Carboniferous limestone near Debnik, north of Krzezowice, Stringocephalus

^ F. Roemer, Gcogn. Beobacht. im polnischen Mittelgebirge, Zeitsebr. deutsch.,
geol. Ges., 1866, XVIII, pp. 667-690, pi. xiii; J. de Hempel, Descr. geol. des environs de
Kielce, de Cbenciny et de Malagoscz, situes au centre de la Pologiie, Ann. des Mines,
1867, 6tli ser., XII, pp. 141-183, with map; E. Tietze, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1883,
p. 31. The neighbourhood of Chmielnik and Pinezow on Russian territory is repre-
sented on the geological map of a part of the Gouvern. Kielce by S. Kontkiewicz,
Sprawozdanie z Badan geol., &o., Pamietn. Fizyjgraf. Warszawa, 1882, II, tab. x.

* Zeuschner, Ueber das Vorkommen von Diceras arietina in Eorzetzko bei Chenciny,
Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1868, XX, pp. 576-580 ; Ueber die eigentflmliche Entwicklung
der Triasformation zwischen Brzeziny und Pierzchnicau, &c., tom. cit., pp. 727-740,
pi. XV ; Ueber die neuentdeckte Silurformation von Kleczanow bei Sandomierz im sddl.
Polen, op. cit., 1869, XXI, pp. 257-262 ; and Geogn. Beschr. der mittleren devonischen
Schichten zwischen Grzegorzowicc und Skaly-Zagaje bei Nowa Slupia, tom. cit.,
pp. 263 274 ; further, Ueber den silurischen Thonschiefer von Zbrza bei Kielce, tom. cit.,
pp. 569-573, and map. I have still some doubt whether according to Hempel’s repre-
sentation the Mesozoic beds have shared all the movements of the older formations.
J. Trejdosiewicz, Opis badan geol., &o., Sprawozd. Komis, fizyjogr., XIII, Krakau, 1879,
has also observed middle Devonian limestone near Zbrza, and assigns the quartzite of
this region to the lower Devonian.

’ F. Roemer, Geogn. Beobacht., p. 675 ; Leth. Geogn., 1880, 1, pp. 23, 49. <



185


OH. i] TRANSGEESSIONS IN THE SUDETES

limestone near Siewersz, and Devonian slate near Tost, north of Qleiwitz,
until finally on the other side of the upper Silesian coal-fields we reach the
slopes of the Sudetes.

Here we are concerned only with the southern part of the Sudetes.
I should far exceed the limits of this work if I were to enumerate all the
distinguished investigators to whom we owe our knowledge of the structure
of this mountain chain. For the Austrian region I will only mention
H, Wolf and D. Stur^; for the border of the Carpathians, the district of
Cracow, Hohenegger and Fallaux^; for Upper Silesia and the adjacent
parts of Poland, F. Roemer ^

The southern part of the Sudetes presents a purely monoclinal structure ;
descending from its highest summits we meet as a rule with deposits
becoming more and more recent towards the east and extending far into
the plains of Poland. The oldest divisions of this series which rise to the
greatest heights have also as a rule the steepest dip ; the next succeeding
members as far as the Coal-measures often exliibit subordinate folds and
fractures, owing to which their thickness, already considerable, appears yet
further increased. The more recent stages are horizontally bedded in the
plain, while further to the north indications are not wanting that great
folding took place after the Cretaceous period.

A closer examination of this great series, which is inclined to the east,
shows, however, that it is not complete ; several members, such as the Lias,
Neocomian, Gault, and Eocene, are wanting ; every gap is followed by a
transgression, which took place over the widely denuded surface of older
formations ; and since the latter did not present horizontal surfaces to the
erosion, Bunter sandstone is found resting here, for example, on the Culm
and there, but a little way off, on the Coal-measures, and so with other
formations. The movements which caused the repeated abrasion and
transgression were evidently very uniform and similar.

The easteni slope of the range, from its summit to the Coal-measures
of the plain, consists for a breadth of several miles of Devonian and Culm.
On rocks, which are probably Archaean, lie lower Devonian quartzites
containing Homalonotus crassicauda^ Grmnmysia Hauiiltonensis, and
Spirifer macroptcitJbs, This zone extends approximately north and south
in the neighbourhood of Zuckmantel and Wurbcnthal, and then turns off
to the south-south-west. In this direction the lower Devonian is con-

^ The results of these works, as far as they refer to the Devonian and. Carboniferous,
have been united in a detailed representation by D. Stur, Die Culmilora, I, pp. 91-103,
II, pp. 317-366 ; Abhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1875-1877, VIIL

* L. Hohenegger, Gcogn. Karte der Nordkarpathen in Schlesien, &c., witH text, Gotha,
1861 ; by the same, Geogn. Karte des ehemaligen Gebietes von Krakau, zusammengest.
von Com. Fallaux, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1866, XXVI.

^ F. Roemer, Geol. von Oberschlesien ; Geogn. Karte von Oberschlesien, in 12
sheets, 1870f •



186 NOETHBRN FOEELAND OF THE ALPS [PAMif

tinned for a long distance and even reaches, near Fetrowitz, east of Raitz,
north of Briinn, the cicatrice which sharply separates the Sudetes from
the Bohemian mass. This cicatrice is formed by the main boundary
fracture, here distinguished by an intrusion of syenite.

The next zone towards the east is of middle Devonian age. From
Bennisch to Sternberg it is distinguished by an outcrop of ironstones, then
by tuffs, amygdaloidal diabase, and subordinate calcareous beds, the age of



Fw. 24. The firdand of the Weetem Carpathians (based chiefly on the works of
F. Roemor, Hohenogger, and F. v. Hauer ; the Coal-measures after Jicinsky), All the
transgressive strata and tlio Miocene and more recent deposits are supposed to be removed.

Archaean rocks; dj, dg, d,^ Devonian; cm » Culm; ca = Carboniferous ; p^Roth-
llegende; <r«Trias ; j— Jurassic; cr=middlo and upper Cretaceous; sy»Syenite.

I

which is determined by Phacops latifrona. Further to the south the zone
consists only of limestone, and it also reaches the syenite to the north of
Briinn while retaining a considerable breadth ^

Then follows the broadest of these zones, the Culm with its slate

^ Of late the view has again been put forward that the narrow band of limestone
situated to the west of the syenite at Schloss Eichhorn is to be assigned to the
Devonian (C. v. Camerlander, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1883, p. 57). From this it
would follow that the boundary of the Sudetes is indicated at this point not by one
continuous fault, but by two or more parallel faults. This would involve no further
alteration in the description attempted here.


WEISSKIECHEN


187


CH. l]

quarriea Stur has distinguished three horizons within this zone, the
rocks of which are very various. Po&idonomya Becheri and Archaeo-
calamitea radiatua are the most important fossils. This zone advances
towards the east near Hultschin in an obtuse angle, and there the steeply
inclined strata may be seen in contact with the succeeding Coal-measures.
In its prolongation to the south and south-west the eastern border of the
zone comes south of Weisskirchen into immediate contact with the outer
border of the Carpathians. The contact of the two chains is so close that



Fio. 25. The foreland of the Kastem Carpathians (based chiefly on the works of F. v. Hauer
and Alth). The Cretaceous transgression, the Miocene, and more recent deposits arc
supposed to be removed.

Arch Archaean rocks ; Sil - Silurian ; ns = Old Red sandstone.

the European watto parting falls completely within the Culm zone of
the Sudetes.

This zone is the last which is continued to the south of Weiaskirchen as
a chain; it forms the outer border of the heights which run down to
Briinn. All the succeeding divisions of the Sudetic series disappear between
this place of contact and the neighbourhood of Cracow.

Near Hultschin, as we have said, the upper strata of the Culm are
followed by the Coal-measure series. Tlie yielding nature of most of these
rocks prevents their forming mountain ranges, and the result is a plain
interrupted by scattered groups of lulls. Nor do they form a zone striking



188 NORTHEEN FORELAND OF THE ALPS [pakth

parallel to the Sndetes like the Devonian and the Culm far in the north,
but, as F. Roemer has shown in detail, a series of outcrops of the Culm,
having the form of a broad crescent, advances from the projecting parts of
the chief masses past Hultschin and Katscher, to the east of LobschUtz,
to the north of Kosel, and thence towards Tost. This line, together with
the outcrops of Devonian limestone near Siewerz, and of Devonian and
Carboniferous limestone north of Krzezowice, surround the area within
which Coal-measures are known

It will be seen that this curve is closed on the west, north, and east ;
but towards the Carpathians it is open. Herr Jicinsky, Director of Mines,
has attempted by means of observations made in the mines to estabUsh
the continuity of the most important seams throughout the whole coal-field,
and here again has obtained a series of great crescentic curves, which are
continued beneath the Trias and open towards the Carpathians

These facts seem to me to prove that the Silesian coaUjield is actvAilly
continued beneath the CarpathiaTis.

Hochstetter long ago put forward this view and personally I have
always shared it ^ ; Stur ® based his arguments on the same hypothesis, and
Jicinsky has indicated the probable extension of the coal-seams beneath*
the Carpathians by dotted lines, and based on this a hypothetical section.
But since these Carboniferous deposits rest conformably on the Devonian
and the Culm of the Sudetes, and the difference in the form of the ground
is only to be ascribed to the greater destructibility of the Coal-measures,
we must regard the lattet as a normal constituent of the Sudetes them-
selves, and thence it follows that the folds of the Carpathians may well
have been packed against the upturned shales and sandstone masses of the
Culm zone, while they haVe been driven over the low-lying surface of the
Coal-measure region, and that in fact a portion of the Sudetes lies under
the Carpathians.

Galleries have been excavated, for example, near Schonhof, close up to
the edge of the Flysch zone of the Carpathians, and have even been bored
in coal near Hustopec, to the north of the contact of the Culm and Flysch,
near Weisskirchen. There a bed of coal was indeed found, but further
exploration showed that it was enclosed in a very large isolated block of
crushed Carboniferous deposits. As a rule, so far as we can judge from

^ E. Roemer, Geol. von Oberschlesien, Atlas, index map, sheet 1.

* W. Jicinsky, Der Zusammenhang der mahr.-schlcB. und der preus8.-schle8. Kohlen-
formation, in the Oest. Zeitschr. filr Berg- und Hiittenwesen, 1877, pi. ix; by the
same, Der Zusammenhang der einzelnen Fl^tze und Fl^tzgruppen im Ostrau-Karviner
Steinkohlenreviere, op. cit., 1880, p, 409 et seq., pi. xvii.

^ F. V. Hochstetter, Ueber das Vorkommen von ErdOl und Erdwachs im Sandecer
Kreise in Westgalizien ; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1865, XV, p. 206.

* Entstehung der Alpen, p. 71.

® D. Stur, Culmfloxa, pp. 319, 320. • *



189


OB. i] OUTEB ZONES OP THE SUDETES

existing exposures, the distnrbuices and fractures in the Coal-measures are,
strange to say, inclined more steeply and violently towards the Sudetes
than towards the Carpathians.

In spite of the great thickness of the Coal-measures — in the Austrian
area estimated at several thousand feet — do not believe that they were
deposited in a basin, corresponding to that in which they at present lie ;
but I regard them as the remains of a much more extensive deposit, which
have been protected, in a broad synclinal, from the great pre-Triassic
denudation. This levelled the whole country at the time of the advance
of the Bunter sandstone, exposing the anticlinal of the Culm, near Tost,
and destroying the Permian deposits, of which only isolated traces are now
visible.

Over these Palaeozoic deposits of the Sudetes there lies a most varied
series of Mesozoic marine formations, with a very gentle dip to the east
or north-east. The course of their western border is determined by the
amount of erosion which they have themselves undergone, that of the
visible eastern border by the denudation of the overlying, next younger
stage. This is the origin of those parallel or concentric lines bounding the
•stratified formations on geological maps, which have so often been re-
garded as indications of subsidence, as for example in the basin of Paris.

This horizontal bedding is interrupted, at least as far as my observa-
tions extend, by a single important disturbance only ; as to the relations of
this to the general structure of the country I have been unable, in spite
of repeated visits to the district, to come to any definite conclusion. The
disturbance is a synclinal or trough fault lying transversely across the
strike of the Mesozoic girdle and involving all the strata, including
the Cretaceous ; its axis lies somewhat north of Cracow and strikes in a
west-north-west direction past Trzebinia towards Myslowitz (Fig. 24) ; it is
at first fairly broad, then becomes narrower and steeper, and appears near
Myslowitz to pass into simpler fracture. It is possible that a second
dislocation of the same kind branches off from the first in the direction
of Trzebinia-Chrzanow. With this exception the course of the Mesozoic
zones is very regular and but little disturbed by protruding hillocks of
ancient formations.

The Trias zone is resolved towards the west into a number of isolated
outliers; in the north it dips, acconling to Roemer’s observations, some-
what to the west of the Wartha beneath the middle Jurassic ; it is affected
by the above-mentioned disturbance of ' Cracow-Myslowitz, and on the
south of this disturbance sinks in face of the Carpathians towards the
Vistula, thus forming the chain of heights between Alwernia ahd Chclmek.
The bedding here appears to be quite horizontal. The foot of the slope,
crowned by the picturesque ruins of the fortress of Lipowee, is formed of
Bunter sandstone. The foot of the Carpathians lies on the other side of



190 ITOBTHERN FORBlLANi) OF THE

the Vistula, and is here, according to Hohen^lger, formed of folded
Nummnlitic deposits. The distance between the foot of the two chains
is 9*5 kilometers ^

Above the Trias formation is the Bhaetic stage, only locally and feebly
represented; the Lias is not to be seen; in the north argillaceous beds
with Peris^dnctes Parkiruoni, in the south the oolites of Balin with
Stephanoceras rnMcrocephalvm extend over the Keuper ; above these oolites
a blue clay with Belemmtea aemihastatua occurs in the south, then follow
the rocks of white Jurassic limestone which from Gzenstochau onwards
form a continuous chain — a very prominent feature in the landscape—*
extending along the eastern side of the Wartha past Olkusz to Cracow, and
thence close to the foot of the Carpathians. To the east they dip, near
Lelow and in the neighbourhood of Cracow, beneath a continuous mantle
of Cenomanian. These Jurassic limestones withstand the effects of denuda*
tion better than the sandstones and clays of the lower stages of the
Mesozoic series and even than the limestone beds of the Trias, which are
intercalated between strata of less resistance. This is the obvious explana*
tion of the fact that the Jurassic limestone con be followed across the
valley of the Vistula, right up to the border of the Carpathians.

. The Jurassic chain, where it is broken up into isolated hills, between
Mirow and Podgorze, facing the Carpathians, attains a very considerable
breadth. Between Tyniec and Podgorze it crosses the Vistula; several
smaller masses rise from the alluvial ground, and the last hill, near
Kurdw&now, to the west of Wieliczka, lies only two kilometers from the
edge of the Carpathians, and stands already within the border of Tertiaiy
clay containing sulphur and salt, which near Wieliczka itself is thrust
by the Carpathians over to the north in great folds *.

This very remarkable junction shows that the Jurassic zone which
comes down far from the north-west, suffers no deviation in the neighbour-
hood of the Carpathians, but dips beneath these mountains.

Above the Jurassic, the Neocomian and Qault are absent. The Ceno-
manian stage, as may be seen in so many places, extends transgressively
far over the older beds, and great isolated patches appear even to the west
of the Trias zone near Oppeln, and directly upon the Culm zone near
Hqtzenplotz. This transgression reveals how great and extensive the
erosion which preceded it must have been. The Culm-shales already lay
exposed, the Trias must have been removed over a large part of the coal-
field, and there is little doubt that at the time when the Miocene deposits
near Wieliczka were driven forwards by the Carpathians, the erosion, not

' L. Hobenegger’i map of Cracow shows these conditions with great clearness.

' Bemerkungen fiber die Lagerung des Salzgebirges bei Wieliczka ; Sitzungsber. k.
Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1868, Bd. 58, 1. Abth., p. 544. ,



i9i

0^7 of the OffbcHuferous, but also of the Trias and Jurassic beds, was
almost as far advanced as it is at the present day.

A continuous belt of Cretaceous deposits appears for the first time in
the east . between the Wartha and Filica, enters the basin of Trzebinia near
Cracow, and finally reaches the Vistula; the Cretaceous formation, like the
Trias, is denuded away, opposite the Carpathians, and on the other side of
the Vistula I know of only obscure traces of it, at least in the neighbour-
hood of Cracow. East of Cracow, however, it covers the plain far and
wide.

Eocene beds are unknown in the whole foreland of the Carpathians ;
but many isolated patches of deposits formed during a Miocene mtmne.
transgression occur on the coal-fields; the sediments of this age attain
a j^eat thickness on the border of the mountains and form great folds in
thk region, as 1 have already mentioned, which have been driven forwards
by the Carpathiana —

We have now reached those beds which are directly involved in the
movements of the Carpathians. Generally speaking we have arrived at
the following conclusions : —

The Archaean rocks of the Sudetes extend southwards to the great fault
of Briinn without any deviation ; this is also true of the lower and middle
Devonian zones. To the south of Weisskirchen the outer border of the
Culm zone comes into contact with the outer border of the Carpathians ;
they are pressed one against the other; aU the other zonee of the Svdetes as
far as the plain of Poland — Carboniferous, Trias, Jurassic, and Cretaceous
— dip from the north beneath the Carpathians.

The formations which have passed this line of contact, viz. the Archaean.
Devonian, and Culm, are suddenly cut off from the Bohemian mass by
the fault of Briinn, and the continuation of the outer zones of the Sudetes
must be sought beneath the plain of Moravia.

If we would read aright the structure of the Carpathians, we must con-
.sequently not lose sight of the fact that, notwithstanding the r^ular course
of its folds, this mountain chain rests, at least in part, on two other very
different fragments of the earth's crust, namely, in the east on the Russian
Platform, and in the west on the south-eastern part of the easterly inclined
Sudetes.

C. The Sunken Area of Franconia and Swabia.

A long belt of Bothliegende coming from the south foot of the Bicsen-
gebirge marks the true border of the Bohemian mass. In the neighbour-
hood of Briinn the strata dip steeply to the east towards the fiault ; at one
point, near Bossitz, south of Briinn, a little patch of upper Carboniferous,
con tainin g workable coal-seams, appears between the Archaean sub-
stratum ynd the Bothliegende, and very far to the south, near Zdbing,



192 NOBTHERN FOIffiLAKD

not for from Erems, a patch of Bothli^nde is preserved on tiie outer
side of the fault.

As far as Brilnn, the Sudetes lie between the mass of Bohemia and
the Carpathians ; beyond, the prospect sweeps freely across the plain from
the flanks of the Mannharts mountains, which form the border of the
Bohemian mass, to the border of the Flysch zone, which here, however, is
interrupted by in-sinking.

On the summit of the Bohemian mass only Archaean rocks are to be
'seen for a great distance, but the out-cropping beds of Bothliegende, rising
like notes of interrogation along the marginal fault, show that they must
once have been continued over the whole land. In the north their
extension is well known, but in the south, also, an isolated patch, near
Budweiss, lies in the midst of the chief region of Archaean rocks \

In Saxony an extensive denudation of the Coal-measures has been
pointed out, which must have occurred before the deposition of the trans-
gressive Bothliegende *. If, however, we turn to the western, that is the
Bavarian margin of the great mass, we find here also, as GUmbel has
pointed out, a fracture which traverses the Fichtelgebirge, and by its
continuation the ThliringerwaJd, at right angles to the strike of the
beds. Along this fracture the same belt of steeply inclined Bothliegende
projects, and with it the same isolated patches of Coal-measures as we have
encountered on the eastern side near Bossitz.

The descriptions of the outcrops of Stockheim and Erbendorf, as well
as of the whole, though fragmentary, belt of Bothliegende on the border of
the ancient mountains of the Thiiringerwald, as far down as Walhalla near
Begensbuig (the latter itself being built on Bothliegende), show the most
striking correspondence with the eastern fault-line, which runs through
Brilnn, Bossitz, and Zobing, at the southern foot of the Biesengebiige ^

The structure of the country which lies on the other side of this
western margin of the Bohemian mass as far as the Schwarzwald is
peculiar. The whole triangular sheet of Trias and Jurassic formations —
bounded on the east by the Thiiringerwald, the Frankenwald, the end
of the Fichtelgebiige, and the Bavarian forest, on the west by the
Odenwald and the Schwarzwald, and on the south, between Schaffhausen

^ D. Stur, Vorlftufige Notiz fiber die dyadische Flora der Antbracit-Lagerstfitten bei
Budweis in Bfihmen ; Verhandl. geoL Reichsanet., 1872, pp. 165-168.

^ H. Credner, Die geol. Landesuntersuchang des Kfinigreichs Sachsen, 8vo, 1881, p. 9
(from the Mitth. des Vereins ffir Erdkunde in Leipzig, 1880).

* Gfimbel, Die Geogn. Verhfiltnisse der frftnkischen Alb (from ‘Bavaria’), 8vo, 1864,
p. 14 ; Geogn. Beschreibung des Kfinigreichs Baiern, IT, p. 656 et seq., Ill, p. 555 et seq.,
et passim. The appearance of Zechstein in the northern part of this region does not
really alter the case. F. Beyschlag, Geogn. Skizze der Umgegend von Crock im
Thiiringerwald, Zeitschr. ffir ges. Naturw., Halle, 1882, Bd. 55, represents on pi. vii
one of these patches of Rothliegende with the marginal faults ; here the coal-beds are
Permian. # *



THE DA3toE 193

and Begensburg, by a great fault, the fa/uU (if the Damuhe — resembles
the broken sheet of ice left on a frozen pond after it has been drained.
From the ancient granite and gneiss rocks, in the east and west, the
Trias and Jurassic sink downwards in steps; before we reach the great
transverse fault of the Danube circular pieces subside in the middle
of the Jurassic formation, and one of these produces the wonderful Hies
caldron, near NSrdlingen. On the other side of the Bies caldron the whole of
the diversified series of the Swabian Jurassic, together with the underlying
Trias, are thrown down along the Danube fault, and their prolongation is
to be found beneath the plain, which is bounded on the south by the
Alps.

The fault of the Danube has long been recognized as the edge of a great
sunken area, and the Bies caldron as the result of collapse, but these
are only parts of a single great system of subsidence, extending to the
Vc^lsbeig and the ThUringerwald, as is clearly shown by a series of
observations on the faults which accompany the foot of the ancient masses
on the east and west. I will only cite a few of the more recent accounts,
beginning in the north-east on the border of the ThUringerwald.

In 1855 H. Credner described in detail the faults, running north-east and
south-west, which traverse the country on both sides of the ThUringerwald ;
those of the south-western slope, which are of particular significance for
us, have been recently examined by BUcking and Frantzen, whose descrip-
tions of some of them may be regarded as monographs

These works refer chiefiy to the district in the Archaean core of the
ThUringerwald, which is also bordered by a fault, and extends from the
north of Schmalkalden as far as Meiningen. The authors in most praise-
worthy fashion examine in detail the movement of each orographic block.
It is evident that some of the faults are accompanied by curvature and
dragging out of the beds, others not, and although the step-like downthrow
is on the whole clear, yet it is occasionally interrupted by faults in which
not the southern but the northern side is thrown down, and also by trough
formation, that is, by the subsidence of long strips of country^betwecn two
faults. In the fault which BUcking has described in attest detail,
namely, that between Mockers and Benshausen, the north-western half is
thrown down on the north side with a change of level amounting to
870-450 meters, while towards the south-east there is a short interruption
in connexion with a transverse fracture, and then for the remainder of its
course the downthrow is on the south side.

Here, then, in the middle of the course of the fault there exists, as it were,

I

‘ H. Backing, GebiigsatOrungen und Erosionserscheinungen sttdwestlich vom Thttrin-
gerwalde, Jahrb. der k. preuss. geol. Landesanst. und Bergakad. zu Berlin fdr 1880, 1881,
pp. 60-105, pi. ii, iii; W. Frantzen, Die Stdiiingen in der Umgegend des grossen
pollmars bei Meiningen, op. cit., pp. 106-136, pi. !▼, v.

POX.LA8 O



194 NOETHERN FOEELAND OP THE ALPS [paw a

a neutral point, and on each side of this movement has taken place in
opposite directions ; it is the same phenomenon as that we have already
pointed out along the great Sevier line in Utah (p. 131); occurrences of
this kind testify to the passivity of the sinking mass.

Further to the south the relations become simpler. GUmbel found that on
the outer margin of the Neuwald and Fichtelgebirge the Mesozoic strata are
always upturned, occasionally even inverted, but within a short distance
of the older formations they assume an approximately horizontal position.
At the same time four long lines of disturbance are visible, almost parallel
to the margin of the mass, which run side by side at nearly equal intervals
of about eight kilometers from each other ; these may be followed to the
south-east up to the western margin of the Franconian Jura, and they
extend in part even as far as the valley of the Danube.

These four principal * splits * are accompanied by dislocation, up- tilting,
and crushing, but not by folding. Gumbel points out that their parallelism
with one another and with the margin of the mass suggests a common
origin : he gives them special names and represents them on the sheets of
the geological map of Bavaria, over the district extending from Coburg to
beyond Thurnau ^

We will now leave the Hercynian borderland, with its south-easterly
striking dislocations, and travel northwards over the Trias region: then
after passing, near Kissingen, the intersection of some great faults striking
to the south-east with others striking to the south-west®, we will make
our way to the Odenwald.

Here again, as on both sides of the Bohemian mass, we find an Archaean
core surrounded by a girdle of steeply-dipping Rothliegende ; the isolated
patches of Carboniferous which are found in that region have here,
however, been sought in vain. In the neighbouring Mesozoic area parallel
faults similar to those described above occur. Benecke and Cohen have
given a general account of them, so far as they affect the southern border
of the Odenwald

According to the facts presented by these writers three systems of faults
may be distinguished in this region : first, those which strike to the north-
north-east and occur in the neighbourhood of the Rhine valley ; secondly,
such as are directed to the north-east and correspond to the outer border
of the Odenwald ; and, finally, a subordinate group of faults, running to the
north-west and crossing the second group at right angles.

' Giimbel, Geogn. Beschreibung Baierns, II, p. 592. They are the Culmbachj
Weismain, Lichtenfels, and StaiFelstein fissures. The author promises much more
detailed accounts of these remarkable disturbances.

‘ Gfimbel, Geol. Rundschau von Kissingen (from the work * Bad Kissingen ' by Sotier),
pp. 13-16.

* E. W. Benecke and E. Cohen, Geogn. Beschreibung der Umgegend von Heidelberg,
8vo, 1881, in particular pp. 595 et seq.



CH. r] ODENWALD, LANGENBRtJ^GKEN 196

The first group has caused the subsidence of the Rhine valley ; it makes
itself evident chiefly on the eastern border of the, Vosges, of the Hardtwald,
and no doubt of the Taunus, as well as on the western border of the
Schwarzwald and the Odenwald. This is the group of the Rhine faults.
The second group corresponds to the boundaries of the great Swabian-
Franconian sunken area, and the third we may consider as the radial
fissures of this area.

To the south of Heidelberg, where the Archaean rocks of the Odenwald
are no longer visible and the Trias reaches the edge of the Rhine valley,
the faults of the Odenwald, which form the second group, meet the Rhine
faults; and here lies the sunken Jurassic area of Langenbriicken, already
recognized as such in 1859 by Deffher and Fraas

At this point, close on the edge of the Rhine valley, an Odenwald fault,
thrown down on the northern side, is cut by a Rhine fault; the down-
throw increases towards the point of intersection, and consequently in the
acute angle formed by the two faults there lies an isolated wedge of
Jurassic preserved from destruction in the midst of the Trias region, one
of the many signs of a once much wider distribution of these deposits.

As in the case of the depression of Langenbriicken, so in that also of the
Hilsbach fault, described by Benecke and Cohen. It is the side nearest
to the Odenwald, that is, the north-western, which is thrown down, and the
more completely known faults of the south-eastern slopes of the Odenwald
also have sunk on the northern side, or in the opposite direction to tliat of
the great majority of the other faults in the Franconian-Swabian area of
subsidence.

In the Schwarzwald the case is different. Here most exact and remark-
able observations have been made by Fraas along the railway line. The
Schwarzwald railway from Zuffenhausen, not far from Stuttgart, to Calw
exposes a difference of level between the different subdivisions of the Trias
amounting to from 350-450 meters, and this is not due to original conditions
of deposition, but to eight larger faults and numerous smaller ones, in all of
which the eastern side is thrown down relatively to the western or that
lying nearer the Schwarzwald ; at the same time the inclination of the beds
is not necessarily, however, directed to the east. ‘ The present configuratwn
of the country f says Fraas, ' thus appears to he the result of stepMJee sub^
sidences of the stratat which took pl(u*e between the Schwarzwald and the
Neclcar. In consequence of the in-sinking the tabular mass of strata broke

' G. Deffner and 0. Fraas, Die Juraversenkung bci LangenbrUcken (from the N. Jahrb.
fttr Mineral., &c.), 8vo, Stuttgart, 1859. According to the explicit statements of Benecke
and Cohen the Rhine and Odenwald fissures are here separated; Knop and .Jordan
consider the Odenwald fissure as a continuation of the Rhine fissure running from the
south to Langenbriicken: Das rhein.-schwSlb. Erdbeben vom 24. Januar 1880, Verhandl.
des naturwiss. ^reins zu Karlsruhe, 1880.



i»8 Xti^'

into a th<WMan«i pieces, which inclined tibtemselves simply in whatever
direction space permitted*.*

Here also, transverse faults, perpendicular to the longitudinal faults,
occur. It will be seen timt both change their direction as they proceed
from the Schwarzwald towards Stuttgart, in such a way that in the Schwarz^
wald district proper the two directions are to one and seven o'clock, but near
Stuttgart, owing to gradual deviation, they are three and nine o’clock ; that
is to say, the direction of the main longitudinal faults in the Schwarzwald
is north to south, but towards Stuttgart it becomes north-east to south*
west, while the direction of the transverse faults passes simultaneously from
east and west to north-west and south-east.

The railway from Bottweil to Villingen also shows the downthrow of
the strata by at least seven step faults ; the younger formations are depressed
relatively to the older, and, according to the words of the same observer,
*we can no longer speak of the stratified deposits of Swabia as having
been deposited against those of the Schwarzwald V

The same system of faults surrounds the Schwarzwald on the south;
their existence has been proved by borings in the Coal-measures, and even
near Zeiningen, not far from Bheinfelden, a fault striking from the east-
south-east meets another wluch runs to the south-west \ In the same way
the table-Jura is broken up and fallen in, as though the folded Jura had
been driven from the south over a stratified platform in course of
breaking down (p. 113, Fig. 10).

All around the Franconian-Swabian sunken area, on the borders of the
Schwarzwald, the Odenwald, and beyond, as on those of the Thiiringerwald
and the Bavarian Forest, the separation of the Mesozoic blocks from the
ancient masses is completed by fardts, which run more or less parallel
to the edge of these masses and are frequently crossed at right angles
by transverse faults. Turning to the centre of this region, we meet
here also with numerous and unambiguous indications of subsidence.
Certain parts of the explanatory text accompanying the detailed geological
maps of Wiirttemberg. contain a whole store of similar observations,
which might furnish the groundwork for a map embracing the fault
system of the whole sunken area. Fraas has lately published a brief
survey of the most important lines of dislocation *. The independence of

* 0. Fraas, Oeol. Frofil der Schwarzwaldbahn von Zuffenhausen nach Oalw; Wflrttemb.
Jahresh., 187ft, XXXII, p. 128.

< The same, Vorlaae der Eisenbahnprofile Bietigheim.Bruchsal and Bottweil-Villingen ;
op. cit., 1872, XXYIII, p. 6ft.

* A. R. Aosfeld, Gleol. Skizze der Gegend von Bheinfelden, Mittheil. Aargauer Natnrf.
Ges., 1882, III, pp. 88-102 ; F. Mflhlbeig, Sammelproftl der Bohningen, id. loc., with plate.

* 0. Fraas, Geogn. Beschreibung von Wflrttemberg, Baden und Hohenzollem, 8vo, 1882,
pp. xz-xzvi. A Anmber of important fhcts have been collected by C. Regelmann,
Trigonom. Hobenbestimmangen, &c. ; Wflrttemb. Jahrb. fOr Statistik, &c^, 1^7, V. ' The
dip of the strata divides the mass of the Alb into three zones parallel to the strike —



g5;iiijvj?6C®^^^ ■ 197'

■' ’ ;■■ '■■ •: ■>

.opioion on this point shown by Deffher, one of the collaborators for this
specif map, will meet with full appreciation and admiration when we
mention that more than forty years ago he not only recognized, in opposi*
tion to many lining authorities, the true nature of these faults and the
universality of the- subsidence, but also drew up a map of the faults in
the region situated on the middle Neckar to the south of Stuttgart. In this
remarkable work ho distinguished peripheral and radial faults under
these very names ; showed the crescentic curvature of the peripheral lines
as they passed from a direction running north and south to one almost
west and east; and finally decisively expressed his conviction that the
younger eruptive rocks, which here and there accompany these faults and
subsidences, are not the cause but the result of fissures, produced in the
solid crust of the earth by other means. Deffner even went so far as to
inquire whether some connexion might not be found to exist between this
extensive subsidence and the origin of the Alps, ‘ in such a way, perhaps,
that a movement of the fluid nucleus of the earth towards the line of
elevation of the central chain of the Alps might result in the subsidence, up
to a certain distance, of the neighbouring peripheral region

Fraas also emphasizes the parallelism of the Danube fault with the
margin of the Alps. ‘ At the same time,* he says, ‘ as the folds of the Alps
arose, the tableland of the Jura split in the same direction

The outline of the sunken area is distinctly wedge-shaped on the north,
the peripheral faults are long and straight and, so far as can be judged
from existing observations, intersect each other at acute angles towards
the north ; they appear to unite in curves as they approach the centre ;
whether they finally reach the fault of the Danube I am unable to decide.
To the north of the fault of the Danube another kind of subsidence occurs
in the form of caldron inbreaks. The smallest of these, if it can be placed
in this group at all, lies near Steinheim, not far from Heidenheim ; it is
hardly one kilometer in diameter and is filled with Tertiary fresh-water
formations. The Ries caldron, in which Nordlingen lies, and that of the
Hohgau, are typical examples of this, group*

D. Ries and Hohgau.

Of the writings dealing with the structure of the Ries caldron it will

a nearly horizontal outer zone on the north, a gently inclined middle zone, and
a southern outer zone with a very strongly marked inclination * (tom. cit., p. 137).

* G. Deffner, Die Lagerungsverh&ltnisse zwischen SchOnbuch und Schurwald, Wtlrt-
temb. Jahresh., 1861, XVII, pp. 170h262, pL iv and v, in particular pp. 236 et seq. ; and
as a supplement to the description of this district, Fraas, Begleitworte zum Atlasblatt,
Stuttgart, 1865; H. Bach, Atlasbl. Boblingen, 1868; Deffner, Atlasbl. Eirchheim, 1872,
and others.

* 0. Fraas, Geogn. Beschreibung von Wffrttemberg, p. ziz.



198 NOBTHEBN FORELAim OF THE

suffice to mention those of Deffiier and Ftaas for the part which lies in
Wttrttembergi.and that of Qiimbel for the Bavarian part^

The Bies presents much that is instructive in the study of the collapsed
area of the Alps, and 1 shall therefore treat it in some detail. That I am in
a position to do so I owe to my friend and master Oscar Fraas, who has
had the kindness to guide me to the most important localities and to
explain their most important featvires.

Seen from a hmght, for example from the summit of the Ipf near
Bopfingen, the Bies resembles a broad flat plate. It is a circular plain
from 12 to 16 kilometers in diameter, which is drained by streams with a
trifling fall through a gorge to the south. Two chains of low hills extend
across this in somewhat divergent directions from the south ; that on the
west runs past Nordlingen towards the Wallerstein, the other on the east
past the Spitzberg to the Wenneberg.

Each of these chains consists of two different parts, viz. of an older
foundation and a younger crown. The older foundation is composed
chiefly of decomposed Archaean rocks, granite or flbrous amphibolite, which
has also been termed diorite. Here and there we And, however, intercalated
among these Archaean remains, patches of red or blue Keuper marl, of lower
Lias, and of clay with Amaltheus margaritatw, or certain stages of the
middle Jurassic. At the Wenneberg a small dyke of recent eruptive rock
also crops out. These are the visible summits of sunken fragments, the
lower parts of which are covered by the plain. The crown of these ranges
is formed of Tertiary fresh-water formations, consisting sometimes of litto-
rinella limestone, sometimes of a breccia cemented together by fresh- water
limestone, but in the most typical cases of coarsely laminated travertine,
built up by gas-chaiged springs invthe middle of the Tertiary lake. The
travertine forms, for instance, the precipitous and remarkable mountain of
Wallerstein, which stands on a broad granite ridge, a surviving fragment
of a once much greater bell-shaped structure. No doubt it and its
companions, the Spitzberg and others, originally presented no small
resemblance to those bell-shaped formations which have given its name to
Pyramid Lake in West Nevada *.

* G. Deffner and 0. Fraas, Begleitworte zur geogn. Specialknrte von Wflrttembeig,
Altasblatter Bopfingen nnd Ellenbeig, 4to, 1877 ; also Fraas, Oeogn. Beschreibung von
Wflrttemberg, pp. xxzi and 161 ; and with regard to volcanic phenomena in connexion
with the structure, Ofimbel, TJeber den Riesvulcan und fiber vulcanische Erscheinungen
iro Rieskessel, Sitzungsber. k. Akad. Wiss. Mfinchen, 1870, 1, pp. 158-200 ; G. Deffner, Die
Granite in den vulcanisohen Tuffen der schwfib. Alb, Wfirttemb. Jahresh., 1873, XXIX,
pp. 121 et seq., and many other works, v. Dechen also regards the Ries as a subsidence,
and the primitive formations in the Ries as part of an old- continent: Ueber auf&Uende
Lagemngsverhftltnisse, Verhandl. naturhist. Vereins RheinL Westph., Sitzungsber., 1880,
XXXVll, p. 37. For thrusting, in particular, see G. Deffner, Der Buchbeig bei Bopfingen ;
Wfirttemb. Jahresh., 1870, XXVI, pp. 95-142, 3 pi.

* C. King, Rep. on the GeoL Explor. of the 40th Parallel, 4to, 1878, K15, pi. xxiu.



199


0H.1] THE BIES OAMIEOIT

In these deposits of travertine Fraas has discovered an unexpected
wealth of organic remains, bones, feathers, birds’ eggs, and fragments
of small mammals, thereby proving that these deposits in the middle
of the Tertidry lake were nesting-places of numerous pelicans and
ducks.

The fragments of sunken formations outside these two chains of hills
are, as we have said, covered up by the plain. Here and there are some
patches of volcanic tuff, but the soil of the plain itself is formed of Tertiary
beds containing brown coal, and of loam, which have been sunk through in
places for 200 feet without reaching their base.

If now we examine the margin of the plain we shall find great
difficulty in determining the tectonic limit of the subsidence. Round
about the edge of the caldron, and for a considerable distance from it, all
the strata have collapsed and broken up. The border of the subsidence is
concealed over large areas by deposits of travertine or by a breccia of
Tertiary age. Sometimes the granite crops up from beneath this cover,
sometimes there jut up along the edge reefs of upper Jimassic limestone,
the strata of which stand on end, fallen in, and sometimes so completely
shattered by pressure that a slight blow is sufficient to cause the limestone
to fall into innumerable angular fragments.

Outside the plain of the Bies and in isolated troughs between these
shattered strata the most remarkable eruptive centres of the border region
occur. I have visited those at Heerhof, south of Kimbheim, and at the
ancient Biirg (Dombruch) west of Edemheim.

At the Heerhof a broad rounded hill may be seen between the Jurassic
mountains, which is composed of coarsely stratified masses of ash and
lapilli. The somewhat divergent dip in the two neighbouring quarries
probably indicates the site of the centre of eruption. Neither dykes nor
fiows are to be seen, but in the ash lie numerous fragments of scoria, ear-
shaped in form or spirally rolled, and sometimes drawn out behind into
a long tail like a comet. These were once gyrating drops of lava, which
flattened out on reaching the ground and then solidified. They leave no
room for doubt as to the immediate neighbourhood of the vent.

There are similar volcanic bombs at the ancient Biirg ; many fragments
of Archaean rocks lie in the ash, and a great block of Jurassic breccia
is enclosed in it.

Many years ago QUmbel inferred from the occurrence of isolated bombs
in the Bies, that true eruptive centres must be present in this region.
The absence of dykes and flows at these points recalls the variable
eruptive centres of the Phlegraean Fields, as well as Monte Nuovo and

The ‘ rough bothryoidal surface, which has the appearance of being made up of large
mushroom-like forms overlapping each other like roof tiles,' is exactly similar to that of
'the deposits ef the Wallerstein.



200 NORTHEEN FORELAND OP THE ALPS [pabth

similar mountains, which were formed by a single eruption, but did not
become permanent eruptive centres. —

The question whether the Bies caldron is to be regarded as an inde*
pendent circular collapse of the earth’s crust, as the circular outline of the
plain suggests, or whether the subsidence took place between long straight
faults, extending beyond the region of the Bies, is difficult to decide.
Deffner and Fraas recognized a number of rectilinear faults in the shattered
deposits of the border regions to which they gave names, such as the
Sigart-Hurnheim axis, the Zipplingen axis, &c. In addition a number of
small isolated 'sporads of dislocation’ were distinguished in this area,
among which the small inbreak of Herdtfeldhausen is the most remarkable.

The most important independent fault is certainly the Sigart-Humheim
line, also known as the Utzmemmingen line. It strikes from north-west to
south-east, approaches the south-western part of the Bies region at a tan-
gent, and is accompanied by small parallel faults. On the south-western
border of the Bies a succession of strata may be seen, extending from the
base of the middle Jurassic to the upper Jurassic. This, four times cut by
faults, is as many times repeated ; it is inclined throughout its whole thick-
ness away from the Bies district, in a south-south-west direction, towards
the Utzmemmingen fault-line.

The trifling dimensions of some of the sunken areas, e.g. that near
Herdtfeldhausen> the circular outline of the little subsidence of Steinheim,
the excessive fragmentation of the Jurassic limestone on the edge of the
Bies, together with the occurrence of other areas of depression of greater
extent, but with less vertical downthrow, in the neighbourhood of the Bies,
as near Neresheim and between Ellenburg and Bopfingen, finally the
association of volcanic phenomena near Urach: these and similar facts
have produced in my mind the impression that triangular or trapezoidal
segments have been determined by the intersection of several fractures,
and that as the subsidence advanced by step faults the action of pressure
on the corners converted the triangles into hexagons, the quadrangles into
octagons, till by the more or less regular multiplication of the sides of the
polygons the inner area of subsidence attained its circular outline, which is
now surrounded by a margin of broken-up segments.

Sunken areas, distinct from one another, large and small, deep or shallow,
accompanied or not by volcanic eruptions, might, in this way, have origi-
nated here. The sinking-in, however, is, as in so many areas of depression,
succeeded by another process, which here indeed seems to have followed
much later, namely, the thrusting of some of the segments over others.
Fraas has recognized one such overthrust over a polished and striated surface
of the upper Jurassic, near the tunnel of Lauchheim, west of the Bies ; and
Defiher has since established in detail the overthrusting of a great mass of
middle and some upper Jurassic still nearer the Bies, at the Buchberg near



CH. i] HOHGAU 201

Bopfingen. Here, too, the polished overthrust surface is formed on the upper
Jurassic stage y ; the direction of the movement was from east-north-east to
west-south-west, and it has been shown that the grains of quartz which
scour this surface are not derived from the overthrust middle Jurassic, but
from a bed of sand, which is probably more recent than the Tertiary. —

Far away from the Ries, at the south-western termination of the
Swabian Alps and already facing the lofty chains of Switerland, lies the
sunken area of the Hohgau. Great volcanic masses rise within it, and at
one time the ash cones of these volcanos probably covered its whole surface.
In outline it is more square than circular and its longest diameter measures
about 18 kilometers. The sunken area is not closed, but open on the south
towards the Lake of Constance. Level bog-land sharply defines the
fracture on the inner side for long distances. In the middle of the depres-
sion stands a broad group of closely connected hills formed of fresh-water
Molasse, volcanic tuff*, and heaps of erratic material; from these the volcanic
summits rise \

The western eruptive masses, of which the Hohenstoffel is one, are
basaltic ; the eastern mountains, the Hohentwiel, Hohenkrahen, and Magde-
berg, are formed of phonolite. Fraas has expressed the opinion that masses
so precipitous as the Twiel must have consolidated within a covering of ash ;
indeed, considerable portions of the old ash cone may still be observed,
especially on its western side, and the sharp preservation of the outlines of
the most delicate six-sided mica flakes shows that the ash has not been
' washed about by water since its accumulation.

The panorama from the Hohentwiel I consider one of the most instruc-
tive, as regards the relationship of diflferent mountain systems to one
another, I have ever seen. On three sides the mountain is surrounded by
the down-sunken area of Jurassic strata, and only its accompanying
volcanic masses which intervene hinder a full view over the broken
edge. To the south a flat country stretches far away, and on the
shores of the Uutersee may be seen the hills of Oeningen, composed of
fresh-water Molasse, with interspersed ash from the Hohgau, which fell
when that rich flora, so clearly made known to us by the labours of Heer,
was in full existence. Beyond the Untersee, behind the dark outlines of
the city of Constance and the shining surface of the lake, tower the mighty
folds of the Santis, like an overwhelming breaker rising from the solid
earth itself.

E. The Horde.

We will descend from the Schwarzwald into the valley of* the Rhine.
Here many years ago £lie de Beaumont pointed out the existence of
a number of faults, which strike fairly parallel to one another towards the

' 0. Fraas, Geogr. Karte von WCrttemberg, BL Hohentwiel, with text, 1879.



202 NOBTHEBN F0ME!LAND OF THE ALPS [PAbr h

north-north-east, and divide into longitudinal strips the two slopes of the
Schwarzwald and the Vosges which face the Rhine. According to de Beau-?
mont there first occurred an upward dome-like swelling of the whole
country, including the Vosges and the Schwarzwald, and this was followed
by a step-like subsidence on both sides which formed the pre&ent Rhine
valley. The fact that on the higher parts of the Vosges only Vosges sand-
stone is to be found, the Bunter sandstone first appearing on the lower
steps of the mountains, and again, that owing to the inclined position of
the sunken strips the Bunter is in apparent discordance with the Vosges
sandstone, which lies above, led £lie de Beaumont to the conclusion
that the Vosges sandstone had been converted into dry land before the
deposition of the Bunter, which was laid down upon it at the foot of the
mountains '.

This error was rectified by Bleicher in 1870. That the Vosges sandstone
is seldom covered by the Bunter, Bleicher ascribes solely to the excessive
denudation of the younger beds; he maintains besides that the Vosges
sandstone was once covered not only by the Bunter, but by the whole of
the Trias and Jurassic formations, wUch extended from Lorraine over this
whole region as far as Wiirttemberg

De Beaumont's views have given rise to a lively discussion ; the discor-
dance between the Vosges sandstone and the Bunter has found champions
even up to the present time, especially in Baden, but it seems to me that
since Benecke's representation of the true state of things, this question
must be considered as decided against de Beaumont K

To the great French investigator the honour is none the less due of
having been the first to recognize the porition of the most important fault
lines, and the chief features in the peculiar structure of the Rhine valley.

If now we cross the Vosges we shall find, not only on their western
. slopes, but in many parts bordering on the Central Plateau of France, par-
ticularly around the Morvan, which forms its north-eastern foot-hills, a great
system of faults similar to those which we have just described in Bavaria
and WUrttembeig. Recent publications by French authors furnish many
examples of these faults. There can thus be no doubt that around the
mountains mentioned above, on the borders of the Bavarian and Thurin-
gian forest, around the Schwarzwald and the Vosges, about the Odenwald,
and far to the west around a great part of the Central Plateau of France,

* £lie de Beaumont, Explic. de la carte geol. de la France, 1841, 1, pp. 267-437.

' G. Bleicher, Essai de gdol. comparde des Pyrdndes, du Plateau Central et des Vosges;
These pres. & la Fac. des Sciences de Strasbourg, 8vo, Colmar, 1870, p. 71 et seq.

* E. W. Benecke, Ueber die Trias in Elsass-Lothringen und Luxemburg, Abhandl. zur

geol. Specialkarte von Elsass-Lothringen, 1877, 1, p. 794 et seq., and Abriss der Geol.
von Elsass-Lothringen, 8vo, Strasburg, 1878, p. 110 et seq. Sandbetger and Platz may
be mentioned as representing Beaumont’s view, Lepsius and Laspeyrea for the opposite
theory. • •



CH. I] THE Hdi^TS 208

the sheets of Mesozoic deposits have sunk down, and out of this gemrtd
bubaidence these mountains rise as horsts, themselves mere fragments of
ancient folded chains, having a strike which is often discordant to their out-
line, and revealing Archaean rocks only where these have been exposed by
denudation. We must picture a common and continuous foundation of
Palaeozoic and Archaean formations, extending from the Central Plateau
to the Bohmerwald ; on this were spread out the strata of the Trias and
Jurassic oceans. No relics of the shores of these seas are anywhere
preserved in this vast area ; we do not even know whether their waters
covered nearly the whole or only a small part of the two chief plateaus,
viz. that of Bohemia and that of Central France, but there is no evidence
that any important barrier separated them in the interval between the two
great masses. This common foundation has now sunken inwards, bearing
with it all its Mesozoic beds, and the horsts which remain standing between
the various sunken areas owe their height, not to independent elevation,
but to this general subsidence of the surrounding region. To obtain an
idea of the true extent of these downward movements of the earth's crust,
and of the subsequent denudation, we should have to pile up on the Vosges,
on the Schwarzwald, and their northern prolongations the whole thickness
of the Trias and Jurassic systems.

There can be no doubt that the whole of the Bohemian mass was
also subjected to extensive denudation before the deposition of the Coal-*
measures ; a second period of denudation occurred before the deposition of
the Rothliegende ; and again, a very extensive denudation preceded the
Cenomanian stage. The case is similar on the Central Plateau of France,
and on that extensive mass which forms a great part of the Iberian
peninsula and which we shall discuss later under the name of the Iberian
Meseta. At present we can formulate no theory as to the connexion of
these events in time. On the other hand the chief features of their con-
tinuity in space are already established. The continuation of the Coal-
measures of the Morvan is already sought for in those of Bochebrune on
the southern border of the Vosges. The Mesozoic deposits sink into the
interior y and in the horde an older Europe stands disclosed.

The hypothesis that the margins of these horsts represent the ancient
shores of Mesozoic seas is quite untenable ; this is clearly demonstrated by
the distribution of some important stages, such as the Muschelkalk, which
surrounds the mountains of the Rhine, and terminates within the Paris
basin. Equally erroneous, however, would be the supposition that these
masses are everywhere limited by continuous peripheral fractures. Fissures
of various kinds, in many instances true radial clefts, are continued from
the subsided Mesozoic strata into the ancient gneiss or granite masses,
where, as a rule, they are distinguished by veins of quartz or barytes.

The dutKnes of the horsts are themselves influenced by fissures of this



204 NORTHEEN FORELAND OP THE ALPS [partiI

kind. The manner in which, according to the investigations of Orebe, the
Mesozoic platforms subside on a network of faults striking to the north-
east or north-north-east on both sides of the Hochwald near Trbves, thus
leaving it projecting like a spur into the subsided basin of Paris, is an
excellent example of the difficulty in establishing a definite rule as to the
mode of limitation of sunken areas \

The faults which, according to Michael L^vy and V^lain, surround the
northern and western Morvan ‘ in tangents,* and from which the stratified
formations descend in steps, are sometimes accompanied by quartz-veins,
sometimes by veins of red homstone, fluorspar, and barytes. Fragments
of Lias lie in the faults on the summit of the Morvan

Generally speaking the characteristic features of subsidence and denu-
dation are much more clearly displayed around the margin of the Central
Plateau of France than in South Germany \

In the Vosges £lie do Beaumont had already recognized and discussed
in detail the connexion between the faults, the metalliferous veins, and the
great dykes of quartz which sometimes rise several hundred feet above the
surrounding country ^ In addition to the veins in the granite, which
strike in the same direction as the Rhine fissures, we may refer here to the
great quartz- vein of the Val d’Ajol in the south-east, which strikes E. 35° N.
and passes near the hot springs of Plombibres.

The conduits of the springs intersect veins which bear quartz, fluorspar,
barytes, and pyrites, and, as Daubree*s masterly investigations have made
known, the water of the springs has deposited fluorspar in the Roman
brickwork

^ H. Grebe, Ueber das Ober-Rothliegende, die Trias, &c., in der Trier’schen Gegend,
Jabrb. k. preuss. geoL Landesanst. fdr 1881, p. 471 et seq., pi. xii; for the continuation
towards Metz, see G. Steinmann, Geol. Fiihrer der Umgegend von Metz, Jahresber. des
Vereines fiir Erdkunde zu Metz, 1882, IV, p. 10; also Benecke s well-founded remarks
in the Neues Jahrb. fQr Mineral., &c., 1880, I, p. 222.

* M. Levy et C. Velain, Sur les failles du revers occidental du Morvan ; Bull. Soc. Gdol.
de Fr., 1877, 3® ser., V, pp. 350-365. The faults of the east border of the Morvan appear
to extend far into its interior ; they are injected with basalt near Alligny to the south
of Saulieu : tom. cit., p. 562 et seq. ; Beaumont, Explic. geol., II, pp. 207, 273, et
passim ; also Gruner, Essai sur une classific. des principal! x filons du Plateau Central de
la France, Ann. des Sciences de la Soc. imp. de Lyon, 1856, 2® ser., VIII, p.202 et seq.

^ Near Thiviers, in the Dordogne, along a great marginal cleft on the south-western
border of the plateau, the Belemnites of the oolite are converted into barytes (Harld,
Note sur les form, jurass. et la position des depdts manganesiferes dans la Dordogne ; Bull.
Soc. G4ol. de Fr., 1864, 2* ser., XII, p. 33 et seq.) ; on the south-eastern border the faults
in the Goirons were already completely levelled by abrasion, when they were covered by
basalt (Torcapel, op. cit., 1882, 3* ser., X, pp. 409, 412).

* j^lie de Beaumont, Explic. de la carte g4ol. de la France, II, p. 417 et seq.

^ Daubree, Mem. sur la relation des sources thermales de Flombieres avec les filons
metall i feres ; Ann. des Mines, XIII, 1858. We will only briefly refer to the springs of
Kreuznach and of Dttrckheim on the Hardt, which lie on the Rhine faults ; the oldest
known deposits formed by the springs are here too composed of quaftz.'^Laspeyres,



nSSURE VEINS


205


CH. l]

Similar veins are not wanting on the western margin of the great
sunken area of Franconia and Swabia ; here they generally take the direc-
tion of radial fissures.

The barytes vein of Schriesheim, which strikes east-south-east, described
by Benecke and Cohen, may be mentioned first

A number of veins striking to the south-east occur in the broad belt of
Bunter sandstone which is continued southwards from Pforzheim into
the Rhine valley, and these are succeeded further to the south by the veins
of Neu-Bulach, with similar strike; they are filled chiefly with barytes,
and are continued as faults into the Trias. The Hochstr&ss fault described
by Bach ^ is an example ; this also strikes to the south-east and connects
these veins with the network of fractures in the Trias of Swabia.

Further to the south this connexion is still more striking. Near Freu-
denstadt, in the duchy of Wurttemberg, a large mass of Muschelkalk is sunk
into the Bunter sandstone and, as Paulus has shown, between parallel faults,
which are about 8 kilometers apart and strike to the south-east. Here we
are already in the region of Deffner’s radial fissures. Both faults are
indicated by fissures, which are filled with barytes for great distances,
and deeper down by quartz, carrying copper and a little galena. Between
these two principal veins appears a group of smaller ones, also parallel and
filled with barytes \

These veins, which, as we have said, correspond to the lines of fracture
in the Swabian Trias, are only part of a much larger group which attain
their greatest development near Rippoldsau and Wittichen in the valley of
the Kinzig : they show that the fracture along which the Trias is faulted
extends far into the Archaean core of the Schwarzwald. The connexion of
the faults in these two regions has been recognized by all observers, in
particular by F, Sandberger, who has studied the veins of the Kinzig valley
in great detail

Kreuznoch und Ddrckheim a. d. Hardt, Zeitschr.deutsch geol.Ges., 1867, XIX, pp. 803- 922,
pi. xii, and 1868, XX, pp. 1.53'204, particularly p. 188 and pp. 198, 199. In the saino
way the Haus-Baden, on the western declivity of the Schwarzwald, close to the thermal
spring of Badenweiler, lies on a Rhine fault: Sandberger, Geol. Beschreibung der
Umgegend von Badenweiler, Beitr. inn. Stat., 1858, VII, pp. 14, 15. Daub, in 1851,
thought ho could trace the original continuity of these fragments through the whole
length of the Schwarzwald, and pointed out their parallelism with the faults of the
Vosges described by Beaumont: Daub, Die Feldsteinporphyre und die Erzgiinge des
Mttnsterthales bei Staufen, Neues Jahrb. fttr Mineral., &c., 1851, pp. 1-23.

* E. W. Benecke and E. Cohen, Umgebung von Heidelberg, p. 178 et seq.

* H. Bach, Begleitworte zur geol. Kartevon Wiirttemberg, Atlasbl. Calw, 1869, p. 18.

* E. Paulus, Begleitworte zur gcogn. Specialkarte von Wiirttemiberg, Atlasbl.
Freudenstadt, 4to, 1866, p. 13.

* Sandberger, Geol. Beschreibung der Umgebungen von Renchbader, Beitr. zur Statis-
tik der inn. Verwalt. des Grossherzogthums Baden, Heft XVI, 1863 ; Vogelgesang, Geogn.
bergmann« Beschreibung des Kinzigthaler Bergbaues, op. cit. Heft XXI, 4to, 1865, and



206 NOETHERN FORELAND OP THfe ALPS [PAiwn

On the slopes of the Bavarian Forest these phenomena occur on a much
larger scale and present remarkable modifications. In order, however, to
show more clearly the structure of the margin of this mass, I will preface
this explanation by a few words on a similar district, the north of Scotland.

Archaean and Silurian rocks, thrown mostly into parallel folds, and Old
Red sandstone build up this wild mountain land. For a long time small
isolated patches of Jurassic beds, such as the coal-bearing deposit of
Brora, have been well known, but it has only recently been shown by
Judd that this whole country, with its present diversified surface, was
once concealed beneath a covering of Trias and Jurassic and by beds
of middle and upper Cretaceous age. The fragmentary remains of this
covering have been preserved to the present . day, partly beneath
fragments of Tertiary lava flows, as in the west of the country, and partly
by mighty faults. Such faults have determined the course of the
coasts of Sutherland and Ross. Along these fractures the land has sunk
down beneath the Dornoch and Moray Firths. A narrow and much
interrupted belt of Trias and Jurassic deposits is visible along the faults
close to the edge of the sea. In Sutherland the fault for a certain distance
becomes stepped, and a band of middle Devonian appears on its upper
step, a band of upper Oolite on the one below. Above these steps the
granite is exposed. All the higher land is formed of lower Silurian and
Old Red sandstone, while beneath the sea, which is of no great depth,
Mesozoic deposits are preserved, perhaps over large areas. The fracture
which borders Moray Firth on the west is probably the continuation of
that great dislocation which traverses the whole country from sea to sea
along the Caledonian Canal \

Here-, too, the ancient mass appe.ars as a horat; along its jagged
borders, at a lower level, lie the Mesozoic deposits. At the foot of the
Vosges also a zigzag outline, though on a smaller scale, is to be seen,
produced in this case by the penetration of the long Rhine fractures into
the river valley. If, however, eastern Bavaria, and especially the basin
of the Naab, were to be covered to-day by the sea, then the coast-line
of the Bohemian mass would present an outline on the west which would
resemble in its main features that of the north-east of Scotland. The
bays of Weiden and Schwandorf would correspond to the Dornoch and

particularly F. Sandberger, Untersuch ungen Cher die Erzgange von Wittichen im bad.
Schwarzwalde, Neues Jahrb. fiir Mineral., &c., 1868, p. 388. Sandberger, in his in-
structive monograph on the chief vein of Schapbach (Untersuch. Cber Erzgilnge, 1882, 1,
p. 45), referring to the manner in which these veins are filled, mentions rounded
pebbles of Vosges sandstone, which show that barytes veins were formed here before the
deposition of the sandstone, but leaves the reader in no doubt that the veins mentioned
here are of younger age, and are often continued as nimifications of quartz or batytes in
the Buntcr sandstone.

^ J. W. Judd, The Secondary rocks of Scotland; Quart. Journ. Qeol. Soc., 1873, 1874,
1878, and in particular 1873, pp. 131-134, pi. vii. • •



CH. I] GIGANTIC QUAETZ VEINS 207

Moray Firth, and just as the great fracture of the Caledonian Canal may
be recognized on the western side of the Moray Firth, nearly as far as
Tarbet Ness, so we should see here the continuation of a fault many miles
long, the line of the Pfahl, issue from the Archaean mountains and form the
northern boundary of the ‘ bay * of Schwandorf , nearly as far as Amberg.

These Archaean mountains are, as we know from the laborious and
detailed investigations of Qumbel, folded in the north, especially in the
Fichtelgebirge; the folds strike to the north-east, so that this district
forms a continuation of the Erzgebirge. In the south, on the other hand,
a uniform dip of the strata to the north-east is the rule, so that the oldest
members of the series crop out along the Danube, and along the fault
to the east of Amberg. In this mountainous country several gigantic
outcrops of quartz appear, which I regard as the grandest monuments of
linear dislocation known in our continent.

Three of these outcrops are of particular importance. The first has
been described by Reuss and Jokely. It begins in the most north-westerly
part of Bohemia, north-west of Asch, runs to the south-east, transversely
across the mica-schist, gneiss, and granite of the Erzgebirge, that is, the
most important zones of rock in the chain, then it cuts across the narrow
outcrop of gneiss which accompanies the southern foot of the Erzgebirge
near Seeberg, disappears beneath the Tertiary covering of the little
depression of Franzensbad and Eger, and reappears immediately on the
other side of this in the granite mass of Sandau, and extends through this
up to the south of Konigswart. The distance between its two ends is
about 40 kilometers^.

This ridge of quartz, which is shown to be quite certainly a vein by
the manner in which it crosses the Erzgebirge, has not indeed a strictly
rectilinear course, yet deviates so little from a straight line, that the
connexion of the two parts separated by the Tertiary area is an obvious
inference. At its southern end, as Hochstetter has shown in his Studies of
the Bohmerwald, a subsequent disturbance in the structure of the country
may be recognized. The first vein of quartz is accompanied at this
extremity by smaller veins or branches, and still further to the south-
west, as though a horizontal displacement had occurred, there appears,
near Hals, north-west of Tachau, the beginning of the second great vein,
which Hochstetter was the first to trace, and which he has named the
Bohemian PfahlK

^ A. E. Reuss, Die geogn. Yerh^ltnisso des Egerer Bezirkes und des Ascher Gebirgs*
gebietes in Bdhmen, Abhandl. gcol. Reiebsanst., 1852, I, pp. 30-32; J. Jokely, Zur
Kenntniss devgeol. Beschaifenheitdes Egererkreisos in B6hmen, Jahrb.geof. Reiebsanst.,
1856, VII, pp. 527, 528. These great dykes of quartz are also marked on Y, v. Hauer's
Geol. map of Austria.

^ F. V. Hochstetter, Geogn. Studien ausdem Bohmerwalde, IV ; Jahrb. geol. Reiebsanst.,
1855, VI, pp. 7^7-774, and the diagram, p. 762.



208 NORTHERN FORELAND OF THE ALPS [part n

It is extremely probable that this ridge, which, generally speaking,
.strikes to the south-south-east, was originally continuous with that
of Asch. It at first describes a marked curve to the east, then it turns
back to a straight direction and crosses the Bavarian frontier near Furth ;
still further, on the western slopes of the Hohe Bogen, some separate smaller
veins are to be seen which mark its southern termination \

The distance between the extremities of this ridge is about 55 kilometers.
The thickness in some places is 30 meters, at others it appears to increase
to from 70-100 meters. For a very long distance the quartz sharply
marks the limit between the gneiss and the hornblende-rock ; this circum-
stance and its very considerable thickness probably account for its having
been at first regarded as a bed ; however, besides the fact that at certain
points where the boundary of the hornblende rock forms a bend the quartz
does not follow it, but cuts across the bend in a straight line, we find
also that towards the south the vein leaves the boundary between the
gneiss and hornblende-rock altogether, and passes completely into the
latter. It is consequently a true vein, like the northern chain of out-
crops which traverses the Erzgebirge, and the fact that for a long distance
it marks the boundary of two different rocks only testifies to the extra-
ordinary extent of the dislocation and of the subsequent denudation.

The third outcrop of quartz, the Pfahl or Vallum, is the most con-
siderable of all. Wineberger has described it in part; for a complete
account we are indebted to Gumbel

The Pfahl, or the Great Pfahl as we will call it, to distinguish it from
the Bohemian Pfahl, deviates less from the rectilinear than the other
series of outcrops. Its direction is N. 58* W., its thickness varies : for the
greater part, at least over the northern half, it seems to be from 70 to
115 meters on an average. The Pfahl begins at Kolmberg, south-east of
Amberg, and from there for a distance of about 44 kilometers to the
south-east it separates the granite from the Trias and middle Jurassic,
and then to the west of Cham passes completely into the Archaean region,
and continues without deviation in a straight line to the south-east, through
Viechtach, Orafenau, and Freyung, as far as the Austrian frontier. The
whole length from the Kolmberg to this point is somewhat over 150 kilo-
meters. The distribution of the rocks in upper Austria and the com-
pletely coincident course of the upper Mulk valley seem, however, to
indicate that the dislocation is continued still further to the south-east.
To the north-west, continuing the direction of the Great Pfahl far beyond
Amberg, a disturbance occurs in the Mesozoic deposits, accompanied by

^ Gttmbel, Geogn. Earte des Ednigreichs Baiern, Bl. IX, Cham.

* L. Wineberger, Geogn. Beschreibung des bairischen und Neuburger Waldes, 8vo,
Passau, 1851, and GCmbel, Geogn. Beschreibung des EOnigr. Baiem, 11, p. 372 et seq.,
pp. 497, 508, et passim. • ‘



THE GREAT PPAHL


OH. l]


209


a vein of iron ore, which Qttmbel assigns to the lowest horizon of the
Cretaceous deposits of this district.

The Pfahl also was interpreted as a bed. Giimbel, however, has
enumerated all the serious objections which may be urged against this
view, above all its extraordinarily long and straight course, such as, we
may venture to affirm, is nowhere presented by any ordinary stratified
formation in any part of Europe, least of all in Archaean complexes, and
again the repetition of certain dominant directions of strike to the north
and south of the Pfahl, which, however, do not cause this feature to
diverge from its course K If we consider, further, that the direction of
the Pfahl is visibly continued by a line of dislocation towards the north-
west, that a parallel vein accompanies it between Bodenmais and Kotzing
at a distance of from 8 to 8^ kilometers, that the southern marginal
fracture of the mountains along the Danube is also nearly parallel to it,
and that at present no one doubts that the great quartz outcrops of
Bohemia are true veins, then we shall also be forced to admit that the
Great Pfahl represents the infilling of a long cleft produced by dislocation.

A number of subordinate quartz veins are present in addition to the
great dykes, as, for example, in the granite of Tirschenreuth. Here, too,
veins of barytes and galena are found within the region of Mesozoic
fractures.

Powerful faults, issuing obliquely from the Archaean mass and pene-
trating into Bavaria, are characteristic of the fractured margin of this
country, and give rise to great zigzags in its outline, which recall those of
the east coast of Scotland. In this respect it presents a striking contrast to
the uniformity of the eastern margin of the Bohemian mass, which, as we
have already seen, continues the marginal fracture of the Sudetes, and
forms a sharply defined slope from Briinn to the Danube.


F. Jurassic Relics of the Sudetes,

On the border of the Bohemian mass, which extends along the Danube
below Regensburg, very remarkable phenomena make their appearance.
The Rothliegende, which we have hitherto found to accompany the border
of this mass, now appears for the last time near Donaustauf. It is not
to be seen anywhere around the southern border of the mass, and only
becomes visible again on the eastern marginal fracture, near Zobing to
the north of Krems. The gneiss begins to extend across the Danube
and sinks very gradually in the region to the south of ' Engelhardts-
zell, beneath a covering of Tertiary deposits. Already, far to the
north-west, we may see in Franconia how different members of the
Trias and Lias diminish in thickness and finally disappear. But beyond
Regensburg, along the Danube towards Passau, we see what does not occur

• • ^ GUmbel, tom. cit., p. 377.

P .


BOLLAB



fito KOBX&EStr^BOBEl^^

elsewhere in the whole district, namely, isolated patches of tiie tippw
Jurassic, resting immediately against those outer dopes of the Archaean
^mountains which look towards the great plain, as, for example, in the
neighbourhood of Straubing and of Hofkirchen, and, with a greater exten-
sion, to the south of the Danube near Ortenhurg, and even nearer stiU to
Fassau, though then only visible in isolated exposures beneath a mantle
of Tertiary deposits. The middle and upper Cretaceous accompany the
Jurassic over the whole of this line.

Let us first consider the disposition of the strata. On the lower course
of the B^n, the Jurassic, some Lias and Eenper rest steeply against the
granite; south of Begenstauf the strata are inverted, and dip beneath
the granite. The last of these fragments, directly contiguous to the
principal mass of the Franconian Jura, reaches the Danube between
Begensburg and Walhalla^ leaning steeply against the granite. The
outline of the granite mass forms almost a right angle. The Bothliegende
appears for the last time near Donaustanf.

The isolated fragments of the Jurassic formation, which near Straubing
are still accompanied by Eeuper, have suffered great disturbance; near
Voglam, not far from Oitenbuig, there occurs indeed, as we have already
said, a synclinal fold directed downwards, the middle of which consists of
gneiss, while the limbs are formed of overfolded Jurassic strata, and
bmieath these dips tiie Cretaceous which also has been involved in this
extraordinary movement (p. 138) ^

At the same time the composition of the Jurassic series undergoes
great changes, which increase as it becomes more remote from Begens-
burg : the Lias disappears ; the middle and upper brown Jura unite to form
a single bed containing species which otherwise do not occur together;
as, for instance, near Cracow, where a number of forms appear which are
common to the middle Jurassic of Cracow. Equally striking is the
alteration of the upper Jurassic; the truth of the suggestion made long
ago by F. Boemer and Neumayr has been established by the latest work
of Ammon and Uhlig, and the Jurassic deposits of Fassau have been
shown to correspond with the isolated remnants near Briinn, and with
the beds of the region of Cracow, and all these deposits were originally
continuous

* J. Q. Egger, Der Jurakalk bei Ortenbuig, from the I. Jahresber. dee naturhiit.
Veteines in Fasaau filr 1857, p. 6 et seq. ; Oflmbel, Geogn. BeBchreibung dea EOnigr.
Baiern, II, p. 695; L. v. Ammon, Die JurarAblageningen zwischen Begensbuig nnd
Paasan, Abbandl. dea zool.-mineral. Vereina in Begenabnig, 1875, X, pp. 94-97.

* F. Boemer, Oeol. Obeischleaiena, p. 276 ; M. Neumayr, Die Cephalopodenfanna der
Oolitbe Ton Balin bei Krakau, Abbandl. geol. Beicbaanat. Wien, 1871, V, pp. 50, 51*;
Ammon, tom. cit./ in particular p. 151 ; V. Uhlig, Die Jurabildnngen in der Umgebung von
BrOnn, Mojaiaovfca und Neumayr, Beitr. zur Palaeont. Oeaterr.'Ung., 1^1, 1, pp. 141-145.
On the character of the Cretaceous formations, see Carl Oerster, Die Plftnerbiidungen nm



l^smAsam mmia^ m wm smmm m

V This Eone of JntasEdo and Gretaoeons lestii^ against the Bohemian
complex tenninates near Fftssau ; but far to the south-south-west, just at
that point where a line drawn from Fassau towards Salzburg would cut the
outermost bordtr of the Alps, there appear at the Trwnaee some strange-
looking deposits. Qreen sandstone rich in Nummulites, the continuation
of the deposits of the Eressenberg, here forms the outermost margin,
including the Wartberg, a little mountain which ends abruptly in the
lake. Close to the edge of the lake, however, one or two small patches of
Chalk with Belemnitella are known, and on the opposite shore there rises
from the plain to' the south of the village of Fruham a little hill of white
limestone, which may be Jurassic ^ For a very long distance onwards,
along the edge of the complex, these fragmentary patches are now
altogether absent. It is not till we reach the other side of the Danube,
close on the outermost border of the Alps, that we meet with them again.
Near Leitsiersdcnf, north of Stockerau, immediately in front of the upturned
beds of the Alpine Orbitoides limestone, a blue clay was observed, the
rich Foraminiferal fauna of which corresponds, according to F. Earrer,
with that of the Senonian of 'Westphalia, with the Mucronata Chalk of
Lemberg, and the Bacculite clay of Bohemia^. Not far off a mass of
light-coloured limestone, possibly of Jurassic age, rises from the marl
and shales of the Flysch zone, here containing numerous erratic blocks.
A flaw, with a steep, smoothly polished face, which strikes north-west,
cuts off this mass on the south.

Here, close to the outer border of the sunken Flysch zone, a long
series of Jurassic hills rises steeply out of the - plain and strikes to the
north-north-east, past Ernstbrunn, Staats, and Falkenstein to the Polau
mountains, also Jurassic, near Nikolsburg. The beds of Nattheim in
WUrttemberg reappear here in their most typical developments, then
follow light-coloured Tithonian limestones. The investigation of this
range has not yet been completed.

Finally, we reach the Jurassic fragments of Olomviechan, near Briinn,
which rest partly on syenite, partly on middle Devonian limestone. The

Ortenburg bei Fassau ; Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol., 1881, XLII, pp. 57, 58. These
correspond to the Plftner of Hundorf and Strehlen, to the marl containing Baculites, and
to the beds of Kieslingwalda. From this the possibility of a connexion with the German
Ocean over Siberia becomes conceivable. In addition the Cretaceous deposits of Siegsdorf,
near Traunstein, are said to resemble the beds of Lemberg and of North Germany for
more than those of Bohemia and Saxony.

Jurassic fossils have not yet been found. The place is mentioned in F. v. Hauer,
Ueber die Eocengebilde im Erzherzogthum Oesterr., &c., Jahrb. geoL Rsicbsanst., IE,
1858, p. 119 ; it has been recently examined by Frauscher. The presence of Belemnitella
in the lake has long been known.

* F. Earrer, Ueber ein neues Yorkommen von oberer Kreideformation in Leitzersdorf
bei Stockeigra ^ Jahrb. geoL Reichsanst., 1870, XE, pp. 157-184, 2 pi.



212 FOREI^^

way in whidi the beds lie shows that the great fault of Briinn and the
band of syenite must have existed already at about the middle of the
Jurassic period in much the same form as at present. * In their structure,-
writes Uhlig at the conclusion of his study of l^ese Jurassic beds, ‘they
present the closest resemblance to the Jurassic deposits of Lower Bavaria
on the one hand, and of Silesia and Poland on the other, and they must be
regarded as the last remains left by denudation of once extensive littoral
formations, thus proving that the two regions just mentioned were at one
time connected by an arm of the sea, which surrounded the southern
border of the Bohenoan complex*.*

Far from this remarkable spot, on the great fault-line of the Biesenge-
biige and Isergebirge, and extending as far as Saxony, there lies, as we'
have already mentioned, a band of Jurassic limestone which, accompanied
by middle and upper Cretaceous, dips in places beneath the granite,
just as was the case between Regensburg and Passau. O. Bruder has
shown that the Jurasnc limestone of Sternberg, near Zeidler, which forms
part- of this band, includes the zones of Pdtoemu hmmmmaivm and
Oppdia temdldbata, and possesses other characters which connect this
district altm with the region of Poland, Moravia, and Lower Bavaria*.

If we consider this in connexion with the fact that near Briinn older
members of the Jurassic system lie horizontally on Devonian and syenite,
we shall perceive that, in the north of Bohemia, movements must have
occurred along the fault at the foot of the Isergebirge, after those which
took place along the fault near Briinn. Further, these Jurassic lime-
stones of Bohenua and Saxony are, as their composition shows, certainly
not to be r^arded as deposits formed in a long narrow fjord; they
are relics of denudaticm, traces of % far-reaching transgression, preserved
from complete destruction by their peculiar position.

'We thus see t^at the Jurassic formation which is lost to sight beneath
the Carpathians, near Eurdwinow, not far from Cracow, reappears to the
south of the point of contact of Weisskirchen (p. 186, Fig. 24) with similar
characters, never accompanied by Lias, but almost always by middle and
upper Cretaceous. Everywhere the clays containing Waldheimia impreeaa
are wanting, while the zone of Peltocercu Hmarn/matwm, is constantly
distinguished by its considerable thickiiesa
We recognize here, marked by many distinctive characters, the existence
of a Jurassic region, which, undisturbed by the forward movement of
the -Carpathians, stretches from Czenstochau to Eurdw4now and Briinn,
from north-eastern Bohemia towards Meissen in Saxony, and along the
Danube as far as Regensburg.

^ Uhlig, loc. oii, p. 145.

* 0. Brader, Zur Kenotniw der Jam-Ablagerungen von Sternberg bei Zeidler in
Bohmen ; Sitsnngiber. k. Akad. Wilt. Wien, 1881, Bd. 88, pp. 47-49, 8 pL “



218


; ^ 4 ixps

O. The Rdatione of the Alpine System to ite Northern Fordand.

The Btissia;^, Platform may be followed with constant characters from
tile north nearly as far as the outer margin of the eastern Carpathians,
bmeath which it appears to dip. The several zones of the Sudetes, suc-
ceeding each other from west to east, reach the outer border of the
western Carpathians ; the more resistant Jurassic formation even appears
along the folded Miocene foreland, only two kilometers from the edge
of the mountains. Cretaceous,. Jurassic, Trias, and Carboniferous appear
to dip, one after the other, beneath the Carpathians; those formations
in the Sudetes, however, which are at present of orographic importance,
the Culm and the Devonian, come into contact near Weisskirchen with
the border of the Carpathians, and appear to dam back the folds of
those mountains by their resistance. These obstructive members of the
Sudetes extend southwards from the point of contact as far as the fault
of Briinn; but more to the south in Moravia there are almost unmis-
takable indications of the reappearance of the sunken Jurassic zone.

Where the Alps, to the west of St. POlten, approach nearest to the
great Archaean mass, and the deviation towards the arc of the Car-
pathians begins, this mass is bare; even those patches of Rothliegende
which elsewhere accompany the faulted margin are here unknown. Then
follows from Passau on towards Donaustauf a zone of Jurassic deposits
which are still constantly marked by some distinctive Sudetic characters,
and together with these patches of northern, probably Bohemian, Cre-
taceous strata. The margin of the mass is overthrust, and both fracture
and thrusting are younger than the middle Cretaceous,

The whole of the Trias and Jurassic region which extends from the
Fichtelgebirge and Bavarian Forest as far as the Schwarzwald and
Odenwald has sunk downwards in larger or smaller* fragments, and is
at last faulted completely out of sight along the Danube. Along this
main fault some large caldron inbreaks occur, such as the Bies and the
Hdhgau. The mountains which surround the field of subsidence on the
east or west rise out of it like pillars or horsts: several fractures
extend from it into the ancient rocks of the horsts, where they are
only revealed as great dykes of quartz.

The fractures of the subsided region are continued also around the
south of the Schwarzwald into the table-Jura, and the manner in which
the first wave of the chain-Jura is overfolded may well be regarded
(Bdtzbeig section, p. 113, Fig. 10; Habsbuig, p. 114, Fig. 11) aqan example
of the actual thrusting of one member of the Alpine system over the
foreland.

The results of the preceding remarks may be summarized as follows :
To the e&8t*of the southern end of the Bohemian mass the Alps, together



2i 4 NOilTHfiBN POBELAND OP THE ALPS [paot ^

vdth the whole arc of the Carpathians, appear to be thrust over two other
structural elements, namely, the Mesozoic zones of the Sudetes and the
Russian Platform. In the same way t6 the south of the Schwarzwald the
chain-Jura is pushed over the fractured table-Jura. Between the two
regions, however, from the Schwarzwald to Regensburg, where we should
expect an overfold on to the sunken area of Franconia and Swabia,
the whole of that part of this area lying nearest the Alps has subsided
along the great fracture of the Danube and been completely withdrawn
from sight ; it is covered by the plain. It is certainly possible that this
fracture was caused by the forward movement of the Alps. The universal
subsidence of the Trias and Jurassic region in Franconia and Swabia is,
however, independent of the Alps, a fact which is already proved by the
repetition of this subsidence in the direction of the Paris basin.

In the whole of this foreland the existence of ancient folds may be
proved ; cases of overthrusting and pinching in have also occurred since the
Mesozoic period, as for example at the Buchberg near Bopfingen, or near
Voglam, or at the foot of the Isergebirge, but ihere is nothing which could
be even remotely compared with the great tangential movements of the
Alpine border. The resolution of forces is thus very marked in this
district.

We may recall, in passing, Qosselet’s theory of the relations of the
Belgian Coal-measures and the movement of the faiUe dv> Midi (p. 148)
to the foreland of that country, and Gilbert’s view that the cause of the
movement in the folded Appalachians is mperjicial, in the subsided Basin
Ranges deep-seated, (p. 107).

We observed almve that the subsidence of the Alps near Vienna and
the great subsidences of its eastern border, frotn Graz to the Bachergebirge,
must have occurred during one and the same stage of the Tertiary aera,
namely, that of the> lignite of Pitten and Eibiswald containing Mastodon
angustidene (p. 136). This is shown by the nature of the Tertiary deposits,
which occur within the fractured areas, and rest nnconformably against
the faults. This stage corresponds in age to the fresh-water Molasse of
Oeningen, with which is interstrewn the ash of the volcanos of the
Hbhgau. It is in particular the terrestrial fauna, which is identical in
Pitten and in Oeningen ; this is known also as the fauna of Sansans. The
terrestrial fauna of the upper fresh-water formation of Steinheim and the
avian remains of the travertine of the Ries also belong to the fauna of
Sansans, as the investigations of Fraas have shown.

The intra- and extra-Alpine subsidences are thus very nearly of the
same age, and it is even possible that they owe their origin to contem-
poraneous events.

There are some indications that the nwtginal &acture of the subsidences
may be older. Deposits of the first Mediterranean stage are tO be met



olL i] A^E OF lim OUTER FBAOTCJBE0 MABOIN 216

mth on the outer border of the Bohemian mass, extending from Betz
past Eggenburg and Horn, where they have been sulgected to later dis>
turbances; they occur also in ma^ isolated patches, as at Wiedenfeld
near Etems, l^lk, Wallsee, Linz, Ortenburg near Passau, and elsewhere,
extending nearly as far as the fault of the Danube, to which, as far as
we can judge, they are similarly related. These deposits are older than
the terrratrial fauna of Oeningen, Steinheim, and Eibiswald j they appear
to penetrate just as little into the sunken areas outside the Alps as
into those of the Alps themselves.



216


CHAPTER II

THE TREND-LINES OP THE ALPINE SYSTEM

The northern border of the Alps and the Carpathiana Local overthrueting of the
outer border. Curvature of the extremity of the Carpathians. Curvature of the moun-
tains of Westem Transylvania. Curvature of the Apennines. Sicily. Mountains of
North Africa. Gibraltar. The Betic Cordillera. Spiral arrangement of the trend-linea

The variety of outline in the mountain masses which form the
northern foreland of the Alps and of the Carpathians stands in striking
contrast to the uniformity of the long and gentle curve which marks the
northern border of the Alpine chain. This curve may be followed without
difficulty, even in regions such as Lower Austria and Moravia, where parts
of the outer border have been faulted down.

At the southern end of the Schwarzwald the folds of the Jura
mountains override by their inverted frontal margin the subsided table*
Jura.

Within the Jura, along the whole of the outer border of the Alps and
even of the Carpathians, the' forward movement of the mountains is
indicated, whatever be the nature of the foreland, by one or more long
anticlinal folds in the Miocene. It would be supeifluous to recall the
anticlinal of the Swiss Molasse; but the difficulties which were long
experienced in tracing these folds in the soft and easily destroyed Miocene
Opposite in the east have lately disappeared, since mining operations
carried on in precisely this ouW border have furnished the requisite
information. Giimbel’s transverse section of the valley of the Leitzach
shows two or three folds, overturned towards the north, in the lignite-
bearing Tertiary beds of the outer border near Miesbach^. Far away
from this locality, in the salt-mines of Wieliczka, the investigations of Paul
have in like manner revealed the existence of two or three sharp folds
inverted to the north, which explain the peculiar position of the salt-beds
in the Miocene clay ^ Still further to the east, also on the outer border of
the Carpathians, the important ozokerite deposit of Boryslaw lies in an
anticlinal of the Miocene salt-bearing day. Paul justly points out that

* Gfimbel, Aasflugakarten in das Tertiftigebiet von Miesbach nnd in den Hocbgebirgs-
stock zwischen Tegernsee nnd 'Wendelstein ; gevidmet der dentschen geoL Ges.,
Mflncben, 1875.

* K. M. Paul, Ueber die LagemngsverbBltnisse in Wieliczka; Jabrb.geol. Beicbsanst.,

1880, XXX, p. 688. « •



OYEKPOLDING OP OUTER EDGE OF CARPATHIANS 217

these two chief productive mining districts of Galicia, ’the salt-mines of
Wieliczka and the ozokerite mines of Boryslaw, have been subjected to
a common tectonic movement. 'ISie same forca directed towards the
north, which tompressed the salt-beds of Wieliczka into steep folds,
also raised the anticlinal of Boryslaw and thus created the conditions
necessary for the accumulation of a product, the exploitation of which has
already produced millions V

As a general rule workable quantities of petroleum are found
accumulated in the anticlinals, and the ozokerite and petroleum zone of
Boryslaw, as it proceeds far to the east, always follows the outermost border
of the mountains ; it extends as far as Slobodamngnrska and Lucza, that is,
to the south of Kolomea ; and the same association is continued even much
further still, to that part of Wallachia where the Carpathians begin to
curve round from a north and south to a north-east and south-west
direction, but in this region in much younger deposits — the Congeria and
Paludina beds. In the basin of the Slonik, to the north of Buzeu, in the
south-eastern part of the Carpathians, the salt-bearing strata are, as
Cobalescu informs us, steeply upturned, and the Paludina beds which
succeed them unconformably, lie in folds, directed from north-east to
south-west, following the curve of the mountains

The folds of the Swiss Molasse lie within the Jura ; those of the valley
of the Leitzach in Bavaria occur south of Regensburg, and of the place
where the great fault of the Danube meets the overfolded and fractured
border of the Archaean mass ; the folds of Wieliczka lie in the immediate
neighbourhood of the Mesozoic zones of the Sudetes, which here appear to
sink beneath the Carpathians, and they are continued through the whole
region of which the Russian Platform forms the foreland.

A closer examination reveals, no doubt, certain secondary deviations in
the otherwise constant course of this outer curve. These are caused by
the more abrupt projection of some parts of the chain. In the neighbour-
hood of the Bodensee, where the Flysch zone passes out of Switzerland into
Austria, its eastern continuation advances in a flat sigmoid curve a good
way beyond the line of strike of the western portion. To this projection
of the outer border there corresponds in the interior of the chain the
shear of the Rhaeticon along the Rhine line (p. 140, Fig. 15) and the
in-break of the Prattigau.

A similar deviation occurs near Salzburg. The Flysch zone has sunken
in, but where it reappears along the Salzach it is plainly seen to have been
carried further to the north.

I

' K. M.Paul, Die Petroleum- und Ozokerityorkommnisse Ost-Galiziens ; op. cit., XXXI,
1881, p. 163.

^ G. Cobalescu, Geol. Untersucbungen im Buzeu’er Districte ; Yerhandl. geol. Reichs-
anst., 1882, *pp* 227-231.



218 TREND-LINES OP THE ALPINE SYSTEM [PAKrn

Another of these displacements, still more sharply marked, is met with
near Yiexma ; at the gorge of the Danube, the outer edge of that part of
the Flysch zone which lies to the north of the river advances from two to
three kilometers beyond the outer edge of that part which lies on the south.

These displacements have taken place along flaws. They Result, like
the overturned marginal folds, from tangential movement; but however
great the importance of this movement may have been in determining the
whole strike and structure of these great zones, yet it has not acted alone,
for these regions, apart from the well-known local subsidences, also present
long linear faults. Lory, who has made such valuable contributions to
our knowledge of the western Alps, even attributes to great subsidence
faults the chief part in the formation of this segment of the chain. Two
of these faults have been traced by Mojsisovics in the Salzkammergut ;
but further investigation will be necessary to show to what extent and
under what form this tangentially moved mass has also sunken in^

A. Bending romvd of the extremity of the Carpodhiana.

It is many years since we were led to affirm that the tangential force,
not only in the Alps, but in the whole of Europe, had been directed mainly
to the north, with deviations to west and east. Later investigations, as
we shall see, have entirely confirmed this conclusion as regards the regions
we then considered, but fresh observations have since been made, which
considerably alter our general conception of the Alpine system.

We had at that time observed that the force which caused the
movement was directed in the western parts of the Alps towards the
west; in the east of Switzerland, in Bavaria, and as far as Vienna, to
the north ; in the Carpathians to the north-west, north, north-east, and
finally east, so that the strike of the beds then becomes north and
south, and the chmn thus describes a vast arc.

We have already mentioned that in Wallachia, on the south-eastern
margin of the Carpathians, the folds strike to the south-west. Much
farther to the west, in the valley of Prahova, Flysch has been observed
containing Acanthocerae mamUlare^, and this appears to complete the
circumflexion. The observations hitheirto published are not, however,
sufficiently complete to enable us to judge of the relations of the Flysch
zone at this point to the extremely complicated mountain chain which
runs from the rapids of the Danube, across the east of Servia, to the
Balkans ^

’ E. T. MojaisOTicB, op. cit., 1883, p. 3. * Yerliandl. geol. Reichsanst, 1877, p. 71.

' P. Lehmann hae only come upon one anticlinal in the ancient rocks of the Fogarasch
mountains ; it slopes to the north and south : Beobachtungen fiber Tektonik und Glet-
Bcherspuren im Fogarascher Hochgebirge, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Oes., 1881, XXXIII,
pp. 109-117, pi. xiv. * *



THE APENNINES


210


6H. n]

In Wallachia also we are still in doubt as to the degree of deflection
which the tangential force has experienced, hut in Transylveinia it has
already been determined with certainty for an inner parallel chain. L(5czi
has observed here that the mountain mass rising within the curve of the
Carpathians in the' western part of the province is girdled round on the
east, south-east, and south by a folded zone of Flysch, regularly broken
through by ‘ klippen-kalk,’ wUch runs in a curve within the bend of the
river Maros \

Here the curving round to. the south is actually completed. Within
the region of Pannonia the tangential movement experiences a deviation of
about two and a half quadrants or 225°. This result calls for a fresh
examination of the southern extremity of the Apennines.

. B. Deflection of the eactremity of the Apennines.

The mountains of the Basilicata formed of limestone and sandstone
reach the Ionian sea in the Qulf of Tarento; their last branches extend
about as far as Spezzano; thence to the south the chain consists of
gneiss and older schist, with all the characters of the older rocks of the
Alps. We will consider only its most southern part, the mass of the
Aspromonte, constricted by the two bays of Squillace and Santa
Eufemia.

The western side of the mass has broken in; it consists, as does the
crest, of crystalline rocks. On its eastern, or somewhat south-eastern
slope, a highly discontinuous zone of schists occurs, only reaching the
summit near Sinopoli. On these older rocks appear isolated patches of
Tithonian limestone, sometimes containing Nerinea, Cenomanian deposits
of African type, and finally, over somewhat greater areas. Tertiary Flysch-
sandstone, with a few be^ of lignite containing Anthracotherium. All
these transgressive deposits are found to the south-east and south of
Aspromonte, and extend as far as its southernmost point near Melito.

Both the older crystalline rocks and the zone of schist extend into
Sicily, where they form the core of the Feloritan mountains up to and
beyond Cape Calav^i, as has been so well described by Seguenza^. The
same transgressive deposits also reappear here, in particular several
patches of Cenomanian of African type, which rest on ancient rocks in
the neighbourhood of Barcellona. At the same time, however, a well-
marked belt of sedimentary beds is added on to the outer edge of the
schist zone, and in this may be distinguished the Bothlicgende, dolomites

I

^ L. Ldezi, Jelent^s a Hegyes-Drocsa-HegyBegbeii tett foldtani Eirindul&sokrdl ;
Foldtani KOzlOny, 1876, 8vo, Budapest, pp. 22, 23.

* G. Seguenza, Breve nota int. le formazione primarie e secondarie della prov. di
Messina; Boll. Comit. geol. d’ltal., 1871, II, pp. 49, 97, 145 (cf. Note, p. 83), and in
particular l/oxtese, ibid., 1882, p. 348.



220 TREND-LINES OP THE ALPINE SYSTEM [partii

of the Trias, Bhaetic beds with Spirigera oxycclpos^ &c., two or three
fossiliferous zones of the Lias, and the Tithonian and Neocomian. Cape
St. Alessio in the south-east and Militello in the west best indicate the
course of this band. It is succeeded to the south by hills of Tertiary
Flysch, the foot of which is covered by the lavas of Aetna. '

Although I have had the pleasure of visiting, under the guidance of
Signor Seguenza, this remarkable zone, the structure of which more than
any other part of the Apennines recalls that of the eastern Alps, I have
yet, on account of its comparatively trifling length, not ventured to draw
further conclusions from its presence.

Since then our knowledge of the structure of the mountains of Sicily
has been considerably extended. Above all, the important investigations
of Gemmerallo have brought to light the fact that the Trias of the east
coast is prolonged through the Madonies, and then, having bifurcated into
two great bands, runs on the one hand along the north coast as far as
Monte San Giuliano near Trapani, and on the other towards the south-west
nearly as far as Sciacca. In many places it forms the base of a diversified
series of Bhaetic, Jurassic, and Cretaceous deposits, and may often be
recognized by its fossils, particularly Daondla and HaloMa. The lowest
beds appear on Monte Sant’ Elia, situated on the north coast near Bagheria,
to the east of Palermo K

A recent work by Mottura has also shown the existence, to an
extent previously unsuspected, of thick masses of Flysch, of ‘argille
scagliose ’ with fucoids, of ‘ Albarese,’ sandstone, and Nummulitic limestone
distributed over wide areas, both on the southern border of the Madonies,
and further to the south-east past Baddusa towards the western edge of
the plain of Catania, as well as in the south-west towards Caltanisctta
Even at Boschetello near Vizzini, Neocomian beds rich in Cephalopods
have been shown to underlie the Hippurite limestones, which in places
are visible towards the south-east as far as Cape Passero^. It thus
becomes difiicult to resist the conclusion that the zone of Verrucano and
Trias dipping to the south on Cape Alessio is to be regarded as part of the
outcrop of a widely extended zone of limestone.

There can be no doubt as to the original continuity of the Aspromonte
in Calabria and the Peloritan mass in Sicily; this is shown by their
mutual position, by the bending round of the Calabrian zone of schist

^ G. G. Gemmellaro, Sul Trias della regions occid. della Sicilia, Accad. di Lincei,
1881-1882, 3^ ser., XII. From pebbles pre-Triassic Cephalopods are also known, which
approach most closely those of the sandstone of Artinsk : Mojsisovics, Verhandl. geol.
lieichsanst., 1882, p. 31.

^ Mottura, Appendice alia memoria sulla formazione terz. nellazona solfifera di Sicilia ;
Mem. r. Comit. geol. 1872, II, pp.5-8.

’ R. Travaglia, La sezione di LicodiarEubea e la serie del terr. nella regions S.E. della
Sicilia, Bollet., 1880, XI, pp. 250, 507 ; Ippol. Gafici, tom. cit. p. 495.



221


CH. n] PROLONGATION THROUGH DAraELA

(discontinuous, it is trae), and by the identity of the transgressive
Cretaceous deposits. From this it follows that the folded sedimentary
beds on the outer margin of the Apennines must undergo a sharp cur-
vature to the west beneath a part of the Ionian sea.

We now find ourselves confronted by a fresh problem. In the north-east
of Sicily there is a fragment of older crystalline rocks, bordered by a zone of
schist, proceeding from Calabria; this is followed by zones of Verrucano,
Trias, Bhaetic, and Lias to Neocomian; all are compressed together into
a somewhat narrow band, which hardly extends further than Taormina ;
then follow the Flysch rocks. They appear at first as an imposing
independent belt extending into tho vicinity of Aetna, then they dip
beneath younger sediments, but crop out in places, where the underlying
beds of Hippurite limestone and Neocomian also become visible.

It is easy to recognize the continuation of tho horizontal younger
Tertiary beds on the plateaux of Malta. But the prolongation of the
Eocene and Cretaceous rocks lies, as Coquand perceived many years ago,
in North Africa ^ Thence the promontory of Dak'hela with Cape Bon
extends a long way towards Sicily ; it is composed chiefly of Neocomian
and Flysch, as is shown by the outcrops on Cape Bon itself, those
near Zaghouan, and on the south side towards the Oulf of Hammamet

It is here, then, that we must continue our comparisons.

C. The North African Chain.

Among the constituents which help to build up the great mountain
chain of North Africa, we may first consider a number of recent volcanic
rocica which emerge here and there as islands off the coast, though in
a few places they also occur on the mainland.

We meet first, at some distance from the land, the rugged island of
Galita, 350 meters in height, accompanied by reefs iCnd smaller islands.
The whole island, with the exception of a steep upturned fragment of dark
limestone and shale, consists of trachyte and a dark dolerite-like rock ®

^ In several places, as, for instance, in Coquand, Descript, g^ol. de la partie septentr.
de Temp, du Maroc, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1847, 2** ser., IV, p. 1189, and Sur la
format, cretac. de Sicile, op. cit., 1866, 2® ser., XXIII, pp, 497-504.

* A. Pomel, Le Sahara, Observ. de geol. et de geogr. phys. et biol. avec des aper^us sur
r Atlas et le Soudan, Publ. de la soc. de climat. d’Alger, 1872, p. 32 ; O. Stache, Geol.
Touren in der Regentschaft Tunis, Verhandl, geol. Reichsanst., 1876, pp. 34-38 ; Tchihat-
cheff, Espagne, Algerie et Tunisie, 8vo, Paris, 1880, p. 495.

* I follow here the account given by Velain, Constit. geol. des iles voisines du littoral de

TAfrique, du Maroc k la Tunisie ; Gomptes rend., 1874, t. 78, p. 73. Renvu long ago
published a geological map of the island ; he believed the porphyritic varieties of the
trachyte to be granite: Explor. scientif. de TAlgerie, 4®, 1848, Geologic, p. 61, pi. ii.
Issel has also recorded granite on Galita, and regards this island as a continuation of
Sardinia : Mus. civ, Genova, 1879-1880, XV, p. 250.



Farther to the west the prolongation of the volcanic rocks lies (m the
ttiftiwInTiH of Africa; I allude to the basaltic masses of Dellya in Eahylia.
Still farther, to the west of Algiers and the plain of Mtidja, these rocks
advance somewhat farther into the country. They even appear in the
district of MUiana, in three separate zones, the first on the sea-coast near
Cherchel and other places, the second on the southern border of the first
more inland range of mountains formed of Cretaceous rocks, and the third,
the most southerly, with a length of more than fifty kilometers at the
south foot of the next chain, the great 8ra Kebim, also formed of
Cretaceous rocks ^

In Oran volcanic rocks also occur, in this case trachyte and basalt,
intimately associated with younger Tertiary deposits, and even with an
inferior ^vision of the Quaternary. Generally speaking the trachytes
appear to be older than the basalts ^

The island of HaJbihaa consists of ‘ millstone ’ trachyte

Still further to the west, on both sides of the Wady Tafna, more con-
siderable masses of basalt occur ; on the basalt island of ASn-Temouchent,
on the confines of Oran and Tlemcen, basalt fiows cover Quaternary
deposits containing land-shells*.

The idand of Saachgoun affords pnzzuolane and glassy felspar*.

Large masses of basalt also appear near Nemowra.

The Zaffarin lalanda west of Nemours consist of trachyte and
phonolite*. On the veiy small island of Alboran, which lies at a great
distance from the coast, a steeply upturned fragment of a stratified deposit
is to be seen, apparently of rment sedimentary origin, and upon this lies
a layer of rock containing olivine

This series of recent eruptive rock^ may thus be recognized far towards
the west on the islands and along the coast.

The next zone, which, with the exception of the little island of Plane, to
the west of Oran, belongs entirely to the littoral margin of the continent,
is composed of a series of older rocks, gneiss, and ancient granite, mica-
schist, and clay slate, with beds of granular marble.

* A Pomel, Deseript. et carte g4ol. du masiif de Milianah ; Soc. de Climatol.
Alg^nenne, 1872, pp. 180-138.

* Bleicher, Becherches mir I'origine dec ^l^mentc litholog. de terr. teit. et quat. dec
env. d’Oran, Compt. rend., 1874, LXXVIII, p. 700; and Note ear la g^ologie dec environe
d’Oran, Bull. Soc. g4ol., 1875, 8* cdr.. Ill, pp. 187-195.

* Ydlain, loc. cit, p. 72.

* Pouyanne, Notice g4ologique cnr la cubdiTicion de Tlemcen ; Ann. dec Minee, 1877,
7* c4r.. XII, p. 188.

* Velain, loc. cit., p. 71 ; and Snr nn feldcpaih orthoce vitrenx dec pouzzolanec de lUe
Bachgofln, Compt. rend., 1874, LXXIX, p. 250.

' y^ain, loc. cit.

F. M. D&vila,:icla de Alboran; Bol. Com. del Mdpa geoL de Ecp., 1876, m,
pp. 177-179.



ittaS. 'isiadair'idHAiNa^ : ^2$

The first mass of gneiss is that of the JAd Ed(mgh, west of Bona. It
is bordered on the south by Lake Fezzarah. Opposite it, on the west side
of the Qulf of Stora, the ' Seven Capes’ near Collo consist of granite and
quartz porphy^. The zone of schist, which follows to the south, extends
from Edough, running fairly parallel to the coast, past Philippeville, and then
southwards from Collo and towards Djidjelly in the Qulf of Bougie, where
quartz porphyry again becomes visible on the coast

The next mass is the gneiaaoae mxm of the great Kabylia, west of the
Ba^ of Bougie, which, with the accompanying ancient schists, occupies the
whole basin of the Wady Sebaou down to its mouth near Dellys, It rises
inland to a height of 1,420 meters, being thus considerably lower than the
mighty limestone chain of the Djurdjana, which dominates it on the south,
with a height of between 1,780 and 2,517 meters. The gneiss mass of
Eabylia is in places covered by transgressive Nummulitic beds, but remains
exposed to view in three larger mountain groups, the most southerly of
which includes ancient schists, and measures fifty-four kilometers from
east to west, with a mean breadth of sixteen kilometers. Towards Dellys
and the sea-coast it appears to be completely covered with Tertiary
deposits*.

The next outcrop of ancient rocks is particularly significant as regards
the maimer in which those parts of this great mountain chain now buried
beneath the sea have given way and sunken down. Just as in Italy the
peninsula of Sorrento, with the island of Capri, projects as a horst between
the Bay of Naples and that of Salerno, thus separating two independent
sunken areas, so here two peninsulas project into the sea, to the east and
west of the Bay of Algiers \ in the east Cape Matifou, in the west the
peninsula of Bouzar^, and each of these promontories is formed by a frag-
ment of the schistose series which covers the sunken mass of Algiers.
This at least is the only interpretation I can put upon the many de-
scriptions which have been made of this region. On Bouzania the mass
of older rocks exposed to view is much more considerable than on Cape
Matifou; we see there a series of garnet-bearing mica-schists, talc-schist,
and clay slate, with an intercalation of dark blue limestone of considerable
thickness; intervening gneiss-like bands and small isolated masses of

* Coquand has given an extremely detailed description of the Edough, Descr. g^oL de
la prov. de Constantine, Mdm. Soc. gdol. de Fr., 1854, 2* sdr., V, p. 12 et seq. ; for the
whist zone see L. Hardooin, Sur la g^ol. de la subdiv. de Constantine,^ Bull. Soc. gdol.
de Fr., 1868, 2* s^r., XXV, p. 328, pL v ; also Parrant, Carte g4oL do ddp. de Constantine
par Tissot, op. cit., 1882, 3* s^r., X, pp. 299-306.

* A. Fdron, Sur la constit. g4ol. des montagnes de la grande Kabylie. Sur les roches

do massif d’Alger et d’autres points dn littoral afric. ; Bull. Soc. g4ol. de Fr., 1867, 2*
sdr., XXIV, pp. 627-662 ; note by P. Marts, op. cit., 1867, 2« str., XXV, p. 185, and
in particular L. Ville, Etudes gdol. foites dans la Kabylie, op. cit., XXV, pp. 251-276,
pL iii. . .



224 TREND-LINES OF THE ALPINE SYSTEM [parfu

giBoite also rise within the schists, resembling those which are met with
in the Edough and on the Peloritan mountains. Near Algiers the dip
of the beds is to the south, and increases in amount as we proceed in that
direction. On the summit of Bouzarda the strike bends in an arc. This
fragment is separated by the plain of Mtidja from the limestone mountains
on the south

Still further to the west, on the west side of the Bay of Mostciganem,
in the littoral belt of the province of Oran, granitic rocks, finely plicated
clay slate with silken lustre, limestone, and dolomite containing calamine
appear below a group of red slates and quartz sandstone. These ancient
rocks form many projections on the shore west of Oran, and, proceeding
in the direction of the coast, appear, according to Bleicher, in the hills to
the south of Nemours ^

Still further south of Nemours, towards Oudjda, a long ridge of ancient
rocks rises up in an anticlinal, which strikes across the frontier of Morocco,
following the direction of the chain. In this locality also isolated masses
of granite protrude through the schists ^ In the eastern part of the
mountains such deep-seated rocks are never, so far as we know, brought
to the surface.

If we follow the sea-coast into Morocco we shall find, according to
Coquand’s painstaking observations, the following facts. While the
mountain folds of Tlemcen, which we have mentioned above, extend
inland in a west-south-west direction, a series of outcrops of older rocks
is confined to the curve of the littoral region and does not penetrate further
into the country. The oldest members appear on the promontories ; for
example, on the prominent Cape Baa-el-Deir (Cabo tres Forcas) near Melilla.
Raa Torf (Cabo Negro), to the north of Tetuan, derives its name from its
dark garnet-bearing mica-schist, which is associated with clay slate and
later veins of granite. These older rocks also form the promontory of
Cevia which bran^es off from the Jebel Mousa.

In this way then the ancient rocks which extend along the south coast
of the Mediterranean reach the Straits of Gibraltar ; on the landward side
they are bordered by a band of Palaeozoic sediments which, from Tetuan
past the Biff, appears to form the greater part of the littoral region lying on
the inner side of the fragments of still older formations mentioned above.

* Renon, Pescription g^ologique de I’Alg^rie, pp. 66-74, section of the promontory,
pi. iii, fig. 22 ; P. Marfes in Bull Soc. g4ol. de Fr. 1861, pp. 365-368, et passim. Cape
Matifou has lately been discussed in greater detail by Tchihatcheff in Espagne, Algeria
et Tunisie, p. 206 et seq.

* Pouyanne, op. cit., pp. 84, 135.

* Bleicher, Recherches sur les terrains ant^rienrs an Juiassiqne dans la prov. d’Oran ;
Bull. Soc. g4ol. de Fr. 1880, 3* a4r. Ylll, pp. 303-309. Here, too, contact phenomena
between granite and schist do not seem to be wanting, e. g. near Nedroma on the road
south-east of Nemours ; schists containing chiastolite and andalusite occur in .this region.


DjAsm. mD sAmmom


226


At one locality near Djaritz, above Tetuan, Coquand has found remains
of Trilobites, Orthoceras, Orthis, &c., in a higher stage of this zone. Its
strike passes gradually from east-north-east and west-south-west to south
and norths ^

Apart from isolated exposures of Carboniferous limestone, which are
mentioned by Bleicher as occurring in Oran, the next zone is composed of
a dark red conglomerate or red sandstone, in which fossil trunks of trees
have been found. Pomel assigns this zone to the Permian, Bleicher regards
it as still forming part of the Carboniferous. It appears above the schists,
and below the Mesozoic limestones in the northern part of the province of
Constantine, then on the Jebel Khar, i.e. the Mountain of the Lions, near
Oran, on Cape Falcon, above the schists of Eastern Tlemcen and in other
places. In the west a crescentic curve of red sandstone, visible a long way
off, forms, from Tetuan onwards, and as it would appear throughout the
Biff, a border to the littoral zone of ancient schists. It is quite possible
that this red Permian series corresponds to that thick succession of red
beds in the south of Morocco, and of the great Atlas to which Fritsch
has given the name * the Wansero sandstone V

Above this red-coloured series lie the thick limestones of the high
mountains. That the lowest part of these, at least in the east, belongs
to the Trias is proved, in spite of the absence of fossils, by the presence
of overlying Lias, which has been recognized by numerous observers*.
Lias is known at several localities in the northern part of the chain;
Jurassic deposits are more largely represented, but the Cretaceous and
Eocene play the chief part in the structure of its mighty folds. The chain
is bounded on the south by the basin of the Hodna and by a series of
shotts. From Tunis its direction for a long way onwards is to the west-
south- west, until, in the Riff of Morocco, that curvature to the north occurs
which we have already recognized in the inner zones, and which closes
the basin of the Mediterranean.

This bending round explains the fact that Cape Spartel, according
to Coquand, consists of Flysch, and that Desguin and Lenz have met with
no deposits older than the upper Jurassic over the whole distance from
Tangier to Mekinez and Fez, and that the only Mesozoic fossils which
Desguin found south of Tangier belong to the horizon of Ostraea
scyphax\

> H. Coquand, Description gdologique de la partie septentrionale de I’empirc du Maroc ;
Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1847, 2® s^r., IV, pp. 1198-1205. Lenz lately recorded mica-
ceous slate near Ceuta : Mittheil. der afrikan. Ges., 1880, II, p. 76.

^ E. V. Fritsch, Ueber die geol. VerhilltniBae von Marokko ; Zeitschr. ^es. Naturwiss.,
1881, 3. Ser., VI, p. 204.

* In particular Coquand, Province de Constantine, pp. 44-60 ; Maroc, p. 1218.

^ Mourlon, Esquisse g4ologique sur le Maroc, 18 pp.^ from the Bull, de I’Acad. roy. de
Belgique, • I 87 O, 2® s^r., XXX (according to collections made by Desguin); Bleicher,

■OLLAfl Q



236 l!BEin>-LI19ES OF THE AI^ [FABv n

In the r^(nui tdtnated within French territory a vast deal haa* already
been accomplished in the disentanglement of the folds of the limestcme
chain ; indeed, the success with which French geolc^ists have interpreted
the structure of the mountain chains of North Africa may be counted
among the most gratifying achievements of descriptive geology, and
redounds greatly to the honour of all who have contributed to it.

It is not necessary to enter here into the details of the folded structure ;
but it is worth mentioning that, according to the fine maps of Brossard,
folding characterizes the transverse' chain which occurs in the region of
£ou Sada to the south-west of the Hodna, and connects the mountains
l3ring to the north of the Sebchas with those to the south. The folds
have the same direction as those of the main chains and are thrown
down by a transverse fault.

The folds strike through the mountfuns to the north of the Sebchas with
a regularity which recalls those of the Jura; and along the margin very
young Tertiary deposits appear, which have suffered the same disturbances ^

To the south of the plain of the Sebchas the folded chains rise again
to considerable heights, but no deposits have been observed in them older
than the upper Jurassic. This is covered by the Neooomian; then
follows, at ateut the horizon of the Qault, a great thickness of Flysch-like
sandstone and upon this the middle and upper Cretaceous. The Ceno-
manian consists of gypsum, marl, and limestone; the upper zones of the
Cretaceous consist of limestone. Towards the east Eocene also appears.

From Figig, far in the west on the borders of Morocco, to beyond
Laghouat, where it is known as Jebel Amour, the chain ends in a steep
rectilinear face overlooking the boundless Sahara, its beds striking to
the north-east, as is shown by the observations of Holland; its outer
margin consists of Cretaceous limestones inclined to the south-east,
forming the outer fi^nk of a great anticlinal. Towards Biskra the boundary
is less rectilinear, but the structure of the chain remains the same^.

We must thus recognize a number of parallel zones in the North

Sor la geologic des rdj^ons comprises entre Tanger, el Araich et Meknts, Compt.
rend., 1874, LXXVIII, pp. 1712-1716.

' Brossard, Constitution physique et gdologique de la subdivision de Setif, M4m. Soo.
gdol. de Fr., 2* s4r., VIIl, p. 271, pi. xz, for the southern border in the Setif, particularly
in the depression of Zahrez; for the western part of the region of the Nahr Uassal,
Bonrguignat, Etudes gdologiques et paldontologiques des hauts plateaux de 1' Atlas entre
Boghar et Tiharet, 4to, Paris, 1868, where, p. 83, a gentle anticlinal is described,
involving Quaternary deposits.

* G. Rolland, Sur le terrain cr4tac4 du Sahara septentrional. Bull. Soo. gdol. de Fr., 1881,
3* 84r., IX, pp. 510-515. For the southern border of the Aoures mountains, see Dubocq,
M^moire sur la constitution g4ologique des Zib&n et de I’Ouad R’ir, Ann. des Mines, 1852,
S" s4r,, II, pp. 249-880, and for the following part extending to the west and far into
the desert, Ville, Exploration gdolpgique du Beni Mzab, du Sahara et de la r^on des
steppes de la province d’ Alger, 4to, Paris, 1867. '



227


qa n] THE SOUTH OF SPAIN

African chains. The first is the volcanic zone, rising for the most part
as islands from the sea, and represented, from the island of Qalita in
the east to the Zaffarin Islands in the Bay of Melilla in the west, by
a number of isolated points. The second zone, frequently projecting
into the sea in the form of promontories, consists of more or less frag-
mentary masses of gneiss, granite, and ancient schists. It extends from
the Edough to the long Bm-el-Deir, following the cur\^e of the coast
as far as the Pillars of Hercules. The relations of the several members
of this zone were recognized long ago by French geologists, and Pomel
has given an excellent account of them in a general description of the
chain \ Above the schist series lie red conglomerate and sandstone, held
to be either Permian or Carboniferous; then rise the high, abrupt, and
lofty scarps of the folded limestone chain, which extends southwards as
far as the Hodna and beyond it to the Sahara. The structure of the
Apennines is thus repeat^ in North Afiica^ but the outer border of the
chain is here turned, towards the south.

In this case also the zone of crystalline rocks has broken down and
sunk inwards, leaving but few remains, and the folded chains have been
dammed back against the interior of the land; here also volcanic rocks
mark the region of in-sinking, which has taken place, as on the west
coast of Italy, not along a straight line but in isolated caldrons — as is
indicated by the promontories, the last fragmentary remains of the ancient
zone.

The lofty Atlas, in so far as it is known, appears to differ greatly, not
only in strike but also in structure, from the preceding chains, which follow
the coasts of the Mediterranean. It diverges from the northern range,
which turns to the north near Gibraltar, and striking away to the west-
south-west, reaches the Atlantic coast at Cape Ghir.

D. The Betic Cordillera.

The North African chains in the Riff and as far as the Pillars of Her-
cules swerve in great arcs to the north and thus bring us back to Europe.

The south of Spain falls into three natural divisions; the first is the
region of the Betic Cordillera, which follows the coast of the Mediter-
ranean, striking to the east-north-east; then comes the valley of the
Guadalquivir, running in almost the same direction; and on the other
side of this river lies the sharply defined southern border of the great
Iberian Meseta, which follows the same direction. This vast highland
district closely resembles the Bohemian mass, or the Central Plateau of
France, sharing with them a number of fundamentally important charac-
ters, such as the extensive occurrence of Archaean rocks, the existence of
numerous gaps in the Mesozoic series, the intersection by its margin of the
Cpquand, Constantine, p. 43, et passim ; Pomel, Le Sahara, p. 26.

QZ


strike of its rooks, and the tnmsgression of the Cenomanian, which nudcOs
its appearance a little farther to the north. The Sierra Morena, its most
important member in the south, is related to its outer border in much
the same way as the Mannhart mountains in Lower Austria are to the
southern margin of the Bohemian mass.

We will first turn our attention to the Betic chains, and in describing
their structure I will adopt the same method as that just employed in
the case of the chains of North Africa; and we will again approach the
mainland from the Mediterranean, examining and following up each zone
in succession.

In that part of the mainland which extmids furthest to the south,
Gape Oaia, we meet with a fairly extensive chain of young volcanic
rocks, which form the south-eastern coast of the province of Almeria as
far as the neighbourhood of Mojacar, and continue from this town in
isolated exposures to beyond Vera in the north-east Smaller masses of
volcanic rocks are visible still further to the north-east near the coast;
and to the east of Cartagena, according to Botella, the tongue of ancient
schists which terminates in Cape de Palos is separated from the mainland
by a chain of volcanic hills. The little reefs in the Lagune Mar Menor
near Cartagena also consist of trachyte and basalts

Thus the whole of the south-eastern border of the Iberian peninsula,
from Cape Oata to Cape de Palos, is occupied by recent volcanic formations ;
and consistently with this no part of the coast, with the exception of the
neighbourhood of Lisbon, is subject to more violent or more frequent
earthquakes

The volcanic zone is succeeded towards the interior by a very extensive
complex of schists, including a small amount of gneiss; its chief com-
ponents are garnet-bearing mica-schists, talc-schists, and clay slate, and beds
of crystalline limestone. This mass or band of schists begins in the east
with the already mentioned ridge between Cape de Palos and Cartagena,
appears in isolated outcrops to the north of this town, and is continued
to the south-west. It then forms several very great anticlinals, which
strike from east-north-east to west-south-west. The first of these
is the Sierra Alhamilla, the next, to the north of this, the broad
Sierra de los Filabres^. Then follows the greatest of these arches, the


* F. M. Donayta, Datos para una reseSla flsica y geoldgica de la region eudeste de la
Prov. de Almeria ; Bol. Com. MApa geol. de Esp., 1877, IV, pp. 16-81.

* F. de Botella y de Homos, Descripcidn geoldgica minera de las provincias de
Murcia y Albaoete, fol., Madrid, 1868, detailed map of Cartagena, p. 48.

* It is sufficient to recall the earthquake of June 10, 1868, which convulsed the valley
of the liver Almanzora, and was followed by a long period ‘of distnrbanoe ; C. de Prado,
in Ferrey, Tremblements de terre en 1863, pp. 189, 172, et seq.

* F. M. Donayre, op. oit., pp. 31-50 ; L. N. Monreal, Apontes flricoa y geoldgicos refer*
entes a la zona oentcid de la provincia de Almeria, Bol. Com. HApa geoL, 1878, V; pp. 54-70.



mighty Sierra Nevada. This, according to the statements of Ansted ^ and
Drasche^, consists of a simple anticlinal, which gradually increases in
height towards the west and then ends abruptly. It is composed of mica-
schist, clay s^te, and ancient limestone. Gfonzalo has lately described
this great mass in detail, and has shown that it finds its further con-
tinuation to the south-west in the precipitous Sierra de Almijara near
the coasts

The Sierra de Gador, an isolated mass of Trias, famous for its rich
mines of lead and zinc^ ris^, west of Almeria, between the south-east
part of the Sierra Nevada and the sea.

The zone of ancient schist extends far into the province of Malaga to
beyond Marbella, where a great mass of serpentine appears, accompanied
by gneiss, granite, and Archaean schists. This, according to MacPherson’s
detailed .description, forks to the north-east, constitutes on this side part
of the semicircular border of the Hoya de Malaga, and forms on the south-
west the most extensive, if not the highest part of the Serranfa de Ronda.
It descends precipitously to the sea, but near Marbella a narrow faulted
band of schists and Mesozoic beds may still be seen along the shore. A
band, equally affected by faults, of intensely folded dolomites, which are
considered to be of Palaeozoic age, accompanies the ancient rocks of the
Serrania de Honda; west of Marbella, near Manilba, the serpentine and
the dolomites terminate near the sea-coast^.

Here lies the limit of the ancient rocks in the Betic Cordillera. No
organic remains have ever been found in this vast zone of schist, although
opposite to the Cordillera, on the border of the Meseta, e. g. near Alcar&z,
in the province of Murcia, the presence of Silurian fossils was pointed
out many years ago by Vemeuil. This zone of schist, recalling in so many
respects the Alps, is followed by a zone of Mesozoic and Eocene age, which
is intersected by numerous faults and highly folded. •

Let us first consider the isolate limestone mass of GUhraltar.
Ramsay and Oeikie, when studying this promontory, also visited the
opposite shore of Africa; they found, near Ceuta, the ancient clay slate
mentioned above, dipping to the west, and convinced themselves that the
Jebel Mousa above Ceuta, i. e. the second Pillar of Hercules, corresponds

1 D. T. Ansted, On the Geology of Malaga and the Southern Part of Andalusia ; Quart.
Journ. Geol. Soc., 1859, XV, p. 588.

* R. V. Drasche, Geologische Skizze des Hochgebirgstheiles der Sierra Nevada ; Jahrb.
geol. Reichsanst., 1879, XXIX, pp. 93-111.

3 D. Joaq. Genzalo y Tarin, Reseha fisicay geoldgica de la provincia de Granada; Bol.*
Com. M&pa geol., 1881, VIH, in particular p. 13 et seq., sheet A. '

« The same, Edad geoldgica de las calizas metaliferas de la .Sierra de Gador ; op. cit.,
1882, IX, pp. 97-111.

* J. McPherson, Relacion entre las formas orogrdficas y la constituclc^n geoldgica
de la senranfe de Rondo, 8vo, Madrid, 1881, 34 pp. and map.



280 TREND-LINES OP THE ALPINE SYSTEM [past a

with the Bock of Gibraltar, both as regards the nature of the r6cks and
their strike. We must therefore conclude that the limestone zone, in all
probability Jurassic, extends across from Africa to Europe. The lime-
stone of the Bock of Gibraltar itself, which is cut through by a great
fault, strikes first south and north; further to the north it turns more
and more to the north-east^.

Proceeding in this direction we reach the northern part of the Serrania
de Honda, which is composed of Mesozoic limestone and Eocene beds highly
folded and traversed by numerous strike-faults. We have already
referred to its southern part, composed of Archaean or Palaeozoic rocks.
The Serrania de Bonda is the subject of several compendious works by
MacPherson ^ in which for the first time the fact is insisted upon, that
the whole chain of North Africa has been formed by a movement directed
to the south or south-east, and not towards the north ^

The Betic Cordillera must be regarded as a mountain range folded
by a force acting in a north or north-westerly direction : * the imposing
phenomena of folding, fractures, and as 3 rmmetric structure which prevail
in all sierras composing the Cordillera B6tica, appear to me,' says
MacPherson, *to result solely from the action of a prodigious lateral
pressure, which forced this part of the earth’s crust against the passive
mass of the Meseta of Central Spain

The faults which traverse the Serrania de Bonda, and which seem in
certain cases to have brought the intensely folded zones of the chain into
a very abnormal position with regard to one another, are in no way
opposed to this conception, the main features of which are already
indicated by the distribution of the rocks. It receives additional
confirmation from the observations made further to the north-east,
particularly from the section of the Sierra de Abdalagis to the north of
Alora in the province of Malaga, published by Orueta ’. The Mesozoic
zone is here continued to the east-north-east past Lorca and Murcia, and

^ A. C. Ramsay and J. Geikie, On the Geology of Gibraltar ; Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc.,
1878, XXXIY, p. 513. Owing to the occurrence of a species considered to be RhynchoneUa
concinna, the limestone of Gibraltar is assigned to the Jurassic. In the west the super-
posed shales and sandstones of S. Roque and Algesiras, which also appear in the great
fault of the Rock of Gibraltar, probably form the continuation of the lower Cretaceous
and the Flysch of the neighbourhood of Tangier.

^ MacPherson, Breve noticia acerca de la especial estructura de la Peninsula Iberica,
from the Ann. de la Soc. Esp. de Hist. Nat., 1879, VllI, 26 pp. ; Estudio geoldgico y
petrografico del norte de la provincia de Sevilla, Bol. Com. Mdpa geol., 1879, VI, in
particular pp. 156-172 ; Uniclinal Structure of the Iberian Peninsula, Ann. de la Soc.
Fisp. de Hist. Nat., 1880, IX ; cf. also note 5, p. 229.

* MacPherson, Uniclinal Structure, pp. 24, 25.

^ MacPherson, Sevilla, p. 171.

* Dom. de Orueta, Bosquejo fisico geoldgico de la region septentrional de la provincia

de Malaga ; Bol. Com. M4pa geol., 1877, lY, sheet 0. • *



OH. n] ' THE BETIC eOBDILLBRA. 28l

to the north of these towns, and, although frequently interrupted by
young Tertiary plains, it reaches the sea in the province of Alicante.

The outer northern border of the Betic Cordillera is accompanied in
the vaUeys of ’ the Quadalete and the Guadalquivir by intensely folded
Tertiary deposits. - These finally sink beneath the plain; then follows
the alluvial land of the Guadalquivir, and, near Seville, we reach the
precipitous border of the Sierra Morena and of the Central Meseta.

Proceeding inland from the Mediterranean we thus meet in this part
of the Iberian peninsula, first a group of younger volcanic formations,
extending from Cape Gata to Cape de Palos, then a zone of ancient schists
striking to the east-north-east, and including the serpentine mass of the
Sierra de Bonda with the older rocks accompanying it. The most con-
spicuous component of this zone is the Sierra Nevada, which extends from
Malaga to Cape de Palos. It is followed by a zone of Mesozoic limestone
and Eocene l^ds, which is continued from the Bock of Gibraltar with
an arcuate strike, through the northern parts of the Serrania de Bonda,
towards the Sagra Sierra into the province of Alicante. Outside this
zone lie the folded Tertiary beds of the plain of the Guadalquivir, then
follows the river itself, and on the opposite side rises the Meseta.

This is the same succession of zones as that which we have encountered,
with trifiing local differences, in the north of Africa, in the Apennines,
and in the Carpathians. The Betic chain turns its in-sunken inner
border, on which volcanic eruptions have taken place, to the Mediter-
ranean; its folded outer border is turned towards the Meseta.

Whether this chain, as has been often supposed, finds its continuation
in the Balearic Isles, I cannot, in view of its complicated structure,
venture to decide, notwithstanding the excellent memoirs which have
been published on these islands.

K The arrangement of the trend-li'nea.

The remarkable correspondence in the structure of all these chains,
and the peculiar and repeated defiexion of the folds which form them,
invite an attempt to trace and describe, disregarding all subsidiary
deviations, the chief lines of strike, the guiding lines, as it were, of
those great folds of the earth’s crust in Southern Europe which have
collectively received the name of the Alpine system.

The accompanying illustration (Fig. 26 ) represents in a rough and
very diagrammatic manner the result of such an attempt.

The Jura mountains form an arc of a circle with its convex side
turned towards the north-west ; its termination on the south lies decidedly
nearer the northern Alps than that on the north-east. The movement
of the folding has been directed towards the exterior.

The .Alps b^n to the west of Genoa ; the curve described by their



282 TREim-IJlinSS OF IHE AIJ»INE SYSTEM [PAier fr

folds extends first to the north, then more and more towards the east.
Several concentric trend-lines have been marked here to represent the
congregation of several chains in this region. The most northerly of these
lines bends round the southern end of the Bohemian mass and forms the
are of the Carpathians, which encroaches upon the Sudetes and'the Russian
Platform. On this line also the movement is constantly directed outwards,
first to the west and north, as in the Jura, then gradually bending round
from the north again to the north-west in Moravia, to the north in
Galicia, and, finally, to the east and south-east in Moldavia and Wallachia.

Another trend-line leaves the Alps, and extends along the Flattensee
to the north-east. This is the line of the Mittelgebirge of Hungary; the
movement here was directed to the north-west.

In Transylvania we have marked within the curve described by the



river Maros an arc, convex towards the east and south ; this is the border
of the Transylvanian Erzgebirge (ore-bearing mountains). Here again
the folding force was directed outwards, i. e. to the east, south-east, and
south.

' Toula’s latest observations in the western Balkans reveal a structure
so extraordinarily complex, that I cannot at present undertake to extend
my remarks to these mountains

The Apennines appear to begin in the Gulf of Genoa with a curve
convex towards the north, the chain then trends to the south-east; the
folding force was directed to the north-east.

In Sicily we have drawn a line nearly due east and west ; it represents
a chain, of which the Archaean core, corresponding with that of the

’ F. Toula, Grundlinien der Geologie des weBtlichen Balkan ; DenkBclm k, Akad.
WiBB. Wien, 1881, XLIV b, pp. 1-56, pi. i>iv/and map, t •



c& n] ■ SPIRAL AERAKGBBIENT 283

Calabrian moantains, is visible in ihe north-eastern part of the island ;
here the folding force was directed to the south.

This segment is continued into the north of Africa by a line running to
the west-south-west ; in the west it curves round towards the north. On
this line the folding is directed to the sooth, and then in correspondence
with the bend of the strike more and more to the west.

This bend passes across the Mediterranean to Europe near the Pillars
of Hercules, and seems to furnish a complete connexion between the
folds of North Africa and those of the Betic Cordillera.

The trend-line of the Cordillera strikes to the east-north-east; the
folding is directed to the north-north-west.

If we regard the ancient masses, from the Russian Platform to the
Iberian Meseta, as the northern boundary of the Alpine system, then
the series . of the principal folds terminates with the Cordillera. But
alien masses are also present in the interior of the chains ; that of Servia-
Croatia, lately pointed out by Mojsisovics, is an example; we might
therefore include the Pyrenees in this system, and we shall then obtain
a long line running approximately west-north-west to east-south-east,
in which the folding force appears to have been directed to the north-
north-east.

We thus obtain a series of lines arranged spirally in a very peculiar
manner, and, with the exception of the Pyrenees, all folded in the same
direction. The centre of this spiral lies to the south-west of Genoa \

So long as we confine our attention to those parts of the Alpine
system which are situated in Europe, they appear, with some trifling
exceptions in the extremities of the chains, to be folded towards the
north-west, north, or north-east. But in Sicily this is no longer the case ;
and if we include, as we must, the North African chain in the system,
we transform the scheme completely. .

The considerations which have guided us in determining these great
curves demand some further explanation. On account of the constant
course of the outer margin of most of the chains, and the frequent inter-
ruptions to which the inner zones are subjected, we have chosen as
data for the construction of the curve the external outline, as well
as the strike of the outer folded Mesozoic zone taken at about the
middle. For . this reason the great dislocation which, for example,
extends within the Alps from the Upper Tessin towards the north-east,
is not represented. The direction of the Bhaetic zone in Corsica has
been determined by Dieulafait, and Lotti has shown that the serpentines

* H. Habenicbt, Die Grundzflge im geologiechen Baue Europa’s, 8vo, Gotha, 1881, mayalso
be* mentioned, because this work contains (pL 3) the first attempt known to me to represent
on a map the lines of folding of the Alpine system. This attempt is, it is true, incom-
plete and parUy erroneous, owing to the author’s mistaken conception of the Apennines.



^ OF lOT

of Corsica axe of the same age as those of the Maritime Alps and of:
Ligoria, and they are perhaps only the continuation of the serpen^
tines of the Alps, which extend as far as Elba, and perhaps still farther
to Qiglio and Mont’ Argentario. Hence the opinion has gained ground-
♦.Vm-t. the true continuation of the ancient Calabrian rocks must be
looked for in Corsica*.

Without wishing to anticipate farther investigation, I may observe
that the coarse of the exterior outline of the Apennines is not in
accordance with this explanation; that, so far as existing observations
extend, it seems much more likely that Corsica presents us with fragments
of an independent chain on the way to join the inner side of -the Apennines;
and, finally, that even if this last view should prove to be correct, it would
involve little modification in the disposition of the curves we have drawn,
which are based on the strike of the outer zones’.

The observations made in Corsica render it all the more remarkable
that in Sardinia the characters which distinguish an extra-Alpine region
acqaire more and more prominence, as in particular the occurrence, proved
by Bomemann, of transgressive extra-Alpine Trias in the south-western
part of the island; this appears to me to recall the red transgressive
deposits of the Iberian Meseta’.

There are thus many important questions concerning this part of the
Mediterranean region which still remain open to investigation. —

There still remain two important facts deserving especial emphasis.

First, the striking correspondence between the western part of the basin
of the Mediterranean and the Hungarian plain. Each of these regions
lies within the curve described, by a great fold of the earth’s crust,
surrounded by a number of .sunken areas of greater or less extent;
each is occupied by volcanos and encroaches more or less on the girdles
of Palaeozoic, Mesozoic, or Flysch deposits which, more or less clearly
defined from each other, compose the folded rampart.

Secondly, that in spite of the evidently recent age of many of these
great general movements, the mountain system itself evidently does
not belong wholly to a recent period. Where the older rocks are exposed
tranegreeeione occur, which in many respects reccdl the trangressions on
the borsts of the foreland.

Middle and upper Cretaceous and Oligocene mark two of the duef

’ Hollande, Gdologie de la Corse, Ann. des sciences gioL, 1877, IX, Art. 2, 114 pp.,
pi. viii-zii ; Dieulalkit, Serpentines de la Corse, leur Age et lenr origine, Compt. rend.,
1880, XCI, pp. 1000-1008 ; H. Beusch, Note sur la gdologie de la Corse, Bull. Soc. gdoL
de Fr., 1882, 8* sdr., XI, pp. 56-67 ; B. Lotti, Appunti geologici snlla Corsica, Bol. Com.
geol. d* Italia, 1888, 2* ser., IV, pp. 65-78.

* C. J. Forsyth-Mujor, Die lyrrhenis ; Zeitschr. Kosmos, 1888, VII, p. 104.

* C. G. Bomemann, Sul Trias nella parte meiidionale dell' isola di Sardegna ; B<dL

Com. geol., 1881, 2* ser., II, pp. 267-275, 2 pL > •


dtJE^ 286 ;


BtageB of tnuii^iression in extra-Alpine Qermany. In Carinthia and to
the west of Qraz Cretaceous beds lie immediately on the Devonian
and still older rocks. In Carinthia and Comiola Oligocene deposits of
the age of the 'beds of Songonini and Castel Gomberto penetrate into
the region of the Trias limestones and crystalline schists. On the Col
de Chaberton in the Cottian Alps limestones of the Cretaceous system
lie within districts, the rocks of which are believed to be very ancient.
Near Genoa a great mass of Oligocene Flysch lies on granitic rocks;
the lignite beds with AwthrMotherUim magnvm near Sav<ma rest
immediately on granite, being themselves covered by the Flysch. I have
already mentioned the transgression in the east of Calabria and the
bneroachment of the Cenomanian of African type on the granite in
the north-east of Sicily. The Flysch extends partly over the mass of
Eabylia.

Within the great curves also we find isolated areas, in which trans*
gressions are equally visible. Along the in-sunken interior border of
the Carpathians, on the isolated masses of gneiss and mica-schist which
appear in the north-west of Transylvania, to the south of the trachyte
mountains of Nagy-Banya, the transgression begins with patches of upper
Cretaceous In Croatia near FUnfkirchen, and in several parts of South
Hungary, a number of characters which are thoroughly extra-Alpine are
met witL

It is precisely this fact, the recurrence of certain transgressions within
the great trend-lines of the mountain chains and even on the older zones
of these chains themselves, as in Carinthia and Sicily, which is of essential
significance and which cannot be fully appreciated without comparing
the Alpine system with other chains.

The Alpine system of lines is not entirely without parallel in other
parts of the world. The nearest approach to such an /urangement is to
be found, as far as we can at pmsent judge, in the mountains which
surround the Caribbean Sea.

It now remains to trace the trend-lines of other great mountain ranges.
Before attempting this task, however, we must pass to the consideration
of that great sunken area which forms the fioor of the Adriatic Sea,
and extends, with its great lines of fracture overthrust towards the
interior, past Lake Idro as far as Meran and Idria in the Alps. This
sunken area determines to a large extent the relations of the Dinaric
chains (not represented on Fig. 26 ) to the Alps.


* G. Hofmann, Bericht liber die im Sommer 1882 im ettdOstL Theile dee Szathm&rer
Comitates ausgeftthrten geol. Specialaufnabmen ; Foldt. EOzlOny, 1883, XlII, p. 106.



CHAPTER III


THE BASIN OP THE ADMATIO

Significance of the Adamello. The Judicarian line. Fractures of the Cima d’ Asia.
Region between the Judicaria and the fracture of Schio. Dislocations on the north
of the fractures of the Cima d’ Aeta. Fractures of the Drau ^d the Gail. Dinaric
fractures or fiactures of the Karst. Recent extension of the Adriatic Sea. Summary.

A uniform and constant curve marks, as we have seen, the northern
border of the Alps; it may easily be followed even where, as in Lower
Austria and Moravia, parts of the outer border have been faulted doum ;
the northern border of the Carpathians forms the continuation of the
curve.

Attention has often been directed to the contrast between the outer
border of the Carpathians and the broken-down inner border with its
accompaniment of great volcanic outflows ; but the contrast between the
northern and southern border of the Alps is equally great, so that for
considerable intervals a doubt may be felt as to where the southern border-
should be indicated on the map.

If we ascend the cathedral of Milan in the early morning we shall see,
extending from the Maritime Alps on the left, far away to the broad mass
of Monte Rosa to the right, and even beyond it, a noble circle of white
peaks and crests surrounding the fertile plain. Here, it is true, the
southern border of the Alps is sharply defined, and here too the distinction
between the rocks of the northern and southern border is best marked.
This broad crescent is formed of ancient rocks, and B. Studer recognized
in it many years ago the fractured border of a large sunken area, which
lies below the plain of Lombardy. The isolated hills of the Supeiga, south
of Turin, with their beds dipping to the south, are the only fragment of
this sunken mass which remains above the ground.

It is near Lake Maggiore, on the southern border of the mountains, that
a marginal belt of Mesozoic and Tertiary beds begins to acquire some
degree of importance. If we consider its outer limit as the southern
border of the Alps it will lead us through Como and Bergamo towards
Brescia ; to the east of this last town we hesitate whether or not to follow
the naked and Karst-like hills of lower Lias which border the plain on
the north-east as far as Salo on Lake Garda. We will not follow them,
but continue in the same direction to the east-south-east through Como,.
Bergamo, Brescia. This leads us from the south of Lake Garda towards


Pirate II



EAGO r>I CAMPO AXD PASSO I»:EEA FORCEELINA ADAMELL.O, SOUTH TYROL

The lower Trias limestone, converted into white marble containing silicates cliaracteristic of contact alteration, is seen extending from

tlie Forcellina down to the lake

On the left, Tonalite ; on the right, plunging vertically downwards, altered Werfen shale&nnd GrOden sandstone

-AfUr a jphotoyrapli ty JDr. C. Ditner



ADAMELLO


287


Yerona; here, however, the margin of the mountains trends more and more
from the east-south-east to the south-east, and we reach far away towards
Este the southern extremity of the Euganaean hills. Where, however, does
the further continuation of the Alpine border lie ? Do Padua and Treviso
and the whole Venetian depression, from Vicenza to Qorz, actually lie
within the Alps?

Monte Adanidh. We will enter the Alps themselves and visit first
the mass of the Adamello, composed of granite and tonalite, which rises
to the north of Lake Idro on the border of the Tirol and Lombardy,
between the valley of Judicaria in the east and Val Camonica in the
west. To the east of Cedegolo the granite mass is so constricted between
sedimentary formations on both sides, that it would be more correct to
speak of two granite regions united by a narrow band. Of these the
southern region is the less elevated and less extensive ; it includes the Bb di
Gastello (2,879 meters), Cima di Danerba (2,844 meters), Corno Busecca
(2,660 meters), and others; while the northern region comprises the
Adamello (3,547 meters). Card Alto (3,461 meters), the snow fields and
glaciers to the north of the Val di Fumo, and as a further continuation
the Cima Presanella (3,561 meters) and its neighbourhood.

We have already mentioned that contact phenomena, resembling those
of Predazzo, occur in the Trias limestone near the margin of these granitic
masses (p. 158).

As early as 1846, J. Trinker, who has added so largely to our know-
ledge of the Tirol, examined the eastern slopes of this part of the chain,
and found that the limestone ‘is converted into crystalline structures
where it meets the plutonic rocks,' as in the Val de Borguzzo and Val di
Daone ^ He also mentioned the occurrence of garnet in limestone in the
latter valley. Not long afterwards Escher, who approached the marginal
zone of the granite from the west, described as occupring on the Lago
d' Amo, which lies above Cedegolo in a lateral valley of the Val Saviore,
a ‘ band of extremely curious rocks which sometimes bear a strong resem-
blance to the silicate-formations of the blocks of the Somma in the tuff of
Naples, or recall the contact phenomena of Monzoni ^ '. Curioni, Ragazzoni,
and Bittner have described some parts of this remarkable marginal zone

^ J. Trinker, Bericht tlber die im Sommer 1846 vorgenommene geogn. mont. Reise in
Sadtirol, in Bericht liber die IX. Generalversammlung dee Vercines zur geogn. mont.
Durchforschung von Tirol und Vorarlberg, 8vo, Innsbruck, 1847, pp. 9, 17.

• Escher in B. Studer’s Geologie der Schweiz, 1851, I, p. 294.

^ Curioni has chiefly described the southern part, and in particular the sinus in the
tonalite towards Blumone, and the high pass leading into the valley of thq Leno, as well
as Lago di Campo ; the Forcellina pass has been crossed by Ragazzoni : G. Curioni,
Ricerche geologiche sull* epoca dell* emersione delle rocce sienitiche (Tonalite) della
catena dei Monti dell* Adamello, Mem. Ist. Lomb., 1873, Xil, pp. 341-360. The wedges
of schist, limestone, and garnet-rock in tonalite, which are described here, are worthy of
notice. •



2S8 THE BASm OF THE ADRtATIO [pAwn

but the most detailed accounts have been famished by Lepsins^ and
Stache*.

Lepsius has traced the zone of contact in the south-east for a distance
of 15 kilometers; he has placed beyond doubt the Triassic age of the lime-
stone beds which are converted into marble, has pointed out 'the frequent
occurrence of garnet, vesuvian, epidote, wollastonite, and other minerals
characteristic of igneous contact, and has recognized in the tonalite the
source of the transformation. He has nevertheless ascribed an Archaean
age to the tonalite, and was led to suppose that it had been passively
raised from a depth, ' at which it possessed a temperature of its own, not
sufficient to fuse it or to reduce it to a plastic state, but enough to render
it capable of producing contact metamorphism

Stache has traced these marginal alterations for a still greater distance
round about the south-east, south, and west border of the mass, where
they penetrate in loop-like forms into the mass of tonalite and granite.
In his last publication on this subject he points out that the rocks on
the -western side and far towards the north, which were previously
believed to be much older, are really metamorphic products of the'Servino,
that is, of the lowest part of the Trias. He regards it as certain that
in the regions surrotmding the Adamello on the east, south, and west,
periods of volcanic activity repeatedly occurred during Permian and
Trias times; while the numerous intercalations in the marginal zone
of dioritic layers resembling flows lead him to the conclusion that these
rocks are to be regarded as having been formed under unusual conditions
with an ' epicrystalline or even sub- volcanic facies.’ At the same time
Stache rightly points out that in none of the conglomerates or breccias
of any pre-GIacial period, not even in the thick beds of Permian con-
glomerates which often contain fragments of porphyry, has a pebble of
tonalite ever beeq found.

The relations of the sedimentary beds to the granite and tonalite of
Adamello are altogether different from those which may be recognized
between Mesozoic deposits and masses of granite or gneiss in other
great mountain-cores of the Alps. On the northern margin of the mass
of the Finster-Aarhom Trias and Jurassic deposits lie in long folds
(p. 110), in which the oldest beds are above and below, the most recent
in the middle. They are folded into the gneiss or granite, and at the

* B. Lepaius, Daa westliche Sadtirol,4to, Berlin, 1878, particularly pp. 67-77, 148-152,
189, 191-229, 334, 336, &c. ; also Verhandl. geoL Reichsanat., 1879, pp. 339-343.

* G. Stache, Die Umrandung dea Adamelloatockea und die Entwicklung der Perm-
formation zwiachen Val buona, Oiudicaria und Yal Camonica, Verhandl. geol. Reichaanat.,
1879, pp. 300-310 ; Aua den Randgebieten dea Adamello, op«cit., 1880, pp. 252-255, et
paaaim.

* B. Lepaiua, ' SOdtirol, p. 76 ; Doelter’a obaerrationa in reply in Verhandl. geoL

Reichaanat., 1878, pp. 349-351 ; R. Lepaiua, op. cit., 1879, p. 31. • •



MONTE DOJA


289


OB. m]

wedge-sihaped extremities of the synclinals the well-known alteration of
the Jurassic limestone into marble may be perceived. The fissures and
thrust planes of the marble may be covered by a green talc-like mineral,
the precise nature of which still remains to be determined, but the silicates
of igneous contact, such as garnet, epidote, and the rest, have never yet
bera met with at these loci of maximum mechanical action.

Although the Trias beds of the Adamello penetrate in irr^fular loops



Fio. 27* M(mU Doja. Mass of the 'Rb di Castello. The Trias limestone dipping beneath

the granite.

Cf Line of volcanic contact ; v, w, sheets of porphyry in Trias limestone.


into the region of tonalite, especially at the point of greatest strangulation
to the east of Cedegolo, and although it is only towards the north-east
that the junction becomes more rectilinear, yet these Trias beds are not
pinched in in wedges like those of the Finster-Aar*hom. In that case it
is always the oldest sedimentary formations visible in the folds which
lie next the granite or gneiss; in this, on the other hand, round about
the southern^ eastern, and western part, and especially about the southern



240


THE BASm OF THE ADBIATIC [PAta.n

part of the di Gastello, and at the point of constriction, it is al%oay$ the
'you/ngest visible mender of the sedimentary formations which lies next
the crystalline rock and is metamorphosed for a greater or less distance
from the point of contact.

Lepsius lias given a very clear description of the manner in which the
Trias beds of Monte Doja dip beneath the granite and tonalite masses
of the Como Buseoca, at an angle which becomes constantly steeper.
The Qrbden sandstone, which is visible a great distance away, owing
to its red colour, crops out at the Grotta rossa (2,188 meters) in the south,
and the Cingolo rosso (2,178 meters) in the south-east ; the shales of Werfen
cross the Yal Aperta, lying between the two summits near the highest
Alpine hut, and are followed by the limestone beds of the Trias in Monte
Doja, which are visible in thick well-stratified masses more and more
steeply inclined, and reaching the point of contact' in a ravine in the
highest part of the valley ^ The zone of contact runs close below the
summit of Monte Bema (2,372 meters), which rises opposite, and on its
southern slopes the line of junction describes a fairly sharp curve, aftipr
which it proceeds to the north-north-east. The white marble, at this point
particularly rich in crystallized silicates, makes it possible to follow the
zone of contact for a great distance.

If, instead of approaching the zone through the Yal Aperta, we now
do so through the Yal di Daone, which succeeds it to the north, we shall
reach the boundary of the granite at a distance of 6,500 meters to the
north-north-east of Monte Bema, at a level about 1,100 meters lower.
The Qrbden sandstone exhibits its usual red colour at the lowest part
of this long valley, and at the bottom of the valley the Permian porphyry
becomes visible teneath it. But at a distance of more than a thousand
meters from the zone of contact, this sandstone, which is valued so highly
in the smelting works of the Alps on account of its refractory qualities,
is already converted into a brownish-grey quartzite ; certain beds of lower
Trias also pass into the same kind of rock, as is proved by the presence
in the latter of sharply defined hollow casts of NaticeUa costata. These
quartzite beds, which are of great thickness, form the sides of the valley,
while upon them lie the unaltered and richly fossiliferous beds of the
Muschelkalk, but far above, where the same beds approach nearer the
granite, they are converted into marble. The Qrbden sandstone appears
to be continued as far as the zone of contact. The contact thus takes
place above in the Muschelkalk, and below in the Qrbden sandstone.

If we ascend the Yal di Daone still further, passing over the zone of

' Fig. 27 represents the same place as that of which Lepsius has given a sketch,
SUdtirol, pp. 73 and 222 ; Cima BrufSone of Lepsius is the Corno Busecca. For the
determination of 'the tabular form of the intercalations of porphyry 1 must thank, in
particular, Dr. C. Diener, who has climbed the slopes up to the decisive joints.



LAGO DI CAMPO


241


oa in]

contact and through the area of hard white granite, we enter the region
of the greatest constriction of the mountain-core, and reach the western
zone of marble above the hut Nudole and to the west of it, towards the
lonely Logo di Campo. We are now on the northern slope of the R& di
Gastello. White marble, with garnet and other minerals characteristic
of contact, occurs with a high dip at the junction with the granite, as in
the eastern zone. This marble extends from the Lago d’ Amo, where
it was observed by Escher, over the frontier pass of the Forcellina (PI. II)
to the Lago di Campo, then turns round in a great curve and passes below
the Cima delle Casinelle, as has been described by Stache. The dark-



Fio. 28. Cima deUe Casinelle* (South part of the Adamello mass. * Reproduced from a
photograpli by Dr. C. Diener.)

In the foreground, on the highest peaks and on the right, granitic rocks ; on the left the beds
of Trias curve down below the snow.

coloured quartzite, which occurs in thick beds within the zone of marble,
is identical with the altered Groden sandstone of the lower Val di
Daone. True spotted schists appear at about the horizon of the Werfen
shales.

As far as our knowledge of the southern half of the margin of the
Adamello region extends, the sedimentary rocks dip from all sides beneath
the granite and tonalite like a funnel, or they break off with flexed edges
in a steep fracture : the youngest beds occur next the contact, the older
lie successively further away from it. This furnishes an explanation of the
encompassing zone of marble. No other great granite mass of the Alps
presents • a ^similar structure; no other shows the silicates of igneous

R


80LLAII


242 THE BASIN OP THE ADRIATIC [part ii

contact. The smaller masses of Predazzo and Monzoni are the only others
which present similar characters.

Adamello and its southern segment, the di Castello, has, in common
with Predazzo and Monzoni, a well-defined massive core and a surrounding
belt of marble containing the silicates of contact. The age of 'the altered
rocks is probably nearly the same in all three cases, that is to say, a little
more recent than the Muschelkalk. The two regions, however, differ
in so far as the dykes and flows of melaphyre together with the accom-
panying tuffs, which surround the eruptive centres of Predazzo and Mon-
zoni, are entirely absent in the neighbourhood of the Adamello. To the
cast of this mass, to the south, and also in the north, towards the Ortler,
as well as to the west, in the Mesozoic folds which traverse the Bernina,
the upper members of the Trias are known to occur; and to the south
and east the long series of younger sediments also occurs ; but the vast
sheets of lavas or ash, which would naturally be associated with such an
important centre of eruption, are nowhere present.

In the aureole of contact, 500 to 2,000 meters in width, a great diversity
of intercalated igneous rocks is certainly not wanting. Among these,
three groups may be easily distinguished. The first includes the sheets of
brownish-red porphyry (tt, tt, Fig. 27), which are normally intercalated
with the beds of the Trias; I believe that they correspond to the out-
poured sheets of Trias porphyry which may be seen at so many places
in the southern Alps, from the Luschariberg, near Raibl, to the Val
Trompia, and even further west. The second group comprises three
masses which fill the fissures in the brown quartzite of the Groden sand-
stone. The infilling material consists of large crystals of white orthoclase,
large flakes of white mica and sheaves of tourmaline in grey quartz, also
of coarse-grained granite, such as occurs in the dykes of so many granite
regions ; here, these veins, which present all the characters of segregation
veins, extend, as we have said, into the Groden sandstone. The third
group finally is formed of true intrusive veins; the few I have seen
consist of a decomposed green rock with crystals of white feldspar;
one of these veins may be seen below the Passo della Forcellina inter-
secting obliquely the banded limestone beds, with which it is in close
contact. In those parts of the western border which have been in-
vestigated by Stache, the intrusions appear to be more numerous and
considerable.

The zone of volcanic contact which surrounds the whole group of the
Re di Gastello and a large part of the Adamello compels us to consider
this great complex of granite and tonalite as a volcanic formation, which
must be of more recent origin than the upper Muschelkalk. Opinions
may differ as to whether it is to be considered as a cicatrice or a laccolite,
i. e. whether the volcanic mass actually produced an eruption at the



JUDIOAEIAN LINE


€H. Ill]


243


surface or not. To elucidate this question let us first follow the complex
in its further course to the north-north-east.

The JudicarUin line. The eastern boundary of the tonalite region
proceeds in a straight line to the north-north-east. Stache, who has traced
it, did not meet with the zone of marble again in the Val di Bre-
guzzo or in the valleys succeeding it to the north, but he observed
gneissose phyllites which however also dip towards the west beneath
the tonalite. The direction of the main axis of the whole complex to
north-north-east and the course of its faulted boundary reveal the
existence of a close connexion between the tonalite mass and the great
easterly line of dislocation of the Judicaria, which passes close to it and
rans in nearly the same direction.

If we turn from Lake Idro to the north and enter the valley of the
Upper Chiese (the Judicaria), we shall see on the left thick dark masses
of Permian porphyry, tuff, shales and sandstone, on the right the white
limestone walls of the upper Trias. The downthrow of the beds to the
right may amount to at least 2,000 meters. This is the mighty fracture
along which the subsidence begins of all the region lying to the cast, in
the direction of the Adige. The same contrast between the two sides of
the valley may also be observed near Storo. About nine kilometers higher
up the valley, which runs in a straight line to north-north-east, at the
entrance to the Val di Daone, the fracture has passed into a great flexure.
The same beds of Muschelkalk, which further to the west dip beneath
the granite as white marble charged with garnet and epidote, appear
here as dark highly fossiliferous limestones, which incline eastwards
towards the valley in great broken curves, and dip beneath the almost
horizontal beds of upper Trias which form the eastern side of the Judi-
caria \

The disturbance soon regains the character of a, fault. Where the
valley of the Judicaria bends to the north-cast it’ retains its direction
to the north-north-east and proceeds, as Bittner has shown, through the
mountains, from Roncone to Verdesina, and so reaches the Val Rcndena ;
this valley it follows as far as Pinzolo ; there it again enters the mountains
without any change of direction, traverses them and crosses near Mal^,
at the entrance to the valley of the Rabbi, the great Val di Sole. From
here it is gradually deflected from the north-north-east, somewhat to the
north-east, and proceeds from Mal^ through Bevia towards Mocenigo and
reaches the valley of the Etsch south of the entrance to the valley of
Ulten

' This exposure, which is very clear and instructive, has lately been described in detail
by Bittner, Ueber die geol. Aufnahmen in Judicaricn und Val Sabbia ; Jahrb. der geol.
Reichsanst., 1881, XXXI, p, 219 et seq.

* Cr. Stache^ Verhandl. der geol. Reichsanst., 1879, pp. 127, 250.



244


THE BASIN OF THE ADBIATIO [past iz

This line, which will be found to be of the highest importance in the
ensuing investigation, has a length of about thirty-four kilometers from
Lake Idro to the point where it reaches the Val Rendena, near Verdesina ;

. thence as far as the Yal di Sole near Midd of thirty-six kilometers, and
from Maid as far as the valley of the Adige, below Lana, of 'thirty-two
kilometers, or altogether for this part of its course 102 kilometers. The
eastern side of the fruit is formed by the down-sunken Mesozoic forma-
tions of the valley of the Etsch, which however, in the neighbourhood
of the fault, frequently appear to be inclined downwards towards it.
At the imposing Laugenspitze, to the south of the point where the fault
crosses the valley of the Etsch, it is the Permian porphyry which appears
as the base of the Mesozoic limestones on the eastern side of the fault.

The west side consists in the south, towards the Bb di Gastello and
the Adamello, first of those bands of Permian and Trias rocks which
we have just studied on the east border of the mass of the Adamella
The east border of the Presanella, in which a rock appears, which is
described as tonalite gneiss, is, according to Stache, only separated from
the line of the Judicaiia by a narrow zone of ancient phyllites. Further
to the north, gneiss and phyllite form the greater part of the western
border, until isolated bosses of tonalite and younger granite again appear.
Finally, before reaching the valley of the Etsch, another great mass of
tonalite arises on the west side of the fracture, and extends from St. Pan-
kraz in the lower Ulten up to the Etsch. Here, porphyry and Groden
saudstone form, as already mentioned, the east side of the fault.

The map of the district around Meran, published by C. W. C. Fuchs,
shows clearly how the tonalite bo^, the great fault, with the porphyries
and Permian beds of its east side cross the valley of the Etsch obliquely
near this town^ The further continuation of the fault has been deter-
mined by the valu^ible investigations of Teller. The Judicarian fracture *
may be followed through the gorge of the Naif, near Meran, as far as
Weissenbach in the valley of the Pens ; from here its course turns more
and more from the north-east to the east. This last segment is twenty-six
kilometers in length, so that the whole length of the fault, from Lake
Idro to the valley of the Pens, measures about 128 kilometers. The most
remarkable result of Teller’s researches is however the proof that the
granite mass is continued a long way to the east. The Iffinger above
Meran (2,561 meters), already recognized by Fuchs as the continuation
of the tonalite mass which rises on the other side of the Etsch, is only
a part of a very long band, the principal mass of which consists of granite,
but on its northern side it is composed of a continuous zone of tonalite
gneiss. This chain strikes through the valley of the Pens, then to the

* C. W. C. Fuchs, Die Umgebung von Meran ; Neu. Jahrb. f. Min., 1875, pp. 812-848,
pi. xvi. , »



JUDICAEIAN LINE


245


€H. m]

«aust, near Mauls and Franzensfeste, and across the Brenner route ^ Near
the latter, where the band of granite attains its greatest breadth, the fault
of the Judicaria is no longer visible on its south side, and the granite
band itself lies t6 the north and south like an arch below the bordering
zones of rock. After following the valley of the Puster nearly as far as



Fio. 29. Approximate arrangemmi qfthe principal frcuitiures andflemres which surround the

Cima d* Asta,

J Line of the Judicaria; Vs line of the Val Sugana; B line of Belluno; S line of Sehio;
T line of Truden ; Ts line of Tiers ; V line of VillnOss.


Brunneck, the granite band dips out of sight and seems to have reached
its termination, but from beneath the gneiss and gneissose phyllites in

^ F. Teller, Ueber die Aufnahmen im unteren Vintschgau und im Iffinger-Gebiete bei
Meran, Verhandl. der geol. Reichsanst., 1878, pp. 392-396 ; Aufnahmen zwhichen Etsch
und Eisack, op. dt., 1880, pp. 91-98 ; Tektonik der Brixener Granitmasse und ihrer
nOrdlichen Umrandung, op. dt., 1881, pp. 69-74; Aufnahme im Hochpusterthale, op. dt.,
1882, pp. 342-346 ; cf. also Pichler, BeitrSge zur Geognode von Tirol, Ned. Jahrb. f. Min.,
1871, pp. ^6 et seq.



246


THE BASIN OP THE ADRIATIC [pahth

the Antholzer mountains (Schnebiger Nock, 3,890 meters), on the other
side of the valley of the Ahr, north of Brunneck, another dome of granite^
surrounded by a ring of tonalite gneiss, makes its appearance. Teller
thinks that it stands in intimate connexion with the surrounding gneissose
phyllites; these contain numerous small lenticular intercalatidns of the
granite, while towards the south-west a subsidiary lenticular mass attains
such an exceptional size, that it crosses the ridges separating three not
inconsiderable valleys in an elongated band^

We thus see a very great line of fracture, stretching from Lake Idro
through Judicaria, through Yal Bendena, past Mal^, through the gorge of
the Naif, near Meran, as far as the valley of the Fens, for a distance
of about 128 kilometers; after maintaining a direct course to the north-
north-east nearly as far as Meran, it then turns round in a hook-like
curve to the north-east. Along its whole length we see the country
thrown down on its eastern side. Further, we see to the west of the
Judicaria, elongated in the direction of the fault, the great mass of tonalite
and granite which embraces the Bb di Castello, Adamello, and Presanella }
where it comes in contact with the Trias limestones in the south it over-
lies them at the margin, and alters them as by volcanic contact. Further to
the north a second great zone of granite emerges, accompanied by tonalite
gneiss on its north side only ; on the south side it is situated close to the
bent end of the great fault, the curve of which it follows, its strike
gradually passing from north-north-east to north-east and finally to due
east. At its extremity it is accompanied by the mass of Antholz, which
is intimately connected with the gneiss by numerous intercalations. The
question asked above now assumes the following form : whether the two
granite masses, which are distinguished by 4he associated presence of
tonalite, and by their relations to the great fault, are of quite distinct
age, or whether th,ey are a series of contemporaneous laccolites, which
at one end of the fault have altered the Trias beds in the Bb di Castello,
and at the other are exposed in the mass of Antholz at the far lower
horizon of the gneiss region.

In the region between the Eisack and the Etsch, where the curvature
in the direction of the fault and the granite band takes place, a remark-
able tectonic phenomenon appears, the existence of which Teller has also
recognized. The country lying to the north of the fault is thrust over the
granite band; it consists of gneiss, mica-schist, phyllite, Verrucano and
Trias limestone containing Diplopora. As we ascend from Sterzing on
the Breimer road to the Penseijoch on the south, we see, below the
Seilspitz, the gently dipping thrust plane along which the phyllites,
probably of Carboniferous age, are driven over the Trias limestone (Fig. 30).
In the lower parts of the wedge of limestone the beds stand erect as
* Teller, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1882, p. 345. , •



FRACTUEES OP THE ASTA


247


OH. ni]

though resisting the force exerted upon them by the mass of older phyllites
(Fig. 31). We observe that this great wedge is directed upwards and
outwards, and not, as generally occurs in the mass of the Finster-Aarhom,
into the interior of the chain. The layers of gneiss, which lie below the
limestone, contain, at the summit of the ridge, bands of Yerrucano con-
glomerate, which have been kneaded into them. To the south of the ridge
lie ancient schists; and here traces are to be seen of another band of
limestone, which appears to pass through them; a small fahlerz mine is
situated on the lower part of the slope, and the tonalite begins to
appear in the valley bottom, near Asten^



Fio. 30. Seilspiiz, ascent to the Penserjoch (west of the Brenner road). Long wedge of Trias

limestone in phyllito.


The faults of the Cima d* Asia. The line of Judicaria, with the bands of
granite and tonalite accompanying it, forms on the west and north-west
the enclasing border or ‘frame* of an extensive area of subsidence — tlie
basin of the Adriatic Sea — which is bounded on the east and south-
east by the flexures and faults of the Karst and of the Dalmatian
coast. It is only in the last few years that the connexion ' between the
various phenomena of this region has gradually become clear. In 1875
I could only speak of isolated, apparently exceptional overthrusts to the

* Here 1 found great blocks of pale yellow hornstone, such as I have not seen anywhere
else in the Alps ; it is possible that they have been derived from the contact of tonalite
and schist^.


248


THE BASIN OP THE ADEIATIC [PAurn

south on the Cima d’ Asta near Sant* Orso not far from Schio, and along
certain faults in the Karst; whereas to>day subsidence, and frequently
overthrusting also, are recognized as the rule over the whole of this large
area, under circumstances which are, it is true, peculiar and essentially
different from those which may be observed in the northern ‘Alps.

The greatest progress achieved here must be ascribed to the admirable
manner in which Edmund von Mojsisovics and his fellow workers have
conducted their researches in the southern Tyrol and the mountains of
the adjacent parts of Italy. A large part of the west of this region has
been found to be traversed by a network of faults, the disposition of
which has been exactly determined. As early as 1879 Mojsisovics was



Fig. 31. Trias limestone merthrust hy phyllife, in the limestone wedge of the Seilspits.


able to publish a general account of the fault-lines between the Etsch and
the Fiave, which has been completed and extended in all directions by the
subsequent researches of Austrian and Italian geologists \

In the year 1882 T. Taramelli represented on a sketch-map the most
important lines of dislocation in the district extending from Lake Garda to
Istria As I have personally investigated a large part of this area I will
here attempt to give a fresh survey of the results so far obtained, and
1 propose at the same time to enter into certain details, which appear to me

^ E. Mojsisovics v. Mojsvar, Die Doloxnitriffe von Sfldtirol und Venetien, 8vo, 1879,
pp. 106, 515, 518, &c.

‘ T. Taramelli, Geologia delle provincie Yenete ; Mem. Accad. Lincei, 18^2, XIII, pi. ii.



OH. Ill] NETWORK OP FAULTS 249

of importance, in relation to the question of the structure and origin of
great mountain chains in general.

I would first recall the tabular faults of Utah (p. 129, Fig. 13),
which start from the western margin of the Wahsatch, especially as
regards their fascicular arrangement, the variation in the amount of
their throw, and the relations existing between them and the flexures
of the same district. It is impossible to read the description given by
Mojsisovics of the great faults of the southern Alps without being struck
by a remarkable correspondence between many of their features and those
of the faults of Utah. The fan-like splitting up of some of the faults, the
intermittency of the less important fault-lines, the replacement of a single
great dislocation by a parallel splintering, the transference of a maximum
throw from one dislocation to another — all these phenomena, observed by
Mojsisovics in the faults of South Tyrol, are repeated in the fractured
areas of West America. A difference nevertheless exists between the two
regions, in so far as the faults of the southern Alps were accompanied by
tangential movements (producing flaws and overthrusts), whicli as we
shall see presently were directed from the margin of the sunken area
towards its centre.

To the north of the Brenta rises the extensive granite mass of the Cima
d’ Asta. It does not, like the phyllite of Recoaro, lie in the bottom of an
eroded valley, Imt rises as a lofty independent mass isolated among the
limestone Alps, on the southern border of the great porphyry region. It
forms one of the most striking features in the structure of the southern
Alps. ‘ Here I no longer understand man and I hardly understand nature,’
wrote the great pioneer Leopold von Buch, when he arrived at Pergine in
1798. ‘ The various rocks seem to be tumbled together chaotically and the
beautiful order of the Brenner has wholly disappeared. Who would have
thought of again finding primitive rocks, after such tremendous masses of
limestone as the terrible chain between Neumarkt and Trento, after
mountains such as those which surround Trento ? . . . With painful regret
I saw a structure collapse which gave us the history and at the same time
the system, and led us insensibly, as we followed the succession of stratified
systems from our present world to am earlier one, the existence of which
we had at first suspected without understanding, to believe later that we
were approaching its comprehension

The southern margin of the Cima d’ Asta is a vast trough-fault, the
northern side, though composed of granite, standing far higher than

^ L. V. Buch, Ueber die geognostische Besebaffenheit der Gegend von Pergine, Der
Oesellscb. naturf. Freunde zu Berlin neue Schriften, 1801, III,.p. 233; also in the
Geognostische Beobachtungen auf Reisen, 1802, and in the complete edition of bis works
published by Ewald, Roth und Eck, 1867, 1, p. 328 ; also G. v. Rath, Die Lagoraikette
unddas Ci<na ^’Astagebirge, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1863, XllI, pp. 121-128.



250


THE BASIN OP THE ADRIATIC [paot ii

the southern, to which the great Trias walls of the Cima Dodeci and the
Sette Communi belong. At the bottom of the trough, traversed by a
whole network of subsidiary fissures, lies the porphyry mountain of Zaccon,
followed by great mountains of Trias limestone, such as Monte Armentera
and Monte Civeron, which have been faulted down from the mass of the
Sette Communi, and finally, beds of Tertiary, Cretaceous, and Jurassic age,
superposed on each other in inverse order, and overthrust from the north
by the granite and phyllite of the Cima d’ Asta \

Towards the west these faults diminish rapidly in importance and [do
not reach the valley of the Etsch \ On the other hand they extend to the
north-east and east. Mojsisovics has named the chief of these faults,
which is also the most northerly, the line of the Val Sugana. It is along



Fio. 32. Enirance to the gorge of Torr^e Maso^ south side of the Cima d' Asta.

Heversed sories : — Or-b alternating beds of clay and Nummulitic limestone ; b-c Scaglia and
Biancoue ; c-d Diphya limestone, Acanthicus zone, dark red bed rich in hornstone, white
Jurassic limestone (lower ^Oolite?) ; e, e phyllite; /,/ granite.

this line that the granite and phyllite are cut off and overthrust ; it consti-
tutes as it were the southern front of the Cima d' Asta, which recalls, in its
relation to the sheaf of fractures, the position of the western front of the
Wahsatch to the fractures of the Sevier,

The line of the Val Sugana runs, together with its subordinate
ramifications and transitions, towards the north-east, and crosses the
Cordevole to the south of Agordo, the Pieve to the north of Longarone.
Still further to the north-east it approaches, as has been shown by

^ 1 have described this locality in Ueber die Aequivalente des Rothliegenden in den
Sttdalpen, Sitzungsber. k. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1868, LVII, p. 230 et seq., pi. i ; also
Entatehung der Alpen, pp. 86-89. See also Mojsisovics, Dolomitriffe, in particular p. 417.

^ This western region has been described by W. Gdmbel in Geognostiscbe Mittheilungen
aus den Alpen, III ; Sitzungsber. Akad. MOnchen, 1876, VI, p. 61 et seq. ^ ,


LINE OP BELLUNO


251


OH. Ill]

Harada, the group of the Villnoss faults, which come from the west-north-
west, and which will be discussed later. In this way are formed those
complicated fields of fracture, which run from Pieve di Cadore towards
Bigolato and correspond to the more southern faults of the neighbour-
hood of Cortino d' Ampezzo and to the fiexure of the Upper Tagliamento \
The north-eastern direction predominates here also, but its further con-
tinuation in the Camic Alps has not yet been clearly demonstrated.

The distance from the point where the line of the Val Sugana
originates, south of Trient, to the shattered region of Bigolato amounts to
nearly 140 kilometers. The extraordinary local variation in the thickness
of the Permian porphyry sheets, and of the limestone masses of the Trias
as well, renders it difficult to determine exactly the extent of the vertical
dislocation, but along the southern front of the Cima d’ Asta it must be
far more than 2,000 meters, possibly even more than 3,000 meters. Every-
where along this main line it is the southern side which is thrown down,
and this is the rule for the whole group of dislocations of the Cima d* Asta,
so that the total amount of the successive subsidences sums itself up
towards the south.

The second important line of this group has been named by Mojsisovics
the line of Belliino. It branches off from the line of the Val Sugana near
the origin of the latter, is separated from it in the Val Sugana by the
subsidiary line of Monte Zaccon, and runs to the east-south-east north of
Feltre as far as the district north of Belluno, assuming, as Hoernes has
shown, the form of a flexTire in the whole of its eastern part. Near
Belluno it meets the transverse line of Santa Croce, which is directed to
the north. The great mass of Monte Cavallo, projecting from north
to south, does not seem, according to existing data, to be traversed by tlie
fiexure, but, according to Tarainelli's description, there begins near Barcis,
in Val Zelline, on the eastern slope of Monte Cavallo^ a new line of sub-
sidence of great length, running with a gentle curve to the north-north-
east ; this, Taramelli thinks, must be considered as the continuation of the
line of Belluno. It crosses the Tagliamento near GemoYia, and reaches
the region of the Isonzo at Starasella, not far from Caporetto \

This line, which for the greater part of its course from Barcis past
Gemona towards the Isonzo forms the boundary between the higher-lying
Trias mountains and the sunken Cretaceous and Tertiary mountains
which now lie to the south, has been named by Taramelli the Frattum
periadriatica, a designation which may be applied to all the faults of this
extensive field of fracture as far as Meran, Lienz, and Idria. ,

^ Toyokitsi Harada, £in Beitragzur Geologic des Comelico und der westlichen Gamia;
Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1883, XXXIII, pp. 151-188, pi. i, ii.

* T. Taramelli, Spiegazione della carta geologica del Friuli, 12mo, Pavia, 1881, p. 172,
and Geol. dellp prov. Venete (Mem. Accad. Lincei, XIII, 1882), p. 201, pi. ii.



262 THE BASIN OP THE ADRIATIO [pab® h

Before this line reaches Starasella it enters lor a short disteuuse the
r^on of Trias and Bhaetie limestones, separating the mass of Monte
Matajur from the chief region of the Trias limiestones, but near Caporetto it
almost immediately meets again the fractured region, recognized by Stur
in 1868, on the southern edge of the great limestone mountaihs lying to
the east of the Isonzo. In this locality, between Monte Canin and the
Natisone, Stur distinguishes three fractmres with overthrust from the north,
by which the Rhaetic limestone is carried over the Cretaceous. - This is the
district in which the group of the Karst faults appears, which will be
discussed later

The line of Belluno measures not less than 180-190 kilometers from its
origin to the Isonzo, i. e. if we include, with Taramelli, the segment lying
on the other side of Monte Cavallo; and even to the east of Caporetto,
towards Deutschmth, the boundary of the Cretaceous lies in its further
continuation. But the connexion between these segments has not yet been
established.



Fig. S8. The Torrente Silano {Val Rovina) entering the plain (west qf the Brenta),

The first hill on the left, which rises on the edge of the plain, consists of marine
deposits of an older Mediterranean stage ; then follow the Schio beds steeply inclined to
the plain; then basalt (drawn dark) — this includes the pointed summit of Monte Gloso;
now follows a thick series of coral limestone, also tuff with NaHca craaeaiina, all belonging
to the stage of Gastel* Gomberto nearly up' to the little church of San Michele (a). Near
San Michele the second band of Schio beds begins ; this is again followed by the stag^ of
Castel* Gomberto, then by the marls of Laverda, erect and OYerfolded by lower Tertiary
and Cretaceous.

To the south oi the western half of the line of Belluno the country
continues to sink in a series of great flexures, which however have no
direct connexion with the group of faults of the Cima d’ Asta. One of
these flexures traverses the Sette Communi, its course forming a curve
with its convex side towards the south. The limestone mountains to the
south of the Cima d’ Asta form, according to Vacek’s observations, a kind
of cupola, with the north-western side (Monte Dosso) faulted down. The
strata then dip a little to the south, rise again, and finally fall away in
a great flexure which runs north of Primolano, first to the east and then
to the north-east.

A second and much longer flexure is overfolded to the south at its
origin near Sant* Orso to the east of Schio ; it then passes to the north-east,

' D. Star, Das Ilionzothal von Flitsch abw&rts bis GOrz, &c. ; Jahrb. geol. Beichsanst.,
1858, IX, pp. 365, 866.


263


OH. ra] BETWEEN JUDIGAIHA AND SCHIO

past Bafisano towards Serravalle, forming the onter edge of the chain
towards the plain, and accompanied in places by a parallel fault, which
gives rise to a repetition of the Tertiary series in the outer border
(Pig. 38)1.

From these observations it would appear that the southern Alps,
from the Lake of Caldonazzo, south of Trient past the south front of*
the Gima d’ Asta to Agordo, Pieve di Cadore, and Rigolato, and south
of this north-easterly line to the plain, present a structure which resembles
a great flight of stairs facing south, its steps increasing in breadth and
number towards the east, while diminishing in height. Some of the
highest of these steps approach the trough on the south side of the
Gima d’ Asta. The steps lying nearest to the plain have the form of
flexures, those more to the north correspond almost exclusively to
faults.

The region between the Judicarian favZt and the fault of the Schio.
From the north-western part of the fleld of fracture rises the irregular
contours of that great buckler of Permian porphyry, in the depression of
which the Etsch and the Eisack unite near Bozen (ir, ir. Fig. 29). Towards
the south and north older deposits crop out from beneath the porphyry;
towards the east and west the porphyry dips* down beneath younger
deposits. To the south the micaceous slate and the granite of
the Gima d’ Asta crop out; their fractured border running to the
south has already been discussed. To the north the micaceous slate
again crops out. The younger formations which overlie the porphyry
to the east form that part of the Tyrol, so famous for the beauty of
its scenery, which is somewhat erroneously termed the ‘ Dolomite region.’
The western dips more steeply than the eastern border, and assumes in
places the form of a flexure overfolded to the west. It passes beneath
a long narrow zone of deposits, which comprises the whole series of strata
from the Permian up to the middle Tertiary, and* is thrown down in
a great trough between the flexure of the western margin of the porphyry
and the line of the Judicaria.

This narrow zone has received the name of the inset mountains of the
Etsch (Etschbuchtgebiige) ; it compri'ses the broad Nonsberg, the wild
mountains of the Brenta with the Gima Tosa, several peaks of which rise
to an elevation of over 3,000 meters, and a number of other important
heights, characterized by a more or less marked strike to the north-east.
This direction is particularly noticeable to the south, where the line of
the Judicaria and the margin of the porphyry buckler diverge from
each other. Still further to the south the zone steadily increases in

* M. Vacek, Die Sette Communi, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1877, pp. 211-218 and
801-805 : Bittner, Die Tertiarbildnngen von Bassano and Schio, tom. cit., pp. 207-210, and
Das Terti&r voiiMarostica, op. cit, 1878, pp. 127-180.



264


THE BASIN OP THE ADRIATIC [parth

breadth, the trough 8ul)8idence terminates, and the prolongation of the
inset mountains of the Etsch then includes both shores of Lake Qarda
and all the mountains and foot-hills far and wide up to the fwulUlvM
of the Schio.

We return to the northern part.

The porphyry surrounds the northern end of the zone and extends,
as we have already seen, along the line of the Judicaria some way beyond
the Laugenspitze ; still older schists, here and there granite also, crop
out owing to an upward flexure of the beds along the lino of the Judicaria ;
in the Val Rendena the porphyry in turn is flexed upwards and for
a greater distance, so that it is visible on both sides of the trough.

The structure of the inset mountains of the Etsch has been made
the subject of investigation by Vacek and Bittner^. The following are
the most important features: —

The trough is not symmetrical. On its eastern side a single flexure,
dropped and somewhat ovcrfolded to the west, occurs on the edge of
the porphyry, while the country lying between this flexure and the
line of the Judicaria is traversed by a large number of flexures, which
are dropped and overfolded to the east or south-east in the direction
of the line of the Judicaria. I describe these lines of disturbance as
flexures, and apply the same term to those lying south of the fractures
of the Cima d’ Asta, although they are all distinguished from the simple
type of step-like flexure by two characteristics, namely, that the upper
limb is inverted or overfolded, and that the lower limb possesses a slight
inclination in the opposite direction. This gives these disturbances the
appearance of very superficial oblique folds, but it is evident that every
flexure must undergo this modification whenever subsidence is accompanied
by horizontal movement directed towards the subsiding area.

These flexures strike, as we have said, more or less parallel to the
line of the Judicaria, and are dropped in the same direction with over-
folding of the upper limb, that is, in the opposite direction to the margin
of the porphyry buckler. They extend through the whole of the inset
mountains of the Etsch, and down both sides of Lake Garda. Com-
plications arise towards the south-west owing to interference by lines
of disturbance which proceed in an east-south-east to east-north-east
direction from the sunken area of Lombardy ; one of the most important
of these disturbances comes from the Val Trompia near Ponte di CafFaro
to the line of the Judicaria, and appears to cross it. The entrance of the
Lombardic flexures and fissures into this region may be clearly seen

' M. Vacek, Die Umgebungen von Roveredo, Veihandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1878,
pp. 341-345 ; Umgebungen von Trient, op. cit., 1881, pp. 157-162 ; Nonsberg, op. cit.,
1882, pp. 42-46 ; A. Bittner, Sedimentgebilde in Judicarien, op. cit., 1880, pp. 233-238 ;
the same in Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1881, XXXI, p. 359 et seq., and elsewhere.



THE ETSCH VALLEY


255


CH. ra]

in the veins of Barghe in Val Sabbia, described by Edmund Fuchs, and
in many other places ^

On the east side of Lake Garda the flexures of the Judicaria are still
met with in their typical form. One of these oblique flexures forms,
as Bittner and Nicolis have shown, the ridge of Monte Baldo. On the
eastern shore of the lake isolated patches of Tertiary beds may be seen
resting on the Cretaceous; then the strata ascend gradually towards
the east, until they terminate partly in a sharp flexure, partly in a fault,
in such a way that the Tertiary beds are bent upwards against the Trias
or break off abruptly against it

It is along this line on the east side of Monte Baldo that the much-
discussed seismic phenomena of this chain appear to occur®. On the
other side of the Etsch, a corresponding disturbance parallel to the line
of Monte Baldo occurs on the eastern side of Monte Pastello and Pastelletto.
Thus far extends the region of the flexures of the Judicaria.

To Vacek belongs the credit of having shown that some of these
flexures, chiefly in the neighbourhood of the valley of the Etsch, swerve
round in an arc and with a completely altered strike proceed towards
the east, where they merge into the flexures which run parallel to the
faults of the Asta. I attach great importance to this phenomenon,
since it reveals the connexion between different movements; wo shall
meet with it again on a much larger scale in India*. In the south

^ E. Fuchs, j^tude surlesgiscments metallifcres des vallees Trompia, Sabbia et Sassina ;
Ann. d. Mines, 1868, 6® ser., XIII, p. 420, pL xvi, fig. 7. I am not sure whether the veins
of the Val Trompia, which have been described by E. Fuchs, and subsequently by myself,
are to be included among the flexures of the Judicaria, or among the faults running
north to south which will be discussed directly: Ueber das Rothliegende im Val
Trompia, Sitzungsber. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1869, LIX, p. 107 et seq. The great com-
plexity of structure in this locality has been recently described by Bittner in his
Nachtrilge zum Berichte fiber die geolog. Aufnahmen in Judica^ien und Val Sabbia;
Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1883, XXXIII, p. 438 et seq.

’ The south part of the line of the Baldo certainly turns from the strike of the Judicaria
towards the west, while subsidence and overturning take place towards the south: Bittner,
Der geologische Bau des sfidlichen Baldogebirges, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1879,
pp. 396-402, and E. Nicolis, Note illustrative alia carta geologica della provincia di
Verona, 8vo, Verona, 1882, pp, 118-122.

® This at least would result from Goiran’s indications ; cf. his Meteorologia endogena,
12mO| Verona, 1879, p. 22 et seq.

* It must first be observed that it is to the east and south-east of Trient, in the direction
of Pergine and the Lago di Caldonazzo, that the extremities of the great fractures of the
Asta lie. As far as this, micaceous slate is visible between the fractures, and the
termination of the fractures appears to coincide with a local wedging out of the porphyry
sheets (Fig. 29). Here, according to Vacek, the bending round of the first flexure across
the Etsch takes place in such a way that this flexure, approaching- from the south-west
from Orto d’ Abramo, assumes an easterly direction immediately to the north of Trient,
that is to the north of the termination of the fractures of the Asta, and at the same time
it becomes, twisted. For while at Orto d' Abramo the direction of the Judicaria is



266


THE BASIN OP THE ADRIATIC [pakch

the line of Pastello appears to curve round in the same manner, and
to find its continuation in a fiezure 'w’hich, starting from the southern
slopes of the Corno d’ Aquiglio, defines the southern border of the Monti
Lessini ^

From the valley of the Etsch as far as Schio several flexures are
present, having as a rule a line of strike slightly convex to the south;
their southern limb is dropped and the northern limb sometimes thrust
over it. One of the most important of these flexures passes to the south
of the caldron of Becoaro and defines the boundary between the Trias
mountains and the less elevated ridges of Cretaceous and Tertiary
beds*.

We must now retrace our steps once more northwards into the inset
mountains of the Etsch, that we may become acquainted with a series
of disturbances which difier from the flexures.

All later observers agree as to the fact that, north of the Nonsberg,
some sharply defined fractures occur with a throw to the east, and that
these out the flexures (or inclined folds) at an acute angle, and run from
north to south. Between Trient and Biva three or four of these fractures
are met with. They recur south of Val Bonchi and towards Velo with
the same north to south strike; one large fracture with downthrow on
the east, but with a strike more towards the north-north- west, has been
traced by Bittner from the neighbourhood of Montecchi^ past Bolca
to Monte Spitz; it forms the western boundary of the chief area of
Tertiary deposits of the Yicentin, and, as Bittner justly remarks, this
fissure, by reason of its direction, indicates a fan-like arrangement, the
last branch of which is the great fault of Schio *.

This great fault begins in the high mountains north-west of Schio,
and forms as far as the neighbourhood of that town the western border
of the tremendous flexure overfolded near Sant’ Orso to the south, which

normally accompanied by downthrow on the east Bide, over which the western side
is shoved, that part of the flexure which lies north of Trient, and which strikes to the
east, shows the north side downthrown and the south driven over it. A second flexure
strikes in the same direction as that of Orto d’ Abramo from Monte Bastornata, north
of Rovereto to the Etsch, and crosses the valley with a similar bending near Galliano,
that is to say, south of the fractures of the Asta, and this is not twisted, but the
same wing remains depressed ; thus at Monte Bastornata the east side is downthrown,
beyond Galliano the south side. Opposite the northern flexure (Orto d’ Abramo— St.
Agatha north of Trient) a flexure occurs on Monte Kalis between St. Agatha and the
porphyry, which is overturned to the south-south-west, as though a small trough sub-
sidence passed between the termination of the faults of the Asta and the porphyry mass
of Lavis: Vacek, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1881, p. 161.

' Vacek in Bittner, V. Sabbia; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1881, XXXI, p. 365.

* Bittner, Das Alpengebiet zwischen Vicenza und Verona ; Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst.,
1877, pp. 226-231.

’ By the same, Vorlage der Karte der Tredici Gommuni ; op. cit., 1878,^pp., 59-63*



VICENZA


267


OH. m]

causes the mountains of the Tretto to sink beneath the plain of Thiene.
From Schio onwards* however, it marks the boundary which separates
the Scaglia and the Tertiary formations from the plain. It crosses Malo
accompanied on the east, as it has been all the way from Schio, by steeply
upturned fragments of the lower Mediterranean Schio-beds, then strikes
through the neighbourhood of Vicenza and forms the eastern boundary
between the Colli Berici and Euganaean hills on the one hand and the
plain on the other. Its direction lies between north-west and north-north-
west ; its length from its origin to its termination near Battaglia amounts
to about seventy kilometers^.

West of this line lies the Tertiary hill land of Vicenza, and this, together
with the Colli Berici and the Euganaean hills, forms a long projecting spur,
which sinks beneath the plain of the Po, along a line from Verona to Este.
No causal connexion can be traced between the Eocene and Oligocene
eruptions of basalt and trachyte in this neighbourhood and the great
fault of Schio, which is younger, and along which, as we have said,
lower Mediterranean beds are upturned. The whole of this region



Fio. 84. CaatleB of tht Montagwa and Capulets to the iceat qf Vicenza,

Br. basaltic brocciola ; a Bryozoa marls ; 6 great Rostellarias, Crassatellas, above Oairea
tarilameUa ; c Clffpena Breunigi ; d coral limestone ; e Lithothamnium limestone ; a, /?, 3 very
small accumulations of basaltic tuff belonging to a horizon not definitely determined ;
/(below the castle of the Montagues) siliceous limestone with corals ; tn, m ffssures, that on
the left with fossils from the horizon of Sangonlni, that on the right with fossils from the
horizon of Castel’ Gomberto.

has the structure of a shallow basin ; in its most southerly part, between
Este and Battaglia, the Cretaceous formation makes its appearance and
extends over a large area, and at Fontana Fredda, a locality mentioned
on p. 146, even the upper Jurassic reappears.

It is affected by subsidiary disturbances, some of which may be seen
to the south-west of Vicenza; e.g. at the castles of the Montagues and
Capulets, where fissures containing soft marl with well-preserved Oligocene
marine shells accompany the fault along which the volcanic breccia
of amygdaloid basalt abuts against the middle Tertiary beds.

I

^ This great fault was recognized by Schauroth in 1855 ; in its northernmost part
Bittner has observed an upward flexure of. the western limb, while from Schio towards
the south the eastern down-thrown limb is turned up : Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst.,
1879, p. 77. It is precisely the same phenomenon which was mentioned on p. 131 as
occurring on the fractures of the Colorado Plateau.

SOLLAS S


258


THE BASIN OP THE ADEIATIO [PARin

In the part of the southern Alps which we have hitherto discussed,
the following dislocations may therefore be observed. First, long flexures,
passing in places into faults which are parallel to the line of the Judi-
caria, are dropped on the east, and also overthrust towards the east or
more exactly from west-north-west to east-south-east. These extend
from the Judicarian line up to the left bank of the Adige below Peri.
Next, there are similar flexures, which, lying to the south of the fractures
of the Asta, run more or less parallel to them, are dropped on the southern
side, and sometimes overthrust in the same direction. Some of the Judi-
carian flexures, chiefly in the vicinity of the Etsch valley, bend round in a
sharp curve, taking the direction of the flexures of the Asta.

The amount of the throw in each flexure decreases as a rule in pro-
portion as we leave behind us the faults of the Judicaria and of the
Cima d’ Asta and approach the plain.

Finally, in addition to the flexures, rectilinear faults occur, arranged
roughly like a fan and with a down-throw on the east side ; these maintain
a north-to-south direction from the Nonsberg into the northern part of
the province of Verona ; from Montecchiit one of these faults runs to the
north-north-west, and the last branch of this group appears, to be the
fault of Schio, which is directed still more to the north-west.

While the significance of the flexures decreases towards the plain, that
of these lines increases in the direction of the fault of Schio ; this at least
would seem to be suggested by the importance of the last two lines of
this group.

Didocatiom to the north of the favlU of the Cima d! Aeta, The mass of
the Cima d' Asta together with the porphyry stands towards all the disturb-
ances we have so far enumerated in the relation of a great horst. The
horst itself is traversed by several great dislocations, which likewise give
rise to step-like suljsidence, but this subsidence takes place Tiot towards the
south but towards \he north. E. v. Mojsisovics and his fellow worker
B. Hoemes have established this remarkable fact, and what I shall have
to say with regard to this region is borrowed almost exclusively from
the admirable descriptions of the first of these authors^.

The margin of the porphyry sheet from its south-west comer at Lavis,
in the Etsch valley, runs in a fairly straight line north-east towards Truden,
to the east of Neumarkt, and it appears to find its direct continuation in
a line of disturbance which extends transversely across the whole porphyry
region, nearly as far as the mountains of Latemar, with a strike which
trends more and more to the east-north-east and a down-throw on the

* Edmund Mojaifiovics v. Mojsv^r, Die Dolomitriffe von SCdtirol und Venetian, 8vo, Wien,
1879, and map ; general view of the disturbances on p. 515 et seq. ; for the line of Truden,
p. 135 ; line of Tiers, pp. 131, 181 ; line below the Langkofel, p. 193 ; line of VillnOss,
pp. 123, 206, 220, 255, 265, et passim. « '



269


GH. in] LINE OP VILLNOSS

north. This is the line of Truden\ it is the more remarkable since it
lies nearly midway between the great fault of the Val Sugana and the
Judicarian fault, and is at the same time intermediate in direction.

Another important transverse fault in the porphyry is the line of
Tiers; it begins near Virgl in the immediate neighbourhood of Bozen,
runs to the east-south-east to Tiers, on the eastern border of the porphyry,
and is continued as a flexure of about 800 meters throw between the
Bosengarten and the Schlem. Here also there is a drop on the northern
side along the whole course of the line.

A similar flexure bounds on the north and north-west the noble
pyramid of the Langkofel.

The river Eisack crosses the porphyry in a trough-subsidence, which is
formed by step-faults nearly in the direction of the Judicarian line, and
to the north of these faults, near the mountain village of Klausen, tliat
important dislocation .begins which Mojsisovics has designated the fault-
line of Villnoss. We will examine this line in detail.

The phyllite, which crops out towards the north from beneath the
porphyry, contains to the north and north-west of Klausen a number
of intercalated diorite laccolites. These masses, according to Teller, who
has investigated their structure and contact-zones, are * to be regarded
as intrusive cores, which have been revealed as isolated bosses amidst
the surrounding stratified rocks by the denudation of their sedimentary
covering^.' These are the characters of true laccolites. Since pebbles
of the same diorite have been observed by Teller in the Permian con-
glomerates beneath the porphyry, these intrusions must be of great age.
The two largest of these bodies end abruptly on the cast-south-east along
a fault with a down-throw on the north. This fault has been revealed
with an unusually steep hade in the superposed galleries of the Pfun-
dererberg at a height of more than 400 meters, bui^ the throw of the
dislocation must be much greater still*. This is tlie western extremity
of the fracture of Villndss.

This fracture crosses the Eisack, runs through the valley of Villnoss,
and exhibits on its down- thrown northern side patches of porphyry in the
midst of the mica-schists and finally also a spur of Trias. In the middle
of the Villnoss, Mojsisovics estimates the throw of the dislocation as at
least 800 meters. The fault now enters the Trias mountains, and here,
according to Hoemes, the throw has much diminished; towards Campil
it rapidly increases again. To the south of it, in the mountains of Gar-
' F. Teller and C. v. John, Geologisch-petrographische Beitrage zur Kenntniss der
dioritischen Gesteine von Klausen in Siidtirol; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1882, XXXII,
pp. 689-684, 2 plates, in particular pp. 636 and 672.

* Teller believes that this fracture represents at the same time an eruptive canal of the
laccolites ; its steep hade is shown in P. Posepny, Die Erzlagerstatten am Pfunderer-
berg, Archifv f«prakt. Geol., 1880, 1, pi. x, figs. 2, 3.



260


THE BASIN OP THE ADEIATIC [paeth

denazza, a great trough-fault occurs, with a throw of at least 1,000 meters,
which brings patdies of Cretaceous into contact with the Bhaetic walls ;
the fault of Villnoss itself is accompanied by parallel faults of greater or
less importance, and from the valley of Wengen eastwards it is rm longer
the northern but the southern side which is thrown down. The fault thus
proceeds obliquely through the mountains of Fanes and reaches the valley
of Ampezzo near PeUtelstein ; through this district it is accompanied by
troughs, as for example that below the Croda di Antruilles, in which bands
of Cretaceous wedged in between Bhaetic masses have been preserved
from denudation.

The fault now traverses the mass of Monte Cristallo from which the
high and long ridge of Monte Pomiqjagnon had been faulted down towards
the south and south-west. Again a trough is formed ; the faults terminate
before they reach the valley of the Mesurina, but almost immediately
a new and very considerable one begins a little further to the south in
Val Buona, which is evidently a continuation of the fault of Villnoss bent
out of its original direction. This follows the northern margin of Monte
Marmarole towards Auronzo and thence to the Comelico.

As in the fault of Villnoss, to the east of the valley of Wengen, it is
no longer the northern but the southern side which is down-thrown, so
again the southern side is down-thrown in the case of the more or less
parallel faults and flexures which accompany this fault towards the south
as far as the fractures of the Asta ; we may cite as examples the fracture
which intersects Monte Antelao and the line of Fauzsrego.

But let us return to the line of Villnoss. Its most eastern part is well
known from the works of Harada. From the Val Buona onwards it is
directed more and more to the east-north-east, and is thus nearly parallel
to the eastern part of the line of Val Sugana. Starting from the Piave
the two lines nowjrun beside each other at a distance of 8-10 kilometers,
and are united by transverse fissures, which stand almost at right angles
to them. Beyond the Comelico inferiore, at the .foot of the Terza piccola,
the fault of Villnoss suddenly turns almost at a right angle to the north-
north-west, and surrounds the phyllite region of Monte Zovo ; it then
reappears for a certain distance near Zappada as the fracture of an arch.
Harada’s works show that, all along the most northerly part of the line
of Val Sugana, the northern instead of the southern side is down-thrown ;
but the very considerable subsidence along the transverse fault of the
Val Frisone may have had some share in producing this reversal.

To the south of the line of Val Sugana the beds sink southwards in
a great flexure to the Tagliamento^

* ToyokiUi Haiada, Eia Beitrag zur Geologic dez Comelico und der westlichen Carnia ;
Jahtb. geol. Reichsanst., 1888, XXXIII, pp. 151-188, 2 plates, in particular pp. 153 and
186. The overfolding of the flexure of Tagliamento in front of the &ul( which bounds



CH. in] DRAU AND GAIL PAULB3 261

The faults of the Drau and OaiL The structures which now present
themselves are of a fundamentally different character.

The part of the southern Alps with which we have so far been
occupied is bounded on the west by the Judicarian line, on the north,
first by the granite' mass which extends from the region south of Meran
almost to Brunneck, and next by the region of phyllites which make
their appearance from below the outcrops of the Permian and Trias beds.
These beds extend from the middle Enneberg in a gentle curve to the east
towards the sources of the Drau, near Inichen, and thence, continuing the
curve, they assume a south-easterly direction, so that the phyllites descend
fairly low down into the valley of the Piave, where they are bounded
by the eastern extremity of the fault of the Villnoss.

This vast region, which extends from Lake Idro to Meran, to the
sources of .the Drau and to the upper Piave, and includes a large part
of the limestone mountains more to the east, resembles great dish. The
country descends to the Venetian plain by numerous fractures and flexures,
but in the western half a great horst rises, the mass of the Cima d' Asia,
which has not only survived the general subsidence and thus produced the
mighty fractures on its south side, but has also led to a subsidence with an
opposite, i.e. northerly down-throw, which extends from this southern side
far towards the north, indeed nearly as far as the boundary of the granite
in that direction

The outcrop of Permian and Trias, which rises above the phyllite and
forms the edge of the ‘ dish ' to the north and north-east, is regarded by
all observers as a denudation scarp. Loretz has published a series of
excellent sections of this feature \ It is certainly not a fault, although the
face of the Trias sometimes rises from the phyllite so steeply as to suggest
that it might possibly be a denuded flexure.

Let us now cross the edge of the ‘ dish.’

We have only to refer to a map of the Alps to sed that the Drau makes
two knee-like bends in its upper course. It turns first to the north-east
towards Lienz, then to the south-east towards Oberdrauburg, this is the first
bend ; then comes the second, in the angle of which Sachsenburg lies, and
the straight reach which begins close to the east of Sachsenburg and extends
nearly to the confluence of the Drau with the Gail, near Villach, is parallel
to the stretch between Lienz and Oberdrauburg. The valley of tlie Gail,

the fragment Ugoi-Lavinamondo (p. 178) strongly recalls the relation of the flexure of
St. Orso to the fault of Schio.

^ All the essential features of this interpretation, and particularly tl\e importance
attached to the * striking localization of the northern faults,' are to be found in the first
general description of this network of faults by Mojsisovics^ Dolomitrifte, p. 515
et seq.

’ H. Loretz, Das Tirol-Venetianische Grenzgebiet der Gegehd von Ampezzo ; Zeitschr.
deutsch. g«oU Ges., 1874, XXVI, pi. viii, .fig. 1-5 ; pi. ix, fig. 6.



261 S THE BASIN OP THE ADRIATIC |VawS

on the other hand, is straight and directed to the east-south-east, and this
direction it noaintains from its source not far south of the Drau to the
south foot of Mount Dobratsch near Villaich, that is, not far from its
confluence, for a distance of more than 100 kilometers. These lines of
valley-bottom thus mark out in the midst of the Alps a region which
on its south side extends to the east-south-east in a straight line along
the Gail from Sillian to the Dobratsch, and on the north side projects
in two wedge-shaped pieces; the apex of one of these lies near Lienz,
that of the other near Sachsenburg. It was of this region that Leopold
von Buch published a geological sketch-map in 1824, which may still be
usefully consulted in studying the following description \

A traveller coming from the Brenner or the Etschthal, and proceeding .
by train through the narrow valley of the Drau between Sillian and
Lienz, will see on his right hand lofty scarps of limestone, and in some
places the .violently contorted red beds of the Lias, while on his left the
slopes are formed of gneiss and ancient schists. The line Sillian-Lienz is
thus a line of dislocation, as is also the outer side of the wedge, lienz-
Oberdrauburg, and the fault is continued in a straight line through the
valley of the Gitsch to the south-east, almost as far as the river Gail, near
Hermagor, where, inclining a little more to the east, it joins the group of
faults along which the marine Carboniferous is visible to the south of
Bleiberg. This is the fault of the Gitach

The triangular space bounded by the line of the Drau from Sillian to
Lienz, by the fault of the Gitsch, and by the valley of the Gail, has been
often described, in particular by Emmrich and Stur \ The structure of this
fragment, apart from less important disturbances, is as follows.

The beds strike obliquely across^ the triangle from east to west. The
slopes of the Gail consist entirely of phyllites; upon these succeed some
remains of porphyry sheets, then red Groden sandstone, forming a con-
spicuous bed visible from a great distance, and finally the Trias, rising
in beds of great thickness to a considerable height. Towards the north
the overlying platy limestones of the Trias (Plattenkalke) plunge steeply
downwards, forming mighty walls, against the foot of which lie Rhaetic beds

^ L. Buch, Ueber die karuischen Alpen ; ein Schreiben an d. Geheimrath v. Leonhard,
Mineral. Taschenb. fCr 1824, pp. 396-437, pi. iv ; also L. v. Buch’s Gesamm. Schriften,
published by Ewald, Both und Dames, III, 1877, in particular p. 177 et seq. pi. v.

* This has been described by £. v. Mojsisoyics, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1872,
pp. 851-853 ; the fractures near Bleiberg have been fully discussed by me in Aequiv. des
Rothliegenden, I, Sitzungsber. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1868, LVII, p. 252 et seq., pi. i.

’ H. Emmrich, Notiz Cber den Alpenkalk der Lienzer Gegend, Jahrb. geol. Reichs-
anst., 1855, VI, pp. 444-453 ; D. Stur, Geol. Verhaltnisse der Thaler der Drau, Isel,
Moll und Gail, op. cit., 1856, VII, pp. 414-424, and geological sections. Mojsisovics has ^
recognized some faults in the south which I do not consider suflBciently characteristic
of the structure of the district to deserve detailed mention here: Verhandl. geol.
Reichsanst., 1873, pp. 235-237. , • *



l^nf] ' IJEm 263

rich in fossils, and the thm-layered, much-crashed beds of the Lias. This
series, of great ihickness and inclined to the north, extends nearly to the
apex of the triangle, but before reaching it the Rhaetic stage suddenly
crops out agwn on the other side of the Lias; the limestone reef of the
Rauchkofel, near lienz, represents the Trias; around the little lake of
Tristach the red Groden sandstone reappears, and beneath it the phyllite,
which occupies a small area in the Heimwalder near liens, and forms
the northernmost part of the wedge-shaped fragment.'

We might therefore describe this region as the segment of on east-
to-west synclinal, but the northern limb is so slightly developed as com-
pared with the southern, and confined so exclusively to the comer of the
triangle, that the whole district resembles more nearly a triangular mono-
clinal fragment inclined to the north, and with its summit fiexed or thrust
upwards.

The line of the Drau, which forms the west side of the triangle from
Lienz to Sillian, appears, from the observations which have so far been
made, to be a very important line of dislocation. Although, as we have
said, phyllite and gneiss may be seen on the left bank of the Drau, yet
Emmrich has also observed Rhaetic beds on this side at a single locality—
the Lienser Elause \

It has only quite recently been shown by Teller that this region is
traversed by two folds of Mesozoic limestone, which resemble in many
respects the Trias fold of the Fenseijoch described on p. 346. The
first band is not more than two and a half kilometers long ; it occurs in
the middle of the schist and gneiss region, to the west of Inner-Villgraten,
is very steeply inclined to the south, and consists of Diplopora limestone ;
it appears to be accompanied by Verracano. The second band is much
more important and begins near Winbacb, not far from Sillian; Trias
and Lias containing Belemnites may be clearly distinguished in it; it is
only separated from the Drau by a cone of debris: Teller has traced
it from Winbach along the valley of the Drau towards the west, and for
thirty-three kilometers up to the dolomite reef of the town of Brunneck
(Fig. 29, p. 245). This band is a fold in the phyllite overturned towards
the south. The Lias at its eastern extremity consists of the red beds of
Adneth and spotted marls (Fleckenmergel), as in the mountains of Lienz.
Teller even considers it probable that this long band is only the deflected
prolongation of the Trias band of the Rauchkofel, that is to say, a part
of the wedge-shaped area of Lienz ^

It is certain that immediately to the north of the outcrop which we

I

^ This corresponds with the occurrence of Alpine limestone near Bannbeig mentioned
by Stur.

* F. Teller* Neue Vorkommnisse diploporenfahrender Dolomite, Verhandl. geol. Reichs-
ansti 18^8, ^pp. 193-200.



284 THE BASm OF TH® [PABsr n

have described as the edge of the ^()ish/ a region begins within the
phyllite region in which the structure and formation of the country are
different, and this extends even to near Brunneck, on the south slope
of the Pusterthal. In place of the broad dish-like subsidence, narrow
folds occur, pinched into the schist, and the character of the deposits
themselves recalls the northern Alps, as Emmrich long ago perceived.

We now turn to the eastern side of the triangular region of lienz.

The structure of the wedge, at the northern apex of which Sachsenburg
lies, differs from that of the lienz wedge. Whereas in the latter the
phyllite was chiefly visible in the south, only a very small fragment
appearing in the north, and the Mesozoic deposits generally were inclined
to the north, in the wedge of Sachsenburg, on the other hand, the northern
part consists for a great distance of phyllite with an intercalated band
of marble, while in the south, or along the Qail, the older formations only
appear over comparatively small areas along great fractures \

It is not necessary to enter further into the structure of this region.
We have seen how the winding course of the Drau is determined by
faults; how the wedge-shaped area of Lienz thrown down to the north
projects into the older formations, as though it were resisting a force
acting from the north, and, further, how the great fold of Brunneck,
which so . closely resembles the limestone zone of Pens, is overturned

^ In few places does the significance of the great lines of fracture in the structure of
the Alps appear so forcibly as in the western part of the Sachsenburg mass, as for
instance on a walk from Lind in the vallej of the Drau, going south to St. Lorenzen, on
the fault of the Gitsch. The ascent begins in the Fellbach above Lind. We walk over
micaceous phyllites dipping south, which alternate with green layers towards the
summit. These are followed by GrOden sandstone dipping south, and in a beautiful
section the lower Trias, standing almost upr^^ght, with layers containing SpiriferfragiliSf
Betzia trigonella, &c. At the summit of the ridge lies bluish-grey stratified marble,
dipping 50-60** south, and a little to the west. We descend towards the Weissensee over
numerous outcrops, since the Trias limestone is more steeply inclined towards the south
than the declivity. The^lake lies almost in the strike, we cross it at its narrowest
part ; on the other side we ascend first over white dolomite, then over black shales with
remains of fishes and Crustacea, probably the fish shales of Raibl, here associated with
beds of hornstone ; it dips only 30-40** south, and a little to the west. We have now
ascended the second ridge, and enjoy a glorious view of the southern peaks ; the same
inclination is maintained ; below the Lorenzen hut brown shale occurs with numerous
shells of Cardita. The dip is 45** south. The shale is followed by dolomite exposed in
great cliffs. In descending we meet with stratified limestone ; this is the * Plattenkalk.*
The inclination of the beds is steeper, and finally becomes vertical, when they describe
some S-shaped curves ; a short slope follows towards St. Lorenzen ; over this short
distance the Plattenkalk becomes inverted, dips 30** to the north, and assumes a fan-like
arrangement. We have now reached the bottom of the valley of the Gitsch. The green
slope on the other side is formed of phyllite. Every trace of the mighty series dipping to
the south, which we have followed from the Kdhlerhaus above Fellbach, has completely
disappeared. The distance as the crow flies amounts to 9 kilometers, the thickness of
the beds to at least 8-4 kilometers. The whole series is thrown down along the fault of
the Gitsch. .



<«. ml : THE WEDGE OP SAOHSEEDUEG 286

towards the sontL The structure of the Sachsenbui^ wedge differs from
that of the great ‘dish’; the lithological and palaeontological characters
of many of its members are also different. The limestone zone is one
and the same throughout ; we have traced it from Villach, many miles
towards the east, across Carinthia into the south of Styria, up to the
south foot of the Bacher mountains south of the Drau, and we have now
seeii that it continues as far as the town of Brunneck.

In the angle formed by the scarp of the great ‘ dish ’ with the region
of lienz the Camie Alps begin, a range which is characterized by the



Fio. 35. Northern border of the Palaeozoic zone to the south of Hermagor, Fracture in the upper
part of the trough of the Buka, Watschiger Alpe, south side of the Gartnerkofel.


a, b Boundary between the nipped-in Carboniferous beds and the white limestone of the
middle Trias.

presence of fossiliferous deposits of upper Silurian and Carboniferous age.
Iii i^xticular the Oraptolite slates must be mentioned, which were first
observed by Stache in Carinthia, and then by Taramelli in the adjacent
regions of Upper Italy

The structure of this region is very complex, and I will only give my
opinion on the eastern part, with which I have become acquainted by
repeated visits of some duration. South of Hermagor the Palaeozoic series
is confined to the middle of the range, and it is easy to understand that

^ The latest description is by G. Stache, Aus dem Westabschnitt der kamischen
Hauptkette. Die Silurformation des Wolayergebirges und des ParalbarSilvellardckens ;
Verhandl. geoi Reichsanst., 1883, pp. 210-216.


266


THE BASIN OP XHE ADRIATIC [pakt h

the mighty masses of light-coloured Trias limestone in the north and
south should have been considered as normally superposed, or even
regarded as representatives of the Permian period. They owe their
position, however, in the north as in the south, to subsidence along
longitudinal faults, and the mass of the Qartnerkofel, so well known
to botanists as the homo of the wonderful Wulfenia Carinthiaea and
so rich in Trias fossils, is separated from the Carboniferous by a down-
throw along a sharply marked fault. Similar phenomena occur to the
south near Malborghetto and PontafeL The down-throw of these faults
is extremely great, but it is impossible to give a numerical estimate.

TJie faults of the Karat. Near Caparetto, on the upper Isonzo, is to



Fio. 36. South 8id9 of the Palaeozoic zone south of Hermagor,

Faulted down limestone of the middle Trias on contorted Carboniferous beds ; crest of the
Loch, Zirkelspitzen, to the north of Pontafel.

be Been the first of ^several long lines of dislocation which extend from
this locality at least as far as Antivari (i. e. through four degrees of
latitude), and proceed probably much further still towards the south;
striking constantly to the south-east, they determine the structure of the
country along the whole of the eastern coast of the Adriatic Sea.

In no other region in Europe are dislocations known of such extra-
ordinary length and regularity. For its exploration, so far as the Karst
district, western Croatia, and the whole of Dalmatia are concerned,
we are indebted to the noble emulation of Austrian geologists. Stur
has described the north-western part along the Isonzo^; Stache, Istria

^ D. Stur, Das Isonzothal von Flitsch abw&rts bis G6rz, &c. ; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst.,
1858, IX, pp. 324-367, and pi. On p. 366 there is an excellent description of the passive
overthrusting of the great tabular limestone mountains over the Eocene marls and sand-
stones of the down-thrown side. For the upper Isonzo cf. also F. v. Hauer, Sitzungsber. k.
Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1857, XXV, p. 328 et seq. ^ ,


FAULTS OF THE KABST


267


OH. ni]

and the adjacent districts ^ ; Hauer, the whole of Dalmatia But it was
only when western Dalmatia and Herzegovina had been investigated
that Mojsisovics was able to point out their connexion with the sunken
area of the southern Alps^, and that Bittner could show that the same
lines of dislocation continue unaltered right into Herzegovina^. Tietze,
finally, has traced them still further to the south in Montenegro They
are, without exception, fiexures or faults, of which the southern flank,
or that nearer the sea, is let down and sometimes over-ridden by the
north-eastern flank. The structure of the flexures of the South Tyrol
is thus repeated on a grander scale ; there, however, subsidence and over-
folding take place, first to the south-east and afterwards to the south,
but here to the south-west. Thus the subsidence of the Dinaric chain
is directed towards the depths of the Adriatic Sea.

The manner in which these lines of dislocation penetrate into the
Alps is worthy of some consideration.

According to Stur, a great fracture running nearly east and west inter-
sects, east of Caporetto, the mountains of Dachsteinkalk, which form the
mighty Km and the heights to the south of the Wocheinthal, and the
Dachsteinkalk is thrust towards the south over the down-sunken Cre-
taceous limestones. This fault appears to be but the prolongation of that
long line of dislocation which, as Taramelli has shown, runs from Barcis
through Gemona to Starasella near Caporetto.

To the south of this main fracture the first of the lines which run
to the south-east makes its appearance. It does not seem to accord with
the direction of the preceding line; but corresponds with tlio course of
the Isonzo near Tolmein, is continued in the valley of the Idria, towards
Tribussa, and near the mountain town of Idria (where it is accompanied
by many subsidiary faults) it brings the overthrown and completely
inverted deposits of the Carboniferous and Trias for a long distance
into immediate contact with the down-sunken Cretaceous limestone®;
and then proceeds past Zirknitz towards Laas.

A second line appears to the south-west of Canale, runs north of Gorz

' G. Stache, Dio Eoc&ngebiete in Innerkrain und Istrien, Jahrb. k. geol. Rcichsanst.,
1859, X, pp. 272-332, pi. viii; 1864, XIV, pp. 11-116, pi. i, and 1867, XVII, pp. 243-290,
pi. vi.

* P. V. Hauer, Erl&uteningen zur geol. Uebersichtskarte der (Jsterr. Monarchic, op. cit.,
1868, XVIII, pp. 431-454, et passim ; G. Stache, Geol. Uebersichtskarte der Kttsten-
lS.nder von Oesterreich-Ungarn, 1878, fol.

® E. V. Mojsisovics, E. Tietze und A. Bittner, Grundlinien der Geologio von Bosnien-
Herzegowina, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1880, XXX, pp. 17, 21 ; cf. Ent;stehung der
Alpen, p. 92.

* Bittner, tom. cit., pp. 265, 269.

® E. Tietze, Gcologische Uebersicht von Montenegro, op. cit., 1883, XXXIV, p. 92.

* M. V. Lipoid, Erlauterungen zur geol. Earte der Umgebung von Idria, op. cit., 1874,
XXIV, pp.42cV456, pi. ix, x ; also Stur, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1872, pp. 234-240.



268


THE BASIN OP THE ADRIATIC [partii

at the foot of the mountain masses of the forests of Tamowa and Bimbaum,
which are thrust over the down-thrown areas; it has been followed by
Stache along the fault of Buccari, north of Fiume, as far as the sea-coast
near Novi, and even into the island of Veglia, where it splits up into
multiple fractures.

A third line begins close to the sea near Duino, to the north-west of
Trieste; it runs obliquely across the Istrian peninsula and resolves itself
here into a number of step-faults. These Istrian dislocations are pro-
longed further in the west of Veglia, on the island of Cherso, on Lussin,
and UnieL

Thus run these great lines of disturbance, sometimes in smaller
numbers, sometimes multiplied by splitting up ; one of them forms a great
part of the coast of Dalmatia. To trace them, however, in detail to the
south-east would be to exceed the limits of my present task.

Enlargement of the Adriatic Sea. The marine sediments of the middle
Tertiary in the north do not extend very far towards Bosnia, while
the younger deposits which occur here and there in the west of
that country, and throughout the peri- Adriatic region, from Istria to
Montenegro, have been laid down in fresh water. Those parts of the
coast lying within the region of the lines of dislocation, as well
as the numerous islands, are quite free from the more recent marine
deposits, which are frequently met with over wide areas on many parts
of the Mediterranean coast. The little island of Pelagosa, lying in the
middle of the Adriatic Sea just at the spot where the western and
eastern archipelagos approach one another most closely, is the most
northerly point at which these deposits are known, and Stache regards
the chain of islands — Lagosta-Pelagosa-Tremiti — as marking the south
coast of the once existent Adriatic continent \

There are indeed a number of outcrops along the east coast of Italy,
which may be regarded as fragments of the in-sunken Dalmatian plateau.
The first of these is Monte Conero, near Ancona; the second, which is
much more important, consists of the broad and complicated promontory
of Monte Gargano. This rises in some places to a height of over
1,000 meters; it is cut off abruptly on the side facing the Apennines,
from which it is separated by a depression filled with recent marine
formations. Its steeply inclined strata consist, according to Bucca, of
Tithonian, Cretaceous, and Eocene limestone and marl^. Finally, in

' G. Stache, Geologische Notizen iiber die Insel Pelagosa, Verbandl. geol. Reichsanst.,
1876, pp. 123-127 ; cf. also Star, op. cit., 1874, p. 391 ; for the Adria cf. also Mojsisovics,
Dolomitriffe, p. 531 ; Marchesetti, Descrizione dell' isola di Pelagosa, Boll. Soc. Sci. Nat.
Trieste, 1876, II, pp. 283-306 ; R. F. Burton, A Visit* to Lissa and Pelagosa, Journ. Geogr.
Soc., 1879, XLIX, p. 184 et seq.

^ L. Bucca, Appunti geologic! sui monti del Gargano ; Boll. Com. Geol. d' Italia, 1881,
XII, pp. 556 and 563. « *



269


CH. Ill] CONERO, GARGANO, APULIA

this category we must also include the great outcrops of Cretaceous
limestone which occur in the Murgie of Bari and beneath the younger
deposits of Apulia to beyond Otranto^. The contrast between all these
districts and the Apennines is so great that de Giorgi proposed to regard
them as an independent orographic system, ‘the Apulo - Garganiau
group

In confirmation of the theory that communication by land may
have existed across the existing Adriatic, Neumayr points out that
according to Kobelt the molluscan fauna at present met with on Monte
Gargano presents characters which are not Italian but Dalmatian

Numerous other indications of this communication may also be
observed. On the east coast of the most southerly part of the peninsula
of Istria very recent masses of sand are met with above the well-known
terra rossa, jmd these are continued on to the little western islands of Unie,
both the Canidole and Sansego; Stache and Marchesetti have lately
examined these islands, and Marchesetti has found beneath the sand of
Sansego a hard layer containing the shells of living species of land-shells.
The two observers regarded these deposits as the sediments of a large
river

In many of the islands the remains of great terrestrial animals are
found in breccias; thus Neumayr and Woldrich point to the occurrence
of the horse, bison, stag, and rhinoceros on Lesina as a proof of the
previous communication of this island with the mainland ^ The most
remarkable case of this kind appears to be furnished by the little reef
of Silo not far from the south peak of the Canidole piccola. According
to Marchesetti this rock, the surface of which only measures a few square
meters, lies so low that it is completely covered by the sea at every spring
tide. Notwithstanding this the remains of large ruminants are found
in its breccias •. It is a well-known fact that on several of the Dalmatian
islands the jackal (Canis aureus) is still to be found living at the
present day.

There is however every reason to suppose that the movements which
have enlarged the Adriatic in comparatively recent times are not yet
concluded. The region of the peri-Adriatic faults is at present subject to

^ C. de Giorgi, Note stratigrafiche e geologiche da Fasano ad Oii*ant(>; Boll. Com.
Gcol. d’ltalia, 1881, XII, pp. 187-203, pi. iv.

* The same, op. cit., 1879, X, p. 622.

* M. Neumayr, Ueber den geologischen Bau der Insel Kos, Denkschr. Akad. Wien,
1879, XL, p. 263, note ; Kobelt, Jahrb. deutsch. malakoz. Ges., 1879, p. 144.^

* Stache, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanat., 1872, p. 221 ; C. Marchesetti, Cenni geol. sulP
isola di Sansego, Boll. Soc. Adriat. Trieste, 1882, VII, pp. 289 304.

® M. Neumayr, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1882, p. 161 ; J. Woldrich, Beitriige zur
Fauna der Breccien, &c., Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1882, XXXII, p. 454 et seq.

* Marchasetjjbi, loc. cit., p. 300.



270


THE BASIN OP THE ADBIATIC [partii

frequent seismic movements of the most varied description. According
to the observations of Bittner and Hoernes ^ it may be inferred that the
great earthquake of Belluno which occurred on June 29, 1878, took
place along two parallel surfaces of horizontal dislocation or true flaws
directed to the north-north-east; starting from the south 'side of the
Alps it crossed this chain and extended right into the mass of Bohemia ;
it thus presented a close resemblance to those earthquakes which occur
on the north side of the Alps. I am not able to offer any explanation
of this kind of concussion, which proceeded from within the sunken area
outwards. Other flaws accompanied by horizontal displacement are also
present, near Raibl, for example, and in the valley of Weissenfels, and
it is not improbable that the great earthquake of Villach in 1348 was
also a transverse earthquake.

But it is a well-known fact that Zengg, Zara, Bagusa, and other parts
of the Dalmatian coast, which have been formed by lines of dislocation,
have repeatedly been the seat of most violent concussions, and Hoemes
justly points out that in the years 1869 and 1870 the line of the Karst
passing through Gorz-Klana-Fiume-Ottocac, i. e. the second of the lines
of dislocation mentioned on p. 267, served as the path of wandering
seismic centres, and resembled in all essential respects the peripheral
Calabrian line of 1783. Tietze has made similar observations on the
line of dislocation near the coast of Montenegro close to Antivari^,

Just as we speak of a submerged Tyrrhenis and seek, by means of
zoo-geographical and phyto-geographical studies, to discover the relation-
ship and connexion between such of its remaining fragments as rise
above the level of the sea, so we may likewise speak of an Adriatis
submerged in later times, and endeavour to determine its outline, although
the recent deposits on the outer slopes of the Apennines and on the margin
of the plain of Lombardy render it probable that during its existence there
was a free communication of the sea between Gargano and the Apennines.
The events which occur on the seismic line of Calabria reveal the con-
tinuation of those processes by which the mainland sinks piece by piece
towards the interior, and on the line of dislocation which separates

^ Bittner, Beitra^e zur Eenntniss des Erdbebens von Belluno vom 29. Jiini 1873,
Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1874, LXIX, 2 parts, p. 541 ; R. Hoemes, Erdbebenstudien,
Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1878, XXVIII, pp. 387-448, pi. xi. For the concussions in the
Southern Alps in connexion with the lines of dislocation, see in particular H. Hoefer, Die
Erdbeben Kamtens und deren Stosslinien, Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien., 1880, XLII, 90 pp.,
3 pl. (p. 87 in-sinking of the Adria), and B. Canaval, Das Erdbeben von Gmiind am
6. November 1881, Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1882, LXXXVI, pp. 353-409, 2 pl.;
Tietze, Geol. Uebersicht von Montenegro, pp. 65 and 93.

. * Hoemes, Erdbebenstudien, p. 433, and in other places. Chiefly based on the treatise
by G. Stur, Das Erdbeben von Klana im Jahre 1870; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1871,
XXI, pp. 231-264, pl. ix, x. , •



SPIRAL ARRANGEMENT


CH, III]


271


Istria from the continent we see similar occurrence stake place before
our eyes.

Summary. Among the results of these comparative studies none
appears to me so strange as the obvious arrangement of the main ranges
of the Alpine system in a more or less spiral manner, such as is represented
in Fig. 26, p. 232, and on Plate iii.

At the risk of repeating much that I have already said I will now
attempt to give a general survey of the arrangement of the chains and
of the sunken areas.

To north and west of the Jura and of the principal chain of the Alps
and the Carpathians lies a land of multiform structure. Proceeding from
the west we meet first the western margin of the great horst, which is
known as the Central Plateau of France ; then we come to its continuation
in the little gneiss mass of Dole close to the outer edge of the Jura;
at a somewhat greater distance we reach the southern margin of the
Vosges, and then, close to the edge of the Jura, the southern end of
the Schwarzwald limited by the border of the table-Jura. We next
encounter the great Swabian Franconian subsidence, which extends
from the Schwarzwald and the Odenwald to the Thiiringerwald and
Frankenwald, to the western margin of the Fichtelgebirge and the
Bavarian Forest. One step of this great in-fall extends as far as
the main fracture along the Danube. Its borders are detached from
the projecting horsts along faults; the sinking, although interrupted
by occasional trough-subsidences, increases towards the Danube, where
isolated caldrons occur, accompanied by slight extrusions of eruptive
rocks. Unmistakable examples of horizontal movement may be recog-
nized; the eastern border of the in-sunken area is inverted in places,
and in the caldron of the Rics a case of horizontal thrusting occurs.

From Regensburg towards Linz the border is sometimes overturned
to the south, and the Cretaceous is involved in the ’tblding.

On the other side of the Bohemian horst the foreland presents
a different structure. The Sudetes meet the horst along a great fault, and
in Lower Austria and Moravia probably lie as a whole beneath the plain.
Near Weisskirchen they come into contact with the border of the
Carpathians, and then dip, zone after zone, beneath them (Fig. 24,
p. 186). It is possible, but has not been proved, that the numerous and
mighty faults in the Coal-measures of Ostrau are connected with this
subsidence.

Finally we reach further in the east the Russian Platform^ (Fig. 25,
p. 187).

This is the foreland ; now follow the folded chains.

In front of the principal chain stands the bow-like rampart of the
Jura; it .is, crushed against the Dole, and at its eastern end is driven



272


THE BASIN OP THE AHBIATIC [paot o

over the forelying table-Jura in repeated imbrications. Behind the
Jura lies the plain of Molasse and then the Alps.

It seems to me of essential importance, if we are to understand the
Alps, to bear in mind the unity of their outer border; a unity so
clearly expressed from the extreme west in the south of* France to
the extreme east in Wallachia. In this statement we include the
Carpathians, for they are the immediate prolongation of the outer
parts of the main chain of the Alps. This whole border, confined between
the horsts, extending unimpeded over the sunken foreland, and finally
advancing towards the north in a broad arc, appears, according to all
that is known of its structure, to be the anterior margin of a mperjicial
jlake of the earth's crust over-riding a subsided foreland.

Crossing this border we meet towards the interior of the mountains
progressively older rocks, in more or less regular order, forming ehains,
bands, and flakes, which are folded, overthrust, or thrown down towards
the front along longitudinal fractures, until far to the south we again
reach a collapsed area. Multiform in structure is the foreland of the
Alps, uniform their outer border, and multiform again the inner
border.

Collapse or in-sinking of the inner border takes place in various
ways. In the Carpathians it occurs along faults accompanied by volcanip
eruptions; sometimes these penetrate deep into the mountains, as, for
example, from Tokaj towards Eperies, and only the Flysch zone then remains
visible; sometimes, again, the interior part of the mountains remains
visible over a great breadth, as, for example, immediately to the west
of the above-mentioned places. The in-sunken basin of Vienna, that
on the eastern border of the Alps,vnear Landsee, and that more to the
south between the spur of GUns and the Bacher mountains, have already
been described in detail.

To the south of* the Bacher that independent unilateral branch of the
Alps begins, which under the name of the Mittolgebirge of Hungary runs
towards the north-east to the inner side of the Carpathians; its down-
sunken interior zones lie beneath the Plattensee, but remnants appear near
Stulhweissenburg.

Those isolated mountains which, commencing west of Agram, rise above
the plain along the Save in the south, and on the north to beyond FUnf kirchen,
I regard, with Mojsisovics, as parts of a great mass alien to the Alps both
in structure and composition. Against this mass is thrust the Flysch
zone and intruded serpentine of the Dinaric branch, which has been pre-
vented by the opposing mass from developing in the same typical manner
as the other branches of the Alpine system. Commencing already near the
depression of Laibach, there stretch down to Montenegro, according to
recent investigations, elongated masses of schist, chiefly of Carboniferous



278


CH. m] SUBSIDENCE OP THE ADEIATIC

age, which much more resemble the flattened arches of the Tuscan Catena
metcdlifera than the gneiss cores of the Alps. They form the oldest series
of these mountains; to the west of them, and running parallel to them,
begin the long fractures and flexures along which all the country on the
west is down-thrown in the direction of the Adriatic sea. The Karst,
together with the peninsula of Istria, is only a fragment of the same
mountain system; it is traversed by the same lines of dislocation; the
direction of which is clearly expressed in the zigzag course of the
Isonzo.

We have now again reached the main chain of the Alps. On the
Isonzo, at the points where these lines have entered the Alps, new fractures
appear, which extend for a great distance as far as Meran and Lake Idro.
All these great lines, from Montenegro to Lake Idro, bound the Adriatic
sea on the east, north, and north-west, and may be appropriately termed
the peri- Adriatic fractures.

These lines mark steps of subsidence, and at the bottom of the sunken
area lies the Adriatic sea. The position of this sea is thus already
determined by the structure of the southern Alps. Out of the region of
subsidence, however, rises as a horst the granite mass of the Cima d’ Asia
in South Tyrol, and the country to the north of it subsides by steps in
the opposite direction. The peri- Adriatic lines are marked over the whole
area, not only by subsidence, but also by the overriding of the higher upon
the depressed masses, and since the latter, with the exception of the district
to the north of the Cima d* Asta, always lie next the sea, so the overthrust
constantly takes place from the mountains seawards, i.e. from the higher
towards the lower parts of the sunken area. In the inset mountains of
the Etsch, and on Lake Garda, the thrusting is therefore directed towards
the south-east, south of the Cima d’ Asta to the south-south-east or to the
south, but in Istria, Croatia, and Dalmatia to the south-west.

All the various peri- Adriatic lines of dislocation &fe, as we have seen,
formed on the same plan; both vertical and horizontal movements have
occurred, and all the facts appear to confirm the view which Gilbert arrived
at some years ago in the west of America, namely, that the vertical move-
ment was more deep-seated, the horizontal more superficial (p. 107).

We might naturally attempt to apply these principles to the northern
Alps, and, in conformity with the views held by Monsieur Lory in the case
of the western Alps, explain all the folds of the northern Alps as over-
thrust faults or flexures^. It does not seem to me, however, that this
interpretation would be consistent with the facts. ,

We have seen that in the southern Alps both downward and tangential

' C. Lory, Essai sur Torographie dea Alpea occidentalea, 8vo, Grenoble, 1878; Coup d’oeil
8ur la structure des massifs primitifs du Dauphind, from the Bull, de la section de ITsere
du Club alpin fran 9 ., II, 1878 ; and elsewhere.

80 LLA 8 T



274


THE BASIN OP THE ADRIATIC [paot it

in«)vement8 occur ; under these circuinstauces parallel flexures may pass into
parallel oblique synclinals, and eventually into imbricated structure. The
structure of the western Alps, which face the Central Plateau of France,
may have been largely determined by great lines of fault, and, according
to later observations, the case seems to be similar in the northern Alps in
the neighbourhood of the Bohemian mass. But the folds of the mass of the
Finster-Aarhom, which are repeated several times, one over the other, in the
same face of rock, and thus cause the Jurassic limestone to be surrounded
above and below by the Trias, do not admit of such an explanation, nor do
the folds of Filatus, the Santis, nor any of those masses which are folded
on themselves. The course of the long undulations of the Jura, the
movement and the compression of the Alpine chain as a whole, and the
structure of the Carpathians with their long anticlinals, revealed by
the petroleum workings, show an unmistakable predominance of the
tangential movement. Of late years, however, a large number of subsided
areas have been recognized in the northern part of the eastern Alps, and
the southern boundary of the Flysch zone in particular proves in this
region more and more clearly to be an immense overthrust of enormous
length.

A fundamental diflerence, however, exists between the northern and
southern part of the eastern Alps; in the north all the tangential move-
ments are directed towards the exterior, that is, towards the Bohemian
mass, while in the south, in the whole region of the southern Alps which
we have discussed, this movement is directed towards the interior, or
the concave side of the curve, i.e. towards the bottom of the Adriatic
depression. This is that tendency to override the mbsideTice which
we have already observed (p. 143) even in mountains situated outside
the Alpine region (p. 188).

This subsidence occupies an area such as would be covered by a
regular expansion 'of the Adriatic Sea, and it may therefore truly be said
that the border of the Adriatic depression encroaches on the Alps as far as
Meran. At the same time a glance at PI. Ill shows that a most remarkable
correspondence exists between the outline of the Adriatic sea, or of the
sunken area in which it lies, and of the Swabian-Franconian sunken
area beyond the Alps. Between the two latter lies, however, like a
stiflened beam, the folded mass of the Alps.

In' the southern Alps we meet, further to the west and beginning at
the great flexure of. the Maniva, a second region of subsidence, that of
Lombardy, in the eastern part of which, on Lake Como, a flexure occurs
pushed over to the south. In the interior of the Alps the peculiar volcanic
mass of Adamello marks approximately the dividing line between the two
regions.

Two sunken areas thus face the Apennines : that of Lombardy and that



PEONT OP THE APENNINES


276


OH, in]

of the Adriatic. Remains of the sunken Adriatis rise up near Ancona,
at Monte Gargano and in Apulia. If the question asked above, as to
where the continuation is to be found of the border of the Alps which runs
south-east from Verona to Este, had any real justification; if wo are right
in assuming at all the existence of such a homogeneous border, then we
must reply that the continuation is to be found extending from Este in an
unchanged direction towards the south-east along the west side of Monte
Conero, near Ancona, and still further along the west side of Monte
Gargano.

The Apennines, which appear to be much more independent than any
of those branches of the Alpine system already enumerated, reveal the
same process as that to which the outer border of the Alps bears witness.
Disregarding the diversity of the foreland, the Apennines advance in
a constant unbroken curve towards the depression of Lombardy and that
of the Adriatic, and their outer border, precisely like that of the Alps,
would seem to be the anterior margin of a superficial flake of the eartlis
crust overriding a subsided foreland.

We now cross the Apennines and find ourselves, on its western side,
once more in the region of collapsed areas; volcanos accompany them
as in the Carpathians ; as at Eperies, so at Florence, the Flysch zone alone
remains standing ; the same fragmentation of the inner border also occurs.

The virgalion of the mountains, or the divergent sheaf-like arrange-
ment of the several branches of the Alps, is manifested by the general
advance in constant curves of the margins of crustal flakes over the
variously in-sunken and fractured foreland, and thus it happens that
a region which is the 'backland' of one branch forms the foreland of
the next succeeding.

The folded chain is always sharply bounded on the side towards the
foreland, but in the Alps its relations to the backland can only be recog-
nized with great difficulty. Between the Dinaric chaiA and that of Central
Hungary an ancient core of alien nature appears to be present. In the
Apennines, on the other hand, the relations to the backland are clearly
displayed, as Lotti^ has lately shown. On Elba, for instance, ancient
serpentine occurs beneath the Siluri^u beds ; it is continued into the island
of Giglio, Monte Argentario, and the north-east of Corsica, and probably
corresponds to the great masses of ancient serpentine which occur in the
western part of the southern Alps. These are followed by beds of probably
Permian age, but the Trias is absent throughout the whole of the insular
region, as it is also in the greater part of the Catena metallifcr^a on the
peninsula; and there, as here in the Catena metallifera in Elba and in
Corsica, the Rhaetic stage lies in transgression, even occurring on pre-

‘ B. Lotti, Osservazioni geologiche sulle isole dell’ Archipelago toscano ; Boll. com.
geol. d' Italia, ;884, XV, pp. 56-61.



276 THE BASIN OP THE ADBIATIG

Silurian rocks. In Elba a later transgression coincides with a part of the
upper lias ; above this another great gap occurs over the whole region,
and the ESocene beds extend transgressively in the peninsula, as well as in
Elba and Corsica, over much older rocks.

The backland is thus characterized by gaps in succession and by trans-
gressions, and the fact that the same interruptions in the normal stratified
sequence may be traced into the inner chains of the folded region, and
especially into the Catena metallifera, testifies to their former continuity.



277


CHAPTEB IV

THE MEDITERRANEAN

Five historical phases of unequal value. Relations to America. The Atlantic Ocean.
Guadalquivir, Gironde, Rhone. First Mediterranean stage. The Schlier. Second
Mediterranean stage. The Sarmatian inland sea. The Pontic lakes. More recent times.
Northern immigrants. The latest subsidences. Summary.

The Silurian deposits of central and southern Europe differ as a whole
and in an essential manner from the contemporary formations in the
North. The existence, during a considerable part of the Jurassic period,
of a ‘ Mediterranean ' as opposed to a ‘ North European ’ province is shown
by conclusive evidence. The former included the Alps and Carpathians. In
still later times, the influence of a warmer climate in this Mediterranean
region (always including the Alps) made itself felt, as is clearly shown in
the rich coral fauna of the Turonian stage in the south of France, and in
the Gosau beds of the eastern Alps. Not less remarkable is the beauty
and variety of form in the old Tertiary fauna of the Vicentine pre-Alps.
Towards the middle of the Tertiary period, in Oligoceno times, the sea
extended transgressively over a large part of Europe, so large a part in
fact that this Oligocene transgression is only exceeded by that of the
Cenomanian ; but, during this great extension of the sea, an exceedingly
rich coral fauna still flourished at Crosara and Castel Gomberto; it is
also represented in certain bays of the Alps, especially in the Cariiiola,
and even in the northern zone of the Flysch on the Waschberg near
Vienna. On the other hand, the contemporaneous beds of Gaas and
Lesbarritz, the sand of Fontainebleau and Wcinheim^^ present a poverty-
stricken coral fauna, and contain only a few of the richly adorned mollusca
of the Vicentine foot-hills ; towards the north-east, in the muddy deposits of
the same period, the southern character of the fauna continues to steadily
disappear.

After this great transgression a fauna appears for the first time which
includes a remarkable number of species still existing in the Mediterranean,
and shows as a whole such close relations to the present population of that
sea, that the deposits it characterizes have for some time been known
among a certain school of geologists as the ‘first Mediterranean stage.’
This stage will serve as a point of departure for the following observations
on the history of the Mediterranean.

The Tertiary deposits have been classified according to various principles
and with. v{irying success. Long ago Lyell and Deshayes distinguished



278


THE MEDETEERANEAN


[pABin

the great groups of Eocene, Miocene, and Pliocene, basing them 'on the
percentage of surviving species, and thus created a classification which,
if artificial, was at least rich in results; but since this first step was
taken our knowledge has been very considerably increased. Lyell himself
recognized the necessity of adding to these groups. The uiost impor-
tant of the new members, Beyrich’s Oligocene, rests not so much on the
comparative number of surviving forms, as on a feature of completely
difierent nature, namely, on its transgressive position. On the other hand,
it is on palaeontological grounds that M. Hoemes bases his proposal to
recombine the middle and a large part of the upper members under a
common name as the Neogene group. In this coimexion we must also
mention the Sarmatian series, which contains extraordinarily few, perhaps
indeed, with the exception of certain Rhizopods, no extant species, and yet
is undoubtedly younger than the deposits of Baden or the Leithakalk,
which include a high percentage of surviving species. Finally, local
researches have led to a multitude of geographical designations, which if
they have materially facilitated the analysis of the subject, yet have ren-
dered more difficult the general survey of past events ; and since a large
number of these local series have been raised by K. Mayer and others to
the dignity of independent divisions of the Tertiary formation, the system
of drawing strict boundaries has, 1 fear, become a dangerous instrument
in the service of synthesis.

It is the organic remains, no doubt, which afford us our first and most
important aid in the elucidation of the past. But the goal of investigation
must still remain the recognition of those great physical changes, in
comparison with which the changes in the organic world only appear as
phenomena of the second order, as simple consequences.

With this point in view, let us attempt to obtain a general idea of
the past history of that part of Europe now in question. For this pur-
pose we will first examine those phases in which the marine character of
the deposits attains its most marked expression. These are the phases of
the normal composition of sea-water, consequently of the undisturbed com-
munication of a land-surrounded sea with an ocean, in this case, as we
shall see directly, with the Atlantic. The position of the Mediterranean
shows us further that, provided conditions exist somewhat similar to
those of the present day, the eflect produced by the cessation of an existing
communication with the sea will be the greater the nearer the place of
interruption approaches to the Atlantic Ocean, i.e.to the west, and hence,
that we may expect in the east a more frequent interruption of the
normal marine succession and a greater variety among the consequences
resulting from isolation. It would thus appear from these preliminary
observations, that it would be just as absurd, in the face of such an infinite
diversity of events, to speak of equality between the various gha^es in the



279


CH.iv] THE FIVE MEDITERRANEAN STAGES

history of the Mediterranean as of equality in a series of stages in the
history of mankind. But even as the destiny of a nation is influenced
partly by local and partly by general processes, so in the case before us.
The subsidence of the nortliem part of the Adriatic, discussed in the
preceding section, remains a local phenomenon, while the appearance of
northern mollusca in the Mediterranean is the result of a general process
the causes of which lie outside this sea.

For the present, however, we are only concerned with the classification
of the actual facts, and with this object we distinguish, since the close of
the Oligocene period, several phases in the normal state of the Mediter-
ranean, which will be designated the first, second, third, and fourth
Mediterranean stages, to which must be added as a fifth stage its present
condition, with the subordinate oscillations of the coast-line observable at
the present day. In each of these stages, and especially in the first and
third, several subdivisions may be distinguished. Most remarkable is the
second stage, owing to its extra-marine formations, which reveal an isola-
tion of the eastern region, and separate the preceding from the following
stage. But in the geographical extension of each of these stages, it is to be
observed that while each includes regions already submerged during the
preceding stage, yet it loses some areas which are abandoned by the sea,
and acquires others over which the sea newly encroaches. The contour of
the Mediterranean is therefore different in each phase.

In order to give a first general survey of these stages, and to facilitate
subsequent description, we will illustrate their general significance by the
following important and classic examples of Tertiary deposits.

The first Mediterranean stage includes the faluns of Leognan, the
lower series of marine formations in the Rhone valley with the beds of
St. Paul-Trois-Chateaux, the marine Molasse of Switzerland, the marine
Molasse of Bavaria, the group of the Horn beds on the slopes of the
Mannhart mountains, the Schio beds of Upper ItaljT and the Apennines,
the serpentinous sand of Turin, and the lower limestone with, or at least
up t o, the horizon of Orhitoides Mantdli of Malta, Gozzo, and elsewhere.

the east and south of Europe this stage is followed over large areas
by a thick deposit of blue marl, which presents many independent
characters and is frequently accompanied by deposits of gypsum and salt.
This is the Scldier,

To the second Mediterranean stage belong the faluns of Touraine, the
faluns of Salles, the marls of Cabrieres in the Rhone valley, the deposits
of Baden, Vdslau, Grinzing, Steinabrunn and the Leithakalk near Vienna,
in Hungary, Transylvania and Wallachia, the series of Tortofia, the upper
horizons of the island of Malta.

Overlying these deposits in the valley of the Danube comes the
curious ^Sarmatian stage, into which only a few Mediterranean types



280


THE MEDITEERANEAN


[PARTn

ascend ; it is distributed over an area which extends eastwards beyond that
of the second Mediterranean stage and even beyond the Caspian sea and
the sea of Aral.

Theobald Fuchs rightly points out that in central Italy the blue marls of
the Vaticano occupy a position above the second Mediterranean stage, which
is not unlike that of the Schlier at the base of the lower part of this stage \

The third and fourth Mediterranean stages include the whole series
of older and younger Pliocene, that is to say, the younger marine
deposits of the Rhone valley, the beds of Asti, Siena, and Monte Mario, of
Geracc and Messina, of Corinth and Rhodes. In the fourth stage signs
of increasing col<l make their appearance.

The fifth Mediterranean stage comprises the present Mediterranean,
including its most recent marginal deposits, which occur on the west coast
of Italy, in the west of north Africa, Cyprus, and other places.

These five stages correspond in genera} to the middle Miocene, the
upper Miocene, the Pliocene, Quaternary, and the most recent deposits,
according to the terminology of French and Italian geologists, who reserve
the expression lower Miocene for the ‘ calcaire k asteries ' of the south of
France, and for the beds of Gaas, Dego, and Castel Gomberto.

Relations with America. A series of recent observations have estab-
lished the fact that the marine deposits of the west coast of South
America and of the Antilles present a very close resemblance to those of
Europe. This similarity presents itself even in the oldest deposits, and
according to Philippi continues in Chili up to the Tertiary period, where
during this interval there flourished on the Pacific coast a Molluscan fauna
which is closely related in character to that existing in the Mediterranean \
It is only in the most recent times that this correspondence is destroyed
and the present marine fauna of the west Atlantic, which is distinct from
the European, makes its appearance.

Under these circuTnstances no history of the Mediterranean would be
comphjte which failed to take into account the observations made on this
subject on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean.

The Antilles form, as will be shown later, a mountain chain extending
as a circular arc through Cuba, Haiti, Puerto Rico, and then southwards
towards Trinidad. Jamaica and the south-western part of Haiti belong to
an inner chain which is associated with this. The Caribbean sea has
subsided along the inner side of these chains, while the foreland, in so far
as it is not submerged beneath the waters of the Gulf of Mexico, consists of

* Theobald Fuchs, Studien iiber die Gliederung der jiingeren Tertia.rbildungen Ober-
italiens; Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1878, LXXVII, 1. Abtheil., p. 423, *Fliociiner
Schlier.*

* R. A. Philippi, Ueber Versteinerungen der Tertiarformation Chile's ; Zeitschr. f. d.

ges. Naiurwiss., 1878, LI, pp. 674-685. ^ r



THE ANTHiLES


281


OH. IV]


horizontally stratified deposits covering an area which, starting from
MatamoraSy probably even from Vera Cruz, extends far around the northern
border of the gulf up to Arkansas and Alabama, including the peninsula of
Florida, and proceeds a long way up the coast of Carolina. Nevertheless
the Gulf of Mexico sinks to a depth of 2,000 fathoms or more, and the
Caribbean sea also reaches this great depth near the east coast of Yucatan
and the south coast of Cuba.

In Jamaica there exists, lying above a series which may be compared to
the lower divisions of our Flysch, a light-coloured, highly fossiliferous lime-
stone, the fauna of which, as Duncan, Barrett, and Woodward have shown,
corresponds in the most surprising manner to that of Gosau in the north-
eastern Alps. Besides Actaeonella laevWy Nerinaea, and numerous Hippurites,
a number of the most cliaracteristic corals of the Gosau beds appear here, as,
for instance^ Diplorta crassilamellom, lleliadraea ejcsculptay and Cyathoseris
Ilaidingeri ,

The occurrence of these Cretaceous corals on the otlier side of the
Atlantic leads us to suppose that at this period some sort of connexion
must have existed across the ocean, either in the form of a continuous coast-
line or as a chain of islands, and this supposition is strengthened by the
circumstance that the same phenomenon is repeated in the Tertiary period.
This fact is so striking that it has frequently attracted the attention of
observers; and Duncan, Jones, Etheridge, Guppy, Cotteau, and others have
published a number of admirable treatises on the subject


^ L. Barrett, On some Cretaceous Rocks in the South-eastern Portion of Jamaica, Quart.
Journ. Geol. Soc., 1860, XVI, pp. 324-326 ; M. Duncan and G. P. Wall, A Note on the
Geology of Jamaica, op. cit., 1865, XXI, pp. 1-15.

® Among the most important of these works arc : P. M. Duncan, On the Fossil Corals of
the West Indian Islands, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1863, XIX, pp. 406-458; 1864, XX,
pp. 20-44 and pp. 358-374 ; J. Carrick Moore, On some Tertiary Shells from Jamaica,
with a Note on the Corals by P. M. Dunciin, and a Note on^omc Nummulinae and
Orbitoides by Rupert Jones, op. cit., 1863, XIX, pp. 510-515 ; Duncan, On the Correlation of
the Miocene Beds of the West Indian Islands, and on the Synchronism of the Chert Forma-
tion of Antigua with the lowest Limestone of Malta, Geol. Mag., 1864, I, pp. 97-102 ;
Rupert Jones, The Relationship of certain West Indian and Maltese Strata, as shown by
some Orbitoides and other Foraminifera, tom. cit., pp. 102-106 ; R. J. licchraere Guppy, On
the Tertiary Mollusca of Jamaica, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1866, XXII, pp. 281-295; On
Tertiary Brachiopoda from Jamaica ; On Tertiary Echinoderms from the West Indies, torn,
cit., pp. 295-301 ; On the Relations of the Tertiary Formations of the West Indies, with
Appendices by Woodward and Jones, tom. cit., pp. 570-593 ; Robert Etheridge, Summary
of the Palaeont. of the Caribbean Area as Append. V to Sawkins, Report on the Geoloj^
of Jamaica, 8vo, 1869, i)p. 306-339 ; Purves in Ann. do la Soc. Malacol. de Belg., 1873,
VIII, Bull., pp. xxv-xxviii (only land and fresh-water shells from a siliceous limestone) \
Cotteau, Descript, des Echinides tert. des lies St. Barthelemy et Anguilla, Svensk.
Vetensk. Akad. Handl., 1875, XII, No. 6, and Descript, des Echin. foss. de Pile de Cuba,
Ann. Soc. geol. Belg., 1881-1882, IX, Mem., pp. 1-49 ; Duncan, On the older Tert.
Formations of the West Indian Islands, Quart. Journ, Geol. Soc., 1873, XXIX, pp. 548-565 ;
L. Guppy, On the Miocene Fossils of Haiti, op. cit., 1876, XXXII, pp. 516-532, and as an



282 THE MEDITERRANEAN [partii

These works do not, however, seem to me to prove conclusively the
existence of a true Eocene coral fauna on the West Indian islands. The
Eocene coral reefs of Europe, among which I include the coral beds of
Friaul ^ made known by d’ Achiardi, do not appear to have been observed
on the other side of the ocean.

On the other hand, the coral growths of St. Bartholomew and their
equivalents in Jamaica, Cuba, and other islands correspond, according to
Duncan's researches, to those of Castel Gomberto and Crosara. They also
form the ‘ Fernando beds ' of Trinidad. It is the European species, occurring
in these horizons on the other side of the Atlantic, such as, for example,
Trochosniilia mbeurveUa, Trochosmilia arguta^ iStephanocoenia degavs,
Astrocoenia multigranom^ Ulophylla macrogyra, and Porites ruTiiosa,
which build up and adorn the reefs of Castel Gomberto.

The next younger division of the West Indian Tertiary beds, which
should perhaps be united with the preceding, is the siliceous limestone
of the island of Antigua. Duncan and Jones compared it as early as 1864
with the lower limestone of Malta. The presence of Stylocoenia lobato^
rotunclata cannot indeed be regarded as very significant since this species
has a wide vertical distribution in Europe; of greater importance is
the occurrence of Astrocoenia ornataj which is also characteristic of our
Turin deposits, and the abundance of Orbitoides Mantelli, which is equally
common in the lowest deposits of Malta.

In Europe, however, there is certainly no very great diflerence in age
between the coral fauna of Castel Gomberto and the lower limestone of
Malta. According to Theobald Fuchs this limestone lies below the horizon
of Schio, while its fauna resembles that of Castel Gomberto and Schio
It is therefore unnecessary to suppose that any considerable gap occurs
between the coral-bearing deposits of St. Bartholomew and the siliceous
limestone of Antigua

The succeeding deposits of white limestone in the West Indies correspond
very nearly with the upper limestone of Malta, that is, with the Leithakalk

appendix to W. M. Gabb, On the Topography and Geology of S. Domingo, Trans.
Americ. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, 1873, new ser., XV.

^ A. d* Achiardi, Coralli eoc. del Friuli ; Atti d. Soc. Toscan. di Scienze Nat., 1875, II,
100 pp. and 16 plates.

* T. Wright, On the fossil Echinoids of Malta, with additional notes on the Miocene
Beds of the Island, &c., by A. L. Adams, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1864, XX, pp. 470-
491 ; T. Fuchs, Das Alter der Tertiarschichten von Malta, Sitzungber. Akad. Wiss. Wien,
1874, LXX, 1. Abth., pp. 92-102 ; A. L. Adams, On Remains of Mastodon and other
Yei-tebrata of the Miocene Beds of the Maltese Islands, Quart. Journ. Gcol. Soc., 1879,
XXXV, pp. 517-531.

® Professor Heilprin, of Philadelphia, to whom I am indebted for instructive letters
on tliis subject, believes the Orbitoides beds of Florida and the coral beds of St. Bar-
tholomew and other places belong to this stage. This view is not incompatible with the
results obtained in Europe. , •



CH. iv] MIDDLE TERTIABY OP FLORIDA 283

of the second Mediterranean stage. Cidarw Mditerms appears on several
of the West Indian islands associated with species which are closely related
to some in the upper limestone of Malta, as, for example, Schizader Loveni
and Brissopsis Antillarum.

There can then be no doubt that the coral fauna of Castel Gomberto
and the Orbitoides limestone of Malta are represented in the West Indian
islands, and that above these deposits still younger beds of marine lime-
stone occur. Having established these facts we may now turn to the
north.

Eugene Smith has shown, in confirmation of older statements, that the
peninsula of Florida is neither so low-lying nor of such recent age as is
generally supposed. A ridge, which attains in places a height of over
200 feet, runs from the north throughout the length of the great
peninsula ; . and the larger part of it, to the south almost as far as the
Everglades, to the west in several places up to the sea, consists of Vicksburg
limestone with Orbitoides Mantdli, which is simply the prolongation of the
West Indian Orbitoides limestone, and is thus the equivalent in time of
the lower limestone of Malta \

The most elevated parts of the Bahamas and the whole outer girdle of
the Antilles may be regarded with no small degree of certainty as isolated
fragments of this great Tertiary ‘ plate ' of Florida.

On the map of the Gulf of Mexico published by Hilgard it is easy to
recognize the extension of these Tertiary deposits of Florida to the west and
north 2.

To the east as to the west of the Missiasippi, Palaeozoic and still older
rocks crop out. To the east we see the southern termination of the
Appalachians ; there, as in so many other places, the middle and upper
Cretaceous lie transgressively, covering the southern and western foot
of the chain. The western group of Texas is also surrounded by the
Cretaceous formation. Overlying the Cretaceous anti like it horizontally
stratified, follow the first stages of the Tertiary system. On Fig. 87 all its
older members, together with the Vicksburg limestone, i.e. the Orbitoides
limestone, are indicated by the sign This series comprises, as Heilprin
has shown in Alabama, a lignitiferous group, the ‘ Buhrstone * with Ostram
sellaeformis, which lies at the base; the sandstone of Claiborne, which
may be correlated by its mollusca with the ‘ calcaire grossier ' of Paris ; the

^ Eugene A. Smith, On the Geology of Florida ; Am. Journ. Science, 1881, 3rd ser.,

XXI, pp. 292-309.

® E. W. Hilgard, The Later Tertiary of the Gulf of Mexico, op. cit., ^882, 3rd ser.,

XXII, pp. 58-65, pi. iii ; also by the same. On the Geological History of the Gulf of
Mexico, Proc. Am. Assoc., 20th Meeting, Indianop., 8vo, Cambridge, 1872, pp. 222-236,
and as a supplement to Humphreys and Abbot, Report upon the Physics and Hydraulics
of the Mississippi River, 2nd ed., 4to, Washington, 1876, pp. 636-646, and F. V. Hopkins,
Map in Ann. Rep. of the Louisiana State University, New Orleans, 1871.



284 THE MEDITERRANEAN [pABTir

white limestone (Jacksonian) containing the great Zeuglodont remains, and
the Orbitoides limestone, which appears to be somewhat closely connected
with the last named \ This series extends from the Bio Grande through *
Texas and Louisiana up the valley of the Mississippi, and is visible on the
floor of the latter as far as Vicksburg ; from this point it surrounds the
Cretaceous zone on the east in a similar manner to that on the west,
and is continued to the south towards Florida, as well as to the north across
Georgia in the direction of the Atlantic coast.

Beginning at Pensacola, near the western boundary of the state of



Fig. 87. The Tertiary deposits on the north side of the GtUf of Mexico (after Hilgard).
archf Archaean ; p, Palaeozoic ; cr, Cretaceous ; lower members of the Tertiary, including

the bed of Orbitoides ManteUi ; fg, middle and upper Tertiary of tho Atlantic Coast ; gg^ Grand
Gulf series ; ru, Port Hudson series ; a, Recent deposits.


Florida, these Tertiary deposits reach the shore of the Gulf of Mexico,
and their western limit on the mainland corresponds approximately to
the course of an important steep submarine slope which marks the
100- fathom line west of Florida. We may notice as a remarkable fact


' A. Heilprin, Notes on the Tertiary Geology of the Southern United States ; Proc.
Ac. Nat. Sc. Philad., 1881, pp. 151-159. . •


CH.iv] TEMPORAEY CLOSURE OF GULP OF MEXICO 285

that on the east of the peninsula, along the Atlantic coast, a further series
of younger marine beds succeeds the Tertiary, while towards the west this
is not the case. There on the contrary we find, extending westwards from
Pensacola, across the valley of the Mississippi as far as Rio Qrande, a zone
of dark stiff clay, with thin intercalations of dark limestone containing
gypsum and lignite, but with no other organic remains than traces of leaves
and a tortoise. This is Hilgard's Grand Gulf series (gfflr, Fig. 87), which
this author interprets as indicating a temporary cessation of communication
between the gulf and the ocean. Overlying the Grand Gulf series is first
a bright yellow drift sand, the Orange sarui, and above this the marine
beds of the Port Hudson group, which are of very recent date. They
consist of alternating muds and lagoon deposits with sandy layers, in all
more than 200 meters in thickness, and contain a marine fauna identical
with that now existing.

It is therefore probable that during the time of the Grand Gulf series the
separation of the Gulf of Mexico from the Atlantic Ocean by the Florida
* plate * was more complete than at present. We have already shown that
the continuation of the ‘ plate ' is to be found in the islands to the south,
and indications are not wanting of the very recent date of their separation.
Among these we may include the remains of a large, and only recently
extinct, mammalian fauna found in the caves of the little island of
Anguilla, while a more exact study of the existing fauna and flora throws
still further light on the breaking up of the Tertiary ‘ plate.' Bland, for
instance, has found that the terrestrial mollusca of the islands extending
from Cuba to the Virgin Islands and Anguilla point to a connexion between
Mexico and Central America ; while those of Antigua and St. Christopher
and the succeeding islands as far as Trinidad suggest a South American
origin The fauna of the deeper parts of the Gulf of Mexico and of the
Caribbean sea is, according to the latest researches of Alexander Agassiz,
more closely allied to the deep-sea fauna of the •'Pacific than of the
Atlantic \

From Florida there runs northwards, through Georgia, North and South
Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, and New Jersey, a broad band of horizontally
stratified Tertiary deposits which are but slightly raised above the present
level of the sea and form the Atlantic border of the mainland. It termi-

^ T. Bland, On the Geographical Distribution of the Genera and Species of Land Shells
of the West Indian Islands, &c., Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist., New York, 1862, VII, pp. 635-361 ;
in addition : Notes relating to the Physical Geography and Geology of, and Distribution of
Terrestrial Mollusca in, certain of the West Indian Islands, and On the Physical Geography
of and Distribution of Terrestrial Mollusca in the Bahama Islands, op. cit., 1874, X,
pp. 31 1-324 ; for mammals, see also M. F. de Castro, Pruebas paleont. de que la Isla de Cuba
ha estado unida al Continente Amer., Bol. Com. Mapa geol. Esp., 1881, VIII, pp. 357-372.

* A. Agassi/., Origin of the West Indian (Caribbean) Echinoderm Fauna, in Reports of
the Results of Dredging, &c.; Mem. Mus. Comp. Zool. Harvard Coll., 1883, X, pp. 79-94.



286


THE MEDlTEI^iAEEAK [part it

nates at about the 40th degree of latitude, and that part of the Atlantic
coast which lies to the north of New York is not covered with Tertiary
marine formations.

In Europe reef-building corals of Tertiary age are not of frequent occur-
rence except in the deposits of the south ; this is also the case in America,
and those deposits which occur north of Florida are characterized, like the
horizontal Tertiary beds of northern Europe, almost exclusively by moUusca.
According to the recent and valuable researches of Heilprin, three horizons
may be distinguished here, ail more recent than the Orbitoides limestone of
Vicksburg. The first of these, the (Mge of Maryland, or the Atlantic lower
Miocene, may be compared with a part at least of the first Mediterranean
stage and the faluns of Ldognan; the deposits of Virginia and a higher
horizon in Maryland form Heilprin’s Virginian doge or the Atlantic middle
Miocene, and this may be regarded as the probable equivalent of the second
Mediterranean stage. Finally the youngest (deposits are those of north and
south Carolina, the Carolinian ttage or the upper Miocene of the west
Atlantic

Thus the general arrangement of the beds in this coastal border appears
to be such that the older stages predominate to the north, the younger
towards the south, i. e. towards Carolina. Their fauna is somewhat peculiar ;
in the younger strata the correspondence with the existing fauna of the
west Atlantic increases ; in those of Patuxent river, Maryland, Bolle thought
so long ago as 1859 that he recognized a certain resemblance to the mollusca
of Loibersdorf, i.e. of the first Mediterranean stage of Europe

The Atlantic Ocean. Near lat. 40“ N. the belt of American Tertiary
deposits approaches the Atlantic coast. Further to the north there are no
traces whatever of a Tertiary sea, nmther in the United States, nor in
Canada, nor beyond in the Arctic regions of North America. All the more
recent formations which might possibly be regarded as such belong to
the much later Chafliplain period. Equally in vain do we seek on the
west coast of Norway, in Scotland, or Ireland for marine formations of
the Tertiary period ; they are not met with till we reach the southern half
of the North sea.

It may perhaps be objected that these deposits have been destroyed by
ice ; but it is precisely in th^ northern portions of the Atlantic region
that definite evidence of the existence of dry land during the middle of
the Tertiaiy period has been preserved. This is afforded by the remains of
a fiora occurring in lignitiferous beds, which have been covered by basaltic
lavas, and thus protected from subsequent destruction.

' A. Heilprin, On the Relation, Ages, and Claaeification of the Post-Eoceno Tertiaiy
Deposits of the Atlantic Slope ; Proc. Acad. Nat. Sc. Philad., 1882, pp. 150-186.

* P. Rolle, Ueber die geologische Stellung der Homer-Schichten, Sitzungsber, Akad.
Wiss. Wien, 1859, XXXVI, p. 81 ; also Heilprin, Proc. Acad. Nat. So. Philad., 1880, p. 83.



EEMNANTS OP ATLANTIC LAND


287


OH. nr]


Such plant-bearing beds covered by basalt occur in county Antrim, in
the north of Ireland; they are found also in the volcanic region of the
Hebrides, and are thence continued further northwards. The Faeroes con-
sist of two great horizontal sheets of basalt and tuff, which are separated
by a bed containing coal and terrestrial plants. Similar formations also
occur on Iceland, where they are known as ‘ Surturbrand,’ and on the east
coast of Greenland ; in the basalt which extends from Kaiser Franz Joseph’s
Fjord to Shannon Island, intercalated layers with brown coal have been
found by Payer in several places, particularly in the south part of Sabine
Island \ These are repeated on the west coast of Greenland, as for instance
on Disco Island, which
has furnished material for
some of the most instruc-
tive investigations of Os-
wald Heer,and yet further,
even up to lat. 81° 45' N.,
where, in Discovery Har-
bour and Robeson Chan-
nel, Feilden found Ter-
tiary plants and obtained
from the lignite deposits
of these places the male
flowers of Taxodium di-
stichum, which have also
been found in similar
deposits on Cape Starat-
schin in Spitzbergen at
the present day ; this
plant is a native of
Mexico and the south of
the United States

The wide distribution
of these deposits, from
Ireland and the Hebrides
to the Faeroes, and across the Atlantic Ocean to Iceland, the east coast of
Greenland, and even beyond, has been frequently regarded as a proof of
the existence of a great continent, richly covered with vegetation, which



Fig. 88. Suderlie, the most southerly ofihs Faeroe Islands
(after J. Qeikie®).


' .1. Geikie, On the Geology of the Faerfie iBlands, Trans. Roy. Soc. Kdinb., 1880-1881,
XXX, pi. xvi ; A. H. Stokes, Notes upon the Coal found in Suder^e, Quartj Joum. Geol.
Soc., 1880, XXXVI, pp. 620-626.

* Die zweite deutsche Nordpolfahrt, 1874, II ; Toula, p. 477 ; Lenz, p. 486 et seq. ;
Heer, pp. 512-517.

• 0. Heer, Notes on Fossil Plants discovered in Grinell-Land by Capt. H. W. Feilden,
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1878, XXXIV, p. 67 ; also Etheridge, tom. cit., p. 569.


288


THE MEDITERRANEAN


[PABTII


occupied the site of the present North Atlantic Ocean. To determine
the exact chronology of these floras is an extremely difficult task ; but it is
probable that the existence of the continent or series of very extensive land
areas was contemporaneous with a large part of our Mediterranean stages.
The copious lava flows afibrd at the same time an indirect pitoof of the
importance of the tectonic movements which affected these regions during
the same period.

It is only in the far north that we again meet with marine Tertiary
deposits. Toula, making use of Julius Payer’s collections from several
parts of the Greenland coast between 74® 30' and 76® 30', describes middle
Tertiary quartziferous sandstone which on Hochstetter Foreland contains
the remains of marine bivalves^. Nathorst subsequently brought back
specimens from Eisfjord in Spitzbergen which show that these quartzite beds
with marine mollusca extend as far as that point. According to Nathorst
they are overlaid as well as underlaid by plant-bearing beds. In spite of
the extremely bad state of preservation of the fossils T. Fuchs was
able to distinguish among them such genera as Siliquaria, Pharella,
Psammosolen, and Callista, which are at present quite foreign to the Arctic
seas, and recall in a distant manner the age of our lower Mediterranean
stages. It is at any rate certain that marine animals appear there which
now characterize much more southerly regions. For further light we mupt
await fresh discoveries

Incomplete as is our present knowledge of the delimitation of this con-
tinent, or series of great islands, towards the north, still more uncertain
is it as regards the south. The Azores, however, furnish one point of
guidance. Here, too, there are volcanic rocks of Tertiary age; in the
midst of the lavas and ashes, and beneath them, marine deposits appear.
They occur on Santa Maria, the most southerly of the Azores, in lat. 37° N.,
then on Madeira and on Porto Santo, and, with the exception of a small
patch in Madeira of^nore recent age, they belong, according to K. Mayer’s
investigations, exclusively to the Helvetian subdivision, that is, to the first
Mediterranean stage. In Madeira these beds reach a height of 1,350 feet
above the present sea-level —

The east coast of the North Atlantic Ocean differs widely from the west.

When discussing the northern foreland of the Alps we distinguished
within it three elements, namely, the Russian Platform, the Sudetes, and
the region of the west European mountain cores. Among the latter we


^ F. Toula, Zweite deutsche Nordpolf., p. 477.

* T. Fuchs, Ueber die wiihrend der schwedischen geologischen Expedition nach Spitz-
bergen im Jahre 1882 gesammelten Tertiar-Conchylien ; Bihang till K. Svensk. Vet.
Ak. Handl., 1883, VIII, Nr. 15.

* K. Mayer in G. Hartung, Geologische Beschreibnng der Inseln Madeira u. Porto

Santo, 8vo, 1864, p. 183 et seq., in particular pp. 276, 277. •



RELICS OP ATLANTIC LAND


289


CH. iv]

included the mass of Bohemia, the Schwarzwald, the Vosges, the Central
Plateau of France, and the Iberian Meseta. Their outlines are varied and
irregular, and the older systems within them are folded ; the middle and
upper Cretaceous often extend over them transgressively ; some of them
are familiar to us as horsts, around and between which the Trias and
Jurassic formations have subsided.

The Sudetes do not occupy nearly so large an area as the two other
regions, and a glance at the geological map of Europe shows us that to the
north of the Alps our continent may be divided, apart from the Sudetes, into
two great regions. That on the east is the Russian Platform, which extends
through the Baltic islands into the south of Sweden, where it terminates.
That to the west consists of a group of great island-like masses of older folded
rocks, between which areas of depression have sunk in. This is the region
of the west European mountain cores ; Norway, Scotland, Cornwall, Ireland,
Brittany, and even the Ardenpes, by their insular distribution, reseml)le, in
spite of diflferences in detail, the mountain cores of the Alpine foreland.

The zigzag outlines of the north of Scotland, which owe their origin to
certain great rectilinear faults extending to the sea-coast, have already
(p. 206) been compared with the contours of the Bavarian Forest. Jutld
has shown that along these faults deeply sunken fragments of Mesozoic
deposits have here and there been preserved from the general destruction.
It is, he thinks, impossible to avoid the conclusion that the whole north and
north-west of the British Archipelago, which is at present transformed by
denudation into a rough mountainous land, was once covered like the
south and south-east, if not entirely, yet at least to a great extent, with
sedimentary deposits, which extended from the Carboniferous up to, and
including, the Chalk \ We must therefore regard Scotland as a horst laid
bare by denudation.

Much further to the north, on Ando, the most northerly of the Ijofotens,
a small and isolated relic of middle Jurassic occurs, which in all essential
respects resembles the sunken fragments of Scotland

With the single exception of the north of Spain, where the coast is
formed by the outer border of a mountain chain, the whole west of Europe
meets the Atlantic Ocean in mountain cores, all of them probably horsts.
This is the cause of the excessively diversified outline of the coast ; and as a
consequence the Tertiary deposits do not form a continuous zone, as in the
southern part of the United States, but extend into thc^ continent as bay-
like encroachments.

We have seen that in the Hebrides and the north of Ireland tlie Tertiary
land floras are preserved beneath basaltic sheets. The coast of these

^ Judd, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1878, XXXIV, p. 669.

* The latest description has been furnished by K. Pettersen, Lofoten og Vesteraalen;
Archiv f. Vathem. og Naturvidensk., Kristiania, 1881, 97 pp. and geological map.

U


aOLhAB



290


THE MEDITEBRAHEAN


[PAKrn

localities, as of the whole west of Ireland, is free from any trace of marine
Tertiary deposits. The same is true of Cornwall. It is in the Cotentin,
on the ridge of the old rocks of Normandy, a continuation of those of
Cornwall, that there appears for the first time, as a sort of forerunner, a
group of small patches of marine Tertiary deposits. These patches have
^en isolated on every side by denudation. We recognize here transgressive
Cretaceous, marine deposits of the age of the ‘calcaire grossier,’ very doubtful
equivalents of the fiiist or second Mediterranean stage, and finally repre-
sentatives of the English Crag, which belong to the period of the third
stage. This remarkable spot also shows how widely the seas of the past
may in certain cases have extended beyond those more or less enclosed
basins, which are now filled by their sediments in continuous sheets.

The first of the important bay-like incursions of these deposits may be
seen on the lower Loire. Here, too, as in the lower Mississippi, they over-
lie the transgressive Cretaceous formation ; they also extend over the ridge
of the mountoin core of Brittany.

The second bay is that of the Qironde. This is bounded on one side
by the edge of the mountain core of Brittany and of the Central Plateau,
on the other by the outer margin of the Pyrenees; its situation there-
fore resembles that of the Tertiary land between the Bohemian mass and
the Alps.

The third bay lies on the lower Tagwe. Its Tertiary deposits are con-
tinued as isolated patches towards the south, reappear around Cape St.
Vincent, and seem to be connected, on the other side of the Guadiana, with
the deposits of the succeeding bay, so that here at all events we might
speak of a girdle of Tertiary' deposits bordering the Atlantic coast. In
this case, however, the coast, at least in its general outline, seems also
to correspond approximately to the contour of the Iberian Meseta. In
the south. Tertiary deposits of marine origin lie on the Mesozoic border
of the Meseta.

The fourth bay is that of the Guadalquivir. Its position resembles
that of the Gironde; it is bounded on one side by the border of the
Meseta, on the other by the outer margin of the Betic Cordillera.

The Straits of Gibraltar correspond, as we have seen, to the lateral
fracture of a mountain chain.

Finally, the marine Tertiary formations of the Atlantic Ocean penetrate
into the interior of Morocco.

The parts of the west coast of Europe enumerated above differ widely
in tectonic importance. The patches in the Cotentin, the deposits of the
lower Loire, as well as those of the Tagus, and those along the Portuguese
coast around Cape St. Vincent, we consider to be parts of the old Atlantic
coast or of the Atlantic sea-fioor. The depressions of the Gironde and the
Guadalquivir, on the other hand, correspond to the course of tyo great



291


CH. IV] ATLANTIC BAYS

mountain chains and conceal the junction between these and their fore-
land. However great may be the significance of the Straits of Gibraltar
as regards the existing physical geography of our continent, yet they do not
enter into the scheme of its general structure, and from this point of view
may be regarded merely as an accident of quite subordinate interest.

The close correspondence between the littoral formations of the Atlantic
and the deposits of the Mediterranean compels us from the outset to assume
a free communication during the period they represent between both seas,
and we naturally^ look for it on the two lines of greatest tectonic im-
portance, the Gironde and the Guadalquivir.

Our further study will be greatly facilitated if we now cast a hasty
glance over the younger Tertiary deposits of the north-west of Europe.
A separate treatment of this subject is all the more justified since the
Mediterranean type is only represented in this region in a modified form.

Around the southern part .of the North Sea remains of fiatdying beds
are to be seen, which represent the period of the first and probably of the
second Mediterranean stage. The outlines of the areas over which they
are at present distributed depend, however, solely on the degree of denuda-
tion to which these low lands have since been exposed. They form, as
appears from the investigations of Dumont and Beyrich, a broad arc open
to the north-east, which extends from the island of Sylt towards Antwerp,
and includes the lower course of the Elbe, the Weser, the Ems, the Rhine,
and their estuaries, as well as the mouth of the Scheldt \ Of this great
curve the eastern and western parts are still fairly complete, but
the southern part, to which the marine deposits of Osnabriick and Bunde
are to be assigned, is full of gaps ; still the position of these denudation
remains is such that they may be easily recognized as a series of successive
margins to a basin. The estuaries of the great rivers, which flow into the
North Sea, lie at the bottom of this basin, which thus coincides with an
existing depression of the land.

No prolongation of this great arc is found however in England.
Hitherto no marine deposits of the first and second Mediterranean stage
have been recognized anywhere in Great Britain; nor are they known
with any degree of certainty in the Cotentin, and the valuable investiga-
tions of Vasseur in the valley of the Loire leave little room for doubt that
they arc not represented there, or at the most only in a highly incomplete
manner and by their very uppermost beds^.

Near Bovey Tracey in Devonshire, on the ridge of the old rocks
which finds its continuation in Brittany, plant-bearing beds occur which

^ Beyrich's general map in the Abhandl. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, 1855, still forms the basis
for a study of this region.

’ G. Vasseur, Recherches gcologiques sur les terrains tertiaires de la France occidentale ;
Ann. des Sciences g^l., 1881, XIll, pp. 1-432, and maps.



292


THE MEDITERRANEAN [paktu

Oswald Heer compares with those previously mentioned as occurring at
Antrim in Ireland : he assigns them to the Aquitanian stage and correlates
them with the deposits of Salzhausen in the Wetterau, the age of which
cannot he greater than the lowest horizon of the first Mediterranean
stage, and may even be a little less. We may thus with Baidsay see in
these deposits a fresh proof of the regression of the sea during the
Miocene period, and of the wide extension of a continent or series of
large islands over the site of the existing North Atlantic Ocean

It is very different in the case of the later deposits. The various
subdivisions of the Belgian and English Crag may be regarded as the
chronological equivalent of the third stage. They appear to the west at
the bottom of the great basin which surrounds the North Sea on the
south, cross from Antwerp to Norfolk and Suffolk, lie transgressively in
the low lands of the east of England, in particular on the Eocene
London clay, and appear, also as clay with Noam priamaiica, as encroach-
ments in the Cotentin and the bay of the Loire
Two facts are here especially worthy of note.

. First, we may observe that the English Crag contains a large admixture
of northern speciea They increase in number in the upper beds ; but even
at the base of the lowest division, the Coralline Crag, Prestwich came
across a great block of porphyry, which he regarded as a proof that
transport by means of ice had already taken place in these latitudes at
the beginning of this period. If, therefore, in the case of the Mediterranean,
the introduction of Arctic species is to be regarded as indicative of the
beginning of the fourth stage, we must either admit that such species
appeared earlier in the north or else place the whole of the Crag in the
fourth stage. '•

Secondly, the Crag deposits, both of England and Belgium, in spite of
their horizontal stratification and their trifling height above the present
sea-level, show distiriSt signs of repeated fluctuations of the strand-line.
Owing to the horizontal position of the strata large areas must have been
laid dry by these oscillations. In Suffolk the Bed Crag lies in eroded
valleys of the older White or Coralline Crag, and also surrounds blocks of
the latter, which have been left standing like islands.

The Eocene deposits play a prominent part in the structure of the

* W. Pengelly, The Lignites and Clays of Bovey Tracey, Devonshire, Phil. Trans.
1863, CLII, pp. 1019-1038, 3 pL, and 0. Heer, On the Fossil Flora of Bovey Tracey,
tom. cit., pp. 1039-1086, 17 pi. ; Anther, Ramsay, Physical Geography and Oeology of
Great Britain, 8vo, 1878, pp. 259, 354.

* From the abundant literature on this subject I will only mention J. Prestwich, On
the Structure of the Crag-Beds of Norfolk and Suffolk, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1871,
XXVII, pp. 115-146, 325-856, and 452-496, and E. Van den Broeck, Esquisse g4ologique
et paleontologique des depots pliocbnes des environs d’ Anvers, M4m. de la Soc. Malacol.
Belg., 1874, IX, pp. 83-371.



OH. iv] GUADALQUIVIR 293

south-east of England, and they appear not only in Belgium but also in the
Cotentin and in the islands at the mouth of the Loire, which are formed by
the Calcaire grossier ; in the Oligocene period again the sea advanced in a
still more extensive transgression, forming a long gulf extending from the
Atlantic Ocean to Rennes, and spreading its deposits, as the sands of
Fontainebleau, far beyond the limits of the Paris basin ; on the other hand,
during the first Mediterranean stage we observe a regression of the waters
as far as the Loire. Later still many districts which had hitherto lain
dry were again covered by the sea, and signs of a cold period steadily
growing more distinct make their appearance.

Guadalquivir, The great mountain cores of western and central
Europe bear on their shoulders large patches of fresh-water deposits
which prove that these heights were not covered during the various
extensions of the Mediterranean we are about to discuss. On the
summit of the Spanish Meseta middle Tertiary fresh-water limestones and
marls, sometimes accompanied by gypsum, extend in horizontal beds and
still cover a very considerable part of the surface of the peninsula. In
like manner there appear on the Central Plateau of France, chiefly in the
upper basin of the Loire, Tertiary deposits of various age, which have all
been formed in fresh water. These are accompanied by a diversified series
of volcanic rocks. So too on the Bohemian mass, at the foot of the
Erzgebirge, we see, similarly accompanied by volcanic rocks, a series of
coal-bearing Tertiary deposits, which have been formed exclusively in
fresh water ; the mammalian remains which these enclose leave no room
for doubt that chronologically they also include the first and second
Mediterranean stage. In the same way Hgnitiferous Tertiary beds appear
in the south of Bohemia ; the age of these, however, is no doubt somewhat
more recent.

Large regions may thus be distinguished at once as forming part of the
ancient continent. On the borders of these regions and to the south of
them occur the marine deposits which we now propose to study; some-
times, but only very rarely, they present themselves as true littoral
deposits. Sometimes they rest horizontally against steep mountain slopes,
either as patches isolated by erosion, or again as sheets underlying
broad plains, but frequently also they are thrust against the outer zones
of the mountain chains, and are exposed as the basset edges of erect
strata, thus bearing witness to the remarkable fact that our great existing
mountain chains are in large part of so recent an origin as to have been
once submerged by these later extensions of the Mediterranean Sea.

We now must enter into a multiplicity of detailed observations in
order to discover the main features of the successive extensions of the
Mediterranean.

In the south-west of Spain a large tract of marine deposits, which



294


THE MEDEPEBRANEAN


[part n

correspond to the first, second, and third Mediterranean stages, extends
into the land from the Atlantic Ocean, and at the place where the most
recent of these stages emerges from the sea there stand, near the town
of Huelva, on an ever memorable spot, the ruins of the Franciscan
monastery, Nuestra Seftora de la Babida, where on August 8, 1492,
Christopher Columbus embarked in search of a new world. Here we
will begin.

The arrangement of the Mesozoic strata in the south of Portugal makes
it probable, as we have already said, that the existing outline of the
continent corresponds to that of the Meseta. Ribeiro’s map shows a
Mesozoic girdle, running from west to east, through the whole of Algarve
to the mouth of the Guadiana. Near Ayamonte a last fragment of Trias
is to be seen, and the edge of the Meseta then advances eastwards into
the interior, while to the south the Tertiary bay opens over Huelva,
Xeres, Cadiz, and Vejer de la Frontera, This is the same bay as that
which I have already spoken of as the bay of the Guadalquivir.

Gonzalo y Tarin has shown how the marginal belt of marine Miocene
beds, characterized by great oysters and large species of the genus
Clypeaster, leans against the foot of the Meseta, while more to the south
younger beds with Voluta Lamherti, representing the third Mediterranean
stage, occur and extend past Huelva and La Palma towards the province
of Seville

The base of the first stage is represented by the Orbitoides limestone,
which MaePherson discovered on the margin of the Meseta in Seville^,
while Mallada has traced the Calcaire grossier containing large oysters and
Clypeaster along the valley of the Guadalquivir, across the province of
Cordoba, as far as Jaen \ Vemeuil long ago recognized isolated patches
of the same beds in the upper parts of the valley, even as far as the
vicinity of Alcaraz in western Murcia, and concluded from this, as early
as 1853, that in the Tertiary period an arm of the sea must have extended
across the present continent, and separated the Sierra Nevada, together
with the Sierra de la Sagra, the Sierra de Segura, and the mountains
of Jaen, from the Meseta, which was then covered with fresh-water lakes ^

^ Gonzalo j Tarin, Descripcion geoldgica de la Provincia de Huelva ; Bol. Com. Mdpa
Geol. Esp., 1878, V, pp. 75, 81, 87.

* MaePherson, Provincia de Sevilla, op. cifc., 1879, VI, p. 252.

’ L. Mallada, op. cit., 1880, VII, p. 48.

^ De Vemeuil et Collomb, Coup d’oeil sur la constitution g4ologique de quelquea
provinces de I'Espagne, Bull. Soc. g^l. de Pr., 1853, 2® s^r., X, pp. 78, 79; and by
the same. Geologic du Sud-Est de I’Espagne, op. cit., 1865, 2® ser., XIII, p. 716 et seq.
D'Archiac pointed out as early as 1849 that the Castilian Plateau, with a mean height
of 682 meters, and the tableland of Auvergne, of only 339 meters, had both remained
above the level of the sea which surrounded them : Histoire des progr^s de la ge6l., II,
2® partie, p. 841. •



CH. iv] GUADALQUIVIR 296

These marine deposits, however, frequently extend either as large
sheets or small patches into the mountains lying to the south of the
Guadalquivir. Among the fossils collected by Drasche between the city
of Granada and the Sierra Nevada, close to the foot of the mountains,
T. Fuchs has recognized a Pecten characteristic of the Schio beds, that is,
the lowest part of the first stage, while in the Lithothamnium limestone
of Escuzar Pecten Zitteli is found, which is now regarded as belonging to
the base of the second stage \

According to Gonzalo y Tarin these deposits have taken part in the
great mountain foldings of the district, although they lie transgressively
on the older rocks. The distribution of the patches shows that they once
extended over the whole region of the Alpujarras in the south-west of
the Sierra Nevada, and they also occur near Ugijar in the south of the
high mountains

Vemeuil observed them up to a height of 1,200 meters.

We must, therefore, conclude that the Atlantic and the Mediterranean
were united through the bay of the Guadalquivir during the existence
of the first, and probably also of the second stage. The northern shore
may be traced along the southern foot of the Meseta, far inland from the sea ;
but the southern margin of the bay cannot be determined, since subsequent
mountain movements have completely altered the structure of the land.
There can Jiowever be no doubt that parts of the existing Cordillera,
to the south of the Guadalquivir, still formed the sea fioor, and the
communication between the two seas was established in all probability
not only across the upper courae of the Guadalquivir and the adjacent
parts of Murcia, but also over that region which is now occupied by the
Alpujarras, as well as other places.

At the same time we must not overlook the fact that repeatc<l
oscillations of a subordinate nature are indicated by the intercalation of
fresh-water deposits within the marine series, as, for instance, in the south
part of the valley of the Geniel (Granada). The same phenomenon recurs
along the east coast, for instance near Barcelona, where the greater part
of the marine deposits probably belong to the second stage.

At the time of the third stage -a communication of the ocean with the
Mediterranean along the line of the Guadalquivir did not exist or has
not yet been recognized

Chironde. The great low-lying area which proceeds from the Atlantic

^ R. V. Drasche, Geologische Skizze des Hochgebirges der Sierra Nevada, Jahrb. geol.
Reichsanst., 1879, XXIX, pp. 113, 115; also Silvertop, Proc. Geol. Soc., 1834, p. 216;
Ansted, op. cit., XV, p. 585. *

* Gonzalo y Tarin, Provincia de Granada; Bol. Com. Mapa Geol. Esp., 1881, VllI, p. 78
et seq.

^ Op. cit., p. 83; further, I. Gombau and A. M. Alcibar, Provincia de Taimgona, op.
cit., 1877, IV, p. 237.



296


THE MEDITEERANEAN [paoth

between the northern border of the Pyrenees and the estuary of the
Gironde resembles that of the Guadalquivir in the chief features of its
structure. Here, as there, the northern edge is formed by the southern
slopes of an old mountain core, there of the Iberian Meseta, here of the
Central Plateau of France ; and here, as there, the southern jboundaiy is
furnished by the folded foot of a mountain chain. Here, again, as there,
it is utterly impossible to reconstruct the southern shore of the ancient
ocean; and unfortunately in the Gironde the marine deposits which we
have to trace lie so flat, are of such a trifling thickness, and have sufiered
so much from denudation, that we can only make the vaguest conjectures
even as regards the north.

Let us first consider the immediate neighbourhood of Bordeaux.

As early as 1848 it was well recognized by Baulin, and the fact was
confirmed by Toumouer in an admirable work published in 1862, that
the arrangement of the various marine Tertiary beds in this district is
such that we meet successively older beds as we approach the Central
Plateau, and more recent as we proceed towards the ocean. Thus the older
Molasse lies in the valley of the Dordogne and the Oligocene ‘calcairo
a ast^ries ' chiefly in the region of the Garonne ; the older divisions of the
Mediterranean faluns, so rich in mollusca, find their typical development
to the south-west of the city of Bordeaux ; but the youngest division
presents its most characteristic exposures far out in the plain, in the
midst of the sand of the Landes, near Salles, on the river Leyre *.

The Oligocene deposits resemble more nearly those of the southern
Alps than of the lower Loire and the Seine; they preserve still to a
certain degree south European characters, and conclude with fresh-water
beds. The marine deposits which overlie them are also separated from each
other by intercalated fresh- water beds. Above the ‘calcaire k ast^ries' lies
the first fresh- water horizon ; then follow the marine faluns of Bazas and
Merignac ; another fresh- water horizon is followed by the marine faluns
of L^ognan, this again by a fresh- water horizon, to which finally succeeds
the youngest faluns, those of Salles.

The faluns of Bazas and Merignas should perhaps be correlated with
the lowest part of the first stage ; the correspondence of the faluns of
Ldognan with the deposits of Gaudendorf and Eggenburg, i.e. with
the middle and upper members of the first stage, was pointed out many
years ago by M. Hoemes, and in like manner T. Fuchs has demonstrated
the complete agreement of the mollusca of the faluns of Salles with those
of the deposits of the second Mediterranean stage in the depression of
the Vienna basing

^ Tournougr, Note Btratigraphique et paleontologique sur les faluns du departement
de la Gironde ; Bull. Soc. g4ol. de Fr., 1862, 2* ser., XIX, p. 1038.

* T. Fuebs, Der* Falun von Salles* und die sogenannte *jtlngere Medite^ranstufe ’



GIRONDE


297


CH. nr]

If we leave this region and turn inland towards Lot-et-Garonne and
Gers, we shall find the marine deposits rapidly thinning out, while the
isolated extra-marine intercalations of the neighbourhood of Bordeaux
continuously increase in importance towards the south-east, and finally,
as has been shown in detail by Linder, are superposed upon each other,
retaining their individuality, although no longer separated by marine
beds

Some patches of marine deposits of the second stage which have
escaped destruction still occur, however, near Sos and Eauze, not far
from the boundary of the two departments referred to above, and about
120-130 kilometers distant from the sea 2 . Still further to the south
we find the continuation of these beds at the foot of the Pyrenees.
There to the east of Bayonne they are arranged in the same way as in
the neighbourhood of Bordeaux, so that the younger members of the
series succeed each other in the^ direction of the plain. The older Tertiary
deposits are followed by the faluns of Gaas, which are the equivalents
of Castel Gomberto ; the first Mediterranean stage is represented by the
faluns of St. Paul, north of Dax, and St. Avit near Mont do Marsan, and
these are succeeded by the faluns of Saubrigues and St. Jean de Marsac,
which belong to the second stage, and are consequently the continuation
of the faluns of Salles, Eauze, and Sos K East of these localities the foot
of the Pyrenees is covered with detritus.

The marine deposits disappear towards the interior ; in the department
of Gers and towards Toulouse fresh- water deposits broaden out ; notwith-
standing the existence of the first and second stages near Bordeaux as well
as west of Bayonne, and notwithstanding their evidently deep penetration
into the land, we are precluded, by reason of the great development of the
fresh-water deposits which continues to tlie final exclusion of the marine,
from assuming for the present an ancient communication over this area
between the Mediterranean and the Atlantic. •

Many years ago Tournouer regarded the line of the Guadalquivir, the


des Wiener Beckens; Verhandl. geol. Reichaanst., 1874, pp. 105-111. Even if it should be
found that the faluns of Bazas-Merignac correspond to the depoaita of Molt, nevertheleaa
a charaoteriatic member of the firat stage at Vienna would be wanting in the Gironde,
namely tne beds of Loiberadorf with Cardium Kubecki,

^ Linder, Dea depdta lacuatroa du vallon de Saucata, Actea de la Soc. linn, de
Bordeaux, 1872, XXVII, pp. 451-525 ; also earlier, R. Tournouer, Sur .Page gdologique
des mollaaaea de TAgenaia, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1869, 2® aer., XXVI, pp. 983-1023.

* V. Raulin, Aper 9 U aur Torographie, la geologic et la hydrographie do la
France, in Dechambre, Diet, encycl. dea aciences medic., 8vo, Faria, 1879, p. 349, and
elsewhere.

* J. Delboa, Esaai d’une description g^ologique du baasin de TAdour, 4to, Bordeaux,
1854, and elsewhere ; for the age of Saubrigues see also Benoist, L*etage Tortonien dans
la Gironde, •Actea Soc. linn. Bordeaux, 1878, XXXII, pp. Ixxxv-xo.



298 THE MEDITEERAHEAN [paot h

Andaliman straits as he called it, as the sole channel of communication
between the ancient Mediterranean and the ocean, and this view has
received confirmation from later researches.

This result is the more remarkable since in the region of the Loire, to
the east of the older rocks of Brittany, a vast lobe of marine deposits
belonging to the second stage occupies the land. These are the faluns
of Touraine, which extend beyond Blois, while the region of the Seine
was not invaded by this extension of the sea^. The faluns of Pont-
Levoy in Touraine correspond with those of Salles and Saubrigues, but the
communication of this part of the sea with the ocean was not by way of
the north, the east, nor the lower Loire, but probably over Poitiers. No
doubt a very extensive erosion of these readily destroyed deposits has
taken place.

The bay of the Gironde must thus be regarded, not as an ancient strait
of the Mediterranean, but solely as an Atlantic gulf, from which the sea
repeatedly retired, only to return to it again. The first stage is represented
by marine deposits ; the second stage extended over a very large area, and
it may even be supposed that at this time the sea reached as far as the
Loire. Deposits of the third stage have not been observed in this region.

Rhone. As the valley of the Guadalquivir and that of the Loire opened
into the waters of the Atlantic, so the present valley of the Rhone opened
into the western Mediterranean. Near Montpellier a diversified series of
younger Tertiary deposits rests against the southern border of the Central
Plateau, and marine deposits of the first, second, and third stage penetrate
from the mouth of the Rhone far north into the land. A knowledge of
this region is of great importance in the study of the history of the
Mediterranean, and we possess, apart from older works, a series of excellent
monographs by F. Fontannes, which afford us a clear insight into the
subject \

It must be observed first that the valley of the Rhone below Lyons,
which might more correctly be termed the valley of the lower Saone,
shows the same features in its general structure as those which we have
already met with on the Guadalquivir and the Gironde. Here again
one side of the valley is formed by an ancient mountain core and the
other by the folded border of a mountain chain, in this case the Alps.
But it must be observed here that the deposits of the first, and, according
to Fontannes’ sections, also of the second stage, although to a great extent

^ R. Tournou€r, Sur les d^pdts d'eau douce du bassin de la Garonne, correspondant au
calcaire de Beauce et aux sables de TOrleannais, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1867, 2* s4r., XXIV,
in particular p. 486; and by the same, Sur les lambeaux du terrain tertiaire des environs
de Rennes et de Dinan, op. cit., 1868, 2® s^r., XXV, p. 386 et seq.

‘ F. Fontannes, Etudes stratigraphiques et paleontologiques pour servir h Thistoire de
la periode tertiaire dans le bassin du RhOne, 7 parts, Lyons and Paris, 1875-1881.



RHONE


299


C2H.IV]

resting transgressively on patches of Cretaceous, have yet been involved
in the movements of the outer border of the Alps. Towards the Alps
they are steeply upturned, and in some places even inverted^, and we
are thus depiived of the data by which we might determine the eastern
shore of the first and second stage. As regards the third stage, the case is
different, as will appear directly.

About half-way between Lyons and the sea, near Mont^Iimart, the
convex curve of the Alps approaches nearest to the marginal fracture of
the Central Plateau, and precisely at this place there rises a long ridge of
Cretaceous rocks, bordered on the east and west by Tertiary deposits.
This ridge separates the province of Dauphin^ in the north from that of
Provence in the south. The latter is interrupted by the rounded summits
of the Cretaceous mountains.

All three Mediterranean stages extend to the north across the gorge of
Mont^limart and beyond it. TJiey rest on fresh-water beds, the uppermost
of which may possibly belong to the first stage. Upon these follows a
thick scries of marine beds, which Fontannes terms the ‘ Helvdtien ' or
‘ Groupe de Visan.* This group includes the equivalents of Ldognan and
the first Mediterranean stage, but its highest beds, the marls and sands of
Tersanne, Visan, and Cabriferes, represent the second stage. This highest
member presents two different developments. In the south, e.g. near
Cabriferes by Mont Luberon, it is a purely marine deposit, distinguished
by AncUlaria glandiforviis, Cardita Jouannetti, and other characteristic
species, and is compared by Fisher and Toumouer to the faluns of Salles,
while T. Fuchs and Fontannes both recognize a remarkable resemblance to
the beds of Grinzing^. It is therefore certain that this horizon belongs to
the second stage, and that the fresh-water deposits, which elsewhere are
intercalated between the first and second stages, are here unknown. In
the Bas-Dauphin^, on the contrary, and to the north of it, a deposit appears,
which contains at Tersanne (Drome) a fairly large nuiifber of marine species,
but further north furnishes, besides numerous Helices, only a single species
of a smooth-shelled Nassa, N. Michaudi.

The second stage is followed by fresh- water limestone ; above it appear
red clays with the rich mammalian fauna of Cucuron.

The next beds have been deposited under very different conditions.
They are separated from the preceding by a period of erosion, when the
valleys within which they lie were excavated ; they have not shared in
the folding movements of the Alps.

The first member of this second group consists of the remarkable fresh-
^ Fontannes, op. cit., VI, Le bassin de Crest, Fig. 13, p. 47.

* C. Fischer et R. Tournoufir, Invertebres fossiles du Mont Leberon (from Gaudry,
Fischer et Toumouer, Animaux fossiles du Mont Leberon), 4to, Paris, 1873, p. 152 ; Fon-
tannes, ]^tudes, IV, p. 59 ; and in particular Fuchs, Boll. Com. geol. d'ltal., 1879, pp. 17-19.



800 THE MEDITEBMNEAN [part ii

water beds of Boll^ne, with Melanopsis, Cardium, and Congeria; their
resemblance to the extensive fresh- water deposits of eastern Europe was first
pointed out by E. Mayer. Then follow the marls with Naosa semistriata
as the marine representatives of the third stage, after these again land and
fresh-water deposits. The beds with Mastodon avemensia are still more
recent.

Thus the valley of the Rhone also exhibits a long series of alternating
marine and extra-rmarine strata. The limit between the first and second
stages is not, as in so many other places, marked by an extra-marine inter-
calation ; towards the north, however, the second stage is only indicated
by the littoral beds with Naaaa Michaudi and land-shells. Between the
second and third stage, on the other hand, so important a regression of the
sea occurred, that the excavation of valleys followed, and it is possible that
great tectonic changes along the border of the Alps took place in this
period. The Congeria beds of Boll&ne are, the first which were deposited
in these new valleys. I must, however, confess that I am still in some
doubt as to the position occupied in this classification by the mammali-
ferous red clay of Cucuron ; it appears to be neither a marine nor a purely
fresh- water formation, but, as in many other places, a sort of Terra roaaa,
which is in the main subaerial, the action of streams, if concerned at all,
being restricted to its final accumulation ; it is the residue left by solution
on limestone plateaux which have been exposed for a long time to the
action of the atmosphere. Of this nature are the red clays of the Karst,
the red breccias in the joints of the limestone of many islands in the
Mediterranean, and probably also the red clay of Pikermi, near Athens \

The three stages of the Mediterranean penetrate into the land in the
following manner : —

The first stage follows the margin of the Alps, takes part in the folding,
but becomes horizontal at a little distance from the mountains. It passes
through Chambery dnd the Lac de Bourget into Switzerland, and finds its
direct continuation in the marine Molasse of the Swiss Alps.

The second stage also appears to take part in the mountain foldings,
but like the first lies flat at a little distance from the Alps. To the
north it is only represented by a littoral deposit rich in land-shells, and
containing Naaaa Michavdi; it extends northwards, together with its
substratum, in small plateaux divided by erosion, as far as the great bend
of the Rhone, near Lyons. But it does not pass as a marine deposit into
the Swiss Alps.

The course of the coast at the time of the third stage has been traced

' The suggestion of Fontannes (IV, pp. 61, 62 in particular) that the OBsiferous layer
of Cucuron is older than the beds with Nasaa aemistriata (third stage) appears to me
to be perfectly correct and in accordance with all that I have observed elsewhere with
regard to beds of this kind.



GH. iv] PIBST MEDITERRANEAN STAGE 801

in great detail by Fontannes through the whole of the south of France ^
Near Perpignan at the eastern end of the Pyrenees it bites like a bay into
the land, extends through Narbonne and Bezi^res, passes around the
promontory of Frontignan and Cette, is then determined by the Cretaceous
ridges of Montpellier and Nimes, and finally penetrates deep into the land
near Avignon. The marine deposits of this stage are known as far as the
P^age-de-Roussillon, south of Vienne. The northern part of the gulf is
narrow and lies, as has already been observed, in the hollows excavated in
the deposits of the first and second stage. The beautiful sections drawn
by Fontannes across the already mentioned Cretaceous ridge of Montdimart,
which extend from the Alps to the border of the Central Plateau, show the
following structure : between the Alps and this ridge, the first and second
stage are bent together in a synclinal, while on the other side of the ridge,
between it and the edge of the Central Plateau, lie the horizontal beds of
the third stage through which flows the existing river Rhone

The east side of the gulf in the third stage was indented by several
bays as in the valley of the Durance ; it reached the present coast near
Martigues.

We now return to Chambery and enter the region of the Alps. Over a great
stretch of country we encounter only the first Mediterranean stage, represented
by marine deposits ; this fact may serve to introduce another method of
treating our subject. We will no longer compare whole regions according
to the distribution of the three stages in them, but will now attempt to
trace each single stage through the several areas in which it occurs.

The first Mediterranean stage. The first stage not only appears in the
outer zone of the Alps, but also in many of the great longitudinal valleys
of the Jura, and has been involved, together with the overlying upper
fresh-water Molasse, in all the great and regular foldings of this chain.
This stage here bears the name of upper marine Molasse or Muschdsandstein.
It occurs, for example, in the Jura of Waadtland near*Locle and La Chaux
de Fonds and contains rolled fragments derived from the lower Cretaceous,
a proof that a part of the- Jura had already risen above the sea before this
period Nevertheless, as a result of folding, it attains near La Chaux de
Fonds a height of 1,040 meters. In the longitudinal valleys of the Bernese
Jura it is accompanied by Nagelflue, the pebbles of which have been derived
from the Vosges or the Schwarzwald \

The thickness of this stage within the Jura is, however, inconsiderable,
and many circumstances testify to the proximity of the coast.

^ Fontannes, Note sur Textension et la faune de la mer pliocene dans lo sad-est de la
France, Bull, Soc. g^ol, de Fr., 1862, 3® sdr., XI, pp. 103-141.

^ Fontannes, Etudes, YI, Le bassin de Crest, pi. A, B, C.

* A. Jaccard, Description gdologique du Jura Vaudois (Mat4r. p. 1. carte gdol. de la
Suisse, VI, 18*69), p. 106 et seq.

* J. B. Gseppin, Le Jura Bemois (Mat4r., VIII, 1870), p. 176.



302


THE MEDITEBRANEAN [part ii

ft

Near Chambety the marine Molaese lies, according to Studer, on the
lower fresh-water Molasse ; at the Lac de Bourget it rests with a steep dip
against the Budistes limestone, as is also the case near Seyssel ^ ; at the
Perte du Bh6ne itself, Benevier descrihes it as lying horizontally on the
Cretaceous *.

We are now in the interior of the Molasse region of Switzerland. The
marine Molasse lies here on the lower fresh-water Molasse, which includes
a marine or hrockish- water deposit, compamhle in age with the faluns of
Bazas near Bordeaux ; above the marine Molasse lies the upper fresh-water
Molasse. The structure of this region has often been remarked upon. The
beds of the Molasse are arched up along the front of the Alps, but at
a little distance from the mountains they become horizontal. The marine
Molasse extends along the whole length of ' the anticlinal of the Molasse,’
leaves Switzerland near Bregenz, and is continued in the direction of
Kempten in Bavaria. Here, too, the northern limb lies horizontally and
is continued across the Lake of Constance towards the edge of the
Swabian Alps.

In the region we are about to describe we see, as in so many
previous cases, on one side the forward thrust border of a mountain chain,
and on the other, first the fault of the Danube, and then the southern
boundary of the Bohemian mass. We have thus a southern (or sub-
Alpine) zone and a northern zone of marine Molasse, while the more
recent formations cover more or less completely the intervening plain;
in this case again the southern zone evidently cannot be regarded as
a coast-line.

The southern zone, according to GUmbel’s observations, runs from
Bregenz through Schefiau, Kempten, Peissenberg, and finally Traunstein,
into the immediate neighbourhood of the Salzach, keeping an almost
constant distance from the limestone Alps ®. It does not appear to cross
into Austria. We have thus established that from Mont Luberon on
the Durance (an east-to-west offshoot from the curve of the Alps), up the
valley of the Bhone past Montdlimart, then past Chambery through
the whole of Switzerland, the Vorarlberg, and the whole of Bavaria,
that is, from the Durance to the Salzach, marine deposits of the first
Mediterranean stage have been involved in a forward movement of the
folded border of the great Alpine chain, which thus itself, at least in
its outer zone, stands on a space which once formed part of the Medi-
terranean Sea.

The northern flat-lying zone of the marine Molasse rests, not on the

' B. Studer, Geologie der Schweiz, II, p. 434.

' E. Renevier, Mdmoire g4ologique sur la Perte du Rhdne ; Denkechr. Schweiz. Natf.
Gea, 1855.

' Gtttnbel, Geognostische Beschreibuog des KCnigsreiches Baiem, I, p. 75& et zeq.



303


OH. IV] FIBST MEDITEBRANEAN STAGE

lower portions of the Tertiary formations, but on much older rocks,
chiefly the Jurassic limestone of the Swabian Alps. It is the continuation
of the zone which is known in Switzerland as the ‘ sub- Jurassic ’ marine
Molasse. On the slopes of the Randen it may be observed, according to
Schill, at a heiglit of more than 800 meters^; in the adjacent volcanic
region of the Hohgau it has been subjected to many disturbances, thence
it proceeds far to the north-east following approximately the foot of
the Alps.

The continuity of its course is often concealed by erosion or by super-
ficial deposits, but it may be distinctly followed up to the edge of the
Bavarian Forest, where it lies sometimes upon Archaean rocks, sometimes
on the patches of Jurassic in the neighbourhood of Passau, as, for
example, at Ortenburg, where it is distinguished by a great abundance of
fossils A series of patches mark its continuation along the margin of
the Bohemian mass, near Linz, Wallsee, Molk, Wiedendorf near Krems,
Griibern, Meissau, Eggenburg, until its last traces disappear near Unter-
Nalb, not far from Betz.

Thus this zone also is known to extend over an extremely great dis-
tance, from Switzerland almost as far as the place where the river Thaya
makes its exit from the ancient mountains into the plain (v. p. 215).

Towards the east its diversity increases to some extent. In the
west, os we have already observed, marine sands rest os a rule
directly on the older rocks ; near Linz the zone is chiefly represented by
white sand, containing remains of Squalodon and other marine mammals ;
but near Molk this white sand is underlaid by clay containing
Cerithium margaritaceum and Odrea fimhriata^ accompanied by
carbonaceous beds, which recall the brackish-water beds underlying
the southern zone in the sub-Alpine region of Switzerland and
Bavaria

Near Meissau in Lower Austria a true littoral formation occurs on the
outer slopes of the Mannhart mountains, and, as M. Hoernes observed many
years ago, sea-acorns may still be seen attached to their wave- worn, rounded,
granite summits. To the west of Meissau, near Horn, a large patch of
these deposits is let down into the older rocks: this is tlie so-called
‘basin of Horn,* the structure of which exhibits the greatest diversity
and complexity. The substratum consists here of the brackish-watcr beds
of Molt containing Cerithium margaritaceum ; these correspond to the coal-
bearing deposits of Molk. They are covered by the sand of Loibersdorf , con-

' J. Schill, Die tert. u. quart. Bildungen des Landes am n5rdl. Bodensee u. im HChgau,
8vo, Stuttg., 1858, pp. 33, 102, et passim.

* Gdmbel, op. cit., II, p. 784.

• F. Posepny, Oligocane Schichten bei Pielach nachst Melk ; .Tahrb. geol. Reichsanst.,
1865, XIV, Verhandl., p. 165. 1 have also met with fragments of Cyrena at this place.



804


THE MEDITEERANEAN


[part II

tainingthe great Gardinm KUbecki^ and the other types already mentioned
as recalling American species ; a horizon of trifling thickness and containing
many Oligocene species has been recognized as far as Transylvania, but
up to the present has not been observed in western Europe. The next
liorizon is that of Gaudemdorf, which is strictly comparable to the marine
Molasse of St. Gallon, and on this rest the more littoral formations of
Eggenburg and Meissau.

The southern zone terminates on the Salzach, while the northern zone
extends nearly as far as the Thaya.

Some traces of the first Mediterranean zone occur still further to the
north, but they are isolated and not distinctly characterized. The only
certain indication of its presence on the outer side of the Carpathians
occurs not far from Mautnitz, near Seelowitz, in the north of Moravia^,
where the horizon of Gaudemdorf and perhaps that of Eggenburg are
to be seen. In the beds overlying the Carboniferous region of Ostrau
the former of these horizons also appears to be represented, and
beneath it lie basaltic tuffs with great marine shells resembling those of
Loibersdorf.

To the north of these coal-fields and further along the whole border of
the Carpathians I know at present of no other certain indication of the
presence of the first stage.

Thus it appears that in this first phase of transgression the Mediter-
ranean extended up to the southern edges of the great horsts of western
Europe, and that one of its arms, the breadth of which we cannot now
even approximately deteniiine, embraced the whole region now occupied by
the chief range of the Alps. Against the Swiss and Bavarian Alps we
meet only the outcropping ends of upturned strata ; towards the north the
border of the Rauhe-Alp and the southern edge of the Bohemian mass
appear to have nearly coincided with the old coast-line, but brackish
deposits are introduced in the direction of the Rhine valley, and the horizon
of the Cerithium limestone of Mainz which lies beneath them must be
regarded as the chronological equivalent of the whole, or at least of the
lower part of the first Mediterranean stage. It appears, however, not only
in the bottom of the Rhine valley, but also as an isolated patch near
Darmstadt. Such patches serve to strengthen the supposition that the
Tertiary deposits, now visible near Mainz, must once have been far more
extensive, and that the great trough fault of the Rhine is more recent than
these deposits^. —

It is not necessary to trace in detail the distribution of the first
Mediterranean stage further to the south. For the questions which

^ Untersuchungen iiber den Charakter der dsterreichischen Terti&rablagerungen ;
Sitzungsber. Akad. Wigs. Wien, 1866, LIV, 1. Abth., pp. 87-152.

^ On this point cf. R. Lepsius, Das Mainzer Becken, 4to, 1883, p. 113, et passim.



THE ANATOLIAN CONTINENT


305


CBt iv]

concern us here, suffice it to say that the presence of this stage in many
localities in that direction furnishes evidence to show that the extension of
the sea in the south of Europe, and in a great part of the existing Mediter-
ranean area, was very considerable. Yet the first stage has not, so far as I anjL
aware, been observed on the inner faulted margin of the Carpathians, neither
is it known to exist in the subsided basin of Vienna, between the Flysch
zone and the Leitha mountains, nor along the fractured margin of the Alps
near Guns and Graz ; nor is it to be seen in the sunken areas on the inner side
of the Apennines. On the other hand, it occurs in many places within the
Hungarian plain ; near Korod, in IVansylvania, the beds of Loilxjrsdorf are
again met with. It is widely distributed in the south of Styria and Camiola,
where it is thrown into great folds, which strike from east to west.

The beds of Schio and the greensand of Belluno in the southern Alps
belong to the first stage ; to it also we must refer the serpentinous sands of
Turin and the limestones of Monte Titano on the outer side of the Apennines,
as well as the lower beds of the island of Malta.

It is known to occur in Corsica and Sardinia, and also along the
Algerian coast. Among the fossils collected by Lenz in Morocco, T. Fuchs
has identified Fecten Beudanti, a characteristic form of the first stage.
The specimen was obtained in the district of the Tertiary salt deposits
of Fezh

We may now leave the west and turn to a series of observations made
in the east which throw an unexpected light on the past history of the
Mediterranean.

In the region of the Black sea, the sea of Marmara, and the Aegean,
no trace of the first Mediterranean stage has hitherto been found, llumclia
and Anatolia formed then, and even in much later times, as will be
shown later, a compact continental mass. The ancient extension of the
Mediterranean was felt, however, on the southern and eastern l)order of
this land, and has left its traces in highly fosfliliferous |)atches and
fragments which, isolated by recent mountain movements and erosion,
are met with resting on older rocks, sometimes at astonishing altitudes. It
is not always possible from the published information to distinguish
whether a particular patch belongs to the first or second stage, but there is
no doubt that both stages are represented in this region.

These patches are first met with in Earia, near the village of Germano,
on the southern slope of the chain of the Lida, to the east of the island of
Kos ; they are continued towards the north-east through a scries of localities
and still further inland ; in the same direction a fragment of richly fossili-
ferous marine Mediterranean beds is met with on the summit of the Davas

' 0. Lenz, BeitrS.ge zur Kenntniss der TertiSlrbildungen in Nord- und Westafrika;
Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1883, p. 229.


X



306 THE MEDITEKRAHEAN [pAran

Dagh., at a height of over 1,360 meters, resting transgressively on upturned
older strata. This deposit was discovered by Tchihatcheff and subsequently
described by him ^

. A second group of these patches is known in southern Lycia. Spratt
and Forbes have found them in four places; the first lies near Arsa on
the left bank of the Xanthus, the second near Saaret in the neighbour*
hood of Antiphellus, more than 800 meters above the sea, the third near
Gendever on the west side of the valley of Kassabar at a height of 900
meters, and the fourth, finally, near Armutli, at the southern extremity of
the tableland of Armali, at a height of 2,000 meters Tchihatcheff has
found some traces even much further to the north-east, on the other side of
this tableland, near Tshobansa.

In Cilicia Petraea these deposits become continuous; according to
Tchihatcheff, they extend along the valley of the Gueuk-su from the sea-
coast to beyond Ermenek, they then pass afx)und the chain of Topguedik
Dagh, formed of ancient rocks, and attain, near Boyalar,not far from Kara*
man, a height of 1,318 meters. From Earaman onwards they surround on
the south-east the older formations, and extend along the coast between
Tarsus and Adana ^

The Mediterranean deposits of the neighbourhood of Tarsus are dis-
tinguished by their wide distribution and their richness in organic remains.
Russegger observed them many years ago, and traced them along the upper
tributaries of the Saihun, far into the mountains. Fossils were found
in especial abundance near the village of Hudh on the east side of the
Bulgar Dagh*.

The Mediterranean beds are not confined even to this extensive region.
Tchihatcheff ’s laborious travels h^ve revealed the presence of isolated
fragments far in the interior of the country, and in surprising proximity
to the shore of the Fontus.

Far to the north, *to the east of Tokat, between Alus and Terzi, on
the upper course of the Jeshil-Irmak (here Derekojun-Su), sandstone and
yellowish limestone with Pecten pUmecoslatvs and Anomia costata are
found. Further to the east, to the south of Enderes, a larger patch of
these deposits occurs; Pecten flanecoitatua and Pecten ecahrMvs have
been collected here. To the south-east of this place the same beds reappear
on the upper course of the Euphrates, but it must be particularly noticed

' P. de Tchihatcheff, Agio Mineure, IV* partie, G^ologie, III, 8vo, 1869, pp. 15-20 ;
also Bull. Soc. gcol. de Fr., 1854, XI, p. 393.

* T. A. B. Spratt and E. Forbes, Travels in Lycia, Hilyas, and the Cibytatis, 8vo, 1847,
II, pp. 169-175 ; cf. below, note 1, page 316, on some of the points mentioned.

’ Tchihatcheff, op. cit., IV, 3, pp. 27-60.

* J. Russegger, Reise in Griechenland, IJnter-Egypten, im nCrdl. Syrien und sfldOstl.
Kleinasien, 8vo, 1843, II, pp. 607, 628, et passim ; by the same, Geognost. Earte des
Taurus, fol., Wien, 1842.



xm. iv] THE PIEST MEDITERRANEAN STAGE 307

that, in spite of their close proximity to the Black sea, they still remain
separated from it by a mighty chain of mountains K

We have thus no reason to doubt that the eastern part of Asia Minor
has suffered great changes of configuration at a comparatively recent period,
and that the Mediterranean once covered a great part of this region.
The beds at Hudh, although lying far inland, must be assigned, according
to the list of fossils published by F. v. Hauer, to the second stage * ; the more
northerly exposures belong, in my opinion, to the first stage. —

Surprising as these facts are in themselves, their full significance was
not perceived until the exhaustive researches of Abich had made clear the
leading features in the structure of Armenia, Azerbijan, and the Caucasian
isthmus. From these researches we learn that the fossiliferous beds of
the first Mediterranean stage, in the southern part of this region also, were
broken, up and carried to great heights by recent mountain movements ;
they extend in the region pf the Euphrates from the neighbourhood
of the pass of Sipinkbr, north of Erzinghan, to beyond Mamachutun
in the country of Terjan (west of Erzerum). They do not, however, reach
the Armenian plateau, north of the Araxes, on which only Oligocene
deposits have hitherto been observed, but they are prolonged to the south-
east, and attain a considerable development on the islands of Lake Urmia
and its shores, where they lie unconformably on Palaeozoic rocks

From this region the Mediterranean marine deposits extend far over
the Iranian plateau, and Fuchs, from an examination of Tietze's collections,
has been led to recognize the presence of the lower part of the first stage
in the Siakuh mountains to the south-east of Teheran

Fuchs expressly points out that the assemblage of Mollusca from the
Siakuh mountains still bears the stamp of a Mediterranean Tertiary fauna.
Tchihatcheff has shown that not even the most northerly of these deposits
stands in any connexion with the shores of the Black Sea ; in the same
way Tietze points out that neither these beds nor the salt deposits of the
southern side, of which we shall speak directly, have been observed on the
Caspian slopes of the Alburz ® —

The Oligocene beds of the horizon of Castel Qomberto are known to

* Tchihatcheff, tom. cit., pp. 95, 97, 101, 110.

* F. V. Hauer in HaidingeFs Berichte fiber Mittheil. d. Freunde d, Naturwiss. Wien,
1848, IV, pp.311, 312.

* H. Abich, Ueber den Steinsalz u. seine geol. Stellung im russ. Armcnien, M4m. Acad.
P^tersb., 1857, 6® s^r., VII, pp. 61-150, 10 pi., and in particular Geol. Forschungen in-
den kaukas. LS.ndern, II, Geol. des armenischen Hochlandes, 4to, 1882, pp. 210-327.

* T. Fuchs, Ueber die von Dr. E. Tietze aus Persien mitgebrachten Tertiftrverstein-
erungen, Denkschr. Akad. Wien, 1879, XLI, pp. 99-108, 6 pL, and Sitzungsber., 1880,
LXXXI, pp. 97-100, and plate.

^ E. Tietze, Bemerk. fiber die Tektonik des Albursgebirges ; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanat.,
1877, XXVII, p. 414.



308 THE MEDITEBSAKEAN [PABiif

occur in the West Indies ; they reappear in the south of Europe'; and
Abich has observed them in Armenia.

In the same way, the first Mediterranean stage extends from the
Azores and Madeira to Europe and even to Persia. It penetrates from the
Atlantic coast into the gulf of the Qaronne between the Central Plateau
and the northern foot of the Pyrenees, without, it would appear, reaching
the present rejg^on of the Mediterranean by this path. On the other hand,
it advances up the Andalusian strait between the Betic Cordillera and the
Iberian Meseta, and there may also have been a more southerly path of
communication by Fez. The sea approached the Central Plateau of France
from the south, extended into the region now occupied for the greater
part by the Jura mountains, probably continued towards the north, where
the subsidence of the Rhine valley now lies, as a brackish-water extension,
washed against the foot of the Swabian Alps and the Jurassic limestone of
Passau, surrounded the Bohemian mass, and following first the outer slopes
of the Mannhart, and then the foot of the Devonian mountains north
of Briinn, reached the northern confines of Moravia.

Great changes have taken place since that time ; from the gulf of Lyons
almost to Salzburg, the deposits of the first stage are folded into the
forward moved margin of the Alps, and so stupendous has been the
transformation of the mountains that at present we can recognize only
a few isolated features of the configuration then existing. We can, never-
theless, perceive that the sea' extended eastwards as far as Transylvania,
and its deposits are represented in the coastal range of northern Africa,
in Italy, Sicily, and Malta; but they are entirely absent in the Balkan
peninsula, the Pontus, and the western part of Asia Minor.

On the south side of Asia Minpr they appear again, and have been
traced northwards in isolated fragments as far as the valley of the Jeshil-
Irmak and the upper course of the Euphrates, and thence over Lake Urmia
into the Iranian tableland.

To whatever extent our knowledge of this subject may be increased
or completed in matters of detail, yet owing to the efforts of the numerous
observers already mentioned, one fact at least has been definitely established,
namely, that at the period during which our marine fauna for the first time
assumed in its main features the character of the existing fauna of the
Mediterranean, this sea included the present region of the Alps, and
extended to the east far beyond Teheran.

We will now trace the steps by which the Mediterranean passed from
this first phase to its present condition.

The Schlier. The period we are about to discuss is one of the most
remarkable episodes in the past history of the Mediterranean. The first
great extension, with its diversified deposits of clays, sands, and calcareous
sediments, bearing witness to a complete sorting out. of the stratified



CM. iv!] THE SGHLIER 809

material, has passed away, and in its place there exists a sea, wherein is laid
down, over extraordinarily wide areas, a uniform bluish-grey mud, often
strewn through with little flakes of mica. Subsequent changes have
converted this mud into a marly, scarcely plastic ‘ molasse,’ sometimes some-
what shaly, sometimes compact and hard, which is known in Upper
Austria as the * Schlier.* Over the district from Upper Austria to Qalicia,
great lenticular masses of cleanly-washed loose gravel are intercalated in
this ^molasse ’ ; in the Apennines similar intercalations of serpentinous sand
occur. True limestones are entirely wanting; on the other hand, the
Schlier is often accompanied by iodine-bearing or magnesian springs, beds
of gypsum or rock-salt, and, indeed, near Kalusch, at the northern foot of
the Carpathians, even by those potash salts which are a product of sea-
water in a very advanced stage of concentration.

This horizon is everywhere marked by the same fauna, which possesses
a very peculiar character. Atnria AtuH, Sclenoniya Doederleini, Axinus
angulatus, Pecten denvdatus] Spatangus av^triacus are among the most
characteristic forms; corals are almost exclusively represented by simple
forms ; sometimes vast numbers of Pteropod shells are met with.

It is strange that this important horizon of the Tertiary formation,
which is distinguished by so many constant characters, should have escaped
the notice of the older observers.

In 1852 C. Ehrlich, of Linz, described the Schlier of Ottnang in Upper
Austria^. In the following year M. Hoernes published a list of the Mollusca
of Ottnang, which he considered in all essential respects as identical with those
of the ‘ tegel ’ [brick-clay] of Baden near Vienna, that is, of the deep-water
deposits of the second Mediterranean stage In the year 1866 I identifled
the bluish-grey marl containing fish scales, which occurs in the extra-
Alpine basin of Vienna, with the Schlier of Ottnang, and I was able to
show that the latter is an independent member of the Tertiary formation,
deposited upon the first Mediterranean stage, and •that the bitter springs
of Laa, in Lower Austria and many other places, are to be attributed to it ;
finally, I ventured to advance the hypothesis that the famous salt deposits
of Wieliczka in the north were also to be referred to this horizon \

Since then the Schlier has been recognized in many other localities in
Austria and Hungary, always distinguished by the same characters. In
1872 T. Fuchs announced the surprising discovery that the Austrian

' C. Ehrlich, Geognost. Wanderungen im Gebiete dcr nord-iistl. Alpen, 8vo, Linz,
1852, p. 72 ; a preliminary list of Foraminifera by Reuss is appended.

* M. Hoernes, Verzeichniss der in Ottnang vorkommend. Versteinerungen, Jahrb.geol.
Beichsanst., 1853, IV, p. 190; also Reuss, Foraminifera von Ottnang, op. cit., 1864, XIV,
Verhandl., p. 20. This group of animals was also treated later by F, Karrer, Ueber
die Foraminiferen des Schlier in NiederOsterr. u. Mahren, Sitzungsber. Akad. Wise. Wien,
1867, LV,pp. 331-349.

• Untersuch. fiber den Charakter der fisterr. Tertifirablag., op. cit., 1866, LIV, p. 127.



310 THE MEDITERRANEAN [part h

Schlier was to be met with in Italy, while not long afterwards he showed
that the mighty Molasse mountains which, in bold masses cut through by
the Reno, form the outer border of the Apennines above Bologna, contain
the same characteristic fossils, such as Aturia Aturi^ Solenortiya Boeder^
leini^ and Pecten denudatus^ and occupy the same tectonic, position as
the Schlier on the outer margin of the Carpathians \ Finally, after a visit
to the islands of Malta and Gozzo in 1876, Fuchs was able to prove that
there, too, argillaceous and marly beds, with Aturia Aturi, Pecten denudatua^
and other characteristic fossils of the Schlier, appear between the first and
second Mediterranean stages \ Then, after the palaeontological researches
of K. Hoemes in the north ^ and of Manzoni in the neighbourhood of
Bologna^ had furnished confirmation of these statements, we were able to
affinn that not only on the northern edge of the eastern Alps, but over
a region extending from the northern border of the Carpathians to
Malta, the Schlier wa^ intercalated between the first and second stages
of the Mediterranean as an independent, peculiar, and uniform stratified
series, distinguished by very remarkable characters

Its extension, according to existing observations, is as follows : —

The Schlier begins in the most easterly parts of Bavaria. It extends in
Upper Austria (where it is covered by the more recent deposits of the
plain) from the border of the Alps up to the edge of the Bohemian mass.
It also forms the basis of the plain still further to the east, from the
southern point of the Bohemian mass to the Alps; it rests, to the east
of Krems, directly upon granite spurs, and near Grubern, to the south of
Meissau, directly upon the uppermost parts of the first Mediterranean stage.

' T. Fuchs, Gool. Studien in den TertiHr.-Bildungen Silditaliens, op. cit., 1872, LXVI,
1. Abth., p. 48; by the same, Die Gliederung der tert. Ablag. am Nordabhange der
Apenninen von Ancona bis Bologna, op. cit., 1875, LXXI, 1. Abth., p. 164. Also
A. Manzoni, Lo Schlier di Ottnang nelF Alta Austria e lo Schlier delle colline di Bologna ;
Boll. Com. Geol. d'ltal., 1876, VII, pp. 122-132, and in many other places.

* T. Fuchs, Das Alter der Terti3.r8chichten von Malta, Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien,
1874, LXX, 1. Abth., pp. 92-102, and Ueber den sog. ' Badner Tegel’ auf Malta, op. cit.,
1876, LXXIII, 1. Abth., pp. 67-73.

’ R. Hoernes, Die Fauna des Schliers von Ottnang; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1875,
XXV, pp. 333-400, pi. x-xv.

^ A. Manzoni, Gli Fchinodermi foss. dello Schlier dello colline di Bologna, Donkschr.
Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1878, XXXIX, pp. 149-164, 4 pL, and Echinod. foss. della Molassa
Serpentinosa, op. cit., 1880, XLII, pp. 185-190, 3 pi.

^ I must here lay particular emphasis on its independence. The Schlier has sometimes
been regarded as a deep-sea formation of the first stage, a view for which 1 know of no
sufficient grounds ; quite recently it has been assigned to the second stage, because it
contains a large number of species belonging to this stage. But just as the fauna living
at present in the Mediterranean comprises elements of various origin, so also do all the
earlier faunas, and the exclusive study of lists of species may easily lead to error. We
must consider the physical characters as a whole, and when we succeed in tracing
a formation over a great space by means of its constant characters it becomes itself the
mark of an independent episode of the past, and must be recorded as such.



THE SCHLIEE


311


OH. IV]

Where the latter has been denuded away it rests on primitive rocks ; it
next extends, frequently covered by patches of the second stage, across the
present European watershed, forms the greater part of the beds overlying
the coal-fiells of Ostrau, and thence proceeds towards Troppau and Prussian
Silesia. Indications of various dissociation products of the sea are very
numerous ; they begin with the iodine springs of Hall in Upper Austria.
Where overlying beds are absent and the Schlier is freely exposed over
considerable areas it often forms impervious surfaces covered with white
efflorescences ; these, which only support salt-water plants, are the so-called
* Nassgallen.’ The lenticular patches of gravel intercalated in the Schlier
overlying the coal-fields of Ostrau prove, when they are first sunk into by
borings, to be full of water containing a small quantity of salt or iodine ;
this is the case, e.g., with the basement beds which supply the iodine baths
at Gotschalkowitz. In Silesia beds of gypsum and springs of slightly salt
water are found in larger number.

Let us now consider the margin of the mountains.

At the point where the first Mediterranean stage disappears in the
west, along the Salzach, the Schlier rests against the border of the Flysch
zone, and in those few places where observation is possible it is seen to bo
folded and turned on end. Maintaining this disposition it is continued to
the east. Near Staats, in Lower Austria, it forms an obvious arch between
the line of the subsided Flysch zone and a projecting ridge of Jurassic lime-
stone. In the neighbourhood of Seelowitz in Moravia it is so well exposed
that Bzehak was able to make an attempt at separating it into several
distinct subdivisions ^

We now cross the previously mentioned coal-field of Ostrau, and
as we follow the border of the Flysch zone, finally meet the great salt
beds of Wieliczka, the folding of which has been discussed in an earlier
passage (p. 216). Pecten denudatvASy Solenomya Doederleini, and with these,
it is true, many other marine species, which pass up into the beds of the
second Mediterranean stage, accompany the salt. The salt deposits form
a zone about 80 kilometers in breadth, which follows the foot of the
mountains through the whole of Galicia and the Bukowina ; in more than
two hundred places the presence of salt is revealed by exposures or
springs ?.

The beds of this folded zone are continued into the foreland where
they lie flat. The observations of Kontkiewicz have shown that to the
north of the Vistula, in the south-eastern parts of the kingdom of Poland,
there lies over the Chalk a deposit of grey marl with Ostrea cochlear^

I

* A. Rzehak, Ueber die Gliederung u. VerbreituDg der &lteren mediterran. Stufe bei
GroB8‘Seelowitz ; Verb. geol. Reichsanst., 1880, pp. 300-303.

* M. Kelb, Die Soolequellen von Galizien ; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1876, XXVI,
pp. 135, 169, pi. xiv.



812


THE MEDITEERANEAN


[part ir

Pecten crietatvs, and P. Cohen% and this is succeeded by gypsum. This
gypsiferous series with Pectens must be considered as the equivalent of
the Carpathian salt zone \

The same succession of strata appears, according to Lomnicki, both near
Lemberg and throughout the whole of the central part of eastern Qalicia ;
Hilbcr's careful investigations show that beneath the gypsum Pecten
denudatua and P. GoJteni of the Schlier occur, together with a number of
species which ascend to the second stage, and above the gypsum follows
the second Mediterranean stage \

The salt zone of the Carpathians is continued from the southern boundary
of Bukowina through Moldavia and even north of Ploesci, in Wallachia,
rock salt occurs in the Schlier resting on the flank of the mountains, here
turned towards the south-east^. To the west of this the younger beds
rest against the southern foot of the Fogaras mountains, and the salt zone
has vanished

Thus the zone of marine deposits, distinguished by a variety of evapora-
tion products, extends from the iodine springs of Hall through the whole
of Lower Austria and Moravia towards Silesia, and forms a mighty sali-
ferous zone along the whole outer edge of the Carpathians right into
Wallachia. In the plains this zone corresponds to the gypsum beds of the
south-west of Poland and the adjacent parts of Galicia. Some easily
recognized fossils, such as Pecten denudatua and P. Coheni, which are
only known in the Schlier, show the connexion between these flat-lying
beds and the folded beds of the sub-Carpathian salt zone. In the
Sandomir mountains and to the west of them the northern boundary of
these deposits may be recognized for a short distance, in the east the shore

' S. Kontkiewicz, Eurzer Bericht iib. die von ihm auBgef. geol. Untersuch. im sOdwestl.
Theile v. KOnigr. Polen ; Verb. geol. Reichsanst., 1881, pp. 66-69. The gypsum appears
directly over the Pecten bed in a layer which is composed of gigantic crystals, sometimes
2 meters in height, standing side by side in a vertical position. I extremely regret that
the second part of J. Niedzwiedzki's admirable monograph on Wieliczka only reached
me when these pages were in the press ; the results of his careful investigations corre-
spond in all essential points with what I have said here : J. Niedzwiedzki, Beitr. z.
Kenntniss der Salzformation von Wieliczka u. Bochnia, 2 parts, 8vo, Lemberg, 1888-1884.

^ M. Lomnicki, Einiges iib. die Gypsformation in Ostgalizien, Verb. geol. Reichsanst.,
1880, pp. 272-275 ; the fauna in Hilber, Geol. Studien in dem ostgalitz. MiocS.n-Geb.,
Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1882, XXX II, pp. 292-297.

^ V. G. Cobalcescu, Ueb. einige Tertiarbild. in der Moldau ; Verb. geol. Reichsanst.,
1883, pp. 152-157.

* C. D. Pilide, Ueb. das neogene Becken nOrdl. v. Ploesci, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst.,
1877, XXVII, pp. 132, 140; Paul, Verb. geol. Reichsanst., 1881, pp. 93-95. On the
folding of these deposits see Coblacescu, op. cit., 1882, p. 230.

^ The occurrence of Schlier in the small Tertiary patch of Bahna, above the Iron
Gates of the Danube, does not appear to me to be as yet completely established ; cf.
Stephanesco, Note sur le bassin tertiaire de Bahna, Bull. Soc. geol., 1877, S’’ ser., V,
pp. 387-393, pi. V, and Tournou6r's observations on this.



THE SCHLIEE


CH.IV}


313


line is not known ; there might well have been a shelving coast on the
Russian Platform. —

Let us leave the Carpathians and return once more to the west.

Towards the end of the period in which these saliferous deposits were
formed, or immediately after it, great tectonic movements took place over
the eastern margin of the Alps. It was at about this time, as we have re-
marked above (p. 135), that the great intra- Alpine depression of Vienna was
formed by the subsidence of the orographic block connecting the Alps and
Carpathians, and that the passage across the Alpine system was fashioned
through which the existing Danube bears so largo a proportion of the
Alpine waters to the Black Sea. At the same period the two great sunken
areas of Landsee and Graz originated, as well as the present eastern border
of the Alps, as far as the Bacher mountains in the south of Styria. In all
this vast region the Schlier is nowhere known, or at least nowhere with
complete certainty. It is the deposits immediately succeeding the Schlier
which rest against the marginal fault of this region.

The same is true, according to Hoernes, of the upper part of the basin
of the Save

South of the Bacher mountains, on the other hand, a broad zone of east-
to-west folds occurs, which advances far eastwards into the plain, and here
we meet with both the first Mediterranean stage and the Schlier.

The Schlier has also been deposited in the vast plain of Pannonia. . Thus,
for instance, K. Hofmann has observed beds with Atnria Ainri super-
posed on the marine deposits of the first stage in the great and remarkable
section of Tertiary deposits near Zsib6, where the river Szamos issues
from the Transylvanian caldron into Hungary^. Within the great caldron,
however, a thick zone of salt is to be seen bordering the foot of the sur-
rounding mountains. In hundreds of places the salt reveals its presence
in visible outcrops or by salt springs, and traces of it in the middle of
the country show that this zone is only the margin of a saliferous horizon,


* Some very subordinate and doubtful exposures occur within the depression of Vienna
near Gross Kussbach; cf. also T. Fuchs, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1868, XXVIII, p. 288,
note ; for the distribution in the south see R. Hoernes, Ein Beitr. z. Kenntniss der niioc.
Meeresablag. der Steiermark, Mittheil. naturw. Ver. Steierm., 1882, p. 19. In the south
of Styria and in Carniola the Schlier is also known as the ‘Mergel von Tiiffer’;
according to Bittner's observations it bears in some localities a strong resemblance to
HilbeFs Galician ‘ beds of Baranow.’ This confirmation of the views expressed in the
present work is the more valuable, since it proceeds from an observer who does not share
them : A. Bittner, Die tert. Ablag. von Trifail u. Sagor, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1884,
XXXIV, pp. 457, 491, 548, 588, et passim.

“ T. Fuchs, Neues Jahrb. f. Min., 1881, Referate, p. 99. Koch and Kuerthy have shown
that in the north-west of Transylvania the great dislocations occurred, as in the eastern
Alps, between the first and second Mediterranean stage, so that the latter rest unconform-
ably on the sand of Korod of the first stage: Petrogr. u. tekton. Verh&ltnisse der
trachyt. Gesteine des Vlegyasza-Stockes, Siebenb. Mus. Verein, Elausenburg, 1878, p. 385.



SU TKB MEDlTEBBAllEAN [pAimf

which is continued like a basin over the whole floor of the Transylvanian
caldron \

Strange indeed must have been the configuration of this region at the
time of the Schlier. Although the salt zone of Moldavia is folded on the
outer slopes of the Carpathians, and the similar deposits of eastern Transyl-
vania reveal a great disturbance— Posepny's saliferous line of Parajd— yet
the chain must have already existed, although not in its present form. This
is shown by the fact that a part of the eruptive rocks of the Carpathians is
older than the Schlier. The chain was washed on both sides by a sea, in
which great masses of salt were deposited. Within the mountains on the
east and north side of the caldron rose great volcanos, and there are some
indications to suggest that a communication existed between the two salt
seas in the direction of the sources of the river Aluta and of the Ojtos
pass, that is, in the south-eastern part of the caldron —

The Schlier appears in northern Italy in isolated patches above
the beds of Schio, which belong to the ^rst Mediterranean stage. In
the neighbourhood of Turin, where it dips to the south, it covers the
Schio beds of Casino and the serpentinous sand of Turin; the latter
is considered by some observers to belong to the Schlier itself. On
the southern border of the Apennines, as far as Acqui and Serravalle,
Schlier occurs again; here it rests directly on the Flysch, as in the
Carpathians. The Schlier forms at this place the ^ Langhian * stage (dtage
Langhien) of Pareto and C. Mayer; T. Fuchs has confirmed this correlation.
Aturia Aturif Sdenomya Loederleini, and many other forms characteristic
of the Schlier are met with here, but gypsum and salt are absent K

Then follow the deposits of Bologna already mentioned. Schlier is found
also near Ancona, and other patches of it occur along the outer border of
the Apennines ^ In Sicily the Schlier has been described by Cafici; it is
very well developed, particularly in the south-eastern part of the island, and
here too it contains Muria Aturi and Sohnomya Doederleini ; it is covered
by the second Mediterranean stage ®. Throughout the whole of Italy these

^ For a brief account of these rich beds see F. v. Hauer and Gl. Stache, Geol. Sieben-
bilrgens, 8vo, 1863, pp. 102-110, and F. Posepny, Studien aus dem Salinengebiete
Siebenb., Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1867, XYII, pp. 475-516, and 1871, XXI, pp. 123-188,
and plate ; F. Herbich, Das Sz^klerland, 8vo, Budapest, 1878, pp. 261-266.

* Hauer and Stache, tom. cit., p. 290; Posepny, op. cit., 1871, p. 147. I think the
older views of Coquand on the age of the salt beds may be neglected.

* G. Mayer, Sur la carte g4ol. de la Ligurie centrale, Bull. Soc. g4ol. de Fr., 1877, 3® s4r.,
V, p. 288; T. Fuchs, Studien (lb. die Gliederung dcr jdng. TertiArbildungen Ober-
Italiens, Sitzungsb. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1878, LXXXVII, 1. Abth., pp. 419-480.

* Near Gamerino, Brmapais Ottnangenaia with Aturia Aturi occur in the Schlier:
Loriol, Descr. des £chin. des environs de Gamerino (Toscane), pr4c^d4e d'une note strati-
graphique par M. Ganavari, M4m. Soc. phys. hist. nat. Geneve, 1882, XXYIII. Seguenza
met with Aturia Aturi in the * Langhiano ' near Stilo in Galabria.

* Ipp. Gafici, La formazione miocenica nel territorio di licodia-Eubea ; Acad. d. Lyncei,
1883, ser. 3, XIY.



Ctt iv]


THE SCHLIER


815


deposits are frequently accompanied by beds rich in Pteropods, as for
instance in the north of Moravia. That they are continued into Malta and
Gozzo between the first and second Mediterranean stages has already been
mentioned.

The Schlier thus follows the outer border of the Apennines, as it does
that of the Carpathians, and it extends in flat-lying beds over the foreland
towards Ancona, as well as towards the south-east of Sicily and Malta,
It is therefore the more remarkable that we have so far no certain proof
of its occurrence on the western side of the Apennines over the down-
thrown areas of the chain, and in this respect we observe a remarkable
correspondence with the eastern Alps. But if we leave the region of these
down-throws, in the most northern part of which, west of Genoa and near
Savona, the third Mediterrariean stage rests directly against the fracture,
we again meet at Vence, north-east of Nice, the typical Schlier containing
Pecten denvdatus and other characteristic fossils. It was recognized here
by Toumouer as the ‘ Molasse grise * resting on the * Molasse jaune de Vence,’
which Toumouer rightly compares with the beds of Qaudendorf, that is, to
a horizon of the first stage. This locality belongs to the western margin
of the Alps, and these beds may be regarded as an outlying member of the
deposits of the bay of the Rhone

Up to this point we possess trustworthy indications.

We perceive that from eastern Bavaria to Silesia and around the outer
side of the Carpathians as far as Wallachia, then over a great part of
Hungary to Transylvania, through a part of the southern Alps near Turin,
next around the outer margin of the Apennines to Sicily and Malta, and
finally in the most south-western end of the Alps near Vence, there exists
a peculiar marine deposit, nearly always grey and marly, which is inter-
calated between the first and second stages, from each of which it is dis-
tinguished by special characteristics. Its fauna contains many species
in common with the marine beds above and below it, land yet its stamp is
so peculiar that there can seldom be any doubt in referring a particular
exposure to this horizon. When for instance the smooth Pecten denu-
datus appears with Aturia Aturi in bluish-grey marl near Ottnang in
Upper Austria, and the same Pecten -appears in similar marl in Malta or
at Vence, this recalls rather the uniformity of the Jurassic stages than
the diversity of Tertiary deposits.

The great salt deposits of Wieliczka and Bochnia, of Parajd, D^esakna,
Thorda, of Maris-Ujvir, Vizakna, and so many other places, the medicinal
springs of Hall, Luhatschowitz, Darkau, Gotschalkowitz, and elsewhere,
which contain iodine and sometimes also bromine, the bitter spas of Laa,


' Toumouer, Notes paleoni sur quelques-uns des terr. tert., &c. ; Bull. Soc. g^ol. de Fr.,
1877, 3«idr.,V,p. 844.



316 TEE [PAUf tt

Seelowiiz, and elsewhere, all lie in the briny northern part of this sea, but
we can trace the contemporary sediments of the same sea as far as the
south of France and Malta.

It would also seem probable that the Schlier is present in Lycia, where
we have already recognized the first and second Mediterranean stages.
Herr Fuchs has had the kindness to inform me that among the specimens
collected by F. von Luschan on his journey from Assa-AltU to Kassaba, and
in fact from the scarped edge of the plain of Kassaba, he had found some
deposits which exhibit the characters of the Schlier. Numerous fossils
occur in a hard pale grey argillaceous marl, which is so crowded with
Foraminifera that it presents a sandy appearance. ‘The nature of the
rock, as well as the frequent occurrence of Aturia Aturi, point to the
Schlier, a supposition with which all the other fossils accord very well, if
we except a single large specimen of Conua ecstenms and another of
Faaciolaria Tarbdliana, which would rather indicate the horizon of Grund
or Gainfahrn (second Mediterranean stage)

•This discovery leads us to the still undecided question whether the
extensive salt beds of Persia are also of the same age as those of the Car-
pathians. A Tertiary deposit following on the first Mediterranean stage
and containing salt and gypsum runs from the east of Asia Minor and from
Armenia through Azerbijan to the south-east, and is continued eastwards
through the whole of northern Persia along the edge of the desert; it
extends far beyond Ehorasan, and, according to some accounts, even
advances as far as Herat. It is known also in some parts of the south of
Persia, and forms further a continuous belt along the western edge of the
chain of the Zagros, which strike to the south-east. This belt extends
from Kurdistan down through the whole valley of the Tigris, and includes
the salt beds to the west of Shiraz as well as those of the islands Kishm
and Ormuz. This is the ‘ gypsiferous series ’ of Loftus

^ Herr T. Fuchs writ&i as follows: ‘Dr. Tietze visited the same neighbourhood some
time after Dr. Luschan, and was kind enough to entrust to me for examination the
specimens collected. According to the information which he gave me deposits
resembling Schlier occur at many places in Lycia, where they fill narrow valleys ; they
consist of an alternation of marl, sandstone, and conglomerate, rest on Nummulitic lime*
stone, and have shared in the later movements of the mountains ; in appearance they
sometimes recall the Flysch. The beds which Tietze met with are of a more sandy
nature than those found by Luschan, the Aturia are absent, and the fauna recalls rather
the horizon of Grund. Only a few light grey specimens of marl, with numerous
Pteropods, Gorbula, and Limopsis, approach the type of the Schlier.* The fossils collected
by Luschan near Seret in Lycia (probably the Saaret of Forbes) correspond, according to
Fuchs, to the deposits of Grund or Lapugy (second stage).

^ Loftus, On the Geology of Portions of the Turko-Persian Frontier and Districts
adjoining. Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1855, XI, p. 247 et seq. ; W. T. Blanford, Eastern
Persia, An Account of the Journeys of the Persian Boundary Commission, 1870-1872, 8vo,
Lond., 1876, II, pp. 461-462. The more recent marine deposits of Tertiary age on the
coast of Makr&n rest unconformably on the edges of t^ie upturned salt beds.



817


OTiiy]


THE SOHLIER


Abich, who long ago maintained the unity of this great salt and gypsum
deposit of the middle Tertiaiy^ compares it in his descriptidn of the
Tertiary system of Armenia and Azerbijan to the Qaj stage, i.e. the gypsi-
ferous stage; which appears in the middle Tertiary formation in the south
of Sind.

Dr. Wahner informs me that on the way from Eazwin to Hamadan
he met with the very fossiliferous Orbitoides limestone, which fonns the
basis of the first Mediterranean stage, first near Hissar to the north of the
Earaghan mountains, then near Eabutarchan to the south of these
mountains, and that in both localities, which are about four days’ journey
distant from one another, the zones consist of folded and upturned strata.
Between the two zones lies the salt district, also very much folded.

Tietze, who knows l)oth the Carpathian and the Persian salt beds from
personal observation, regards the latter as more recent than the deposits
of the first Mediterranean sta^e on the Siakuh, and as nearly contem-
poraneous with those of the Carpathians

At the Caspian Gates, to the south-east of Teheran between the
Euh-i-getsch (mountain of gypsum) and the Euh-i-nemek (mountain of
salt), as well as in the neighbourhood of Euh-i-getsch towards Hassana-
bad and towards the desert, the same observer, who has added so much
to our knowledge of the north of Persia, found loose yellow sand, which
overlies the salt and gypsum deposits, contains great oyster shells, and
is believed to correspond in age to the Leithakalk, that is, to the second
stage.

I consider this observation as quite decisive. As we shall see directly,
however, the penetration Of the second stage into the Iranian tableland has
not as yet been established by further observations. —

The Schlier, intercalated between the depoeite of the first and eecond Medi-
terranean stages, thus affords us the spectacle of a great expiring sea. This
sea may be traced by its sediments and organic remains from Vence near
Nice to the south-west of the kingdom of Poland, and to Malta and Gozzo,
while fairly certain traces are known in Lycia. It includes the Carpathian
salt beds, and many indications suggest that those of Armenia and
Azerbijan, of the Iranian tableland as far as Ehorasan, of the valley of
the Tigris and the coast of the Persian Gulf up to the islands of Ormuz
and Kishm, are also to be referred here.

The second Mediterranean stage. We are now approaching the end of
the salt period. In Lower Austria the upper portions of the Schlier, which
are thickly strewn through with ciystals of gypsum, show the remains of

' H. Abich, Das Steinaalz und seine geol. Stellung im russ. Armenien ; M^m. Acad. Sc.
P^tersb., 1857, 6® s^r., VII, pp. 61-150, 10 pi.

* E. Tietze, Verb. geol. Reichsanst., 1875, p. 30; also Die Mineral-Reichthttmer
Persiens, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1879, XXIX, pp. 572, 573, and in other places.



m THE MEDITEBBAKEAK [pAia n

land plants, particularly of cinnamon trees ; then follow peculiar layers
of sand cont^ing eitW the forerunners of a new 'marine fauna, or a
mixture of this fauna with terrestrial mollusca, or else traces of brackidi
water. Now for the first time appear those brackish-water faunulae,
abounding in shells of Cardium, the facies of which is not unfittingly
designated the ' Caspian type.’

Further to the west, from the Banda up to Eirchberg on the lller, on
the Hochstrass near Ulm and down towards Dillingen, that is, on the
upper course of the Danube and a little beyond it, as far as the canton
Schaffhausen, a fresh-water formation has long been known under the
name of the * Eirchberg beds.’ Among its fossils Oncophora sodalia, Umo
Eaeri, and Cardivm aolitarmm are some of the commonest forms. Near
Ehingen, according to Sandberger, these beds lie immediately upon the
marine Molasse, i. e. the first Mediterranean stage, and they are covered
by fresh-water beds containing Hdia eylvana.

Near the Danube it has not been possible to trace this horizon further
down the stream, but it reappears, as has been shown by Bzehak, in the
neighbourhood of Briinn. Just at the point where the valley of the
Zwittawa, and with it the great fracture, which separates the Sudetes
from the Bohemian mass, reaches the plain, there rises an accumulation
of sand, containing the mollusca of the Eirchberg beds enumerated above,
and accompanied by the first traces of a new marine fauna ; it is inserted
between the Schlier and the diversified succeeding sediments of the second
Mediterranean stage 1.

Meanwhile the new marginal fracture of the eastern Alps extending
from 'Vienna through Styria as far as the Bacher mountains has been formed.
It is not, however, the sea which at once takes possession of the newly
formed depressions : beds of brown coal are first deposited along the frac-
tures ; they contain a rich terrestrial fiora and fauna identical with those
which are met with in the upper fresh-water Molasse of Switzerland, in the
brown coal of Winterthur, and in the fresh-water limestone of Saussans
in the south of France. This is the stage which the Austrian geologists
term the ‘ lignitea of Pitten’

The sea now invades the country on every side. The first beds which
it deposits not infrequently contain brackish-water species; Melanopsis
occurs in places in great quantities among the marine mollusca. These
lower divisions of the second Mediterranean stage, in which Pyrula comuta

* A. Rzehak, Beitr. z. Eenntn. der Tertiftrfonn. im anueralp. Wiener Becken, Verb,
naturf. Vereinz in Brflnn, 1883, XXI ; F. Sandberger, Die Eirchberger Schichten in
Oesterr., Verb. geol. Reichsanst., 1883, pp. 208-210. J^ebak fonnd pebbles of Scblier
with Aturia in tbe Oncopboia sand. Near Schaffhausen the Schlier is covered by true
Jura Nagelflue : F. Schalch, Ueb. einige Terti&rbildungen der Umgeb. v. Schaffhausen,
Neu. Jahrb. f. Min., 1881, II, pp. 42-76, pL iv.



ijaiv] THE SECOND MEDtrEBBANEAN STAGE 819

and Oerithi/um lignUarum ^ abound, have recently been regarded as forming
an independent sta^, and have been designated the 'beds of Grund.’

I have spoken of them here along with the other marine deposits of the
second stage' without wishing thereby to express any definite opinion as
to their claims to a separate existence.

We will begin with the Atlantic coast.

The second Mediterranean stage penetrates into the gulf of the Garonne,
where, as we have already seen, it is represented by the faluns of Salles
and Saubrigues. These are separated from the first stage by a fresh-water
seri^. The sea extends transgressively as far as Touraine, and there
fohns a wide gulf into which the Mediterranean deposits had not hitherto
•penetrated.

The same stage appears near Lisbon ;• Pereirea Gervaisi, a very peculiar
Gastropod, is met with here. The deposits follow the coast of Portugal,
and enter the gulf of the Guadalquivir ; they then appear on the Medi-
terranean coast of Spain near Barcelona, and in many other places.

They are also present in Morocco, on the coast of North Africa, in
Sardinia, Corsica, and the Balearic Islands. They enter the gulf of the
Khone, and then as they proceed north pass into littoral beds with
Nassa MicJumdi, but they do not follow the first stage into the region of
the Swiss Alps.

The mode of occurrence of these beds in Italy is very remarkable. They
appear in the northern part of the sunken areas in the interior of the
Apennines, where they are represented by the limestone of Rosignano,
while the collapsed regions further to the south are of more recent origin.
At the same time they appear in rich development on the outer border of
the Apennines, where they are known as the ‘ Tortonian stage, and rest
there upon the Schlier, as is also the case in Sicily and Malta.

These deposits must have extended far into the region of the existing
southern Alps. In the great trough subsidence lyinjf to the south of the
Cima d’ Asta, a detached vertical block of these beds with lignite, Cerithium
li^nitaTV/nit Panopaea, &c., occurs on Monte Civerone. It is wedged
in between masses of Trias limestone.

In the south of Styria not only do these deposits appear close to the
marginal fracture of the Alps, but they also extend into the Alps and,
full of their characteristic mollusca, enter the valley of Lavant in the
Alps of Carinthia. From the fractured border of the Alps they extend far
over the Pannonian plain. In the south-western part of this plain the
peculiar Pereirea Gervaisi of Lisbon is met with again. ,

This stage is likewise known near Belgrade ; there it extends into the
valley of the Morava; it also appears within the mountains at Bahna,

* Pgraztu bidentatus according to TonmonCr, Sur le Certth. hidentatum, Grat., et inr le
Cerith. lignUarum, Eichw. ; Crosse, Joum. de Conchyl., Janv. 1874, pp. 1-8.



820 THE MEDITERRANEAN [pakth

near the Iron Oates, while the last known trace of the extension of the
Mediterranean in this direction crops out at the foot of the blood-soaked
hill of Plevna ^

In the basin of Pannonia the sea advances on the one hand towards
Transylvania, and on the other through the gaps which separate the Leitha
mountains from the Alps in the south, and from the Carpathians in the
north, to enter the recent Alpine depression of Vienna; and at the same
time it extends over the debris of the Flysch zone into the extra-Alpine
basin.

Near Vienna, as in Hungary, the diversity of the sediments and the
richness of their fauna are astonishing. The blue clay of Baden and Voslau
with its Pleurotomas, its simple Corals and Pteropods; the sands of"
Potzleinsdorf, rich in bivalves; the beds of limestone built up of Litho-
thamnium, and between them the marls of Gainfahm and Steinabrunn,
with Ancillaria glandiformis and Venericardia Jouanetti, with their multi-
tudinous species of Conus, Cypraea, Voluta, Strombus, and Cancellaria;
the coarse littoral conglomerates with great Clypeasters, Pectens, and
oysters ; here and there, too, remains of great coral reefs ; all these beds are
the deposits of the same sea, laid down in different bathymetric zones.
This was asserted many years ago, and has now been established by the
careful monographs of T. Fuchs and F. Karrer

In the Alpine portion of the basin of Vienna, the second Mediterranean
stage appears as a littoral belt, and is overlaid by more recent beds,
which occupy the middle of the depression. Outside the Alpine portion
the case is different. The marginal belt is there almost entirely confined
to some of the Jurassic ‘ klippen,' and neither on the outer border of the
Alpine zone of Flysch, nor on that of the Bohemian mass, do deposits of
this age appear. The stage is represented by certain block-like or tabular
masses which rise from the plain above the Schlier as witnesses of exten-
sive denudation. The Buchberg near Mailberg is a block of this kind.
It is difficult to determine precisely the extension of the sea towards the
west ; but it is certain that its deposits are not visible as far as the gorge
of the Danube at Wachau near Krems, whereas the Schlier, as we saw
above, extends beyond the boundary of Bavaria, and the first Mediterranean
stage stretches around the Alps into the valley of the Rhone, where from
Lyons onwards it is covered by the sediments of the second stage pushing
forwards from the south. These are the first traces of the hydrographical
separation of the valley of the Danube from western and southern Europe,

' P. Foetterle, Die geolog. Verh£lliiiisse der Gegend zwisch. Nikopoli, Plewna u.
Jablanitza in Bulgarien ; Verhandl. geol. Heicbsanst., 1869, p. 191 et seq.

* In particular T. Fuchs and F. Karrer, Ueber das Verhftltniss des marinen Tegels zum
Leithakalke; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1871, XXI, pp. 67-122.



CH. iv;i SUBMEEGENCE OP EUSSIAN PLATFOElf 321

a separation which from this time becomes more and more marked, and
which is still of such great importance at the present day. —

Although, as we have observed above, these beds do not rest against
the outer border of the Bohemian mass, where only the Schlier, the first
stage, or the naked rock are visible, yet they extend in the form of a
deep bay from the neighbourhood of Briinn towards Bohemia. This bay
terminates near Wildenschwert, Abtsdorf, and Bohmisch-Triibau ; it is
about 85 kilometers in length^.

Between Briinn and Olmlitz there are a large number of block-like
hills or buttes left by denudation, of which the highest forms a plateau
consisting of Lithothamnium limestone and attains a very uniform height
of 350-355 meters. At Ruditz, not far from Briinn, these deposits attain
a height of 435 meters, and towards the end of the great Bohemian gulf
near Altsdorf of 429 meters * As the result of numerous measurements
I have come to the conclusion that the ancient strand-line lay about
440-450 meters above the present sea-level.

This stage now crosses the European watershed, always as patches
superposed upon the Schlier, and in the neighbourhood of the watershed
it attains a height of 310 meters ^

It extends towards Silesia, and reaches the south-west part of the
kingdom of Poland on the other side of the Vistula, where it overlies the
gypsum, and there can be no doubt that the sea of tliis period ovei*flowed
the whole depression of Galicia. On the north and east the boundary
of the sea is not known to us, but here and there in the south of Russia
inconsiderable remnants of its deposits occur, which show that for some
time at least it flowed far over the plain.

These remnants are separated by great distances from each other.

The Russian Platform has been repeatedly covered by the sea since the
close of the Permian period.

The first submersion resulted in the deposition of a number of stages of
the upper and middle Jurassic, which are known as the ‘Jurassic of Moscow.’

The second overflowing occurred during the period of the middle
Cretaceous. This transgression extended not only over the Russian
Platform, but at the same time over extremely large areas in all four
quarters of the globe, and its universal distribution is one of the most
problematical phenomena in the history of sedimentary formations.

The third overflowing, although it appears in certain places, especially

' A. E. Reuse, Die marin. Tertiftrschichten Bcbmens ; Sitzungsber. Akad. Wise. Wien,
1860, XXXIX, pp. 207-285, 8 plates.

* J. Wolf, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1862, p. 52: Weihon near Seelowitz, 185-05
fathoms, Urbaniberg near Austerlitz 187.72 fathoms, Kopaninberg near Wischau 185
fathoms.

• On the Hranitzki Kopec : Wolf, Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1863, p. 20.


SOIXAS



322


THE MEDITERRANEAN


[PAKT n


near the sea of Am\\ to be accompanied by Eocene deposits, belongs
essentially to the Oligocene period; it is a prolongation of that great
transgression of the Oligocene sea which covered the whole of north-
eastern Germany. The northern boundary, within which remains of
Oligocene beds are known, runs from the shores of the Baltic near Kdnigs-
berg towards Thom, then towards Kiew and Elisabethgrad. Oligocene
Mollusca with north European characters are to be met with near Achalzik
in Imeretia and also on the shores of the sea of Aral. Oligocene deposits
stretch far towards the north along the eastern side of the Ural mountains,
and extend eastwards over the Siberian plain. Trautschold mentions
fossils of this age from the district of Eamyschloff, and Karpinsky has
shown that they occur on the western tributaries of the Tobol as far as
the Tura below Werchoturie, that is, about lat. 68® N.® It is extremely
probable that the Oligocene sea of north Europe, the organic remains of
which are distinguished in so striking a planner from the contemporary
fauna of the sea of the southern Alps, was in this way connected with the
Arctic regions.

The fourth of the transgressions known up to the present is that of the
second Mediterranean stage. It advanced from the west over Galicia. Till
quite lately, the most remote localities in which this stage was known to
occur were those near Elisabethgrad in the north of Kherson described by
Barbot de Marny. The patches found here contain Bucdnnm miocenicurriy
JB. coitvZatum^ Mitra scrobiculata, Turritdla turrisy and other characteristic
Mollusca ^ Even further to the east, however, on the northern side of the
peninsula of Kertsch, indications of their occurrence were discovered some
years ago by Abich, while the investigations of Andrussow in this region
have now placed the matter beyond doubt. Near Tschokrak, on the side
of the peninsula facing the sea of Azov, a limestone containing a number of
Mollusca of the second Mediterranean stage lies above blue clay ; this is in
turn covered by the*Sarmatian beds which will be discussed presently ^


^ Abich, Beitrage zur Pulaeont. des asiat. Russla'nds (from the M4m. Ac. Petersb.),
1858, and elsewhere. Eocnen also suspects from these statements that Nummulitic
beds occur in the sea of Aral beneath the Oligocene deposits: Bull. Soc. imp. nat.
Moscou, 1868, XLI, p. 171.

* H. Trautschold, Traces de P^tage tongrien pres de Eamyschloff, Bull, de la Soc.
Ouralienne, Ekaterinoslaw, 1882, Vll, pp. 21-23, and in particular A. P. Earpinsky,
Sediments tert. du versant oriental de I'Oural, tom. cit., pp. 60-72.

* N. Barbot de Mamy, Geological Description of the Government of Eherson, 8vo,
St. Petersb., 1869, p. 150 (in Russian).

^ H. Abich, Einleitende GrundzOge der Geol. der Halbinseln Eertsch u. Taman, Mdm.
Ac. Petersb., 1865, 7® s^r., IX, p. 9 et seq. ; N. Andrussow, Observations on Geological
Investigations in the Neighbourhood of the town of Eertsch (in Russian), Neuruss.
naturf. Gesellsch., 1883, XI, and Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 18W, pp. 190-194. Herr
Abich has had the kindness to send me the specimens collected in localities still more
to the east, and since no decisive conclusion could be drawn from their examination, to



823


CH. IV] SUBMERGENCE OF NE. AFRICA

There is nothing, however, in the distribution of any of these remarkable
Mediterranean remains to suggest a connexion with the present outline of
the Fontus ; they lie to the north of that fragment of the Caucasian chain
which forms the Crimea.

On the coast of the Black sea itself, as well as of the sea of Marmara
and the Aegean sea, throughout the middle of the Balkan peninsula,
and in the west of Asia Minor the second, like the first, Mediterranean
stage is completely unknown. But it appears to the south of this region
in Cyprus and Candia, as well as on the coast of Asia Minor. That
the fossils of Hudh are to be assigned to this horizon has already been
mentioned. Nevertheless some doubt is permissible as to whether the
second Mediterranean stage docs actually advance so far towards the east
as the first stage and the salt deposits of the Schlier.

Many indications, such as the sand containing oysters, which Tietze
observed above the salt at the .Caspian Gates, seem to suggest that it did,
but the decision must be left to further investigations.

While this question remains unsolved, the southern limits of the stage
have been determined by some remarkable observations.

The presence of middle Tertiary marine deposits in the Libyan desert
was first recognized by Ehrenberg near the oasis of Siuah, while Fraas
furnished the first evidence of their existence between Cairo and Suez,
and on the ShalAf along the Suez Canal. Since then Zittel and G.
Bohlfs have travelled through the Libyan desert, and we now know that
these deposits extend from the Cyrenaica to the oasis of Siuah, fonning
a wide plateau, which rises to a height of 100 meters above the sea and
terminates towards the south in a steep scarp. The plateau and its
scarp are continued from the oasis of Siuah towards the north-east.
The lowest member of the deposits is formed of greenish salt marl with
gypsum and alternating beds of sandy CaJeaire grossier and green marl,
which lie on Nummulitic limestone. The marine Mediterranean beds in
the oasis of Siuah are covered by hard fresh-water limestone and fresh-
water quartz^.

In studying the distribution of these strata near Suez, Beyrich’s
descriptions are of special importance ; they are based on the observations
of G. Schweinfurth.

The beds appear not only on the northern slopes of the chain between
Cairo and Suez near the Wady Gj&fTara, where they have been observed by

institute a fresh search, which it is hoped may prove successful. All the Mollusca of the
second stage, collected near Tschokrok, are very small.

^ K. A. Zittel, Beitr. z. Geol. u. Palaont. der libyschen WCste u. der angrenzenden
Gebiete v. Aegypten, 4to, Gassel, 1883, pp. cxxviii-czxxii. The presence of Miocene
deposits in the Cyrenaica has been confirmed by the subsequent finds made by Schwein-
furth near Tobruk : loc. cit., p. cxxxi, note.

Y 2



324


THE MEDITERRANEAN


[part II


Fraas, and on the north-eastern slopes of the Jebel Gen^f, where they were
found by T. Fuchs resting on gypsiferous marl, but they also extend
between Jebel Gen^f and Jebel At&ka near Suez, on the one hand, and on
the other to Jebel Gal&la, which projects further to the south towards the
Ked sea^ I attach particular importance to this circumstance. These
mountains consist of Cretaceous limestone and older Tertiary beds, which
however are more recent than those in the oasis of Siuah, on which the
Mediterranean beds rest conformably. While the earlier discoveries of
Fraas and Fuchs revealed the presence of the Mediterranean sediments
only on the northern slopes of these mountains, we now find them extending
south-westwards from Suez, towards the region of the Red sea, the
present fauna of which is so different from that of the Mediterranean.
It follows that the Erythraean region must have annexed in this place a
portion of the ancient Mediterranean, but we must not omit to mention that,
in spite of the otherwise uniformly Mediterranean character of these
beds, a single alien of Indo-Paciflc type — Placuna miocenica, Fuchs — has
been met with in the oasis of Siuah. These deposits belong, according
to T. Fuchs, to the horizon of Grund, that is, to the lower part of the
second stage*. This conclusion, which is derived from palaeontological
comparisons, would assign the inundation of the north-east of Africa to
approximately the same period as that in which the Mediterranean for the
first time washed against the eastern fractured margin of the Alps.

The difference between the new outline of the Mediterranean and that
which it possessed at the time of the first stage is therefore as follows : —

The communication to the north of the Alps, over the Jura mountains
and the pre-Alps of Switzerland and Bavaria, has ceased to exist. A per-
manent extension in the direction of the Euphrates and Persia cannot be
proved from present observations. On the other hand, a new extension has
taken place from the Loire towards Touraine, and into the sunken areas on
the north of the Apennines and of the eastern Alps, over the Schlier of
Galicia, towards the southern portion of the Russian plain and the sea of
Azov, and finally over the Cyrenaica towards Suez.

The Sarmatian deposits. The second Mediterranean stage is followed
near Vienna by a stratified series, which in the poverty and uniformity of
its fauna presents a wonderful contrast to the second stage; it extends
from the valley of the Danube eastwards far beyond that region within
which the second Mediterranean stage is known; spreading over a con-
siderable portion of the south of Russia, it appears on the shores of the sea


* E. Beyrich, Ueb. geognostische Beobacbtungen G. Schweinfurth’a in der Wdste
/.wischen Cairo und Su4fl ; Sitzungsb. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, 1882, X, pp. 163-182, pi. iv, v.

’ T. Fuchs, Die geol. Beschaffenheit der Landenge von Suez, Denkschr. Akad. Wise.
Wien, 1877, XXXVllI, pp. 25-42, and Beitr. z. Kenntniss der Miocanfauna Aegypt.
u. der libyschen Waste, in Zitters Beitr&gen, pp. 21-66.



MARINE SAEMATIAN FAUNA


325


CH. iv]

of Marmara, of the Black sea, of the sea of Azov, and the Caspian, and
reaches the sea of Aral. All this vast region was at this time covered by
a sheet of water, which stretched from the eastern Alps to beyond the Ust-
Urt. In its extension it surpassed the longitudinal axis of the existing
Mediterranean taken from the Straits of Gibraltar to the Syrian coast.

Barbot de Mamy, whose energetic and successful efforts to throw light
on the past history of the Pontic and Aralo-Caspian depressions resulted
first in the loss of his health and then of his life, assisted me in 1866 with
much friendly information, when it was proposed to designate these
deposits by the independent name of the Sarmatian stage. Even at that
time it was recognized that the remains of terrestrial mammals, washed into
these beds in some places, belong to the same species as those which are
also met with in the littoral deposits of the second Mediterranean stage, and
that they are older and altogether different from those which are sometimes
contained in the third Mediterranean stage ; it would therefore be erroneous
to compare them clironologically with the third Mediterranean stage

In the Sarmatian marine fauna wc observe not only the complete
absence of Pteropods, Balani, Brachiopods, Echinoids, and corals, but of
all the more richly ornamented forms of Molhisea, and in particular
the absence of any indications which would lead us to assume a warm
climate. Even in 1866 it was possible to distinguish species of Mollusca
surviving in the Sarmatian deposits as the impoverished remains of the
preceding Mediterranean faunas, from those which appear as new species.
But the former are limited (according to the emphasis laid on subordinate
differences) to twenty or thirty species, among which, however, there is no
single species of Conus, Cypraea, Oliva, Tritonium, Strombus, or of thos(^
numerous other genera which bear witness to the ‘warmer habitat’ of
the second Mediterranean stage. We only find small species of Murex,
Cerithium, Pleurotoma, &c. In addition to these there is a large oyster,
which some regard as an independent species, others^ however, as identical
with the Ostrea Giengensis of the Mediterranean beds.

Nor are the fresh species, which make their appearance, of essentially
different character. Buednum dujdicatmrij Mactra podblica, Tajm gre^
garia, are among those which most frequently occur. A greater variety of
new fonns is developed among the group of the Trochides.

The lack of variety among the species of this molluscan fauna is com-
pensated by the often astonishing number of individuals, the shells of
which crowd the beds in millions.

In 1866 the patches of Mediterranean beds in the south of Russia were
still unknown, and Humboldt’s theory of a comparatively late communica-
tion of the Caspian and the sea of Aral with the Arctic Ocean was

^ Untersuch. iib. den Gharakter der Osterr. Teriiarablagerungen ; Sitzungsb. Akad.
Wise. Wien, 1866, LIV, 1. Abth., pp. 87-152.



m T]^ MEDEffiK^^ [fa^ it

uncontested. It was therefore natural that the sudden and extraordinary
reduction of the Mediterranean fauna, especially the disappearance of all
indications of a warm sea and the appearance of new forms, should be con-
sidered as coincident with the extension of the sea to the east and the
re-establishment of communication with northern waters. Since then our
knowledge has increased in every direction, and experienced investigators,
such as F. Schmidt, have opposed the theory of a communication with
the Arctic Ocean during the Sarmatian period^. At the same time the
advance made in our knowledge of the relations of the Chinese Han-hai to
the depression of Turkestan has brought this question into connexion with
a number of others which can only be discussed later ; as bearing on this
subject the following remarks are of importance.

T. Fuchs asserts that the Sarmatian sea was isolated and was some-
what less salt than the ocean; as a proof of this he lays stress on the
similai'ity of the general character of the deposits, especially as regards
their fauna, with that of the present Pontus^.

R,. Hoemes attributes the peculiar poverty of the fauna to local and
temporary changes in the saltness of the sea

A. Bittner considers the Sannatian sea merely as a relic of the Mediter-
ranean, and the Sannatian fauna near Vienna as a minute fraction of the
preceding fauna degenerated or modified by isolation and the influence of
bi^kish waters

These three theories agree* in the supposition that the communication
with the open sea was not sufficient to maintain quite normal conditions
within this extensive inland sea; and as soon as all communication to the
north or east is left out of consideration the whole Sarmatian sea, notwith-
standing its great transgression towards the sea of Aral, the lower Danube,
and the sea of Marmara, assumes the subordinate position of a mere annex
of the Mediterranean. There is, however, no doubt that a number of
species, such as Mactva podolica, Tapes gregaria, and others of frequent
occurrence, are unknown outside the Sarmatian area^

Further, according to the descriptions of Orbigny, Sinzow, Barbot
de Mamy, and others, there appear in the Sarmatian sands of Bess-

^ F. Schmidt, Briefe an F. v. Richthofen ; Zeitschr. deutsch. gool. Ges., 1877, XXIX,
pp. 830 and 837.

‘ T. Fuchs, Ueb. die Natur der sarmatischen Stufe und deren Analoga in der Jetztzeit
u. in friiheren geol. Epochen; Sitzungsb. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1877, LXXV, pp. 321-339.

’ R. Hoernes, Sarmat. Ablagerungen in der Umgebung von Gratz ; Mitth. naturw. Ver.
f. Steierm., 1878, p. 4 et seq.

* A. Bittner, Ueb. denCharakter der sarmat. Fauna des Wiener Beckens; Jahrb. geol.
Reichsanst., 1883, XXXIll, pp. 131-150.

® Many of these species are probably from other districts ; some, for instance, have
been quoted from the first stage (Swiss Molasse), but a stricter examination of the facts
has not confirmed this quotation.



ta^cb^

‘ arabia and the Crimea whole series of new forins of the genera Trochus,
Phasianella, Turbo, &€., which are never found in Mediterranean waters \

This not unimportant portion of the Sarmatian molluscan fauna must,
for the present, be regarded as autochthonous, and it affords us an example
of an indigenous fauna, in an extensive part of the sea, which has remained
attached to the place of its birth.

To this molluscan fauna, which may thus be regarded as consisting partly
of an impoverished Mediterranean residue, and partly of an autochthonous
group, we must add a number of fishes and a disproportionately diversified
series of marine mammals, which belong to the seals, dolphins, and whales^.

‘ These mammals appear in the Vienna basin, as well as in Bessarabia and
the Crimea.

Near Vienna they occur chiefly in the blue clay which forms the lower
part of the Sarmatian stage, and they are accompanied by river, marsh,
and land tortoises, as well Sa by terrestrial plants (Daphnogene, Laurus,
Cassia, cones of Conifers) •

In these deposits many indications reveal the proximity of a river, but

^ J. Sinzow in Die Schriften d. neuruss. naturf. Gesellsch. in Odessa, 1875, III, and
1877, V; Barbot in Geol. des Gouvernement Kherson, p. 151 et seq.; also Hoernes, Fauna
der sarmat. Ablager. v. Eischineff in Bessarab., Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1874, XXIV,
pp. 33-45, pi. ii, iii ; A. £. Reuss, Tert. Bryozoen v. Eischinew, Sitzungsber. Akod. Wise.
Wien, 1869, LX, I. Abth., pp. 505-512; F. Karrer and J. Sinzov, Ueb. das Aufbreten der
Foraminif., Genus Nubecularia, im saroiat. Sande v. Eischinew, loc. cit., 1876, LXXIV,

1. Abth., pp. 272-284 and plates.

* K. Peters, Fhoca pontica, Eichw. bei Wien, Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1867, LV,

2. Abth., pp. 110-112 ; J. F. Brandt, Untersuch. ttber die foss. u. subfoss. Cotaceen
Europa’s, Mem. Ac. Petersb., 1873, 7® s4r., XX, and supplements, op. cit., 1874, 7® s4r.,
XXI ; P. J. van Beneden, Les Pachyacanthus du Musee de Vienne, Bull. Acad. Belg.,
1875, 2® sdr., XL.

’ In the richest locality near Vienna, in Nussdorf, a strange circumstance is observed,
namely, that two animals, a mammal and a fish, are characterized by hyperostosis,
i. e. a peculiar swelling of the bones. The Sirenid, on which Brandt founded the genus
Pachyacanthus, exhibits this characteristic in so high a degsee over a large port of the
vertebral column that the spinal canal is reduced to a narrow fissure; this phenomenon
may be observed to a smaller extent in living Sirenides, according to van Beneden chiefly
in older individuals. In the fish Caranx camngopsia the vertebrae are so overgrown
that they can only be recognized as such at their concave ends, and the ribs are
covered with large bladder-shaped distensions (F. Stoindachner, Beitr. z. Eenntn. der
foss. Fischfauna Oesterreichs, Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1859, XXXVII, pp. 685-694,
pi. v<*vii). This fish is allied to the Caranx carangua of Brazil and the Antilles, which
frequently exhibits similar distensions of certain parts of the skeleton. Herr Stein-
dachner, however, informs me that, notwithstanding the simultaneous occurrence of
this phenomenon to such an unusual extent in the individuals of two quite dififerent
animals, we cannot draw any conclusion as to the abnormal composition of the sea-
water, since thickening of this kind is not rare in tho case of Sparoides, Sciaenoides,
Garangides, Taenoides, and others, especially in the case of large individuals, and this
.in normal water. It is known in various other groups of animals and even in man.
The specimens from Nussdorf have also been described by P. Gervais, De Phyperostoso
chez Phomme et chez les animaux, Joum. de Zool., 1875, IV, pp. 282, 455.


328


THE MEDITEKRANEAN


[part n

the abundance of crystals of gypsum in the clay point to other conditions,
which we cannot now discuss ; on the other hand, the presence of oyster
beds is an indication of normal salinity. ^ In the sandy deposits the poly-
morphism of certain bivalves points to changeable conditions, but there are
also places, as, for example, in Wiesen to the west of Wiener-Neustadt, and
in Kishinev in Bessarabia, where a great variety of species occur in pure
sand, and without any indication of abnormal conditions such as might
furnish an explanation.

While the Mediterranean fauna has evidently continued to exist in
other places, and hundreds of species of this fauna have been perpetuated to
the present day, all the autochthonous species of the Sarmatian sea have
become extinct : they disappeared simultaneously with the sea itself, and
from this results the remarkable fact that the Sarmatian fauna is much further
removed from the present Mediterranean fauna than that of the first and
second Mediterranean stage. To attempt to determine the age of this fauna
according to the percentage of existing forms would, as we observed above,
lead to false conclusions, and it is an open question whether the Sarma-
tian fauna contains even a single species of Mollusca which is still extant.

Surprising and so far unexplained is the isolated occurrence, in the
Sarmatian deposits of Galicia, of certain Mollusca which are otherwise
alien to this fauna, namely, a Haliotis and two species of Lima

The distribution of the Sarmatian deposits is as follows : —

West of Vienna they appear only at a few points outside the Alpine
l)order, and I know of no certain evidence that they cross the present
watershed in the north of Moravia, although Kontkiewicz has observed
them in the south-west of the kingdom of Poland. Near Vienna they
rest as a rule on the slopes of the second Mediterranean stage, as a step
at a somewhat lower level, thus forming a new concentric band; some-
times, however, they cover over this stage, as in the hilly country which
separates Lower Austria from Hungary, to the south of the Leitha
mountains. The highest deposits of this kind present a littoral character,
and lie in this neighbourhood as high as 386 meters on the summit of the
Marzer Kogelberg.

They are then continued into the Pannonian plain and as far as
Transylvania, they extend to the gulf of Gratz, and south of the Bacher
mountains take part in the formation of those east-to-west Tertiary folds
which we have already mentioned. In this region they appear in the
middle of long narrow synclinals. To the west they penetrate into the
Alps as far as Stein in Camiola*. They appear here and there on the most

^ Y. Hilber, Geol. Studien in den ostgaliz. Mioeftn-Gebieten ; Jahrb. geol. Beichsanst.,
1882, XXXll, p. 309 et seq.

* V. Hilber, Ueb. das Mioeftn, insb. lib. das Aufbreten sarmatischer Schiebten bei Stein
in Krain ; op. cit., 1881, XXXI, pp. 473-478.



THE SAEMATIAN STAGE


329


CH. IV]

northerly border of the Bosnian heights, surround the Fruska-Gora near
Peterwardein, and are present in the Banat.

The remnants of more recent Tertiary formations, which occur in the
south of the Banat at unexpected Iieights, point to the fact that the
communication, which once existed between the area of the Mediterranean
deposits near Plevna, and that of the Sarmatian deposits of the lower
Danube, must have been closed by later orogenetic movements.

The Sarmatian stage is extensively developed in Wallachia and in
the north of Bulgaria. It rests against the south side of the Fogaras
mountains, and thence extends northwards through Moldavia and Bess-
arabia into Bukowina and east Galicia. On the lower Danube it forms,
according to Toula, the underlying beds of the plain between the foot of
the Balkans and the river as far as the Isker^; it is tlien continued, resting
near Plevna on the second Mediterranean stage, to beyond Nikopoli, but
the plateau between Rustchuk and Varna is formed of upper Cretaceous,
according to Hochstetter, who thinks it probable that the Sarmatian
deposits are absent from Sistowa to Tschemawoda But they certainly
occur between llaschowa and Kustcndje‘\ Although the Balkans here
attain their southern limit, yet they are continued along the western
margin of the Black sea, near Baldtjik and Warna, where they were
long ago described by Spratt.

They then advance into the sea of Marmara, but, as has been shown
by Hochstetter, not into the depression of Adrianoplc; they form the
greater part of the peninsula of Gallipoli, present themselves as hori-
zontal beds on both sides of the Dardanelles, rising to a height of 244
meters above the sea, and lie near Constantinople, as well as near Renkioi
not far from the ruins of Hissarlik, on a fresh-water deposit containing
Anodonta Hellespontica, Mdanojjsis hnccinoulea, with other species, and
regarded both by R. Hoernes and Neumayr as an inferior member of the
Sarmatian stage •

South of Troy the Sarmatian beds arc not known, up to the present,
further than the promontory which closes the gulf of Adramyti on the
north®, and neither Samothrace, nor Chios, nor the whole west coast of

^ F. Toula, Die sarmat. Ablag. zwischen Donau u. Timok, Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss.
Wien, 1877, LXXV, 1. Abth., pp. 113-144 and plate ; by the same, Grundlinien der Geol.
des westl. Balkan, Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1881, XLIV, p. 39.

* F. V. Hochstetter, Die geol. Verhaltnisse des 5stl. Theiles der europ. Tilrkei ; Jahrb.
geol. Reichsanst., 1870, XX, p. 401.

® K. Peters, Grundlin. z. Geogr. u. Geol. der Dobrudscha, II ; Denkschr. Akad. Wiss.
Wien, 1867, XXVII, pp. 51, 52.

^ R. Hoernes, Ein Beitrag z. Eenntn. foss. Binnenfaunen, Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss.
Wien, 1876, LXXIV, 1. Abth., pp. 7-34 ; Frank Calvert and M. Neumayr, Die jungen
Ablagerungen am Hellespont, Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1880, XL, p. 360 et seq.

® The little map in J. S. Diller, Notes on the geology of the Troad, Quart. Joum.
Geol. Soc., 1883, XXXIX, p. 628.



880 THE MEIDOT 1^^

the galf of Salonica as far down as' Euboea, have famished any certain
indication of these deposits. Certain limnic deposits, which L. Burgeratein
observed on the peninsula of Cassandra, may perhaps lend support to the
supposition that the Sarmatian sea may have extended as far as this point,
although possibly it may not have been so salt here as elsewhere

Let us now return to the Fontus.

On its southern shore no trace of these deposits is known On the
north, on the other hand, the above-mentioned zone of Sarmatian strata
extends from the south of Poland and Galicia, through Podolia and
Bessarabia, to be continued on the one side towards Wallachia, and on the
other towards the east in the direction of the Russian plain. This zone,
which rests in the north on the second Mediterranean stage, is distinguished,
both at various localities in Galicia and near Kishinev in Bessarabia, by
the presence of some genuine marine species, as well as by the great
variety of its fauna. To it belongs the long chain of the Miodobores
(honey-woods), which rises to a height of "over 400 meters, extends from
Fodkamia, near Brody, to beyond Eaminiec Podolski, and consists of
a Sarmatian Polyzoan-reef ; Pleuropora lapidoaa is the species which has
chiefly contributed to the formation of this, as well as of a number of
other smaller reefs in Podolia^..

From the zone of Bessarabia, which extends to beyond the lower
Dniester, a belt of Sarmatian deposits stretches eastwards through Stepa-
nowka and Wossnesensk towards Nikopoli and Tauria, overlying in the
north the Cretaceous and the granite, and overlaid in the south by the
younger limestone of the steppes.

The Sarmatian deposits appear in the Crimea and extend without
interruption as far as the isthmus 'qf the Caucasus; there they follow the
mountains in the north through Stawropol as far as Derbent ; in the south
they are known in the river district of the Rion and the Kura. They have
shared in the great •movements of the chain, and, according to Abich’s
observations, have been carried up on the Schach-Dagh, near the eastern
end of the Caucasus, to a height of 2,330 meters ^

They then follow the Caspian sea towards the south ; Tietze has met
with them on the northern side of the Albourz, near Beschel, at the

^ L. Burgeratein, Geol. Untersuch. im sUdw. Theile der Halbinsel Ghalkidike ; Denkscbr.
Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1880, XL, p. 325.

^ The information furnished by Brauns calls for a fresh investigation of the peninsula
of Sinope : Tchihatcheff, Asie Mineure, G^ol., Ill, p. 150.

^ N. Barbot de Mamy, Ueb. die jttngeren Ablagerungen des stldl. Russland, Sitzungsber.
Akad. Wlss. Wien, 1866, LIII, pp. 339>342 ; Hilber, Jahrb. geol. Beichsanst., 1882, p. 311,
and in other places ; L.Teisseyre, Der podolische Hilgelzug der Miodoboren als ein sarmat
Bryozoen-BifiP, op. cit., 1884, XXXIY, pp. 299-312; E. v. Dunikowski, Geol. Untersuch.
in Russ. Podolien, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1884, pp. 55, 63.

^ H. Abich, Prodromus einer GeoL der kaukasischen Lftnder, 4to, 1858, pp. 152 et seq.



ete iv] r THE PONTIC DEPOSITS 881

entrance to the valley of the Talar East of the Caucasus they contribute
to the formation of the plateau of Ust-Urt. They rise in horizontal beds
On the east side of this plateau, far above the surface of the sea of Aral,
and once certkinly occupied the whole extent of this inland sea, yet they
have not been observed further to the east.

The Sarmatian sea was thus a broad sheet of water which extended
beyond the existing sea of Aral, and towards the west, in the present valley
of the Danube, was divided into smaller basins. The communication with
the open sea was probably not complete, but, apart from exceptional con-
ditions near the coast, the water of this inland sea evidently retained the
same composition for a considerable length of time. The several basins
to the west had the same composition, and must thus have communicated
freely with the great inland sea.

The greater part of the Pontus, or at least the whole north, east, and
west, the sea of Marmara, an^ the north of the Aegean were already
accessible to these waters, and they could also reach the Caspian region up
to the foot of the Albourz. The relations of this sea with the Asiatic basins
will, as we have said, be discussed later.

The Sarmatian region lies completely outfdde the present Mediter-
ranean^ if we consider the latter in a restricted sense, i. e. to the exclusion
of the Aegean and Pontic seas ; the place of union with the Mediterranean
is not known, and the greatest variety in the fauna, as well as its most
purely marine type, is to be found, strange to say, in the Oalician-
Bessarabian zone.

The PonJtic deposits. In the autochthonous species of the Sarmatian
inland sea we observed the first indication of a new marine fauna. This
germ was not destined to develop further. The subsidence of the
coast-line from the sea-level of the second Mediterranean stage to that
of the Sarmatian was only the precursor of a further depression of far
greater extent. We have indeed reached the pdriod of the greatest
shrinking of the Mediterranean. In the region of the Black sea the
Sarmatian strata are covered by a group of horizontal .beds, which
were formed in fresh or slightly brackish water, and which are dis-
tinguished by numerous and peculiar species of Cardiuin, and by genera
such as Melanopsis, Yalenciennesia, and Congeria. To this group belongs
the limestone of the steppes of Odessa. This is the older Aralo-Caspian
stage of Murchison, which is now more usually known as the Pontic
or Pannonian stage. It stretches eastwards in the direction of the
Caspian sea, in particular into the basin of the Manytsch ^ ^penetrates on

* E. Tietze, Bemerk. ab. die Tektonik des Albursgebirges .in Persien; Jahrb. geol.
Reichsanst., 1877, XXVII, p. 392.

* y. V. Mailer, Palaont. Beitr^ge und Erl&ut. z. Briefe Danilewskj’s Cb. die Resaltate
seiner Reise an d. Manjtsch ; M^l. phys. chim. Ac. Patersb., 1878, XI, pp. 55-76.



332


THE MEDITERRANEAN


[part II

the south-west into the basin of Adrianople and over the west coast of
Chalcidice, and extends westwards far into Wallachia, north-westwards
as far as Czortkow in Galicia.

Similar and contemporary deposits fill the basin of Pannonia and that
of Vienna.

Near Vienna the Pontic deposits begin in several places with a hard
basement bed containing Conger ia triangularis'^ \ then follows thick blue
clay, with layers of sand. The series closes here with a purely fluviatile
fonnation, the ‘Belvedere schotter,’ which descends from the Archaean region
in the north-west, that is, from Bohemia, and spreads over the plain as
a layer of yellow pebbles and sand. These are the deposits of a river
which formed a great delta below Krems, now broken up by denudation
into hills

The disposition of the Pontic beds in this region is peculiar. In
certain places, as, for example, to the west^of Lake Neusiedl, they rest in
valleys, which are excavated in the second Mediterranean and the Sar-
inatian stages. Their deposition must therefore have been preceded by
the complete abandonment of the land by the sea, and by the erosion of
these valleys by running water. In other places they lie horizontally
on the Sarmatian stage at heights which are not inconsiderable, sometimes
as much as from 300 to 350 meters, as, for instance, in the neighbourhood
of Modling near Vienna^.

The explanation of this lies in the fact that after the land had been
laid dry and sculptured into hill and valley, the waters of the lake rose
gradually till they reached the height just mentioned. Then arose, as
already said, the great river coming from Bohemia.

The lake communicated with the other lake basins of the Danube, and
so with the sea, as is evident from the fact that several marine fishes were
able to ascend nearly as far as Vienna^.

The traces of this* extraordinary retreat of the sea, by which the whole

^ F. Karrer, Ueb. die Verhaltn. der Congerien-Sch. z. sarmat. Stufe bei Liesing, Jahrb.
geol. Reichsanst., 1868, XVllI, pp. 273-276 ; T. Fuchs, Ueb. ein neuartiges Vorkommen
V. Cong.’Schicht. b. Gumpoldskirchen, op. cit., 1870, XX, pp. 128-130.

^ This is the * Belvedere Schotter * of tho Viennese geologists. It corresponds to the
gravels of Eppelsheim in the basin of Mainz and of Balta in Podolia, as well as to
the Dinotherium sands of the Jura mountains.

” T. Fuchs, loc. cit.; F. Karrer, Geol. der Franz Josef-Hochquellen-Leitung, Abh. geol.
Reichsanst., 1877, p. 250 et seq. The Kichkogel near MOdling is 1,146 feet high, yet
its highest peak is composed of fresh-water limestone, which is superposed on the
Pontic stage.

^ J. Ileckel, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1851, II, Verb., p. 157 ; probably a Brosmius,
related to the cod of the present day ; T. Fuchs, Ueb. die Fischfauna der Gongerien*
Schichten, Yerhaudl. geol. Reichsanst., 1871, p. 227 : Beryx ein Clupeoide u. vielleicht
ein Scomberoide. The Sarmatian genus Cetotherium ascends into the Pontic deposits of
South Russia; Fuchs, op. cit., 1871, p. 303.



CH.iv] EEGRESSION OP THE MEDITEIOIANEAN 833

valley of the Danube and the entire Pontic region were abandoned to
fresh or brackish water, may also be seen in Italy.

Many years ago Capellini recognized the remains of a Pontic Cardium-
fauna above the Tortonian deposits, that is, above the second Mediter-
ranean stage, while a number of later observations, particularly the dis-
covery of the 'same fauna in Sicily by Cafici, have led to the following
results \

In the north of Tuscany and in the march of Ancona, on both sides
of the Apennines, near Reggio, and as far as Sicily, beds with Aricillaria
glavdiformis and Gardita Jouanettit or their equivalents, are overlaid by
a deposit of tripoli, which contains innumerable remains of Radiolaria and
Diatomacea, as well as a varied fauna of fishes. This fauna, in which
Bosniaski has distinguished nearly a hundred species of fishes, consists
according to this investigator of a mixture of genera belonging to the
high sea (Clupea, Gadus, Caranx, Rhombus), and numerous small fresh-
water fishes (Leuciscus). The general character of the fauna is Mediter-
ranean, with a somewhat northern facies

In the tripoli, molluscan genera, such as Syndosmya, Ervilia, Tapes,
and Cardium, are met with, which indicate a certain affinity with the
Sarmatian fauna, although corresponding Sarmatian species have not been
recognized with certainty. Capellini believed that in these deposits he
had actually found the representatives of the Sarmatian stage.

Some observers concluded from the nature of the sediments and the
abundance of Diatomacea that this extensive deposit of tripoli had been
laid down in a greater depth of water than the underlying beds containing
Gardita Jouanetti ; others believed that the abundance of fresh-water fish
and the character of the Mollusca pointed to shallow water and the

* From the fairly abundant literature on this subject I will only mention - for the neigh-
bourhood of Turin: Fuchs, Studien, &c., Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1878, LXXVII,
1. Abth., p. 419; for Leghorn and the west coast, and for Andbna and Sinigaglia, with
the corresponding part of the east.coast: G. Capellini, La formaz. gessosa di Castellina
inarit., Mem. Ac. Bologna, 1874, 3* ser., IV ; by the same, Gli strati a congerie e le
marne compatte mioceniche dei dintorni di Ancona, Mem. Ac. Lincei, 1879, 3*'^ ser., Ilf ;
also by the same, Gli strati a congerie e la formaz. gessoso-solfifera nella prov. di Pisa
e nei dint, di Livorno, op. cit., 1880, 3» ser., V ; S. de Bosniaski, Cenni sopra Tordinam.
cronol. e la natura dei strati tens. sup. nei Monti Livornesi, Rendic. Soc. Tosc. Scienz.
Nat. Pisa, 6. lugl. 1879, and by the same, La formaz. gessosa e il secondo piano
mediterr. in Italia, op. cit., 14. nov, 1880 ; for the south and for Sicily : G. Seguenza, Le
formaz. terz. nella prov. di Reggio, Atti Ac. Lincei, 1880, 3» ser., VI, ii^ particular p. 161
et seq.; I. Cafici, Le formaz. gess. del Vizzinese e del Licodiano, Boll. Com. geol., 1880,
pp. 37-54 ; E. Cortese, Brevi cenni sulla geol. della parte NE. della Sicilia, op. cit., 1882,
XIII, pp. 331-334 ; S. Mottura, Appendice alia mem. s. form. terz. nelhi zona solfifera
della Sicilia, Mem. Com. geol., 1872, II ; B. StOhr, Sulla posiz. geol. del tufo e del tripoli
nella zona solfif. d. Sicil., Boll. Com. geol., 1878, IX, p. 498 et seq.

* S. de Bosniaski, La formaz. gess., p. 11, et passim; to this horizon belong also the
fish fauna of Licata described by Sauvage.



334


THE MEDITEERANEAN


[pABTn

proximity of the shore ; however this may he, it is now certain that above
the tripoli normal deposits of the second stage with Cardita Jimanetti,
Pecten aduncua^ and others again appear. Stohr and Bosniaski do not
therefore share Capellini’s view that the Sarmatian stage is represented
by the tripoli, but they regard it merely as an intercalation in the second
stage, although it extends over the whole of Italy.

The deposition of these highest beds of the second stage, which are
superposed on the tripoli, was followed by a general sinking of the strand-
line; on both sides of the Apennines lagoons were formed in which
gypsum was deposited. This gypsiferous horizon may be traced in the
east from Turin, past Ancona to Reggio ; it runs likewise in the west from
Sazzano past Leghorn and Volterra down through Tuscany, reappears in
the west of Calabria, and proceeds from Reggio into Sicily, where it is
widely distributed. The sulphur mines of Sicily belong to this horizon,
the sulphur having been produced by the reduction of the gypsum de-
posited in the lagoons. Tufaceous limestone has also been deposited in
many places.

These sediments are poor in organic remains; Lehiaa craasicauda
occurs in them. It is the gypsiferous horizon and not the lower lying
tripoli which is regarded by Bosniaski, and doubtless rightly, as the true
equivalent of the Sarmatian stage.

Near Leghorn and at other places white marl of trifling thickness, with
Melanopsis, Planorbis, insects, fresh-water fishes and frogs, occurs above
this horizon. The period during which this was deposited was, according
to the same observer, that of the greatest regression of the sea.

Then follow, as the highest members of this group of strata, sand,
marl, and molasse, probably some gypsum also, and with them the Pontic
fauna, with Congeria and the peculiar species of Cardium which occur in
the limestone of the steppes of South Russia. This horizon is now known
both in the north and the south of the peninsula. It forms the upper
part of Mayer’s ‘ stage of Messina ’ (Piano ^lessiniano of Seguenza) ; its
correspondence with the Pontic deposits is generally recognized.

Bosniaski, in his valuable studies on this subject, points out that traces
of the presence of marine fishes (Dentex, Raja) are found in the Pontic
deposits, and he concludes from this that the level of the sea must have
been higher than during the formation of the immediately preceding
fresh-water beds.

We may recall the fact, first, that west of the lake of Neusiedl the
deposition of the Pontic beds was preceded by the erosion of valleys, from
which we concluded that the land had been laid dry in the interval
between the Sarmatian and Pontic periods; and next, that a few
marine fishes had ascended from the sea as far as Vienna. We will now
leave Italy and turn to the valley of the Rhone.



PBE-PONTIC EBOSIOIJ


385


CH. IV]

Here, too, we learn from the researches of Fontannes that the depo-
sition of the Pontic Cardium beds of Bollfene was immediately preceded
by the erosion of valleys. The deposits of the second Mediterranean stage
are channelled out, and the Cardium beds lie in the channels. Thus in
the south of France also a remarkable retreat of the strand-line took place
before the deposition oi the Cardium beds.

We now recognize the Pontic stage as a deposit of fresh, or slightly
brackish, water, extending from the Caspian into the valley of the
Rhone. With these characters it covers the south of Russia, penetrates
up the valley of the Danube to beyond Vienna, overlies the gypsum on
both sides of the Apennines and in Sicily, and lies in the ancient line
of erosion of the Rhone valley. Neumayr rightly describes it as a well-
marked continental epoch, pointing out that its marine equivalents are not
yet known, because the coast-line at this period probably stood lower than
at present \

We perceive, then, that th*e maximum of regression probably coin-
cides with the interval between the Sarmatian and Pontic periods ; this is •
indicated by the erosion which took place along the Danube and in the
Rhone valley, and by the intercalated beds containing fresh- water fish in
Tuscany.

At the time of the maximum of regression, when the Mediterranean
probably did not extend further eastwards than Sardinia and Corsica,
a change took place in the terrestrial population. The preceding fauna
with Mastodon angnstidens, Palaeomeryx, Listriodon, &c., is supplanted by
a new one containing Mastodon longirostris, Hippotherium, Antilope, and
other forms. Whereas a fair number of cases are known in which remains
of the preceding terrestrial fauna with Mastodon angustidens occur in
littoral marine beds, and this is also true of the terrestrial faunas which
follow the Pontic period, yet no trace of the terrestrial fauna of the Pontic
period itself has ever been found in any marine formation : so far had the
coast retreated.

From the beginning of the third Mediterranean stage to the present day.
At the close of the Pontic phase the sea broadened itself out once more
over the land and covered a great part of the region of Pontic deposits
with purely marine strata. The fauna of this sea makes a still greater
approach to that of the existing Mediterranean than do those of the first
and second stages. Simultaneously with the renewed advance of the sea
a fresh terrestrial population once again makes its appearance. This is the
beginning of the third Mediterranean stage.

Stupendous changes, the main features of which we recognize with

' M. Neumayr, Ueb. den geol. Bau der Insel Kos u. iib, die Giiederung der jung-
tert. Binnenablagerungen des Archipels; Denkschr. Ak^. Wiss. Wien, 1879, XL,
pp. 255, 279.



336


THE MEDITEKRANBAN


[part II

increasing clearness as we approach the present day, lie between this period
and modern times. Throughout this long interval there is no recurrence
of the isolation arid evaporation of so great a portion of the sea as took
place,between the first and second stages, nor of so considerable a regression
of the sea as between the second and third stage. The multiplicity of
phenomena is, however, now so great that we can only present them in
a very condensed form.

We will begin in the west.

The great denudation to which the gulf of the Gironde was subsequently
exposed appears to have erased from it all traces of the third Mediterranean
stage. They are, however, well known in the gulf of the Guadalquivir, and
may easily be distinguished from thase of the second stage. They appear
in many places in the western Mediterranean, both on the coast-land of
North Africa and on the southern borders of the Iberian Meseta and of
the Central Plateau of France, and they penetrate, superposed on the
Pontic Cardium beds, far into the Rhon^ valley, within the pre-Pontic
• erosion valleys.

They border both slopes of the Apennines, form in the north the
deposits of Asti and of Siena, which are distinguished by the abundance
of their organic remains, and cover a part of Sicily, resting almost
everywhere on the Pontic Cardium beds. An exception seems to be
aflbrded by the most northern part of the gulf of Genoa, where they rest
directly on the older rocks of the Alps, and where recent subsidence
appears to have occurred; and a second exception is met with at the
southern point of the peninsula. To these deposits, which are usually
known elsewhere as ‘lower Pliocene,' Seguenza has here given the name
of ‘Piano Zancleano’ on account of their peculiar development, and his
valuable researches show that the Zancleano overlaps all the preceding
stages, resting even on the upturned edges of much older strata, and that
it ascends on the slopes of the Aspromonte to the considerable height of
1,200 meters

From the shores of the Ionian sea, as at Gerace, for example, we can see
the white cubical masses of the thick Zancleano, formed of friable limestone,
sand, and Polyzoa-beds, clothing the dark older rocks, like the remains of
a tom mantle, and rising with a very gentle inclination up the mountain.
But although I have only visited the lower part of this covering, I must
confess I find it difficult to regard the Polyzoa beds of Gerace as a deposit
formed at a depth of more than 1,000 meters, seeing that they show so
striking a resemblance to the ‘ coralline,’ that is, to the Polyzoan zone of
the present Aegean sea, which occurs at a depth of only 20-36 fathoms ;
and yet this must have been the case if the beds of the Zancleano were

^ G. Seguenza, Le formaz. terz. nella prov. di Reggio (Calabr.) ; Atti Accad. Line.,
1880, ser. 3», VI, pp. 169, 175, et passim.



LEVANTINE LAKES


OH. IV}


387


deposited with their present inclination. Some later movement of the
mountains must consequently be assumed here \

We shall soon meet in the same region with still more recent marine
beds also occurring at considerable heights. —

Although the equivalents of the Zancleano are, as we have said, to bc^
seen on both slopes of the Apennines, and although they attain a con-
siderable development, especially on the north-eastern side of the chain,
yet they are completely absent in the northern part of the Adriatic sea,
and they are replaced in the interior of the limestone mountains of
Dalmatia by fresh-water deposits of the same age. Tietze found them,
however, near Dulcigno. They may also be seen on the Ionian Isles, where
T. Fuchs observed them with the bedding much disturbed. From here
they contribute to form a great belt around the Peloponnesus, associated
with younger marine beds of which they form the base.

It i^J not certain whether deposits of this ago reach the islands of
Cyprus and Crete ; they are not known on the east coast of Africa, they
are absent in the Cyclades, and do not penetrate into the Aegean or the ^
Pontic region or the valley of the Danube ; the last named does not show
any marine remains more recent than the Sarrnatian stage.

The extension of the sea both to the north-east and to the south-east
must consequently have stopped far short of the limits it attained during
the second Mediterranean stage. A further proof of this is afforded by the
existence in the valley of the DanulMj, especially in Slavonia, and also in
the islands of the Ac^gean sea, of fresh- vrater beds which, as Neumayr has
shown in his masterly monograph on the island of Cos, are of the same
age as the marine deposits of this stage. We will call them, in accordance
with Hochstettcr’s suggestion, the Levantine group.

The Levantine beds with their great abundance of Paludinas prove;
the existence of a series of larger and smaller fresh-water lakes, traces of
which have been already recognized in Dalmatia, in Bosnia, in the north of
Greece and in Asia Minor, and every year adds to their discovery in fresh
localities. They attain a great thickness in the Aegean region, where they
rest on white or variegated marls, which perhaps represent a still older
fresh-water deposit. On Cos they reach a height of 330 meters, and
remnants of the lower beds lie scattered over Imbros, Lemnos, Samos,
and other islands. On Euboea they are of great thickness, and in Locris,
near the highest summit of the Karya mountains, Bittner met with
Tertiary fluviatile congIomerate.s, which belong to this stage, at a height of


* G. V. Rath, Ein Ausflug nach Calabrien, 8vo, 1871, has published a sketch by
jnyself of Monte Jejunio and the mountain of Geracc which shows this arrange-
ment. The conical summit which rises to the left below the highest mass of Jejunio
^8 said to bear a patch of Tertiary sand, but I have not made an ascent of the
mountain.


SOLLA8


z



338


THE MEDETEERANEAN


[part It

900 meters above the sea^ It is even possible that the thick Tertiary
conglomerates of the northern Peloponnesus are to be assigned here ; they
have been traced by Boblaye and Virlet in the Ziria mountains, south of
Trikala, up to a height of 1,500 meters, though it would seem with a
marked dip 2 . Finally in their typical form as Paludina bedi^ they extend
beyond the Cyclades and even as far as Crete.

The abrupt termination of the Levantine fresh-water beds near the sea
led Spratt many years ago to the conclusion that the whole of this part of
the Mediterranean owed its origin to a subsidence of recent date, and the
travels of Neumayr and his fellow workers have completely confirmed this
view. —

At the close of the third stage a great transformation again took place ;
a new marine formation, containing the fourth Mediterranean fauna or the
upper Pliocene, appears. The sea again surrounds the Apennines on both
sides ; near Rome the marine sands of Moi^te Mario rest on the blue marls
of the Vatican, which in many respects recall the Schlier; in Calabria the
contemporary sediments lie on the slopes of the Zancleano and, according to
Seguenza, fill channels of erosion in it. They cover a great part of Sicily,
but do not reach the Dalmatian coast ; the belt which they form around the
Peloponnesus attains a fairly uniform height of 500 meters. They proceed
as far as the Cyclades and lie, as in Cos, on the Levantine Paludina beds.
Yet they do not reach either the Aegean region or the coast of Egypt.

From the moment the sea crosses the boundary of the Levantine
fresh-water region, the multiplicity of phenomena increases to such an
extent that I find myself compelled again to alter the method of treat-
ment, and must be content to give a concise account of some particular
phenomena or events, instead of a chronological survey. The points which
I propose to discuss briefly are the transitory appearance of Arctic Mollusca
in the Mediterranean and the formation of some sunken areas of recent
date. The temporary penetration of the Red sea into the existing Mediter-
ranean region, which is to be observed in Lower Egypt, will be discussed
in the next chapter.

Northern immigrants in the Mediterranean. Through all the phases
in the history of the Mediterranean, and particularly during that great
shrinkage of its area which preceded the second stage, as well as during
the still greater restriction which introduced and accompanied the period
of the Pontic fresh-water lakes, the Atlantic Ocean was the region in which
the Mediterranean fauna continued to exist, as represented by its most
characteristic species, and from which it was continually replenished to

^ A. Bittner, Der geol. Bau von Attika, Boeotien, Lokris und Parnassis ; Denkschr.
Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1878, XL. p, 12.

^ Fuillon de Boblaye et T. Virlet, Ezp4d, scient. de Mor6e, II, 2, Geol. et Min4r., 4to,
Paris, 1833, p. 214.



NOETHEEN IMMIGEANTS


839


OH, IV]

populate afresh the districts re-invaded by the sea. This is the significance
of the dominant western character which marks the affinities of the faunas
from the first stage up to the present day.

Many years ago, before a separation had been made between the first
and the second stage, it could be shown from M. Hoernes* description of
the Tertiary Mollusca of Vienna that many very typical forms occur among
them which still exist on the coast of Senegambia, and more recent
researches on the Cape Verde islands and the west coast of Africa have
increased the number of these examples^. But in addition to this very
important element the several faunas include other groups of different ago
and origin, which can only be distinguished by a careful analysis.

Such an analysis, remarkable for its thoroughness, has been made by
R. Tournouer of the Mollusca of the second Mediterranean stage, as it
occurs at Cabriires in the gulf of the Rhone.

He distinguishes the following groups: (1) A small number of species,
which appear to be the descendants of the ancient types which existed in
the European seas during Oligocene or even Eocene times. (2) A much larger
group of new and important species which distinguish the Mediterranean
from the Oligocene fauna, and give to it its particular character ; these
allied species are at present to be found in the warmer waters of foreign seas.
(3) Species of which the near relations are to bo found neither in ancient
European seas nor in the warmer waters of the present day, but which appear
as new types, some to disappear again in later times, some, however, to
persist, and these latter, multiplying and undergoing further development,
were the ancestral stock of the present Mediterranean fauna

The principle of Tournouer’s classification may be briefly described as
a separation into ancient autochthones, immigrants, and young autoch-
thones, the last named consisting of sterile and fertile types. The conversion
of the original fauna into that now existing might have been brought about
by the progressive extinction of the ancient autochtliones, by the continual
driving out of the immigrants, by the disappearance of the young sterile
types, and finally by the multiplication and ultimate preponderance of the
young fertile types. This, however, is not the way in which this great
process was accomplished.

In the first place it is not a question of the displacement of the second
group alone; before the commencement of the Pontic period the whole
marine fauna was expelled from a very large part of the sea, the sea itself was

' Ueber die Wohnsitze der Brachiopoden, II, Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1860,
XXXVIII, p. 159; Ueb. die einstige Verbindung N. Afrikas mit S. Europa, Jahrb. geol.
Reichsanst., 1863, XIII, pp. 26, 27 ; also L. Tausch, Die von Prof. C.' Doelter auf den
Gapverden gesammelten Gonchylien, Zeitsebr. deutsch. malak. Ges., 1884, pp. 181-188,
et passim.

^ R. ToumouSr in Fischer et Tournouer, Invert, fossiles du Mont Leberon (Gaudry,
Animaux foss. du Mont Leberon, 4to, 1873), pp. 168-170.

z %



840 THE WEDITERRANEAH [pabt h

restricted within narrow bounds, while the deposits formed in inland lakes
were widely extended. The question, then, is which of the types out of the
whole of this expelled fauna were able on the renewed advance of the sea
to reach the Mediterranean shores and to maintain themselves there.

From Fontannes’ analysis of the thi/rd Mediterranean faui^a in the gulf
of the Rhone it is clear that the southern forms lagged behind. This
fauna includes 315 species disposed among 143 genera. Of these 143
genera two occur at considerable depths in the existing Mediterranean, but
are represented by one or two small species only; two genera are extinct;
16 genera are absent from the present Mediterranean and live, many of
them in rich development, in the warmer seas of the present day. They
thus indicate the degree of relationship in the third stage to the warmer seas
of the present day. But these 16 genera are all, with a single exception,
represented in this fauna by a very insignificant number of species, just as
in the present Mediterranean the single Connie mediterraneua represents, as
an isolated epigone, the large and numerous species of Conus of the earlier
Mediterranean fauna

In passing from the third to the fourth fauna, or the upper Pliocene,
we meet with a completely new element, which has been hitherto foreign
to the Mediterranean, namely, a series of northern immigrants. At the
same time the representatives of warmer seas become still further reduced
in number.

The highly fossiliferous deposits of Monte Pellegrino and of Ficarazzi
near Palermo have been assigned by some authors to the fourth fauna,
while others have considered them as somewhat more recent. Monterosato
distinguishes here 504 species of marine Mollusca, of which 411 still live
in the Mediterranean, 27 are not at present found in the Mediterranean,
but in the Atlantic or North Atlantic Ocean; the remaining 66 species
have so far never been met with among living forms. In the second
group there occur such species as Bucdnum Oroenlandicumy B. un--
datum, Tricliotropis borealis, Panopaea Norvegica, Mya truncata, Cyprina
Islandica, and others which are at present characteristic of cold northern
seas

The appearance of these species doubtless stands in causal connexion
with those indications of great cold which are to be observed at the con-
clusion of the Tertiary period over a great portion of the earth’s surface,
and especially over the whole of the continent of Europe. It is, however,
particularly difficult to fully trace this horizon within the marine deposits

^ F. Fontannes, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1882, 3^ sdr., XI, pp. 116, 117.

^ Marchese T. A. di Monterosato, Nota intomo alia conchologia fossile di Monte Pel-
legrino e Ficarazzi, 8vo, Palermo, 1872 ; the northern species lie (p. 17) near Ficarazzi
in a particular layer ; also by the same, Catalogo delle conchiglie fossili, &c., Boll. Com.
geol. d’ Ital., 1877, VIII, pp. 28-42.



Sf, i?g AIMYBIS OF . 841

of the Mediterranean, and it has up to the present not been accomplished,
although as early as 1844 Philippi had pointed out the presence of some
species from the extreme north in the south of Sicily.

Let us now compare this fauna from the neighbourhood of Palermo
with P. Fischer’s analysis of the Molluscan fauna of Rhodes, which is also
assigned to the fourth fauna, the upper Pliocene. Of 312 species, 246 still
continue to live in the Mediterranean, 68 species are extinct, and only

8 species appear to have emigrated. Of the latter, 3 species live at
present on the coast of West Africa or the Cape Verde islands, and one in
the west and north of Europe, while 4 are northern species \

Neumayr sees in the marine deposits of the island of Cos, which overlie
the Levantine fresh-water beds, a considerable resemblance to those of
Rhodes, and thinks they are of the same age. Of 107 species collected on
Cos, 80 are also to be found on Rhodes, but the northern immigrants have
so far not yet been met with on Cos

The explanation of the facts in the south of CaldbrUi is, however,
much more difficult. Seguenza here distinguishes a Sicilian stage (Piano
Siciliano) from a Saharan stage (Piano Saariano) which rests on the former
unconformably ; the northern species are said to pass from the lower stage
into the older part of the next stage above, the Piano Saariano.

According to the statements of this observer the Saariano inferiore
or the older Quaternary, attains a height of 830 meters above the sea-level
overlooking Reggio, and comprises 497 species, of which 300 are Molluscs ;

9 of these are northern and only 6 or 7 extinct species.

The Saariano superiore rises to a much less height, its coast-line m ly have
reached to about 250 meters, and it rests against the deposits mentioned
above; 615 species are known, among which 310 occur in the Saariano
inferiore, but the northern forms are absent. On the other hand, among the
309MolluBca of this division, we find, besides a great preponderance of existing
Mediterranean types, 8 species which still live in warmer waters.

If we take all the groups of invertebrate animals into account we find
11 species belonging to warmer seas; 7 of these live at present on the
west coast of Africa, about the Canaries and the Cape Verde islands, and
4 in the Red sea or other warmer seas. In addition 10 to 13 extinct
species of Mollusca occur in the Saariano superiore, among which, however,
are a few recurrent types from the second or third Mediterranean stage.

From these faets we conclude that at the time when the coast-line
reached its highest level the northern species still lingered in the Mediter-
ranean, but that as the sea-level sank they disappeared ; while, on the other
hand, a few representatives of a warmer climate temporaKly reappeared.

' P. Fischer, Pal4ont. des terr. tert. de Hie de Rhodes ; M^m. Soc. g4oL de Fr., 1877,
3® B^r., I, pp. 40-44.

* Neumajr, Kos, p. 252.



342 THE MEDn^RRANEAH [parth

Finally, as the strand continued to approach its present level, the marine
fauna was established as it now exists \

There are still further indications of this transitory appearance of
a small number of warmer types in post-glacial times. To this quite recent
period we may with considerable probability assign the marine deposits of
TarentOy which appear in the neighbourhood of this harbour as a plateau
rising not more than twelve to sixteen meters above the sea, and extend
on the one hand towards the Apulian plateau, and on the other to the
little island of Pelagosa

On this island Kobelt found, among 260 species of marine Mollusca,
only 9 to 11 species which are completely extinct or no longer present
in the Mediterranean, and he observed no northern forms. The remaining
species belong to the existing fauna of the Mediterranean ®.

In not a few places the northern element is represented only by a single
species, CypriTia Islandica, and in this case all the other groups are
present, from which in the course of time* the present population of the
Mediterranean has been derived. In the shell-bearing beds of Valle biaja
the lists of Stefani record 253 spejcies of marine Mollusca; 209 of these
still live in the Mediterranean, and of these 115 occur as far as the coasts
of Great Britain and Norway; they practically constitute the Celtic
clement of the fauna; 20 species are survivals from older stages now
extinct; two species still live in Senegal, one in the Antilles. One, Gyprina
Idandica, alone represents the northern element ^

As I propose to discuss later the intermittent regression of the Mediter-
ranean coast-line up to the historic period, these examples may for the
present suffice.

They show how far the composition of the present fauna of the
Mediterranean is dependent on the past history of this sea. Recent
investigators, such as Jeffreys, have shown that the existing deep-water
fauna of the Meditermnean corresponds in a most extraordinary manner

^ Seguenza, Prov. di Reggio, pp. 237, 315, 336, and in particular p. 345 ct seq. ‘ Piano
Siciliano * with northern Mollusca is assigned to the Tertiary as * Pleistocene,’ ‘ Piano
Saariano,’ which in its lower parts contains the same northern species, to the Quaternary,
and the recurrence of the warmer forms falls in the younger Saariano ; these attempts
at classification show the difficulty of the subject clearly enough. Mantovani gives
a somewhat divergent description of the relations of the beds near Reggio : Alcuni osserv.
nei terr. terz. dei dintorni di Reggio Gal., Boll. Com. geol. d' Ital., 1878, pp. 443-468.

* T. Fuchs, Dio Tertiarbildungeu von Tarent; Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1874,
LXX, pp. 193-197.

^ W. Kobelt, Verzeichniss der von mir bci Tarent gesamm. foss. Conch., Jahrb. deutsch.
malak. Ges., 1874, 1, pp. 65-77. The homotaxy of these deposits with those of Lentini in
Sicily is emphasized by Fuchs and Bittner, Die plioc. Bildungen v. Syrakus u. Lentini,
Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1875, LXXl.

* C. de Stefani, Sedimenti sottomarini delT epoca postpliocenica in Italia ; Boll. Com.
geol. d’ Ital., 1876, VII, pp. 272-289; also Neumayr, Kos, p. 251,



CH.iv] MIXED NATURE OP MEDITERRANEAN FAUNA 343

with that of the British seas. This is the Celtic element, which, having
appeared here in great part during the glacial period, still survives in the
deeper regions. The higher zones are populated by the Lusitanian and
typical Mediterranean element, with hero and there a foreign form of great
antiquity, such as the West Indian THtonium nohUe, found on the cast
coast of Sicily Finally, northern relict forms are not entirely absent, as,
for example, the strange Norway lobster, HfejyJirops Norvegicus^ which
according to Lorenz appears, together with a small number of other northern
species, only in the deepest parts of the northern and central Quarnero, and
does not occur anywhere else in the whole of the Mediterranean. But in
the places where it does occur individuals are so abundant that baskets of
them are daily brought to market in Venice, Trieste, and Fiume®.

The general result of the preceding investigation seems to me to be
as follows : since the beginning of the third stage many local events have
occurred in the Mediterranean (the most important of which will be
discussed directly), many oscillations of the coast-lino have since then
taken place, but the sea was never again so narrowly restricted as it was
immediately before the third stage.

This sea, with its labile coast-line, was first colonized by the tliird
fauna, then the immigrants from the north arrived, and finally, as the
climate became milder, some warmer elements again made their appearance.
The climate and the position of the coast-line approached more and more
closely to their present state, and of each of the earlier immigrations some
trace at least remains in the present fauna.

It is therefore extremely difficult, in the present state of our know-
ledge, to establish exact divisions within the long series of deposits which
separate us from the beginning of the third fauna, although within this
lengthy period many great changes may easily be recognized

In the investigation we are pursuing the appearance of immigrants
from the north must be considered as a fact of prirjiary importance. The
tectonic modifications of the Mediterranean basin must, notwithstanding
all their grandeur, be regarded merely as local accidents. The appearances
of northern forms, on the other hand, resulted from general causes quite
independently of these local events ; and it affords therefore, in spite of
much uncertainty as to detail, due to the incomplete state of our olwerva-
tions, a datum of the highest value in the chronology of the tectonic
events.

The lad eubddences. It is a very remarkable fact that the younger

^ Kobelt, Jahrb. deutsch. malak. Ges., 1874, 1, pp. 347-352. ,

* For its habitats, see J. R. Lorenz, Physikalische Verhaltnisse und Vertheilung der
Organismen im Quarnerischen Golfe, 8vo, 1863, p. 328.

^ The same results are obtained by P. Fischer, lie de Rhodes, p. 42, and previously by
Phifippi, Enumeratio Molluscorum Siciliae, 1844, 11, p. 271.



344 THE MEDITEERANEAN [parth

terraced marine deposits which we have just discussed are absent in
certain parts of the Mediterranean, either wholly or with the exception
of the lowest, and consequently youngest, terraces, and their absence is
associated with circumstances which prove the recent age of these parts
of the sea.

The most important example of an addition to the sea in very recent
times is fui’nishcd by the Aegean and the Black sea. In the south of
Russia, as we have seen, the Tongrian sea extended from Samland
over the whole plain as far as the eastern side of the Urals. Then
followed after a long interval the second Mediterranean stage, which we
were able to follow from Galicia to Elisabethgrad and towards Kertsch,
without however perceiving (a fact not to be overlooked) any direct
communication with the present basin of the Mediterranean. The Sar-
matian stage next covered the whole region, extending far towards the sea
of Aral. Then followed the Pontic stage, with the limestone of the steppes,
marking the time of the greatest shrinkage of the Mediterranean. But
whereas in the west, in Italy for example, the Pontic stage is succeeded
by the third and fourth Mediterranean stages, in the region of the Black
sea this is not the case. On the contrary this region remained for a long
time excluded from the Mediterranean.

Events shaped themselves in the Aegean region in a peculiar fashion. It
was covered neither by the first nor the second Mediterranean stage. The
Sarmatian and Pontic stages extend from the north as far as the Troas ;
the latter also reaches Chalcidice. During the third Mediterranean stage
a deep fresh-water lake stood over the site of the Aegean, a part of that
Levantine chain of lakes which stretched from Slavonia to Asia Minor,
^rhe Mediterranean lay entirely to the south of this area. Up to this
time the existing continent of Europe had always been connected with Asia
in this region by a broad tract of dry land.

The events which followed next have been clearly explained by
Neumayr h

First the southern part of this continent subsided, and the fourth
Mediterranean stage penetrated as far as Melos, Rhodes, and the eastern
part of the island of Cos ; it there deposited marine strata on the fresh-
water formations of the Levantine series. This is probably the period in
which that great zone of fractures was formed, which is indicated by
the volcanic line of the Cyclades passing through Nisyros, Santorin,
Melos, Poros, Methana, and Aegina, along which earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions continue to the present day. It appears to be continued into
the gulf of Corinth, and, according to the structural relations observed by

^ Neumayr, Kos, p. 273 et seq., and Zur Geschichte des dstl. Mittelmeerbeckens,
Virchow u. Holtzendorff's Samml. gemeinverst. wiss. Voitr., Heft 392, Berlin, 1882.



OH.iv] SUBSIDENCE OP THE AEGEAN 345

T, Fuchs on the isthmus, it there presents all the characters of a great
trough fault \

At length in very recent times the Aegean continent completely
subsided ; Levantine fresh-water deposits of great thickness and wdth
broken edges indicate the new coast, the Mediterranean spread far and
wide over the Pontic basin, and even overflowed the otherwise regular
shores of this sea into the sea of Azov.

A new order of things was thus established; where lofty mountains
stood there is now a deep sea, in many places thousands of feet deep,
dating from quite recent times, in any case post-glacial. It is even
possible that these events were witnessed by man. Mediterranean deposits
certainly occur in the Dardanelles and near Gallipoli, but they do not rise
more than forty feet above the present sea-level ; they contain no northern
and only one extinct molluscan species, all the rest are existing Mediter-
ranean shells. Near Gallipoli a flint knife was found which is said to
have been obtained from these beds The valley of the Danube, which
so long formed a link in the great chain of depressions extending throiigh
south Russia and the interior of Asia, is now separated from them by
a part of the Mediterranean. To the west of the existing Black sea is
open egress to the rivers and their world of life ; to the east of it there
is no outflow, and life stagnates.

In the great closed region of the east lies, as the true successor of the
old Pontic brackish -water lake, the Caspian sea, which has been deprived
of its great tributary, the Danube, by the advance of the Mediterranean
over the sunken area of the Aegean. The Danubian character of the piscine
fauna of the Caspian filled Filippi with astonishment as early as 18G5,
long before these facts were known, and from an examination of tl\e
Caspian fauna he drew the conclusion that, in studying the physical history
of this sea, attention should be directed to the Danube, rather than to its
hearer neighbour the Black sea •

The present surface of the Caspian sea lies, as is well known, 26 meters
below that of the Black sea Deposits of the Caspian, distinguished by

^ T. Fuchs, Stud. iib. d. jiingeren tert. Bildungen Griecheulands ; 'Dcnkschr. Akad.
Wiss. Wien, 1877, XXXVI f, 2. Abth., pp. 1^42.

* Calvert and Neumayr, Junge Ablag. am Hellespont, pp. 366 and 368. As early as
1856 Spratt was acquainted not only with the recent Mediterranean marine dcjposits in
the Dardanelles, but also with a similar deposit at Leftero-Khori, in the bay of Salonica,
south of Vardar; it is about thirty feet high, evidently very recent, and rests on fresh-
water beds: On the Geology of Varna and the neighbouring parts of Bulgaria,
Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1856, XIII, pp. 72-83; On the fresh-water deposits of Euboea,
tom. cit., pp. 177-184.

* F. de Filippi, Note di un viaggio in Pjfirsia, 8vo, Milano, 1865, p. 318.

* V. Helmersen, Beitr. z. Kenntniss d. geol. u. physikogeogr. Verhaltnisse d. aralokasp.
Niederung, Bull. Ac. Petersb., 1879, XXV, pp. 513-549; in particular p. 543 et seq.



346 MEDITEEElAN^^

existing species of Mollusca, extend as far as the Uil, Lake Elton, and
Tzaritzin, and, according to Stuckenberg, even into the region between
Stawropol and Simbirsk on the Volga. Moller has shown from Danilewsky’s
collections that they extend in the basin of the Many tsch as far westwards as
the Metschetnoy-Liman, opposite Orlow Simonik, only 140-160 kilometers
from the sea of Azov. But in the region of the Many tsch itself Sarmatian,
Pontic, and Caspian beds lie horizontally one on the other

From Konschin’s account of the Kara-Kum steppe we learn that its
western part presents Aralo-Caspian deposits containing recent Mollusca,
while the eastern part is of greater age

Generalizing from the results of these later researches, and of the older
observations, and in particular the masterly description of the region as
a whole published by Helmerson in 1879, we arrive at the following
conclusions^: — The Caspian consists of a northern shallow moiety and
a southern deeper moiety which attains depths of 1,000 meters, and, as
Abich has shown, occupies the site of a sUnken and perhaps still sinking
part of the Caucasian chain which runs across the Caspian. Communica-
tion with the sea of Aral in recent times, that is, since the appearance of
the existing molluscan fauna, has only existed in the south across the
western part of the Eara-Kum, so that at the time of its greatest extension
this sea formed a sort of double lake with two clearly separated parts.
The separation was brought about by the rise of the tableland of the
Ust-Urt, which, together with the Mugodjar mountains, divided the Caspian
basin from the sea of Aral.

Around this great median mass the Aralo-Caspian double lake extended
in such a manner that its western half covered a part of the lower Volga
in the north, and the basin of the Manytsch in the west, as far as the sea
of Azov. Its remaining boundary was determined by the slopes of the
Caucasus. In addition an arm branched off from the bay of Krasnowodsk,
which became broader in the western part of the Kara-Kum, and was
bounded on the north by the southern foot of the Ust-Urt. It embraced
the whole of the Aral towards the north ; but as this lake lies at present
48*5 meters above the Black sea and 71«1 meters above the Caspian, it is
clear that after the separation its water became entirely independent of
that of the Caspian. But traces of a still greater extension have been
observed above its existing margin, as, for instance, near Mali-basch on the

According to Starinow's historical investigations the last separation would fall in the
years 1540-1545.

^ y. V. Moller, loc. cit. (note 2, page 331).

^ Konschin, Reiseskizzen aus den Steppen Kara-Kum ; Iswest., 1883, pp. 315-332.

* V. Helmersen, loc. cit., and (Jakowlew) Zur Geol. der aralokasp. Niederung, op. cit.,
1883, XXVIII, pp. 364-379. A previous communication with the sea of Azov is indicated
by the presence of living Caspian Mollusca in the latter ; E. v. Martens, Ueb. vorderasiat.
Conchylien, 4to, 1874, p. 79.



^^ 5 ^! 347

Syr-Daria; and in the south Helmersen has obtained evidence of a level
which must have b^n about 20 meters higher.

Having made these observations on the history of the Pontic region, we
will turn for a. moment to the gulf of Mexico (vide Fig. 87). The north of
the gulf is surrounded by horizontal Tertiary beds (t^); on the Atlantic
coast the formation of marine deposits proceeded undisturbed (t^, but
they did not extend into the gulf; there the inland lake deposits of the
Grand Gulf series (ffg) were laid down. Later, it is true, the Atlantic
Ocean again entered the gulf and deposited the marine strata of Port
Hudson upon the Grand Golf series, just as in most recent times the
Mediterranean has deposited its sediments upon the beds of the ancient
inland lake of the Pontus.

Let us now return to the Mediterranean.

An excellent example of the subsidence of a wide area .is afforded
by the island of Malta, which, as we have already observed, consists of
deposits of the first Mediterranean stage, the Schlier, and of the second
stage.

The bedding is horizontal, but faults are present which, according
to Hutton and Leith Adams run as follows : a principal fault, marked by
a series of steep cliffs, extends across Malta from the bay of Fomm-er-rih
north-east to the bay of Maddalena. The north-west side is thrown
down to a considerable depth, according to Hutton about 350 feet near
Fomm-or-rih, and 270 feet at the other end. Two other faults, running
in the same direction, bound St. Paul’s bay, which forms, together with
the valley extending inland from it, a sunken trough. The ridge which
now succeeds and is continued into the island of Salmunet is a subsidiary
horst; this is the ridge referred to in the Acts of the Apostles, xxvii. 41, as
a place having the sea on both sides of it whereon the apostle Paul suffered
shipwreck. Melleha bay is also a sunken trough, but these troughs only
form part of a great trough-subsidence which occupies the whole space
between the fault of Fomm-er-rih and a fault on Gozzo. The latter runs
north-east from the ravine of Migier-Scini to the B&s el Kala. Another
great fracture, the fault of Malak, follows the south coast of Malta ; here
too the amount of the throw is 850 feet ; it increases, owing to the coming
in of a second subordinate fault, to 550 feet ; at no great distance from the
shore the sea is 500 fathoms deep.

In this way the plateau has given way and sunk inwards ; the island
of Comino and the straits of Frioul lie in the trough; Malta and Gozzo
are fragments of horsts. Spratt, who has rendered such eminent service

I

* P. W. Hatton, Sketch of the Physical Geology of the Island of Malta, GeoL
Mag., 1866, III, pp. 145-152, pi. viii, ix ; A. Leith Adams, Notes of a Naturalist in the
Nile Valley and Malta, 8vo, 1870, pp. 75, 141-147, 174; most of these faults are marked
in the geological map of Malta, fol. 1854, by the Earl of Ducie.



348


THE MEDITERBANEAN


[fabt n

towards the elucidation of the physical history of the Mediterranean,
believed that the confused manner in which the remains of terrestrial
animals occur in the fissures and caves adjacent to the fracture of Malak
might have been brought about by a seismic fiood

The subsidence of the northern part of the Adriatic sea, and its con-
nexion with the fractured area of the southern Alps, has already been
discussed (p. 268 ). The varied series of marine Tertiary deposits, which is
visible on the eastern slopes of the Apennines, is completely absent from



Fio. 89. The troibgh-sithsidence of Malta and Gozso (after the Earl of Ducie,

Hutton, and Lcith-Adama).

the Dalmatian coast as far as Dulcigno. The plateau of marine deposits
which extend from Tarento to Pelagosa, where their last trace appears, is,
as we have seen, probably of post-glacial age, and the whole marine area
situated to the north of the chain of islands, Lagosta-Pelagosa-Tremiti, is
still more recent than the post-glacial plateau.

We meet with similar indications in the Tyrrhenian sea, A part of the
subsidence of the western Apennines, in particular that situated in the

' T. A. B. Spratt, On the Bone-caves near Grendi, Zebbug, and Melliha, in the Island
of Malta, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1867, XXIII, p. 296. Dolomieu had previously
expressed similar views, but from other reasons.


OH. iv] RECENT AGE OF LATEST INBREAKS 349

north of Tuscany, is, judging by the distribution of the second Mediterranean
stage, approximately of the same age as the eastern down-break of the Alps,
but some of the subsidence is much younger, and movements still persist
at the present day (p. 82 et seq.). All the observations hitherto made with
reference to the Tyrrhenian sea, and on Sardinia and Corsica, have recently
been brought together by Forsyth-Major. On the little island of Pianosa
remains of deer have been found, and on Giannutri, which only measures 200
hectares, remains of the stag and a larger Ruminant ; a number of similar
fossils are known in Elba. Of the sixteen Mammals (exclusive of bats and



Fia. 40. View of the fault of Maldk on (he south coast of Ih^ island of Malta
(after Captain Goff in Leith- Adams).

The walls, i, i, are formed by the limestone beds benoatli the Schlior (lower lime.stone) ;
the Schlior is not visible; the second Mediterranean stage, ir (upper limestone), lies with
dragged-out basset edges at the base ; v-v, fault plane; in the background the little island
of Filflah ; 1, 2, S, caves and fissures with Hippopotamus, Elephas, MyoTUs, &c. ; 4, debris out of
the cave ; 5, breccia with elephant remains:


a few small Iiisectivores) at present inhabiting Corsica and Sardinia, seven
arc recorded which do not occur on the Italian peninsula, but ar(5 all cited
as living in Algeria. The country has thus been broken up in quite recent
times, but the relationship of the pai'ts cannot at present be completely
determined h »

A large part of the region of the Syrtis Minor is formed of a recent


' ' C. J. Forsyth-Major, Die Tyrrhenis, from the magazine Kosmos, 1883, XIII; compare
the remark on p. 234.


350


THE MEDITERRANEAN


[pabth

deposit of sandy loam with beds and loose crystals of gypsum overlying
Cretaceous limestone. It contains Zonites carididwdmvs and other existing
forms of land-shells, and is continued inland on both declivities of the Shott
el-Fedjadj. It is certainly not a marine deposit ; nevertheless it dips beneath
the sea and forms the group of the Kerkena islands, opposite Sfax \

Formentera, in contrast to the other Balearic islands, also consists of
a recent terrestrial deposit‘d.

In Crete the remains of the hippopotamus occur in great numbers in
recent deposits ; not only in Malta, but also in Sicily and in the caverns
and clefts of the Rock of Gibraltar, the remains of great terrestrial animals
are to be found. It may be observed that Hyaena epelaea, which occurs
so frequently in caves in England, and is also found in the caves of central
Europe, appears near Mentone associated with human remains, and in
Gibraltar with African types. This hyena is not identical with the
striped hyena (//. striaia) of North Africa, which appears to have come
originally from Asia, but with the spotted liyena {H. crocuta) of the south.
The jackal still lives, as we said above, on a few of the Dalmatian islands.
The porcupine, chameleon, and numerous other forms of animals and plants
connect Spain, Sicily, and Italy with the north of Africa.

A theory has repeatedly been put forward that a communication by
land existed in quite recent times across the Mediterranean, and that
large parts of this sea are of recent origin ^ But at present it is still
very difficult to form a precise opinion on the subject. So much alone
is certain, that the fragmentation of the continent was accomplished little
by little, and at very different times; and that very great subsidences
have affected it since the glacial period.

Summary, The preceding facts testify to the following series of ^
changes in the state of the Mediterranean.

The deposits of the middle Cretaceous in Jamaica, and those of the
Oligoccne period in eeveral of the West Indian islands, present a striking
resemblance to the deposits of the same age in the south of Europe. This
resemblance persists to a certain extent up to the time when the south of
Europe first possessed that marine fauna which furnished the ancestral
stock of the existing Mediterranean fauna: in the evolution of the latter

* A. Pomel, 64oI. de la Petite Syrte et de la region des Chotts Tunisiens, Bull. Soc.
geol. de Fr., 1878, 3® ser., VJ, pp. 217-224 ; also Le Sahara, p. 53.

* L. M. Vidal y £. Molina, Bosquejo geol. de las islas Ibiza y Formentera; Bol.
Com. mapa geol. £sp., 1880, VII, p. 91, sheet B.

’ Those who have gone furthest in this direction are ; A. C. Ramsay, The Geology of
Gibraltar and the opposite coast of Africa and the History of the Mediterranean Sea,
Proc. Roy. Instit., 1879, VIII, pp. 594-601 ; and E. Blanchard, Lespreuves de la formation
rdeente de la Mediterranee, Comptes rend., 1881, XCIII, pp. 1042-1048 ; also the observa-
tions by A. Milne Edwards, loc. cit., p. 1048; Daubree, p. 1050; and Hubert, Observ. sur
I’etat de la Mediterranee a la fin de Pepoque tert., tom. cit., pp. 1117-1119,



OH. IV] SUMMABY 861

many characteristic types have b^en eliminated, and new or foreign elements
introduced.

The deposits in which this fauna first appears form the firtst Mediter-
ranean dage. It is not improbable that at this time a large part of the
North Atlantic was either dry land, or was interrupted by a series of
great islands which have subsequently sunk to profound depths. The
waters of the Atlantic Ocean flowed at that time into the gulf of the
Gironde, without however reaching by this road the basin of the Mediter-
ranean. Such a communication existed, however, along the line of the
Guadalquivir, at the south foot of the Meseta, and there was most probably
a still more important communication across Morocco. The sea extended
from the south side of the Central Plateau of France through the Rhone
district into Switzerland; its deposits appear on the northern border of
the Swiss Alps and in some parts of the Jura; it surrounded the southern
part of the Bohemian mass, and extended as far as the north of Moravia.
It has left traces of its presence in several parts of Hungary, in Tran-
sylvania, in the south of Styria, in several parts of the southern Alps, on
the outer border of the Apennines, in Corsica, Sardinia, and Malta. Its
deposits appear in isolated patches in the extreme south of Asia Minor, and
may be traced northwards still further in the east, beyond the sources of the
Euphrates ; thence they extend past Lake Urmia into the north of Persia.

Above this first and varied group of marine deposits there lies in
eastern Europe a broad sheet of bluish-grey clay with Aturia Aturi and
a number of special forms which constitute an independent horizon ; we
have given it the name of the Sddier. Its most westerly occurrence lies
in the neighbourhood of Nice and in Malta. In the east of Bavaria the
Schlier runs between the Bohemian mass and the border of the Alps and
Carpathians, through Austria, Moravia, and Silesia, and it surrounds the
whole outer border of the Carpathians as far as Wallachia. Throughout
the whole of this region it is characterized by the presence of gypsum, rock
salt, and other products of evaporation. The salt beds of Transylvania also
belong to it. The Schlier is likewise known in Hungary ; it follows the
outer border of the Apennines, and appears with similar characters in
the south of Asia Minor. It is not improbable that the extensive Tertiary
beds of gypsum and rock salt in the region of the Euphrates and in Persia
also belong to the same perio<l as the Schlier.

At the conclusion of this period, which is distinguished by the isolation
and concentration by evaporation of largo parts of the sea, some of the
greatest tectonic changes occurred. At the time when the marine Schlier
was involved in the folding of the Alps, the Carpathians, and the Apen-
nines, and contributed to the building up of the outer border of these
chains, in other places, as in many parts of Tuscany, Austria, western
Hungary, and Styria, great in-sinkings were formed, and in these lie leaf-



852


THE MEDITEERANEAN


[PABTn

bearing Hgnitiferous beds which are immediately subsequent in age to the
Schlier. It is about this time that the Alpine basin of Vienna was broken
in, that the Alps were separated from the Carpathians, that the eastern
down-break of the Alps with the gulf of Gratz was formed, that the way
was prepared for the subsequent discharge of the Danube to the east, and
that the Tuscan part of the inner Apennine depression was formed or at
least indicated. It is probable that a large part of the inner Carpathian
subsidences also belong to this period. In the west the Schlier appears to
be represented only by fresh- water beds.

Then the Mediterranean made a fresh advance and the second Mediter-
ranean stage was deposited. Not only did the ocean penetrate into the
gulf of tlie Gironde, but it extended transgressively northwards towards
Orleans, and once more in all probability it failed to reach the Mediter-
ranean by the gulf of the Gironde. The communication along the Guadal-
quivir was again in existence. The sea advanced far to the north in the
region of the llhone, but did not reiich Switzerland, and there was no com-
munication with the basin of the upper Danube, such as existed at the time
of the first Mediterranean stage. On the other hand, this sea has left its
traces in the in-sinkings on the inner side of the Apennines and Alps,
and just as in the previous stage the sea exceeded its ancient limits in the
direction of Orleans, so in this it not only surrounded the Carpathians but
spread far over the Russian Platforai into the government of Kherson, and
even into the neighbourhood of the present sea of Azov. It also reached
the southern part of Asia Minor, but it is not certain whether deposits of
this period are also present in the interior of the country, in Armenia and
Persia.

On the other hand, it is the lower beds of this stage which spread over
the Libyan desert into the oasis of Siuah and extend in the neighbour-
hood of Suez as far as the Red sea, which is at present inhabited by an
entirely different fauna.

The second Mediterranean stage is again succeeded in the west by
fresh-water beds, while in the east of Europe a now and independent group
of strata, the Sarmatiav stage, makes its appearance.

The Sarmatian must be regarded as a marine stage, although in
many places it contains brackish-water intercalations, and although its
fauna bears a characteristic impress of uniformity. It fills the depressions
of the Danube region from Lower Austria to the Black sea, covers large
areas extending from the south of Poland through south Russia to the
Caspian and the sea of Aral, and penetrates into the Dardanelles and the
northern part of the Aegean sea. The extensive gypsiferous beds on both
sides of the Apennines, to which the Sicilian sulphur deposits also belong,
are perhaps contemporaneous with the Sarmatian stage.

The Sarmatian is followed by a brackish-water deposit of truly



SUMMARY


353


OH. iv}

wonderful extent, characterized by many species of Cardium and by Con-
geria ; this is the Pontic deposit. It appears in the valley of the Rhone,
where its deposition was preceded by a period of erosion, presents itpelf on
both sides of the Apennines, and is known as far as Sicily. Throughout
the region of the Danube plains, from Lower Austria southwards, it rests
on the Sarmatian stage, and this is also the case in the south of Russia.

Once more the Mediterranean broadened its bounds ; the third Mediter-
ranean stage again penetrates into the valley of the Rhone, overlying the
Pontic deposits ; it occurs in many places within the circumference of the
existing Mediterranean, and the inbreak of Genoa appears to belong to this
period. But towards the north-east it does not extend beyond Cos, and on
the site of the present Aegean sea there was still dry land during this
period, with one or more large and deep fresh-water lakes. Nor does this
stage penetrate into the interior of Asia Minor.

An extensive oscillation of the coast-line may be recognized along the
existing shores of the Mediterranean, by means of the different levels at
which the later beds succeed one another, often in distinct terraces.
Emigrants from the north, species which live at present in Greenland, made
their appearance during this period in the fauna of the Mediterranean ; the
greater part of these subsequently disappeared, but it is probable that
a whole series of the Celtic species, which at present inhabit the deeper
and colder regions of the Mediterranean, wandered in about this time.

After this period great subsidences again took place. The Aegean con-
tinent, which during the whole of the preceding epoch had extended from
Asia Minor and isolated the Pontic region, now subsided, as did also the
Pontic region itself up to the northern edge of the western Caucasus, and
the Mediterranean thus entered a new and vast region, while in the Caspian
basin the former state was maintained. The northern Adriatic also now
sank inwards, and in many other places larger or smaller subsidences and
attendant faults occurred. •

In addition to these events another of a different nature now affected
the Mediterranean, namely, a general alteration of the coast-line. This was
not a local accident, but, as we shall see later, a very general phenomenon.

The shore deposits abandoned. by the sea, which may l)e seen in many
places a few feet above the present sea-level, have doubtless aris(3n in the
same way as the much higher marine terraces, which date from the time
of the northern immigrants or even earlier. Many observers have been
struck by the contrast between the regularity of these recent terraces on
the one hand, and the folds and faults of the mountain chains on the other.
The regularity of the ‘cordon littoral quaternaire,* that is, of the most recent
marine terraces of Cyprus, led Gaudry to distinguish two distinct series
of phenomena in the Mediterranean : first, a general sinking of the water-

Aa


aOLLAS



864


THE MEDlTEBBAlirEAN


[PABTn

level ; secondly, the formation of dislocations \ This distinction between
the movements of the water and the movements of the land is of the
greatest importance in the study of the changes in the earth's surface.

The series of events we have just passed in review also brings into
prominence clearly enough the different parts played by thp folding and
the sinking movement, or, as we have expressed it above, dislocation in
a tangential and dislocation in a vertical direction. In the gulf of the
Guadalquivir we have seen to the north the Tertiary shore resting on
the southern margin of the Meseta, but towards the south, on the border
of the Betic Cordillera, upturned beds and abrupt basset edges. The gulf
of the Gironde shows a similar contrast, but the case is not so striking.
On the other hand, it is repeated in the Rhone district in the clearest
manner, both to the south and to the east of the Bohemian mass.

The intervening areas, the depressions which separate the mountain
chains from the foreland, present the appearance of marine areas crumpled
up on one side ordy. We are not in a position to say how broad that
marine area may have been, the deposits of which, under the name of the
marine Molasse, may be seen infolded with the outer border of the Alps.

It is, however, evident that those changes which we have attempted
to trace in the eventful history of the Mediterranean are not yet at
an end. The oscillations of the coast<line still continue. Fresh down-
breaks are in preparation. The indications furnished by Calabria in this
respect have already been mentioned ; R. Hoemes regards the seismic line
Gorz-Klana-Fiume-Ottocac as a peripheral zone of the fractured area of the
Adriatic. Equally remarkable observations have been made in the East.
Abich has shown that the eastern Caucasus has sunken in, that its
prolongation lies beneath the Caspian sea, and that the great earthquakes
of Shemakha-Baskal travel along the fractured margin of a subsidence.
The detailed and instructive account of the phenomena which occurred on
the lower course of the Kur, in May, 1859, points to the fact that the whole
region between Baku, Shemakha, Nucha, Elisabethpol, and Shusha, that
is, the entire plain which opens out towards the Caspian sea, behaves in the
same way as the sunken area of Calabria and the North Adriatic, i.e. that
fresh subsidence is in preparation This region is adjacent on the west

’ A. Gaudry, Geol. de Tile de Chypre, Mem. Soc. g^ol. de Pr., 1859, 2® s^r., VII, p. 233.

^ H. Abich, Geolog. Forschungen, &c., II, p. 427 et 8e4. * In order to form a just idea
of the extent of these disturbances (the earthquakes in Shemakha) we must bear in
mind the fact established by careful investigation, that the central ridge of the Caucasus,
at least from Babadagh (11,900 feet high) to the sea-coast, represents the northern side of
a great fault ; this fault destroyed the continuity of an originally flat arch in the direction
of its long axis, while the whole of the other side of the fault subsided, in consequence of
a general depression of the ground towards the valley of the Kur, and by the formation
of other longitudinal faults was resolved into a number of terraces. Geognostic facts
which 1 have observed in the course of wanderings along the coast of the Caspian near



SUMMABY


865


to that zone, stretching southwards from Qotschkai as far as Ararat,
which, as far back as historical records extend, i.e. for more than
a thousand years, has been visited by the most violent earthquakes. In
Armenia we meet with frequent accounts of earthquakes in the lofty
volcanic plateau north of Ears, as well as in the neighbourhood of Erze-
rum. In the same month of May, 1859, at the same time as the shocks
wandered far in the east along the lower course of the Kur and the
Araxes, this town was suddenly visited by an earthquake which overthrew
one-third of the houses and caused the death of hundreds of human beings.
From this place a second seismic zone stretches past Lake Van towards
Mambedj, Aleppo, and Antioch. In this zone also devastating earthquakes
occurred in ancient times, and they have been repeated almost up to the
present day (p. 69).

Is the land of the lower Kur, on the south side of the Caucasus,
destined to break down in the same way as the eastern prolongation of this
chain ? Will a now gulf form itself here in the Caspian sea ? Or do these
repeated earthquakes denote that the whole of eastern Asia Minor will
one day collapse, just as the Aegean continent has given way in compara-
tively recent times, and that as at a recent period the Pontus was united
with the Mediterranean, so next the Caspian will be united to it either
by way of Antioch or of the coast of Colchis ?

We can make no answer to these questions, l^ut we perceive that the
old forces are still at work, and we must assume that the changes which
they are preparing will bo similar to those which have already come to
pass.

Lenhoran and Astara, as well as in the Talysch mountains, as far as the plateau of
Ardebil, point to the fact that we must consider the area of this sunken region as
extending not only over the plain of the valley of the Kur, but also over the southern
half of the Caspian sea * (H. Abich, Ueber eine im Caspischen Meere erschienene Insel,
M^m. Ac. P^tersb., 7« ser., VI, No. 5, p. 45).


Atm



356


CHAPTER r

THE GREAT DESERT PLATEAU

The Sahara and Egypt. South Arabia and Abyssinia. Sinai, Syria, and north
Arabia. Suc/< and the Nile.

The Sahara and Erjypt A line drawn across northern Africa from
the mouth of the Wady Draa on the Atlantic coast cast-north-east to tlie
Mediterranean coast, north of Syrtis Minor or the gulf of Gabes, will indi-
cate approximately the boundary between* two regions of the earth's crust
which differ from one another in structure and composition. The northern
region is folded and exhibits a very complete succession of strata; the
southern is flat, the succession is interrupted, and a new series of strata
does not begin after the Palaeozoic till the Cenomanian transgression.

It is to the broad region in the south that wc will now direct our
attention. Incomplete in many respects as our knowledge of it may be,
yet the simplicity of its structure makes it possible to systematically
combine the results of a number of organized investigations which have
been carried out by our colleagues in the central and eastern regions of
the great desert, together with many isolated observations which have
been made in the more distant parts of the south and west by the heroic
devotion of explorers such as Duveyrier, Barth, Overweg, Nachtigal,
de Bary, Roche, and Oskar Lenz.

A general description of this region was attempted by Pomel as early
as 1872, in an excellent work on the Sahara, already mentioned. The
whole of western Guinea, as far as the limit of the summer rains between
Timbuctu and Saint Louis, would, he says, if sunk to a depth of 200 meters,
become an island or peninsula of ancient crystalline rocks or schists. The
complicated structure of the Atlas shows its connexion with Europe.
The Sahara, as far as the Syrtis (Gulf of Sidra) and beyond, is formed
of Palaeozoic and Cretaceous rocks’.

In 1881 G. Holland gave a brief survey of the structure of the entire
Sahara, as an appendix to an account of his own previous observations,
whicli extended as far as El Gol^a, and those of the unfortunate Roche,
the distinguished member of Flatters expedition; he also published the
first geological map of the whole central part of the desert from Figig and

^ Pomel, Le Sahara, pp. 23, 26, et passim.



THE SAHARA 357

Gurara in the west to the Black mountains in the east and the mountainous
country of Ahaggar in the south \

In tlie preceding year K. Zittcl, who accompanied Rohlfs’ expedition
into tlio Libyan desert, had published a geological map of the Ciistern
Sahara, extending from the Red sea to the oiisis of Siwah, and south-
wards to the latitude of Edfii. In 1883, however, after the memorable?
and successful journey of Oskar Lenz through the west as far as Timbuctu,
Zittel was able to give a description of the desert as a whole, which was
far more complete than those of his predecessors

We will first trace the border of the desert plateau along the folded
mountains [Atlas], Our knowledge of the west is, it is true, still most
incomplete, notwithstanding the recent explorations of Fritsch ^ and Lenz
The fact that an independent chain — the Anti- Atlas — composed of ancient
rocks, is inserted in the extreme west-south-west, is alone sufficient to
show that, in spite of the correspondence in the direction of the mountains,
conditions prevail here which arc essentially difierent from those in the
east, though of their precise nature we are at present ignorant. In
th(j cast of Morocco and to the cast of Figig the rectilinear outer border
of the mountains consists of upturned Cretaceous beds (p. 226). ‘ Nothing,'

says Holland, ^can be more striking than the last folds of the Jebel Amour,
which rise along a straight line, sometimes almost vertically, in face of the
immeasurable Sahara, emerging suddenly from the mantle of recent
detritus, which has levelled everything to the south as far as the eye
can reach. The flebel Tizigrarin or Rock of Dogs, on which the town of
Laghouat is built, is one of these; an isolated ridge, sharp and jagged,
formed of liinestoiie beds, which dip south-east at 45® •'’/

To the west of Biskra a sunken area occurs, somewhat similar to that
of Salzburg or Vienna; by this the depression of the Hodna situated in
the mountains is connected with the foreland. East of Biskra, howevcjr,
where on the outer border Nummulitic limestone is visible, in addition

^ Rolland, Sur le terrain cretacc du Sahana septentr., Compt. rend., 1880, XC,
2 )p. 1576-1578, and Bull. soc. geol. do Fr., 1881, 8*^ ser., IX, pp. 508-551, pi. xiii-xv;
Mission transsaharienne, Geologie et hydrologie, Ann. des Mines, 1880, 7'- ser., XVIII,
pp. 152-161 and map ; further: Roche, Itineraire de Biskra chez les Touaregs, Compt.
rend., 1880, XC, p. 1297; Sur la geologic du Sahara septentr., op. cit., 1880, X(JI.
pp. 890-893.

* K. A. Zittel, Ueber den Bau der libyschen Wiiste, Festrede k. bayer. Akad. Wins.,
1880; further: Beitragc zur Geologic und Palaeontologie der libyschen Wusti*
(Expedition zur Erforschung der libyschen Wiiste im Winter 1873-71, ausgcfiihri von
G. Rohlfs), 4to, Cassel, 1883.

^ C. V. Fritsch, Ueber die geol. Verhaltnisse in Marocco ; Zeitschr. f. d. ges. Naturw.,
Halle, 1881, 8. Folge, VI, pp. 201-207.

^ 0. Lenz, Vorliiufiger Bcricht, in Mitthcil. Afrik. Ges., 1880, 11, p. 100 et seq. ; map
in Petermann’s Mittheil., 1884; Kurzer Bericht uber meine Keise von Tanger nach
Timbuktu und Senegambien, Zeitschr. d. Ges. f. Erdk., 1881, XVI, pp. 272-293.

* Rolland, Bull. soc. g^ol. de Fr., 1881, p. 511.



368


THE GEE AT DESEET PLATEAU [partii

to Cretaceous beds, and where the swerving of the chains in the direction
of Cape Bon and towards Sicily becomes apparent, ranges of foot-hills
occur, and the simplicity of the boundary is thus lost.

Within these chains of the Atlas the Cenomanian stage rests regularly
on the Gault and the lower Cretaceous, and the latter on the Jurassic;
older members only reappear further north. If we now enter the region
of the Sahara we perceive that from the Cenomanian stage upwards it
presents the same petrographical and palaeontological development of the
Cretaceous system as the folds of the mountain chains and the ‘ Hamadas,*
i. e. the stone deserts of the foreland. But whereas in the mountains these
thick Cretaceous deposits rest on the bods below in normal succession, to
the south-west of Figig, a day’s journey to the south of Djorf and Torba,
they already rest directly on Devonian, and thus at no considerable
distance from the outer border of the folded mountains the whole of the
lower and middle scries of the Mesozoic deposits has disappeared.

In the same way the Nummulitic limestone, which is present in the
eastern border of the mountains, disappears in the adjacent desert country,
only to recur much further to the east in the Libyan desert ; at least no
trace of it has as yet been discovered in the region of the Shotts. This
might be ascribed to the effect of abrasion, which plays so important
a part in the modelling of the Sahara; the Mediterranean beds with
Ostrea longirostris, however, which occur within the chains in Constantine,
also appear on the borders of the Shotts.

If we compare the relations of this eastern part of the folded mountains
to its foreland with, say, the relations of the Carpathians to the Russian
Platform, wc shall find that in North Africa the outer border of the moun-
tains shows steep upturning of the strata, but not overthrusting, and
further that an important series of strata, the middle and upper Cretaceous,
is continued with unvarying characters into the foreland ; it is separated
from the great plateaux of the latter only by a broad zone of very
recent detritic deposits. The forelands of the two regions present, however,
a striking correspondence in the incompleteness and flat bedding of the strati-
fied series and in the transgression which begins with the Cenomanian stage.

The zone of the Shotts, which approaches the Mediterranean near
Gabes, belongs entirely to the foreland, Dru has furnished a very instruc-
tive description of the Shott el Fejej, and of the Shott el Djerid, connected
with the former in the west The northern border common to the two
Shotts is formed by a cliff about 140 kilometers long, which extends west of
Gabes as far as the threshold of Kriz, and is continued still further to the
west by the spur of Nefta, rising in its highest parts to from 400-500
meters. The central part of this border, which is only 250-300 meters

' Dru in Roudaire, Rapport sur la derniere expedition des Chotts, 8vo, Paris, 1881,
pp. 45 GO.



ZONES OP THE SAHARA


359


CH. V]

high, belongs to the Cenomanian stage while towards its extremities the
more recent members of the Cretaceous system occur, and the Mediter-
ranean beds with Ostrea longirostris appear liere and there in fragments
which have been thrown down along secondary faults. The soutluirn
border is also formed by a cliff with a maximum height of 350 meters, but
it is independent of the northern cliff in direction, and is considerably
shorter. It also runs from east to west, but is convex towards the south,
and ends to the west in a spur which separates the two Shotts. The
eastern Shott, Shott el Fejej, presents rocky escarpments to the north
and south ; the western Shott el Djerid, on the other hand, only to the
north, while on the south its shore is flat and undefined,

Dru thinks that the elevation has been accompanied by a mighty
subsidence, and he compares the Shotts to a ‘buttonhole,’ like the well-
known boutonniere of the Pays de Bray. The fact that relict strand-
lines extend to the top of the ridge at the threshold of Gabes, but that in
those parts of the Shotts which* further to the west sink bciiieath tlie level
of the sea, no certain traces of a recent marine submersion have been
observed, seems to me to indicate the very trifling age of this subsidence.

The disposition of the rocks in the tableland of the Sahara is such that
the older appear in the south and east, the younger in the north and
particularly towards the delta of the Nile.

The first and oldest zone is formed of granite and gneiss sometimes
associated with ancient schist and quartzite. To this zone belong the
granite peaks which Lenz met with in El Eglab, on the southern edge of
the great sand desert of Igidi in the west. Here too must be assigned the
lofty range of Ahaggar, in the interior of which Duveyrier, judging by
loose boulders, believes volcanic mountains to occur. The granite and
gneiss complex is continued to the north as far as the southern edge of the
table mountains of Mudjir and Tazili,and includes the region of the sources
of the Wady Ighargar. In the group of the Egore, basalt flows lie in
valleys excavated in these ancient rocks.

Barth and von Bary went roixnd the eastern border of the Ahaggar
range on their way to Air, and the latter has left an exact record of the
formations which he encountered \ but this journey cost him his life, and
once more we add a name to the long list of victims sacrificed to the
exploration of the globe

We know that, to the south of Ghat, beyond the table mountains of
sandstone and the spurs of the Tazili, granite reappears and forms the

' I do not think it necessary to mention the doubtful traces of, the Urgo-aptien,
because no confirmation has been obtained of the presence of these beds in the
promontory.

* Tagebuch dcs verstorbenen Dr. Erwin von Bary, gefiihrt auf seiner Rcise von
Tripoli nach GhS.t und Air; Zeitschr. ges. Erdk., 1880, XV, pp. 334-418.



360 THE GREAT DESERT PLATEAU [pABun

foundation far to the south, nearly as far as A'ir ; on this, however, several
isolated plateaux of sandstone are superposed, one of which south of
Falesles and another much further to the south, near the northern border
of Air, are specially worthy of mention. These are probably the outposts
of the great level Hamadas which extend over a large area towards the
oasis of Kawar to the east.

The sandstone and granite are in places accompanied by basalt ; amphi-
bolite schists and gneiss also occur. Air itself consists of granite ; in the
neighbourhood of Adshiro volcanic structures are present, for example the



Fio. 41. Sketch-map showing the distribution of the formations in the desert of Sahara,

>1, Archaean ; p, Talaeozoic ; cr, middle and upper Cretaceous; t^ Eocene; second
Mediterranean stage and more recent deposits. The map is drawn on too small a scale to
show the small exposure of Palaeozoic rocks on the peninsula of Sinai ; many other details
are omitted for the same reason.

I

volcano Tekinduhir, the lava-fields of which extend into the immediate
neighbourhood of Adshiro.

The Tiinimo mountains are composed chiefly of sandstone, and the
observations of Rohlfs and Nachtigal made on the route from the Tummos
to Lake Chad show clearly that the sandstone plateaux are prolonged
towards the south. The steep isolated blocks of rock, which in some
localities in Kawar serve as places of refuge in case of hostile attack,
consist of the same horizontally stratified sandstone ; in Dibbela it is still
the prevalent constituent; to the south of this locality, in the Geissinger
mountains, llohlfs mentions the first occurrence of granite, and in Agadem
Nachtigal met with stratified limestone ^

' G. Rohlfs, Qaer durch Afrika, 8vo, 1874, I, pp. 238-274 ; G. Nachtigal, Sah&rd* und
SMan, 8vo, 1879, II, pp. 491-554.



THE AECHAEAN ZONE


361


CH. V]

It is therefore not impossible that the stratified sediments to the north
of Ghat extend southwards into the depression which now contains Lake
Chad, the remains of an inland sea, once of much greater extent.

We now enter the mountainous country of Tibesti and meet first the
volcano Tarso, 2,500 meters in height; along the edge of its crater in
September, 1869, Nachtigal pursued his perilous flight from Bardai. On
the south-west side of the volcano granite and sandstone are recorded ; the
composition of the chain in its continuation to the south-east is unknown ;
on its southern side in Borgu, north of the oasis Buddu, rises the table
mountain Koroka, formed of the blackened sandstone which has here such
a wide distribution

The structure of the mountain mass which lies further to the south-east,
in Ennedi, is also unknown, and as for as Dar-Fur we have no indication of
the geological nature of the country. There, however, those vast plains
begin from which Archaean rocks emerge in isolated knolls and masses,
forming the whole foundation bf the country from Kordofan and Sennar
nearly as far as Khartum. Thence these rocks extend to the Red sea
, and stretch along its shores far to the north, even as far as the gulf of Suez,
^ where, as we shall see later, they are continued through the mountain
mass of Sinai to Arabia.

? This eastern region, composed chiefly of granite, gneiss, and amphibolite
rocks, is very irregularly bounded on the west, where it is overlapped by
patches of sedimentary rocks. In many places it advances as far as the
Nile, and forms the cataracts ; only below Assuan is it confined to a narrower
zone running parallel to the sea-shore.

In the south-east, this Archaean region is crowned by the broad volcanic
area of Abyssinia and Shoa, which is distinguished l)y the varied forms of
its mountains.

As far as we can at present judge the Archaean foundation of the Sahara
is bounded as follows : — •

It appears in El Eglab on the southern edge of the great desert Igidi,
probably follows this as far as the mountains of Ahaggar, which it includes,
and then retreats southwards far to the south of Ghat. Thence to the south
as far as Air the boundary is very, indefinite owing to the superposition of
tablelands of sandstone ; Archaean rocks do not reappear until we reach the
Geissiger mountains north of Agadem, and the slopes of the Tarso (Togar
mountains). Thence the northern boundary is unknown for a very long
distance; further to the cast it runs through the north of Dar-Fur and
Kordofan ; finally the ancient rocks are deflected far to the north, and thus
form a broad basin. *

The second zone of the Sahara is of Devonian and Carboniferous age.

^ Nachtigal, tom. cit., p. Ill ; also p. 109, blackish sandstone of the oasis of Kirdi in
Borgu. In the Egei the slopes arc terraced down to the plain.



362 THE GBEAT DESEET PLATEAU [parth

The specimens brought home by Lenz from the desert in the west have
enabled Stache to show that the rock underlying the region between the
Atlas and the desert of Igidi is formed for long distances by marine beds
of Carboniferous age^. I have ali’eady mentioned the Palaeozoic lime-
stone, which far to the north, near Djorf and Torba, underlies the Cretaceous.
On the eastern edge of the sandy desert, near Gurara in the Tidikelt, Palaeo-
zoic rocks crop out ; their flat-lying beds form that zone of table mountains
on the northern border of the Ahaggars, to which Mudjir, Irauen, Tazili,
Egele, Akakus near Ghat, and as a prolongation, Amsak and others belong.
In several places Devonian fossils have been met with, but in the region of
Murzak there are also traces of Carboniferous beds

The blackened sandstones of Tazili, supposed to be Devonian, appear to
be the same as those which we have just traced above as far as the northern
boundary of Air and even as far as Borgu.

This zone is broad in the we^^t, appears to be narrowest to the south of
Timassinim on the north side of the moufltains of Ahaggar, and expands
again to the north, as is shown by the occurrence of Devonian fossils at the
spring of El Hassi. East of Murzuk, however, all traces of this zone are
lost, and no evidence of Palaeozoic marine deposits has as yet been furnished
by any part of the eastern border, down to the peninsula of Sinai.

The third zone is formed of Cretaceous rocks. Although isolated
patches of this zone are known in Morocco, yet we shall take it to begin
with the great continuous cliff of Cenomanian, which rises to the south of
Lagliouat, runs through El Golea towards In Salah, there turns sharply
to the east, and enveloping the table mountains of Tademaut and Tingert,
finally forms the southern border of the great Hamada el-Homra. The
whole area lying within the curve described by this great cliff, as
far as the Shotts, that is, the whole middle and lower region of the
Wady Igharghar, together with the great sandy desert which lies to the
west of Ghadames, belongs to this zone. It rises in the direction of
Tripoli towards the Mediterranean, where it attains the not inconsider-
able height of 700 meters; to the south of Tripoli it supports some recent
volcanic cones.

The Cretaceous zone is continued eastwards through the Hamada el-
Homra and the Black mountains to the Libyan plain ; it reappears on the
eastern side of the great sea of sand, and forms the underlying rock of the
oases Farafrah, Dachel, and Chargeh ; on the northern side of these it is
covered by the next zone, and then expands till it attains an enormous

^ G. Stache, Fragmente einer afrikan. Kohlenkalkfauna aus dem Gebieto der West-
Sahara; Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1883, XLVl, pp. 369-418, plate.

* Beyrich, Bericht flber die von Overweg auf der Reise von Tripoli nach Murzuk
und von Murzuk nach Ghat gefundenen Versteinerungen ; Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges.,
1852, IV, pp. 143-161, in particular pp. 159, 160,



OH. v] CEETACEOUS AND TEETIARY ZONES 363

breadth in the south. Here, and as far as the north of Eordofan, it appears
to rest everywhere directly against the Archaean complex.

In the valley of the Nile it extends as far as the ruins of Thebes, but
to the north of this it is reduced to a narrow belt, running along the
western margin of the ancient rocks which separate the Red sea from
the valley of the Nile. To the north of the monastery of St. Paul it
reaches finally the shore of the Red sea.

Throughout its extension in the east this zone presents at the base
a formation, known as the ‘Nubian sandstone,* which I have hero, in
accordance with Zittel and the earlier publications of Lartet, assigned to
the Cenomanian, while further to the east, as we shall see later, deposits
have been designated by this name, which are probably of more ancient
date.

The Cretaceous area is thus narrow in the middle region of the Sahara
and extremely broad in the east ; but since Rohlfs has recorded ‘ Cornua
Ammonis * on the way to Lake Chad, far to the south, even beyond Garo in
the oasis of Bilma, it is possible that some of the relics of table mountains
which are met with in that direction are not Devonian but Cretaceous
in age^.

The fourth zone is formed of Nummulitic limestone. Although this
contributes to the formation of tlxe mountain chains north of the Shotts,
it is not known anywhere in the western and central Sahara, and only
reappears in Egypt.

This zone rises from the sandy desert between the oases of Siwah and
Farafrah, includes the oasis of Beharieh, where it is broken through
by an isolated boss of basalt, and forms Ixxth the shores of the Nile from
the Mokattam near Cairo to beyond the first cataract, where the Cretaceous
zone, and below this, the Archaean rocks, crop out from beneath the
Nummulitic limestone.

Against this fourth zone, the western part of which is completely buried
beneath the sandy desert, the second Mediterranean stage rests, and forms
as it were a fifth zone. It appears in the oasis of Siwah, and is continued
thence to the north-east; it is not observed in the valley of the Nile, but
reappears to the east of this, and reaches the Red sea at a point to the
south-west of Suez. Certain observations seem to indicate that the
Cyrenaica also consists of those deposits The remains of Mediterranean
beds with Ostrea longirostris in the Shotts west of Gabes have already been
mentioned.

South Arabia and Abyssinia. We have now followed the arrangement
of the stratified rocks which underlie the desert region of North Africa,
and we have seen how its Archaean foundation crops out between the Nile

^ Rohlfs, Quer durch Afrika, I, p. 269.

’ Zittel, Libysche Wdste, p. cxxxi, note 2.



364 THE GREAT DESERT PLATEAU [partii

and the Red sea. The question now arises, whether the deposits of the
desert tableland really terminate here or whether they are continued
further to the east. In order to ascertain this, we will first consider the
regions which lie beyond the southern end of the Red sea, and afterwards
those which lie beyond its northern end.

The first of these tasks is rendered comparatively easy by Carter’s
description of the coast of south Arabia. From this we borrow the
following facts ^ : —

The Ras Mussandum, in the straits of Ormuz, often mistaken for
basalt, consists of horizontal beds of dark limestone. From this point
the mountains rise gradually to a considerable height, so that above Muscat
they reach an elevation of 6,000 feet, and there are some even higher;
among these appears for the first time the white Nummulitic and Alvcolina
limestone, which in the following stretches of the coast attains considerable
importance. The town of Muscat is built on a green diallage-bearing rock
which is described as euphotide ; diorite has also been observed. The white
limestone is continued towards the east ; in the cliffs of the Wady Shab it
is horizontally bedded; towards Ras el Hadd the height diminishes and
this eastern promontory is merely a flat sandy spur.

The green rocks of Muscat reappear in the Ras Djibsh; the coast
becomes (juite flat and the sands of the desert finally reach the sea ; so that
from the island of Masira, which lies opposite and is about 600 feet high,
a wide view of the interior is obtained. This island consists of the same
green rocks, on which here and there patches of white Nummulitic
limestone repose.

On the mainland the richly fossiliferous Nummulitic limestone now
emerges from beneath the desert; it forms the west side of the bay of
Haschish and the small island of Hammar el-Nafur, and extends nearly
as far as Ras Djesireh.

This promontory again consists of the green rocks of Muscat ; to its
right and left extend, as far as the eye can reach, horizontal beds of
light-coloured Nummulitic limestone. Of these the Ras Shiribedat is also
formed. In the background of the bay of Kuria-Muria, which next
succeeds, a black eruptive rock emerges, and dykes proceed upwards from
this into the white beds of the Cretaceous. —

We have here reached an important boundary. From Ras el Hadd
the cliffs along the coast do not exceed moderate heights, but now

^ H. J. Carter, Memoir on the Geology of the South-East Coast of Arabia; Journ.
Hombay Branch Asiat. Soc., 1852, IV, pp, 21-96. Among other works on this coast we
may mention W. T. Blanford, Note on Maskat and Massandim, Rep. Geol. Surv. Ind.,
1872, V, pp. 75-77. In this work it is suggested that the dark limestone of the straits
of Ormuz may belong to the Trias ; Myophoria is quoted as occurring here, but also
Exogyra, so that the facts are contradictory.



SOUTH AEABIA


366


CH. V]


the land rises suddenly from Ras Nus to a height of about 4,000 feet,
and, with the exception of a single interruption just before Ras Fartak,
continues at a very considerable elevation as far as the straits of Bab
el Mandeb.

Here, too, granite appears for the first time. It forms the Kuria-
Muria islands, where it is accompanied by the green rocks of Muscat;
isolated patches of Cretaceous ■ deposits overlie it. On Ras Nus itself
the granite rises to a height of 1,200 feet: but its upper part is formed
of limestone. From this point the surface of the granite slopes down,
and near Morbat it is covered by a well-defined succession of strata.

The first member of the series is formed of yellowish and brown
micaceous sandstones, about 1,700 feet thick, and without organic remains.



Fio. 42. Uorhed on the south coast of Arabia (after Carter).

In the foreground granite; .at the foot of the mountains recent murine deposits ; a, sand-
stone for the grojiter part concealed by slopes of debris ; &, variegated fossiliferous marl of the
Cenomanian ; c, upper Cretaceous limestone. •

This is followed by a series of red or variegated clays 300 feet in thick-
ness, which arc frequently repeated in the succeeding stretches of the
coast, where they have furnished Pecten quadricostaiusy Salenia scutiyera,
Orhitulina concava, and other well-known Cenomanian sp(icies^.

The beds of limestone which next succeed belong to the Cretaceous
system, and on tliese rest, still higher, ramparts of Alvcolina limestone,
broken up into pillars. They are not represented on Fig. 42.

The lower sandstone of Morbat thus corresponds, both in structure and
in position, to the Nubian sandstone of Egypt, and the sequence of strata

* P. M. Duncan, A DcBcription of the Echinodermata from the Strata on the South-
Eastern Coast of Arabia, and at Bagh on the Nerbudda; Quart. Journ. Qeol. Soc. 1865,
XXI, pp. 349-363.



366


THE GREAT DESERT PLATEAU [paktii

observed by Carter at this point is the same as that met with near Assuan,
for example, in the valley of the Nile.

In the lofty promontory of Ras Shejer the granite has disappeared;
the sandstone also lies, in part, beneath the sea ; and above the variegated
argillaceous scries rises in white cliffs the Cretaceous limestone.

Now follows in the bay of El Kamar the already-mentioned inter-
ruption of the lofty mountain slopes, but at Ras Fartak the plateau
recommences. On this promontory we first see the beds of white Alveolina
limestone rising obliquely from the sea to a height of about 1,900 feet;
they then become horizontal and continue so as they extend further.
In like manner, on the other side of the promontory, the beds of the
variegated Cenomanian scries rise at an angle of forty-five degrees and
assume at a certain height a horizontal position. Near Ras Sharwain
the basalt makes its first appearance as an intrusion into the variegated
marls of the Cenomanian.

A narrow plain now inserts itself between the shore and the high
cliffs, and on tliis several small volcanic cones appear between Ras Shar-
wain and Mokalla. Owing to their black colour and the sharply defined
outlines of their lava-flows they stand out in striking relief against the
white surface of the strand ; they extend for a distance of about seventy-
two kilometers.

In Mokalla granite reappears, accompanied by the green rocks and
overlaid by the limestone ; the edge of the great tableland rises to a height
of 6,000 feet ; the granite is exposed along the coast.

About ninety-six kilometers to the north-cast of Aden, the deep sea
washes against the foot of a mighty precipice, wliich rises thousands of feet
al)ove it ; this continues for a distance of alwit forty kilometers ; the
precipice then runs inland in a straight line as far as the straits of Bab el
Mandeb, so that a flat triangular space is left in front of it. On this
stands a volcano, the^^crater of which rises to a height of 1,700 feet, and
in the crater lies the town of Aden.

The coast of Somaliland, which lies opposite in the south, presents
the same structure. The country to the east of Berbcra consists of light-
coloured limestone; on Ilais an amphibolite rock crops out below this;
Meid again is composed of light-coloured limestone, which probably
extends without interruption as far as Cape Guardafuib

The island of Abd-cl-Kuri is 1,600 feet in height; granite and the
green rocks of Muscat form its base, over them lies limestone. In the

' Velain’s description, Mission de saint Paul, 4to, 1879, pp. 1-92, does not seem to me
opposed to the older view, that Aden is really an eruptive centre. The limestone
formations probably extend inland as far as the upper Juba in the country of the
southern Galla: R. Brenner’s Forschungen in Ost-Afrika, Petermann’s geogr. Mitth.,
18G8, p. 365.



CH. v] SOUTH AR^IA AND ABYSSINIA 367

island of Tol-Faraun, 400 feet in height, only gypsum has been observed ;
the ‘ Brothers * between Abd-el-Kuri and Socotra are composed of tlie same
rocks as Abd-el-Kuri, and according to B. Balfour’s collections this is, in
all probabi^'ty, also true of the great island of Socotra itself^.

In the north of this island a long band of ancient rocks, such as
granite, gneiss, and hornblende schist, appears ; it includes the Jebel Huggir,
and is distinguished by the varied forms of its mountains; the whole of
the south-west and east of the island is formed of hard, light-coloured,
flat-lying limestone. In the cast a rhyolitic region occurs, and smaller
exposures of basalt are met with at various places. —

Thus the sedimentary formations on the south-east coast of Arabia
are just as flatly bedded as in Egypt, and it is only locally, as, for example,
near Ras Fartak, that bending is to be observed, and this appears to be
due rather to slipping along a fault than to folding. As in Egypt again,
there is no indication whntever, apart from the Nul)ian sandstone, of
deposits older than the Cenomanian. Once more as in Egypt, the Archaean
foundation crops out in many places, and the stratified sequence, at least
as far as the granite zone of the Ras Nus and the Kuria-Muria islands, is
precisely the same in both regions. Further to the east, in Oman, the
only fact with which we are «as yet certainly acquainted is the transgression
of the Nummulitic limestone over the ancient rocks.

The coast regions in the north of Somali and as far as Socotra presemt
the same structure, and we are thus led to recognize in the gulf of Aden
a sunken area which interrupts the continuity of the tableland ; while
Arabia and Somaliland appear as the continuation of the great desert
plateau of North Africa.

The eruptive rocks which were mentioned as occurring to the west
of Ras Sharwain are only the forerunners of that important volcanic
region, which forms the neighbourhood of the straits of Bab cl Mandeb,
and continues thence into many islands of the 14ed sea, and along its
shores on both sides. The indications of comparatively recent eruptions
increase rapidly towards the west. The mountains of Abyssinia and
Shoa represent one of the most important regions of eruptive activity.
It is possible that the extensive . lava-fields of Abyssinia arc not all of
the same age ; some of them may indeed, as Blanford thinks, correspond
to the flows of the Deccan, and thus date from tlie beginning of the
Eocene period ; in any case it is certain that they are underlaid in
most of the great valleys by horizontal beds of sandstone, which rest
on an Archaean basis.


' B. Balfour, Report Brit. Assoc. 1881 ; T. G. Bouncy, On a Collection of Rock
Specimens from the Island of Socotra, Phil. Trans. 1883, CLXXIV a, pp. 273-294,
pi. vi, vii.



368 THE GEEAT DESEET PLATEAU [pabtii

This appears not only from the works of Ferret and Galinier^ in
the case of Abyssinia, and those of Rochet d’Hdricourt ^ in that of Shoa,
but above all from the observations of Blanford, who during the English
expedition into Abyssinia studied the section from Massowah to Magdala
in great detail

Near Antalo, in the north-east of Abyssinia, a formation is represented
which is nowhere else to be met with in the great desert plateau, i. e. the
middle Jurassic, a patch of which had been identified by its organic remains ;
this is Blanford’s Antalo limestone. Unfortunately, as this conscientious
observer himself points out, it has not been found possible to establish
with certainty the relative position of the sandstone and the Jurassic
limestone It is therefore uncertain whether the probable representative
of the Nubian sandstone, Blan ford’s sandstone of Adigrat, is to be assigned
to the Cenomanian, or whether it is one of those doubtless older sandstones
of which I shall have to speak directly.

Sinai and Syria. The massive rocks‘ which form the foundation of
the great desert tableland, the Nubian sandstone, and the thick Cretaceous
and lower Tertiary limestones are continued, as we have seen, from Africa
eastwards into the south of Arabia. Their connexion with the mountains
of the Sinaitic peninsula, the Promised Land, may be yet more clearly
recognized.

The narrow zone of ancient massive rocks which runs northwards
.between the Nile and the coast of the Red sea, known to antiquity as
the Mans porphyritea^ presents a great diversity of lithological cliaracter,
and this also distinguishes the same rocks further to the east. Red
granite plays the chief part ; it is accompanied by gneiss and many kinds
of ancient schist, as well as by red porphyry and diorite. The rocks extend
to the shore of the gulf of Suez, and are thence continued on the opposite
coast in those lofty heights which occupy the southern part of the Sinaitic
peninsula, where they arc dominated by Jebel Musa, the ‘Mountain of the
Law.’ They thus reach the cast coast of the peninsula, and are again
similarly continued on the other side of the gulf of Akabah in the
granite mountains of the land of Midian, and to the north and south of
this range.

* Ferret ct Galinier, Voyage on Abyssinie, TIT, Geologic. All the older observations on
this volcanic region have been collected together by T. E. Gumprecht, Die vulcanische
Thatigkeit auf dem Festlande von Afrika, in Arabien, und auf den Inscln des Rothen
Meeres, 8vo, Berl. 1849, pp. 103-193.

’ Rochet d’Hericourt, Bull. soc. gcol. de Fr., 184G, 2® ser., Ill, p. 541 et seq. ; Second
voyage dans le pays des Adels, 8vo, Paris, 1846 ; Dufrenoy, Rapport, Comptes rend., 1846,
XXII, p. 806 et seq.

® W. T. Blanford, Observations on the Geology and Zoology of Abyssinia, 8vo, Lond.,
1870, pp. 143-203 and geological map.

* Blanford, op. cit., p. 177, note.



SINAI


369


CH. V]

Many circumstances have contri|;)uted of late years to increase our
knowledge of this district; as, for example, Burton’s attempt to prove
the existence of a rich gold-field in Midian ^ and Beke’s doubts as to the
true position of the Biblical Sinai. Jebel Baghir or Jebel el Nfir, ‘the
Mountain of the . Light,’ which lies to the north of Akabah on the west
side of the Wady Ithm, was said to be in reality the consecrated spot;
Milne, who accompanied the Biblical explorer, has described the structure
of the eastern coast of the gulf Thus we reach the neighbourhood of
Petra and Hor, and with them the scene of the valuable researches carried
out by L. Lartet. These have thrown so much light on the structure of
Palestine and Idumaea that, tiiken in connexion with the clear descriptions
of Judaea furnished by Oscar Fraas they enable us to arrive at definite
conceptions regarding the structure of the valley of the Jordan, and its
relations to the Red sea. For the present, however, we will only borrow
from Lartet’s observations the important fact that the massive rocks
extend further to the north oh the east than on the west side of the
Wad}’’ Arabah, a valley which forms the prolongation of the lino of the
Jordan and the Dead sea. The porphyries, which appear to be the most
recent of these rocks, play an important part in the structure of Mount
Hor in the north, and their last oflshoot in that direction is to l)c seen
near Safieh on the south-east shore of the Dead sea.

Thus ancient massive rocks surround the whole northern region of the
Red sea. At the southern point of the peninsula of Sinai lies the inter-,
section of two of the greatest systems of linear fractures which are known
on the surface of the earth. The first is that of the Red sea (the Erythraean
system), which is continued in the direction of Suez. The second, which
runs almost directly from north to south, is that of the Jordan. Tliis
extends from Coele-Syria, through the lake of Tiberias, following the
course of the Jordan, through the Dead sea and the Wady Arabah, over
the threshold of Safeh (which is about 230-240 meters high and formed of
Cretaceous limestone), down to the Wady Akabah and the gulf of the same
name. It meets the line of the Red sea at an acute angle and is not
continued further. The intersection takes place within the region of the
ancient massive rocks, which is consequently divided into three parts.

^ R. F. Burton, The Gold-Mines of Midian and the ruined Midianite Cities, 8vo,
Lond., 1878.

J. Milne, Geological Notes on the Sinaitic Peninsula and North-western Arabia;
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. 1875, XXXl, pp. 1-28.

’ L. Lartet, Essai sur la geologie de la Palestine et des contrees avoisinantes, Ann. des
sciences geol., 1869, 1, pp. 1-116, 149-329, and map ; Exploration geologique de la Mer
Mortc, de la Palestine et de ITdumee, 4to, Paris, 1877 ; this volume forms part of the
Expedition scientifique du Due de Luynes.

^ 0. Fraas, Aus dem Orient : geol. Beobachtungen am Nil, auf der Sinai-llalbinsel und
in Syrien, 8vo, Stuttgart, 1867.

B b


MOI.I. \!4



370


THE GEEAT DESERT PLATEAU [part ii

The first and western part is the Mona porphyrites and the coast range
of Egypt. The second is the Sinaitic region, which is wedge-shaped.
The third part is the Arabian, the last traces of which are to be seen
beyond Mount Hor even as far as the Dead sea.

This group of ancient rocks, which on account of the presence of
poi’phyries and diorites I will not in their entirety designate as Archaean,
is followed by the Nubian sandstone. This begins as a narrow band only,
forming the western border of the ancient mountains in the east of Egypt ;
it runs from their northern end to the sea, and broadening out crosses the
peninsula of Sinai ; it is largely covered with sand, resulting from its own
disintegration. It seems to end suddenly near the northern end of the
gulf of Akabah, but reappears to the east of the line of the Jordan, lying
partly below in the valley in faulted-down fragments, partly up on the
tops of the mountains: thus Milne found two great masses of sandstone
above the granite at an altitude of about 1,000 meters, forming the highest
parts of the Jebel Atagtaghir, not far from the ‘Mountain of Light*; and
according to Lartet the same Nubian sandstone forms the summit of
Mount Hor. This is the site of Aaron's grave, 1,327 meters above the
Red sea: the sandstone here rests on porphyry.

From Mount Hor the sandstone sinks downwards and then forms
the basement of the cliffs on the whole of the east side of the Dead
sea, while on the west side it is not visible. The difference in height
between ]\fount Hor and this exposure amounts to 1,720 meters. For
a considerable distance to the north the Nubian sandstone crops out
again, but only at the foot of the eastern slopes of the valley of the
Jordan ; it probably finds its continuation in the red sandstone of Mount
Lebanon.

In this region the sandstone certainly cannot be at once assigned to the
Cenomanian, as was the c^ise in the west. In the first place we may
remark that, apart from leas certain observations, the Carboniferous has
been recognized by Bauermann and Tate in the Wady Nasb of the
peninsula of Sinai. Marine deposits are represented there by limestone
with Orthia Michelini and other Carboniferous fossils, and the impression
of a Lepidodendron has been found in the sandstone This is an indica-
tion of the reappearance of that Carboniferous zone which Lenz on his
journey to Timbuctu encountered in the far west, where it is represented
by marine beds; it is the same zone which has been recognized in the
neighbourhood of Murzuk by its plant remains, and of which no trace has
as yet been found in the district of the Nile.

In general, however, the characters of this sandstone recall in a most
striking manner the Permian sandstone of Europe. The Nubian sand-

' R. Tate, On the Age of the Nubian Sandstone, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1871, XXVII,
pp. 404-406 ; Pomel, Bull. soc. g^ol. de Fr., 1876, 3® ser., IV, pp. 524-529.



THE NUBIAN SANDSTONE


371


CH. V]

stone is here frequently dark red in colour, or white, or red and white ;
it often rests on porphyry, contains rolled fragments of this rock, and
according to Raboisson is even traversed by dykes of porphyry ^ On
the peninsula of Sinai, as for instance near Petra, it contains copper ;
at some localities turquoise is found in it, both on this peninsula and
in Abyssinia; salt and gypsum also occur. From the examination of a
piece of fossil wood, found by Russegger in the neighbourhood of Assuan,
Unger came to the conclusion, as early as 1858, that the Nubian sand-
stone is contemporaneous with the Rothliegende. This result has not been
confirmed by Zittel, who, on the contrary, has established its more recent
age by the discovery of other plant remains found in the north But
in the cast, as well as in Abyssinia, the number of outward indications
which bear witness to the higher age of the greater part of tlie Nubian
sandstone increases to such an extent that the question must still be
considered open.



The sandstone is everywhere covered by the Cenomanian, together
with the deposits, for the most part calcareous, which succeed it, up to
the Nummulitic limestone ; these will l)C discussed presently. If the
Nubian sandstone is Cenomanian, then an interval of incalculable length
must lie between it and the Carlx)niferous beds of the Wady Nasb. If
it belongs to the period of the European Rothliegende, then the interval
which precedes the transgression is only diminished by a fraction and
the resemblance to those regions where the Cenomanian rests on the
Rothliegende (Bohemia, for example) is increased.

The zone of Cretaceous and Nummulitic limestone extends from Cairo
towards Suez, and there forms the heights which coming from the west
approach the southern part of the Canal and the northern part of the
gulf. One of these is Jebel Ataqa, fonned of numerous horizontal beds,
ending in precipices, which rise broad and bluff above Suez. It is
traversed, as was shown by Vaillant, by a fault with a throw of about
3(X) meters I entirely concur with Beyrich in regarding the form of this

* L’Abb4 Raboisson, Contribution a Thistoire stratigraphique du relief du Sinai, et
specialement de Tage des porpliyres de cette contr6e; Compt. rend., 1883, XCVI,
pp. 282-285.

* Zittel, Libysebe Wttste, p. lix.

* Leon Vaillant, Note sur la constitution geologiquc de quelques terrains des environs

B b2



372 THE GREAT DESERT PLATEAU [pabxu

mountain as determined by parallel fractures, a view which is supported
by the local occurrence of small volcanic cones

The Cretaceous and Eocene beds now proceed, as does the Nubian
sandstone on which they rest, across the peninsula of Sinai: in front
of them extends the desert of Tih. fiauermann has shown that they are
here intersected by a large number of faults*.

They now reach Palestine and form for a great distance the mountains
of Judaea and the whole country as far as the spur of Carmel; then
follows the subsidence of Jezreel with its volcanic eruptions, and on the
other side the same beds extend into the Lebanon. Almost the whole
country is formed of Cretaceous limestone, on which a few Isolated patches
of Eocene limestone repose. To the east of the Jordan the structure
is slightly di^erent At the bottom of the Wady Garundel, to the south
of Petra, lies a downthrown fragment of Nummulitic limestone, and in
several other localities the Cretaceous is likewise faulted down; at the
same time patches of Cretaceous appear bn the heights. Of the three
peaks of Mount Hor, one consists of porphyry, another, the highest, of
Nubian sandstone, as we have already seen, and the third of Cretaceous
limestone. To the north the same white limestone forms the whole of
the highland of Moab and Ammon to the east of the Dead sea. Below
the limestone the Nubian sandstone may be seen on the margin of the
sea ; on the heights above it is crowned by black volcanic masses, isolated
cones, and broad lava streams. Further on, the white limestone forms
the east side of the Jordan valley, and finally disappears beneath the
broad sheets of lava of the Jaulan, the Hauran, and the other volcanic
regions discovered further in the interior by Wettstein and Doughty. —

The traveller who crosses the country from Jafia to Jerusalem and
journeys on to the Dead sea fiirst ascends the ridge of Judaea to a height
of 1,000 meters above the Mediterranean, and then descends about 1,400
meters to the Dead sea, the waters of which stand, as is well known, at
a level of —392 meters. Since, however, the depth of the Dead sea close
to the east coast is nearly 400 meters, the total fall of the surface from
the ridge of Judaea to the lowest point of this great line of subsidence
amounts to about 1,800 meters.

The researches of Lartet, the investigation of the Cretaceous threshold

de Suez, Compt. rend., 1864, LIX, pp. 867, 868, and Bull. soc. g^ol. de Fr., 1865, 2* s^r.,
XXII, pp. 277-286.

* £. Beyiich, Ueber geognostische Beobachtungen G. Schweiniiirth'B, Sitzungsber. Akad.
Berlin, 1882, X, p. 175. An exposure of volcanic rocks near Abu Zdbel on the Fresh-vater
Canal has been described by Bejrich and Arzruni, tom. cit., pp. 177, 182, pi. v. Figari
Bey marks on his geological map a large number of these points in Arabia Petraea, but
these have not been con6rmed.

’ H. Bauermann, Note on a Geological Reconnaissance made in Arabia Petraea in the
spring of 1868 ; Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1869, XXY, pp. 17-39, pi. i.



873


CH.V] DEAD SEA A TROUGH-SUBSIDENCE

of the Wady Arabah, which, rising to a height of from 230 to 240 meters,
forms the watershed between the Red sea and the Dead sea, and the
now demonstrated complete absence of upper Tertiary deposits in the
whole region of the subsidence, have fully established the fact that
the open sea has never penetrated into this great and remarkable rift.
The formation of this depression is a recent event, otherwise the sea
would have crossed the threshold of the Wady Arabah.

The whole country to the west of the Dead sea is horizontally
stratified, and in spite of the stupendous descent of the surface it consists
only of middle and upper Cretaceous limestone. According to Fraas,
however, there exist on both sides of the ridge, on the Mediterranean
side as on that facing the Dead sea, parallel step-faults, along which the
surface sinks from the mountain heights to the depths of the sea on
the eoili^and on the west^

On the east of the Dead oea the case has changed. Lartet has shown
that on this side the ancient massive rocks advance further to the north
than on the west, that the porphyry still crops rut on the south-east side
of the Dead sea, and that the Nubian sandstone may be seen at the foot of
the slopes along the whole length of the east coast and far up the valley
of the Jordan. A transverse section, wherever taken, will therefore show
older rocks on the eastern than on the western shore. This led Lartet
to conclude, in accordance with the earlier suppositions of L. v. Buch
and Hitchcock, that the Dead sea and the line of the Jordan represent
a fault with a downthrow on the west mde.

If we now compare Lartet’s observations to the east of the fracture with
those of Fraas to the west of it, we shall obtain the following results. The
height of the broad ridge of Judaea does not differ much from that of the
highlands to the east of the Dead sea. In both places the ground is
formed of Cretaceous limestone. The line of the Jordan is a fracture, but
whereas in the east this fracture finds its consummation in a single great
fault, in the west it is represented by several parallel faults, along which the
western side has sunk not as a whole but in steps, and thus an asymmetric
trough has resulted.

The ridge of Judaea has retained its height and the step-faulting is
repeated towards the Mediterranean ; but Ivere every trace of the opposite
side of the fault is lost. And since there is no vestige of Mediterranean
deposits of Tertiary age on the whole of the Syrian coast, with the excep-
tion of the low and recent littoral deposits of Beyrout and Jaffa containing
Pectuncvlus violascens, this fracture must also be considered as very
recent, almost as recent as the formation of the Aegean and the Black sea.

Of this we shall soon see further proof.

' Lartet only assumes a very gentle arching of the country of Judaea ; I have followed
the detailed statements in Fraas, p. 72 et seq.



374


THE GEEAT DESERT PLATEAU [part it

Let us, however, return to the Dead sea.

A simple fault may produce a step at the surface, but not a valley ;
it may be widened out into a valley by erosion, but then this valley will
possess a definite slope corresponding in direction to that in which the
waters flow away, and it will never descend below the level of the sea.
A valley, the bottom of which descends 800 meters beneath the sea and
then a little further to the south ascends 230 meters above it, only to sink
beneath it again, cannot have been formed either by a single fault or by
faulting and erosion combined. Strips of land of great length must have
subsided along parallel fractures and to unequal depths. This is another
instance of that variation in the throw of faults which we have already
observed in the lofty table-lands of Utah, and in the great fractures of the
southern Alps. In this way alone can broad valleys such as the Wady
Arabah and the Wady Akabah have been formed, and the unequal
subsidence of different parts of the trough may have been caused by
compression

The Red sea itself is, however, also a trough-subsidence, probably the
greatest in the world. The parallelism of its coasts, the similarity of the
opposite shores (so far as they arc known), and the volcanic phenomena in
the south all point to this conclusion. This basin, especially its southern
part, has already often been characterized as a ‘ collapsed area ' ; but the
most felicitous comparison is by Oscar Fraas : ‘ Just as the Schwarzwald
and the Vosges, although separated by the broad valley of the Rhine, bear
witness to an original organic unity, so too do the crystalline mountains to
the east and west of the Red sea. ... As on the west of the Vosges and
the east of the Schwarzwald the Trias and Jurassic rest against the old
crystalline complex, so too do the upper Cretaceous and the lower Tertiary
on the east of Mount Sinai and the west of the mountains of the Nile

' With regard to the thne of the down-break and the formation of the trough-fault
of the Dead sea the following facts may be mentioned. Up to a height of about 100
meters, that is, 292 meters below the Mediterranean, the Dead sea is surrounded
by very recent alluvial beds which Lartct calls the ‘DepOts de Li 9 an.’ They lie
horizontal and thinly stratified, and contain gypsum, but neither organic remains nor
traces of volcanic rocks, although the eastern flank is covered with basaltic eruptions.
Lartet concludes that the fracture is older than these eruptions, and distinguishes among
the lavas those which are older and extend on the heights in a tabular form, and those
more recent, the streams of which lie in valleys recently produced by erosion. If the
eastern border of the Dead sea has been so far explored that we may speak with some
certainty of the absence of basaltic remains in the Depdts de Li^an which occur there,
a point on which I can give no opinion, we may further conclude from the horizontality
of these deposits that none of the more recent eruptions were accompanied by any
essential change in the chief area of subsidence. Earthquakes have, as is well known,
continued up to the most recent times ; on the Red sea several volcanic eruptions have
occurred in historical times.

* 0. Fraas, Aus dem Orient, p. 33.



876


CH. V] BED SEA A TROUGH-SUBSIDENCE

Let us now consider the valley of the Rhine near Strassburg. The
stratified plateaux of the sunken area of South Gennany and those of the
Paris basin, which were once united across the Schwarzwald and Vosges,
have subsided; the horsts have remained in position, bijjt they are cut
through by the great trough of the Rhine, determined by rectilinear
fractures. Whether these events were contemporaneous, or in what order
plateau-subsidence took place at the sides and trough-subsidence in the
middle, wc do not know. But in just the same way the ancient mountains
on the Red sea rise as a horst out of the Nubian sandstone and the
Cretaceous and Eocene plateaux, and in just the same way this ancient
horst is cut through the middle by the great Erythraean trough. —

Some facts suggest the possibility that the great Wady Serhan in
North Arabia, and particularly its southern part the Jowf, is also a trough-
subsidence; Blunt has already compared this region to the Dead sea^
The volcanic rocks of the Hauran are continued west of the Wady Serhan
for an unknown distance to the south; in the east, latitude 31® appears to
mark their southern boundary. Beyond this lies an extensive region of
sandstone, with beds outcropping in successive steps, as in the Sahara; this
sandstone forms the whole of the stony Hamada as far as the Eu|rtirates. The
highest part of the region, about 2,500 feet high, lies close to the east edge
of the Jowf, and terminates in a fairly steep cliff above this plain, which is
600 feet below. On the flat sandstone plateau rests a sharply circumscribed
sandy desert, the great Nefud ; from this rise humps of sandstone which
are as remarkable for their blackened surface as those of tlie Tazili in
Africa. Humps of sandstone also occur to the south of this sandy desert, till
finally on Jebel Aja, to the west of Hail, and on Jebel Schomar, the under-
lying granite makes its appearance. Red granite predominates, and these
mountains may be regarded as a continuation of the heights of Sinai.

This description by Blunt also confirms the supposition, that as Syria in
the north, and the land of Oman and the coast of -^rabia in the south, so
the whole interior of the country possesses a structure similar to that of
Egypt and the desert region of North Africa.

Thus in the whole of the desert from the coasts of the Atlantic to the
gulf of Gabes ; then southwards through the country of Tuareg to beyond
Air, far south of the oasis of Kawar, to Borgu, to Dar-Fur and even into
Somaliland; then in the north — the whole of Egypt, of Syria, and the
whole of Arabia as far as the Euphrates — we see a great segment of the

^ W. Scawen Blunt, Notes on the Physical Geography of Northern Arabia, in Lady
Anne Blunt, A Pilgrimage to Nejd, 8vo, 1881, II, pp. 235-248. Prom Doughty’s description
of western Arabia, which has just appeared, it seems probable that the granite of Hail
extends to the south-west as far as Mecca ; this work shows for the first time the great
importance of the volcanic Harras : Travels in NW. Arabia and Nejd, Proc. Geogr. Soc.,
1884, pp. 365-399, and map.



876


THE GEEAT DESEET PLATEAU [part ii

earth’s crust distinguished by the possession of a number of characters
common to the whole. Throughout this region flat bedding predominates ;
disturbances occur only in the form of subsidence, particularly as great
trough-subsidences, which are here and there associated with flexure of the
edges. On the other hand tangential movement and folding are entirely
absent, at least as far as we can judge at present ; and as well, according to
the present state of observation, the whole series of deposits which extend
from the close of the Palaeozoic aera to the Cenomanian stage are also
wanting, with the exception of tlie Antalo limestone in Abyssinia ; and if the
objection be raised that these vast plains have been so little explored that
we can scarcely attach importance to negative characters of this kind, yet we
must remember that in central Sahara, in Egypt and Palestine, the trans-
gression of the Cenomanian sta^e, which rests directly on Palaeozoic or
even older rocks, has been established with certainty over large areas.

The gi-eat desert platform thus extends from the Atlantic Ocean as far
as the Euphrates and the Persian gulf, and tire lie of tlie beds as well as their
sequence are distinguished by the same characters as in the Russian Platform.

Suez and the Nile. The Erythraean trough is filled up in the north by
the isthmus of Suez, a narrow low-lying strip of recent alluvial deposits.
In spite of its trifling age and its insignificant heiglit this district separates
two distinct marine faunas from one another.

The fauna of the Indian Ocean enters the Red sea by the straits of
Bab el Mandeb, many of its typical species reach the gulf of Akabah, it is
represented near Suez, and even penetrates inland above Suez into a series
of isolated basins, the so-called Bitter lakes, which are now intersected by
the Canal. The shores of the Red sea present in many places, both in the
south and in the north, traces of a higher level of the strand-line. Even
after the formation of the great trough, the strand must have stood at
a higher level and have been lowered subsecjncntly. The indications of this
consist as a rule of liprizontal beds of recent shells or of coral growths
now laid dry ; they even occur near Suez itself.

The Lusitanian fauna of the Atlantic coast forms, as we have seen
previously, the characteristic part of the marine Mediterranean fauna, but
it contains a large admixture of Celtic relict species and a few rare boreal,
Arctic, and West Indian forms. Thus it extends, though not very richly
represented, as far Jis the ‘ Lido ’ on the east coast of the Delta, and a few of
its members, even before the construction of the Canal, lived in the lagoons
of the interior, especially in the great lake Menzaleh.

How feebly this boundary, so important in the animal world, is expressed
in the relief of the ground may be seen from the fact that the highest
ridge (El Guisr), which had to be cut through for the Canal, is only 18 meters
high. In the Fresh-water Canal, which conducts the water of the Nile
to Suez, and follows in part the line of the old Fresh- water Canal of the



THE ISTHMUS OP SUEZ


377


CH, v]

Pharaohs, the river reaches Ismailia near the middle of the isthmus at
a height of 6-7 meters above the level of both seas. Even before the Canal
established communication between these seas wells were to be seen far
inland, the waters of which rose and sank with the tides, and it is not
unlikely that just as the Rhine and Danube communicate underground in
a common body of subterranean water, so do the Red sea and the Mediter-
ranean, and they have probably always been united by a common subter-
ranean sheet of brackish water.

The total length of the Canal measures 160 kilometers; but if we
deduct fi’orn it the lagoons and the isolated arms of the sea, which penetrate
into the country both from north and south, then the breadth of tht;
dividing isthmus is at once reduced to less than 30 kilometers, or even to
20 or 15 kilometers, if we take into account the beaches of bleached
shells which appear here and there on the lower slopes.

The Canal penetrates the irarrow sandy ‘ Lido ’ near Port Said and enters
lake Menzalch ; the mouths of the Tanitic and Pelusian (or Bubastic)
branches of the Nile lie to the east of this point. All the marsliy land to
the oast as far as the ruins of Pelusiurn is being rapidly silted up. The
Canal intersects the line of the ancient Pelusian branch at kilometer 37 ; it
then traverses a narrow stretch of dry land near Kantara and reaches
lake Balah, the last lake of the Mediterranean region, wliich extends
southwards from El Fardan to about kilometer 66. It is not till we have
reached this point that we leave the Mediterranean region.

We now cross tlie ridge of El Guisr and arrive at lake Timsali, i.e. the
lake of Crocodiles, which the Canal intersects betwiMUi kilometers 76-80. On
the shore of this lake lies the modern town of Ismailia, ami to the west
of it we meet the Fresh-water Canal near Saba’h 'Byar, i.e. The Seven
Springs. This point corresponds to the entrance of the valley of Gessen,
and, as we shall see directly, to the coui’se of a branch of the Nile, which
once flowed in the direction of lake Tinisah. •

The flat country to the east and south-east of lakii Timsah bounds the
lake in cliffs, which are preceded by a few small tabular masses ; among
these I may mention the plateaii of Hyenas in the east, that of Tussflm at
kilometer 85, and near to it the place called Sheich Ennedek.

To the west of Tussflm a large group of dunes occurs which runs to the
south-south- west, and at kilometer 90 we reach the Serapeum. A little to
the south of this point, at about kilometer 94-95, begin the two great basins
of the Bitter lakes, which before the opening of the Suez Canal lay almost
dry. They coincide with the Canal as far as kilometer 138, and the whole
of this area beginning at Serapeum belongs to the Erythraciah region. We
now cross the threshold of the ShalClf, and through a narrow furrow in
which lies the ancient canal of the Pharaohs we reach the gulf of Suez at
kilometer 150, and at kilometer 160 the Red sea.



378


THE GREAT DESERT PLATEAU [part ii

It is only in the southern part that this line is approached from the west
by true mountains ; tliese are Jebel Genef, in the prolongation of which
lies the ridge of Shaluf, bounding the Bitter lakes on the south, then Jebel
Auwebed, and the long ridge of Jebel Atfiqa, which, south of Suez, meets the
Red sea in a broad steep cliff (Fig. 43).

Neither the widely exposed structure of these mountains, nor that of
the flat country, presents any indication of bending or up-tilting of the
strata. Faults, it is true, may be seen in the mountains ; the marine strata
of the plain look as though they Ixad only yesterday emerged from the sea.

In 1869 the Khedive Ismail afforded me the welcome opportunity of
examining the most important sections of the Canal. But the local
observations which I then made were first brought into organic connexion
through the excellent works on the istlimus which have since appeared ;
among them I will mention especially those of Laurent Lesseps and
T. Fuchs But I carried away a deep impression of a region in which
the succession of marine formations may be seen, as they were deposited
from very remote times, in beds which are still almost or quite horizontal.
Two series may be observed in these horizontal sediments, namely, an older
series, in which the strata overlie each other nonnally, and the beds decrease
in age as we ascend the mountains, so that the youngest lie on the summits
of the table-lands ; and a second more recent series, in which the strata rest
against each other, so that the deposits descend in successive steps which
are lower in proportion as the deposits are more recent, so that finally the
youngest members of this series lie at the level of the sea, and at the same
time at the level of the oldest members of the first series. The second
series was evidently deposited at a time when the coast-line was sinking
and, it would appear, sinking rhythmically ; the first or ascending series
hardly furnishes any information on this point ; but it is clear that with
a subsiding strand-line a limit must be reached as soon as the level of the
sea coincides with that of the sediments deposited in it. Finally the
beginning of the second series presupposes, in this case, destiaiction of
the preceding sediments and the consequent formation of new submarine
slopes. —

Three regions may, as we have said, be distinguished without difficulty
on the line of the Canal, namely, the Mediterranean region from kilometer
0-66, extending through lake Menzaleh to the south point of lake BalS,h ;
the central or neutral region from kilometer 66-95, which includes

' C. Laurent, Essai geologique sur les terrains qui composent I’isthme de Suez;
extmit de PAnnuaire 1870 de la Soc. des anc. olives de I’Ec. imp. des Arts et Metiers,
8vo, S. Nicolas-de-Port, 143 pp. and 2 pi.

F. de Lesseps, Communication sur les lacs amors do Tisthme dc Suez, Gompt. rend.,
1874, LXXVni, pp. 1740-1748 ; Deuxieme note, op. cit., 1876, LXXXII, pp. 1133-1137.

^ T. Fuchs, Die geol. Beschaffenheit der Landenge von Suez ; Denkschr. Akad. Wiss.
Wien, 1877, XXXVJTI, pp. 25-42, 3 pi.



THE ISTHMUS OF SUEZ


379


OH. v]

lake Timsah; and the Erythraean region from kilometer 95-160, i.e. from
a point to the south of the Serapeum through the Bitter lakes and the
lagoon of Suez to the Red sea ; but if we follow Laurent, who takes into
account the banks of dead molluscan shells on the slopes, then the Mediter-
ranean zone extends as far as kilometer 68, the neutral zone with lake
Tims&h only to kilometer 83, and the remainder forms the Erythraean
region. Let us also bear in mind that the valley of Gessen and the
Fresh- water Canal coming from the Nile meet the lino of the Suez Canal
in the neutral region not far from lake TimsMi.

The country consists in short of the following elements : the higher
mountains in the south-west, with the inconspicuous remnants of the
second MediteiTanean stage; the Eiythraean deposits; the more recent
deposits of the Mediterranean ; the deposits of the Nile ; and, finally, the
dunes and spits and bars along the coast.

The loftier mountains, the mighty Ataqa near Suez, Auwebed and
Gendf, must be regarded as part' of the great limestone zone which extends
to the peninsula of Sinai and to Judaea.

The oldest series visible is the middle Cretaceous ; judging from the
fossils which Beyrich cites from Auwebed, the succession of strata must
there extend up to the Oligocene.

The second Mediterranean stage has already been discussed (p. 324),
and it has been pointed out that it advances south of the At.'icja into the
present region of the Red sea. Nevertheless, no consideral)lc intermixture
of the Mediterranean and Erythraean faunas has occurred. The Erythraean
trough can therefore hardly have existed here in its present form at the
time of the second Mediterranean stage. Beyrich even suggests that
the Miocene deposits themselves may have been cut up, together with the
mountain masses, by parallel fractures, i. e. that they were not deposited
in the valleys in which we now find them, but that they are older than
these valleys. They must then be assigned to •the ‘ superposed,’ not
to the ‘ apposed ' series of strata. This point is worthy of fresh
investigation.

Of greatest interest are the recent deposits of the isthmus. It is
obvious that with a strand-line only 18 or 20 meters higher than at
present the existing isthmus would be submerged, and that in earlier
times this submersion would have taken place with a strand-line at an
even lower level, since a large part of the existing ridges of land is
only composed of blown sand.

The first remarkable fact with which we are confronted is the relation-
ship of the fauna, represented only by a small number of species, found in the
sand deposits near the pyramids of Ghizeh, with that of the Red sea ; this
was first pointed out by Beyrich and subsequently recognized by T. Fuchs.
These sand deposits form the cliflF which bounds the desert towards the valley



880 THE great DESERT PLATEAU [parth

of the Nile. The Sphinx is carved out of their consolidated beds. Zittel
gives the height of the deposits as 64 meters above the sea, and Schweinfurth
records the same height for the upper limit of a zone of Pholas borings,
which he traced on the slopes of the Mokattam above Cairo and has recog-
nized as belonging to this phase \ The shells of Odrea Fordmli and Pecten
erythraeus^ species which live in the Red sea, lie in this sand.

Thus a district of the Erythraean type, or at least one which includes
several species characteristic of the Red sea, occurs in the region of the
present Mediterranean.

We will now examine the isthmus.

T. Fuchs distinguishes two regions about the Bitter lakes: a lower-
lying younger region with an undulating surface, which does not rise more
than 8 meters above the sea-level, and behind this a terraced land with
concentric cliffs. The highest point visited by T, Fuchs lay about
14 meters above the sea, but other steps further east probably attain
double this height. The largest number 6f shells collected were obtained
from the plateau of Kabret, lying about 8 meters above the surrounding
desert and 5 kilometers to the east of the lake, on the first step of the
terraced land. These are chiefly Erythraean marine Mollusca, but also
include a few forms alien to the Red sea, among others Ostrea paevdo-
crasdssima, which exactly resembles the well-known form of the
Mediterranean Tertiary beds; two Pectens not known living; further,
fresh-water Mollusca which now inhabit the upper Nile, such as Aetheria
fsernUunata and Spatha nilotica, of which we shall have to speak later.

Thus the Erythraean fauna lies at a trifling height above the Bitter
lakes, accompanied by a number of extinct types, of which one species at
least is distinctively Mediterranean ; at the same time we find the Mollusca
of the Nile.

Let us now turn to the coasts of the Red sea.

Fresh observation® by Hull, of which only a brief account is available,
have shown that traces of an ancient sea-level may be seen near Suez about
200 feet above the existing sea ; this very nearly coincides with the height
of the Pholas zone near Cairo.

The accounts of the still younger and therefore lower-lying shell-beds
near Suez are much more complete.

Issel has undertaken the important task of examining the organic
remains of these beds and comparing tliem with the present fauna 2 .
Although the beds He only a few meters above the sea, are perfectly
horizontal, and contain bivalves as a rule in their natural position, and

' G. Schweinfurth, Ueber die geol. Schichtengliederung des Mokattam bei Cairo;
Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Gee., 1888, XXXV, p. 716 et seq.

^ A. Issel, Malacologia del Mar Rosso, 8vo, Pisa, 1869, p. 17, and Catalogo delle
conchiglie fossile raccolte sulle spiagge emerse del Mar Rosso, pp. 245>303.



381


OH.V] CONNEXION OP THE TWO SEAS

although some of the species still retain their original colour, yet this fauna
is somewhat different from that which at present inhabits the gulf of Sue2.
Altogether 232 species were found in these deposits, and of these 18 genera
and 105 species are no longer known in the gulf of Suez or in that of
Akabah. On the other hand, 11 genuine Mediterranean species occur;
and others will probably be found in more remote parts of the Eed
sea.

Without entering further into the details of this comparison we will
merely point out that, even with a strand-line at such a trifling height
above the existing sea, Mediterranean forms were able to mingle near
Suez with the Erythraean fauna. We must, however, at once add that
in the neighbourhood of Suez at the present day Erythraean types live
in company with a not inconsiderable number of species, which are
evidently representative forms of Mediterranean species, and often only
distinguished from them by most trivial characters. Under these circum-
stances I do not hesitate to adopt IsseFs view, and to consider these
representative species as recently modified forms. They are of recent
Ofigin and have probably arisen through isolation. The renewed fusion
of the two faunas, which has been rendered possible by the construction
of the Canal, takes place slowly, as Keller has shown, and is almost
entirely confined to the littoral forms*.

Many circumstances seem to indicate that the subsidence of the strand-
line has not been gradual, but periodic, as we shall explain more fully on
a later page. Attempts have been made to prove from historic sources,
and especially from the statements concerning the passage of the Israelites
through the Red sea and the death of Pharaoh Ptah Men, that at that
time the Bitter lakes communicated with the Red sea and were filled
with sea- water ; but new theories as to the site of the crossing have been
put forward, and I do not venture to give an opinion on this question.

Lesseps has brought together the statements of, Herodotus, Diodorus,
Pliny, and Strabo with reference to the ancient history of the Fresh-water
Canal. For us the fact is important that, as a glance at the description
of Herodotus proves ^ the level of the Nile at the time of Necho, the son
of Psammetich, was precisely the same as at present, for the line of the
Fresh-water Canal of that time coincides for considerable distances with
that followed by the Fresh-water Canal of to-day. Strabo relates that
the Bitter lakes had become fresh owing to the Canal, and it is possible
that this may afford an explanation of the fact (j noted by Renaud, that
according to the borings which were made in the l)ottom of the Bitter


' C. Keller, Die Fauna im Suez-Canal und die Diffusion der mediterranen und
eiythraischen Thierwelt ; Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ge?., 1883, XXVIII, 39 pp , 2 pi.

• Herodot., Euterpe, II, p. 157 et seq.



382 THE GREAT DESERT PLATEAU [part ii

lakes the salt deposit, which is 7*5 meters deep in places, appeared to rest
on mud derived from the Nile \

Diodorus states that Ptolemy II had constructed sluices to open and
close the Canal ; for this reason that part of the Canal which enters the sea
near Arsinoo (Suez) was called the Ptolemaic river. Lesseps believes that
they were afraid, on account of the trifling dimensions of the Canal in
transverse section, that it might be invaded by the flood waters of the
Red sea, and that the sluice was consequently a tidal gate. On the other
hand, Lesseps points out that near the Shalilf the existing Fresh-water
Canal is identical with the ancient one, and that the latter terminates at
present in a sluice with a fall of 3 meters above the mean level of the
Red sea. Eleven centuries ago, therefore, that is, at a time when the
Khalif Omar restored the Canal, the mean level of the Red sea was
3 meters higher than at present^.

That fresh-water Mollusca such as Aetheria and Spatha, which at present
exist only in the upper Nile, were already opresent in this region at a time
when the fauna of the Red sea lived about seven to eight meters above the
present water level in the Bitter lakes, has been maintained by several
observers, in particular by T. Fuchs. Very regular beds crowded with
the shells of Aetheria occur, however, as was first shown by Vaillant,
within the Erythraean region, above the more recent marine formations,
on the Shalflf, near the Serapeum, and at a few other points to the south
of Timsfi,h ; that they should have been formed by the Fresh-water Canal
alone is, as Issel has justly observed, most unlikely. We must not,
however, overlook the fact that the course of the Fresh-water Canal in
the valley of Gessen doubtless corresponds, up to the Seven Springs, with
an ancient branch of the Nile, and there is no doubt from the observations
made by members of the French expedition to Egypt at the beginning
of the nineteenth century, that in 1800, before the reconstruction of the
Fresh-water Canal, tl;ie Nile followed this line during an unusually high
flood and reached the Seven Springs near Ismailia. The river even

^ Renaud, Note sur la constitution geologique de Tieflime de Suez ; Gompt. rend., 1856,
XLII, pp. 1163--1167.

* Lesseps, Compt. rend., 1874, p. 1743 ; also murent, Essai, p. 63. Here it is necessary
to say a few words on the threshold of the Shaluf, which separates the Bitter lakes on the
south from the lagoon of Suez and the Red sea. Laqrent and Lesseps believed it to be
a spur of the Miocene deposits of the Jebcl Gcn^f; 1 could not find any indication of
this, nor did T. Fuchs. Tn 1869 I was permitted to expose this part of the berme of the
Canal by means of a small excavation, but the Canal was already in communication with
the sea, in consequence of which I did not see the lower parts of Laurent’s section.
What I met with was blue clay rich in gypsum ; above it, dipping to the north and
thinning out upwards, a hard brownish-yellow bed which consists chiefly of cavernous
gypsum and appeared to be the edge of a larger basin-shaped deposit of gypsum, on the
surface of which, about 1’5 meters above the sea, boreholes were visible. This was again
followed by blue clay and gypsum.



CH, V] SUMMAEY OF CHANGES NEAR SUEZ 383

washed against the height of Sheich Ennedek, to the south of lake
Timsah, but flowed away northwards into lake BalA,h and towards the
Mediterranean ^

From this it is clear that lake Timsah, the lake of Crocodiles, which
lies towards the middle of the isthmus, is situated within the region
which is naturally inundated by the Nile.

If we now draw the conclusions suggested by these isolated data, wti
shall first see that all the recent marine deposits which compose the
isthmus lie horizontal, that the whole of this low-lying region appears
to have been formed solely by silting up, and that, at least since a certain
period, the Nile has taken part in this process. Further, it is clear that
the strand-line of the Red sea, when at a height of more than 60 meters,
extended beyond the valley of the Nile, and the deposits of Ghizeh
were then formed, which contain Pecten ei'ythraeua and Ostvea Forskiili of
the Red sea — that, when at a height of 8 meters, the typical Erythraean
marine fauna appeared in th« Bitter lakes, but that certain extinct
species of Mediterranean character and also fresh-water mussels of the
Nile intermingled with it — that among the Erythraean Mollusca in the
shell-beds laid dry near Suez several Mediterranean species occur at
a very trifling height above the sea — finally, that in the living fauna of
Suez a great number of Mediterranean Mollusca are represented by
derivative forms. Thus, while the strand-line lay at a higher level, an
encroachment of the Red sea into the Mediterranean region occurred ; later
on a temporary fusion of the faunas occurred, which, as the strand-line
subsided, again became distinct. Near Suez, however, owing to this
isolation, Mediterranean forms gave rise to representative species.

It is possible, and even likely, that the last movements of the strand-
line took place in historic times, and we shall meet later with abundant
proof of such movements in the Mediterranean within the last two
thousand years. But we may regard it as certain that the Nile sent
an arm through the valley of Gessen towards the Seven Springs, at
a time when the Red sea lay six to eight meters above its present level
and extended beyond the Bitter lakes. It is equally certain that sincfi
then the strand-line has mbs^ided, ivhile the level of the Nile has not been
appi^eciably altered. The fall of the Nile, however, in the lower part of
its course is extremely insignificant ; Fraas estimates it from Assuan to
Cairo at 11 centimeters and from Cairo downwards at 4 centimeters to
the kilometer, or 1:9,090 and 1:25,000. The river must, therefore, Ini
very sensitive to any alteration in the relative height of the land.
A deposition of alluvium has certainly taken place, but I ehtircly agree

^ The level on which are based the otherwise most valuable observations of the
great scientific expedition which accompanied Napoleon I to Kgypt is unfortunately
quite erroneous.



884 THE GEEAT DESERT PLATEAU [partii

with the unfavourable opinion expressed by Fraas as regards all the
attempts hitherto made to obtain chronological results from the thickness
of these deposits, which varies greatly according to local conditions \

Just as the horizontal position of all the recent marine deposits which
form the istliinus reveals the fact that they were laid dry, igiot owing to
local causes, but to some very widely extended process, so the position and
past history of the Nile proves that a local elevation of the land cannot
possibly have occurred in more recent times. Most observers have
recognized this fact ; Laurent, Vassel, and T. Fuchs liave put forward
the theory that it is the fresh water of the Nile which has brought about
the separation of the marine faunas. Vassel and Fuchs regard the whole
isthmus as formed by recent silting up-'. ‘Are we,* ** asks Laurent, ‘to
assume a slow elevation in recent times, which raised the rocky bank of
the Shalflf two meters above the present level of the Red sea, or must we
presuppose the simultaneous retreat of both seas^?* I think that the
stationary state of the Nile restricts us to the latter supposition.

It is true that this refers only to the lower course of the river.
According to Leith Adams fluviatile Mollusca and ancient terraces occur
near Sclsileh, that is, even below the cataracts, at a considerable height
above the river, and further up its course such indications of higher water
levels may be frequently seen; they must extend 100 to 120 feet above
the river ^ This only proves the progress of erosion, and the sinking
of the river with the subsidence of the strand-line. But the age of the
Nile is very great.

Traces of the fauna of the Nile are widely distributed. In the alluvial
land of Ghenneh in Arabia Petraea, Bauermann found a shell of Spatha
Chaziana, which lives at present in the Nile, and fragments of the same
fresh-water mussel were found, together with stone implements, in the
neighbouring turquoise mines, which are of very great antiquity*.

Many years ago Tristan brought Chroinis nilotica, a fish characteristic

* Fraas, Aus dein Orient, p. 212.

T. Fuchs, Ueber die ^?eol. Beschaffenheit der Landenge von Suez und des Amur-Liman
ill! Nord-Japanischen Meere ; Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1881, pp. 178'181. The older
view on the elevation of the country was represented by Ferret and Galinier, Note sur le
soulevement des cdtes de la Her Rouge et Tancien Canal des Rois, 8vo, Paris, 1847 (from
Voy. en Abyssinie).

* Laurent, Essai geologique, p. 17.

* A. Leith Adams, Notes on the Geology of a Portion of the Nile Valley, north of the
Second Cataract in Nubia, taken chiefly with the View of inducing further Search for
Fluviatile Shells at High Levels; Quart. Joum. Geol.Soc., 1864, XX, pp. 6-19,

** Bauermann, mem. cit., Quart. Journ., 1869, XXV, p. 35. The mussel evidently
served as food for the labourers. These mines, situated in the Wady Maghara, which
opens into the Wady Ghenneh, were discovered according to Lepsius 4,000 years b.c.,
and worked by a colony of labourers : Lepsius, Briefe aus Aegypten, Aethiopien und der
Halbinsel des Sinai, 8vo, 1852, p. 336.



FAUNA OF THE NILE


385


CH. V]

of the Nile, and other representatives of the Nile fauna from lake
Tiberias, and from this he concluded that the fauna of the river must
be of very great age^. Lortet has confirmed the occurrence of these
forms; the level of the lake is, according to this observer, —212 metei-s;
its greatest depth, situated in the north, is 250 meters, so that the bottom
here attains a depth of —462 meters. Terraces which reach the level
of the Mediterranean may, however, be seen around the lake, and it is
quite possible that communication once existed iicross the plain of
Jezreel

Trionyx aegyptiacus lives in the neighbourhood of Beyrut, and it is
a most remarkable fact that the crocodile of the Nile still exists in the
marahy estuary of the Nahr e* Zerka, or Crocodile river, three kilometers
to the north of Caesarea. Pliny knew of a town — Crocodilon — in this
neighbourhood, it is mentioned by Strain), and the ruins of a village still
bear this name. Bottger has lately collected information on the subject,
from which we learn that tht3 animal is not rare, that it sometimes
attacks children or sheep, and that in April, 1877, a specimen ten feet
long was slain in the neighbourhood of the river

These facts also throw unexpected light on the numerous and circum-
stantial accounts of the slaughter of a scaly monster by the knight
Deodat von Gozon on tlio island of Rliodes in the first half of the
fourteenth century

^ A. Gunther, Report on a Collection of Reptiles and Fishes from Palestine, Proc.
Zool. Soc., 1864, pp. 488-493 ; H. B. Tristram, Nat. Hist. Rev., 1865, XII, pp. 541-544, et
passim.

Lortet, Dragages profomls executes dans le lac dc Tiberiade (Syrie) ; Compt. rend.,
1880, XCf, PI). 500 503. Others have assumed, on the authority of older observations
made by Tristram, that the terraces on the Red sea extend to the summit of the
threshold of Arabah,‘'and that it had once discharged itself to the south (Nature,
March 29, 1883, p. 520) ; but the exact data furnished by Lortet (e.g. Hull. soc. geol. dc Fr.,
1865, 2® s(h*., XXV, pp. 448 et seq.) do not indicate this direction, and it is very unlikely
that the high threshold on the south was ever submerged, since lake Tiberias found an
outlet to the Mediterranean at a lower level.

•* O. Bottger, Die Reptilien und Amphibien von Syrien, Paliistina und Cypern ;
Berichtc Senckenberg. Naturf. Gesellsch., 1879-1880, pp. 199-206, and map of the Nahr
e’ Zerka, pi. iv. The ‘ leviathan ’ of Job xl and xli is certainly the crocodile, but
we can hardly refer this passage to the crocodile of the Nahr c’ Zerka, since the
‘ behemoth ’ mentioned at the same time is* evidently the hippopotamus. Both animals
have been rightly identified by S. Bochart, Hierozoicon, fol., 1563, [I, pp. 753 796. On
this point cf. also K. Schlottrnann, Das Buch Hiob, 8vo, 1851, pp. 490-503.

^ We i)Ossess a detailed account of this in J. Bosio, Tstoria della sacra religione et
Illma Militia di San Giovanni Gierosolomitano, fol., Roma, 1594, II, pp. 45-47. The
incident is said to have occun*ed near a spring below the hill on wliich stands the
little church of San Stefiino, on the road from the town to Casali, in the time of
the Grand Master Helion de Villanuova (1322-1346). Bosio's account mentions all
the circumstances, both before and after the contest, which have found a place in the
verses of Schiller. Apart from many absurdities in the description of the animal, we

0 c


HOLLAS



386


THE GREAT DESERT PLATEAU


Thus the traces of the ancient population of the Nile lie strewn over
the land ; this fauna is older than a large part of the adjacent Mediter-
ranean, and older than the trough-subsidence of the Dead sea. It is
possibly even of the very same age as the period of transition between the
ascmiding to the descending series of strata near Sues.

may mention that the knight was obliged to approach it through the water, that
he was forced to dismount in order to contend with it, and that the less scaly and
vulnerable spot was below the neck.



887


CHAPTER VI

THE FRAGMENTS OF THE INDIAN CONTINENT

South Africa. The East Indian peninsula. Madagascar. Summary.

South Af rica. Soundings made in the neighbourhood of Cape Colony
have shown that both the east and the west coast of South Africa descend
much more steeply to the depths of the sea than the south coast, off which
lies the bank of Agulhas. From the Cape of Good Hope in the west and
from Algoa bay in the east the hundred-fathom line departs more and
more widely from the outline of the continent ; it includes the bank of
Agulhas, and extends about two degrees of latitude to the south of the
mainland \ *

Thus the hundred-fathom line does not correspond with the truncated
outline of the coast, but produces it towards the south. Further, any good
geographical map will show that while the trend of the mountains in the
interior is indeed clearly related to that of the coast, yet important deviations
occur in this case also. From Algoa bay, or from the coast between this
bay and Cape Agulhas, a series of parallel ranges runs to the west, and
somewhere in the neighbourhood of Worcester, north-east of Cape Town,
bends round, in accordance with the curve of the coast, to the north-
north-west, or towards Namaqualand. To this series belong the Winteiv
hoek mountains, the Lange Bergen, the Great and Little Zwartebergen,
the Wittebergcn, and further on the mountains of the Cold Bokkefeld, the
Cedar Berge, and others. The ranges form so many ramparts around the
elevated land of the interior, the Karoo ; but since they run out towards
the sea between Algoa bay and Cape Agulhas therens, as it were, too little
of the mainland in the south-east and too much in the south-west, and
there is no counterpart to the Cape of Good Hope on the east side of the
continent.

This asymmetry of outline is ' determined by the structure of the
country and is clearly expressed on the geological maps. Its essential
features were correctly represented by Bain ^ many years ago, and they are
still more clearly shown on Dunn’s map of South Africa

^ Die Kfisten- und Landes-Vermessung der Kap-Kolonie ; Petennann’s geogr. Mitth.,
1868, pp. 23, 24, pi. hi. ^

^ A. Geddes Bain, On the Geology of South Africa; Trans. Geol. Soc., 1856, 2nd ser.,
VII, pp. 175-192, pi. XX, xxi.

^ E. J. Dunn, Geological Sketch Map of South Africa ; from Personal Observations
combined with those of A. G. Bain, Wylie, T. Bain, Atherstone, Pinchin, in Cape Colony,
Sutherland in Natal, and E. Button N. of 24° lat. (fob, undated).

C C 2



888 FRAGMENTS OP THE INDIAN CONTINENT [parth

Between Cape Agulhas and Algoa bay the rocks of the high ranges
sink beneath the sea ; in Natal they partly reappear ; while in the inter-
vening district, between Great Fish river and St. John’s river, chiefly
in British Kaifraria, the formations of the Karoo extend from the
interior to the coast, and no rampart of parallel chains bounds them on
this side.

The rampart, where it does exist, consists of the most ancient rocks,
while towards the interior younger formations occur and the great sand-
stone table-lands of the Karoo, which reach the sea in British Kaflraria,
form the youngest members of this series ; so that the whole land resembles
a great basin, with ancient rocks forming the edge, which, however, is
faulted down in an irregular manner. Towards the Cape of Good Hope
the edge displays its greatest breadth ; in British Kaflraria it has wholly



Fio. 44. South Africa (chiefly after Dunn).

Qf granite and gneiss ; s, Silurian ; d, Devonian ; b, bands of porphyry ; c, Carboniferous ;
blaekj Dwyka conglomerate; k^, k^, Karoo sandstone and sheets of greenstone; laAite, near
Algoa Bay and to the north-east of Capo Agulhas. Uitcnhnge formation and recent marine
deposits (Tertiary or Quarternary). The patches of Cretaceous on the coast of Natal are not
indicated.


disappeared. The sandstone of the Table mountain is an outlier resting
unconformably on the circumvallate mountains.

Thus the asymmetry of this part of the continent, and at the same time
the significance of the down-thrown areas, is apparent on the first glance at
the map. ' The Table mountain sandstone,’ wrote F. v. Hochstetter many
years ago, ' forms to a certain extent the edge of the great continental
plateau, which consists of the formations of the great Karoo, superposed
one over the other in zones or in the form of a basin ; this edge has sunk


CH.VI] SEQUENCE IN SOUTH AFRICA 389

along many parallel lines of fracture, and the coast-line itself perhaps
indicates the outermost of these fractures

Three tectonic elements are present in South Africa.

The first of these is formed of Archaean rocks and Palaeozoic deposits
which in Cape Colony have afforded marine fossils of Devonian age and
Carboniferous plants ; they are folded and eroded ; they form the ramparts
already mentioned, as well as the base of the Table mountain, and extend
over wide areas in Namaqualand, Griqualand West, and the Kalahari.

The second includes the deposits of the Karoo. Their ago dates from
the Permian period and extends to the Trias ; they are several thousand
feet thick, lie horizontally on the ancient folded formations, and have
never yet furnished any trace of marine organisms.

The third element consists of younger marine deposits of the Mesozoic
period ; they have never been observed on the table mountains of the
interior or indeed at any greet distance from the existing sea-coast; they
have but little infiuence on the^configuration of the continent, and will l>c
discussed later.

The most important part in the interior of the country is taken by the
second element, the deposits of the Karoo. In the whole of Cape Colony
and in Natal, as for example near Pietennaritzburg, they commence with
an accumulation (sometimes very thick) of great boulders of different kinds
of rock. That these were transported by ice was first asserted by Suther-
land, who compared them with the Permian ice-drift of England ‘s. The
series is known as the Dwyka conglomerate, and fonns a part of the lowest
group, distinguished by Bain as the Ecca beds. Alx)ve it lie the hnver
Karoo or Koonap sandstones or shales, which at Klein-Roggeveld and other
places contain numerous fossil trees. Then follow the widely extended
upper Karoo sandstones or Beaufort beds ; besides Olossopteris Browniami
and perhaps Phyllotheca indica, they contain here and there the remains of
Palaeoniscus and above all of Dicynodon, Oudenodon, Galeosaurus, Micro-
pholis, and other strange reptiles. This division is overlaid by the Storm^
berg beds — white and yellowish sandstones, with grey and reddish beds of
shale, frequently coal-bearing. These beds also contain reptiles, but
Dicynodon appears to be absent ; and they are probably the source from
which the remains of Tritylodon longaevus [once regarded as] a mammal,
found near Thabachou, Basutoland, are derived \

^ F. V. Hochstetter, Beitrage zur Geologie des Caplandes ; Rcise der (Jsterr. Fregatte
Novara, Geologie, Theil II, 4to, Wien, 1866, p. 28.

^ Sutherland, Notes on an Ancient Boulder-Clay of Natal ; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,
1870, XXVI, pp. 514-516. The whole series of the Karoo beds is given 'in great detail
by Rupert Jones and Tate, after Bain, op. cit., 1867, XXIIT, pp. 142-149, and according
to Wylie, tom. cit., pp. 171-173.

• R. Owen, On the Skull and Dentition of a Triasaic Mammal {Tritylodon longaevus, Ow.)
from South Africa ; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1884, XL, Discuss., p. 152.



890 FRAGMENTS OF THE INDIAN CONTINENT [partii

These horizontally stratified masses of sandstone contain numerous
sheets of volcanic rocks, which are variously described as porphyritic
amygdaloid, melaphyre, trap, basalt, or greenstone; they have recently
been made the subject of numerous petrographical investigations, and
appear to be of very diversified character. They often give rise to obvious
ledges on the slopes of the table mountains, and frequently cover their
highest parts like a roof. Thus, according to Stow, a fragment of one of
these sheets forms the great cliff beneath the summit of the Hangklip,
which rises above the surrounding country to the south of the Storm-
bergen and another produces the crest of a large part of that stupendous
precipice in which the Quathlamba (Drakensberg) terminate in the east
towards Natal, and even their highest part, the Mont-aux-Sources (said
to be 10,000 feet high), consists, according to Griesbach, of the edge of
one of these covering sheets^.

The contrast between the flat-lying masses of the Karoo from the
Dwyka conglomerate to the Stormberg beds, and the folded complex on
which they rest, is as a rule clear enough : a more obscure problem, however,
and one not yet completely solved, arises from a study of existing descrip-
tions. Both on Table mountain itself, and far away from it in Natal,
transgressive or apparently transgressive masses of sandstone occur imme-
diately over the folded formations. These are older than the sandstones of
the Karoo, and perhaps indicate a transgression which preceded the Dwyka
conglomerate ; they are called by Griesbach and others the Table mountain
mudstone , —

The folds of the older formations, which in the south of the continent
assume, as we have seen, the form of ramparts surrounding the great plateau
of Karoo sandstones, strike at first, west of Algoa bay, from east-south-east
to west-north-west, then further on from east to west, corresponding to
the course of the mountain crests; the southern edge of the sandstone
region also runs approximately in the same direction •*. From Cape Town
onwards these older formations follow the west coast to the north, and in
Namaqualand gneiss forms the greater part of the surface, overlaid,
however, in places by isolated outliers of the horizontally stratified Table
mountain sandstone \ This extensive gneiss region is followed on the east
by a Palaeozoic area which comprises the western half of Griqualand
West. The structure of this, in spite of the complete absence of fossils,

' G. W. Stow, On some Points of South African Geology ; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,
1871, XXVII, pp. 497-548, in particular p. 531.

* C. L. Griesbach, On the Geology of Natal; tom. cit., 1871, XXVII, pp. 53-72,
pi. ii, iii.

^ R. Pinchin, A Short Description of the Geology of Part of the Eastern Province of the
Cape of Good Hope ; op. cit., 1875, XXXI, pp. 106-108, pi. iv.

* Rubridge, On some Points in the Geology of South Africa; op. cit., 1859, XV,
pp. 195-198.



CH.VI] • GRIQUALAND 391

has been worked out by Stow, at least as regards its main features.
Anderson’s map of the desert of Kalahari shows the northern continuation
of the stratified systems distinguished by Stow ^

In order to follow these important investigations let us start from
a point easily found on the map, the confluence of the Vaal with the
Orange river. From this point an important escarpment extends to the
north-east, running at first parallel to the Vaal, and then following the
course of the Haart river ; it marks the boundary between the Palaeozoic
formations and the horizontal deposits on the east. Although known as
the Campbell range, it is not a mountain chain, but the edge of an extensive
plain or of a somewhat convex or buckler-shaped surface, and is formed by
the outcrop of a very thick bed of siliceous limestone; at its foot there
appear here and there the remains of a still older and steeply up-tilted
series of strata.

Starting from Campbclltown let us now ascend the face of the
Campbell range and cross th^ broad limestone region to Oriquatown.
Here the limestone comes to an end, and is succeeded by the long shoulders
of the Oriquatown (Kuruman) range which strike to the north-north-east.
These consist of siliceous schists, carrying magnetic iron ore, and in the
south asbestos ; it is this chain which is broken through by the Orange
river in the sharp bend it makes to the south near Prieska. The Oriquatown
range extends to the north far beyond Griqualand ; in the south, on the
other side of the Orange river, it is continued in the Doornbergen, which
runs to the south-east ; this mountainous zone is known for a distance of
more than two degrees of latitude.

It is succeeded on the west, near Moss Fontein and Ongeluk, by a region
of felspathic rocks and amygdaloids, of considerable extent and often
covered by red sand. Still further to the west we reach the long ridges of
the Matsap and Klipfontein mountains, which are composed of ancient
folded quartzite and ran north-north-east parallel to the Oriquatown
range. These are only the foot-hills of the Langeberg, that remarkable
chain which is crossed by the Orange river between Bulfontein and
Kheis; approaching from the south it rans at first parallel to the
above-mentioned ridges to the north-north-east, but further to the north
follows the direction of the meridian, and according to Anderson's map
even extends along the eastern part of the desert of Kalahari, nearly as
far as latitude 22°. Thus the length of the Langeberg would amount to
about seven degrees of latitude. This remarkable chain consists as far as

’ G. W. Stow, Geological Notes upon Griqualand West, op. cit.,i 1874, XXX, pp,
581*682, pi. xxxv-xxxix; also E. Cohen, letter in the Neues Jahrb. fQr Min., 1878,
pp. 52-56, and A. A. Anderson, Notes on the Geography of South Central Africa, in
Explanation of a New Map of the Region ; Proc. Roy. Geogr. Soc., 1884, VI, pp. 19-36,
and map.



392 FRAGMENTS OP THE INDIAN CONTINENT [pabtii

it hafi been explored, like those just mentioned, of folded or steeply
upturned quartzite which Stow assigns, but only conjecturally, to the
Devonian. Now wc reach the projecting arms of the sandy desert, and
near Eheis schistose rocks, the relations of which to the gneiss of Nama-
qualand are only imperfectly known.

From the foregoing we perceive that in the centre of the continent is
a vast folded region of Palaeozoic rocks striking to the north or north-norlh-
east, which was either exposed by the denudation of the Karoo beds,
or, as Stow thinks, served from the beginning as the boundary of these
deposits. The desert of Kalahari appears to belong wholly, or at least for
the greater part, to this Palaeozoic region.

Having established these facts let us turn to the horizontally stratified
region of the Karoo.

The course of its continuous southern border is indicated oh Fig. 44 by
the outcrop of the Dwyka conglomerate ; above it rises the lower, and then
the upper or Beaufort sandstone, which forfns the surface of the land far
and wide. In the west the Stonnberg beds occur upon it only as isolated
outliers, while in the east they form a continuous sheet.

The southern margin of the great sandstone region extends in Cape
Colony through Kliprug Kop near Calvinia, Schoorstein Berg, Schildpad
Kop, Spitzkop, and many others; the Great Winterberg belongs to this
region. The Dwyka conglomerate reaches the sea near the mouth of the
Great Fish river and emerges from it again near St. John's river to the
north of KalFraria. Between these two points, as we have already seen,
the great mass of sandstone also reaches the sea.

The eastern border of the sandstone mass is very shai-ply defined and
runs through Natal, Zululand, and the eastern Transvaal into the immediate
neighbourhood of the Olifant river; and it may be followed from 31" 30'
to about 24° 15', that is, through more than seven degrees of latitude. From
west to east the table-land ascends, and then suddenly sinks in the direction
of Natal. We have already mentioned that the Quathlamba or Drakens-
berg form the eastern edge of the table-land, that they attain their
greatest height in the Mont-aux-Sources, about 10,000 feet high, and that
intercalated effusive sheets form both this edge and the peaks which n’se
from it.

For a closer study of this important line we shall now follow the
descriptions of Griesbach ^ in the case of Natal, and those of Cohen ^ for the
district between Lydenburg and Delagoa bay.

' C. L. Griesbach, Geologischer Durchschnitt durch Siidafrika, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst.,
1870, XX, pp. 501-504, pi. xix, and in greater detail in the passage mentioned. Quart.
Journ. Geol. Soc., 1875, XXXI.

* E. Cohen, Eri3;Utemde Bemerkungen zu der Routenkarte einer Reisc von Lydenburg
nach den Goldfeldern und von Lydenburg nach Delagoa Bay, 8vo, 1875.



C3H. VI] QUATHLAMBA 398

We must first observe that the line is not straight ; near the sources of
the Tugela a great excision occurs which displaces the crest towards the
west, although further north it again assumes nearly the same direction as
in Natal. Still further north it terminates near the Olifant river, and
while the plateau of Lydenburg attains a height of some 1,800-1,900 meters,
and many of the hills upon it rise to over 2,000 meters, the Mauch Berg
even to 2,660 meters, the Olifant flows far below at a level of 600 meters.

Notwithstanding its sinuosities, the eastern border of the sandstone
region is determined, in Natal and Zululand, probably indeed for its whole
length, by a very great fault, as has been well recognized by Rehmann b
This seems to me proved by the fact that, on the oast coast of Natal, and in
other localities more to the north, sunken fragments of llwy ka conglomerate
and Karoo sandstones may be observed at a very low level. This also
explains the fact that, as shown in Fig. 44, the zone of the Dwyka
conglomerate is repeated on the east in Natal.

Let us examine a transverse section of the chain of Quathlamba and
its foreland in Natal.

From the Mont-aiix -Sources the land descends, jiccording to Griesbach,
in great terraces, which correspond to the basset edges of the Karoo beds
and the ends of the intercalated igneous sheeis. Near Pietermaritzburg we
roach some shaly layers which are peculiar to the lower horizons. They
pass downwards fairly gradually into the Dwyka conglomerate, which
borders the foot of the great escarpment. This conglomerate rests uncon-
formably on an older quartzite which is still, however, horizontally
stratified. It is regarded with much reason as the ecpii valent of the Table
mountain sandstone of the Cape of (}ood Hope. Below the Quathlamba it
forms several typical table mountains, as for instance the Krantzkop on the
Tugela. Beneath the quartzite the rivers have in many places expose<l
ancient folded schists and gneiss. The gneiss forms the foundation of the
whole series. Before we reach the sea on the east thg Dwyka conglomerate
reappears, and is followed on the coast by isolated outliers of Karoo sand-
stone, the beds of which dip towards the sea. The cliff on which the
lighthouse of Durban Harbour is built is composed of the seaward-dipping
beds of such an outlier, the continuation of which is to be sought far above
in the pile of strata which crop out in the face of the Quathlamba.

From the foregoing we see that the Karoo deposits once extended much
further to the east, and that the outliers on the sea-coast arc thrown down

^ A. Rehmann, Das Transvaal-Gebiet des sttdlichen Afnca in physisch-jreographischer
Beziehung, Mitth. geogr. Ges. Wien, 1883, XXVI, pp. 257-266, 321-362, 369-395,
417-443, map and 2 plates; also F, Jeppe, Die transvaabs he oder siidafrikanische
Republik, Petenn. geogr. Mitth., ErgS^nzungsheft, XXIV, D.’8, with the map by
Jeppe and Merensky; further, Jeppe, Notes on some of the Physical and Geological
Features of the Transvaal, Joum. Roy. Geogr. Soc., 1877, XLVII, pp. 217 250, and map.



394 FRAGMENTS OF THE INDIAN CONTINENT [partii

along one or more great faults ; the existing slopes of the Quathlamba do
not, however, coincide with the line of faulting. The ^eat fracture that
severed that part of the continent now lying beneath the sea took place
much nearer the existing coast-line ; subsequent dcnuclation has diminished
the steepness of its face and caused its edge to retreat gradually inland.
The resulting scarp is the scarp of the Quathlamba ; the head waters of
the Tugela are still active in driving it back, and similar forces are at work
along the whole line. High though the Mont-aux-Sources rises at present
above the lighthouse of Durban, yet the original face of the fault must
have looked down upon the sea with an altitude greater still.

The same general features reappear on the slope of the Quathlamba in
the north. In order to observe them let us accompany Cohen on his journey
from Lydenburg to Delagoa bay.

As soon jxa we reach the margin of the plateau to the east of Spitzkop,
we notice a change in the character of the landscape. The steep cliffs and
gorges of the table-lands give place to don?e-Hke hills and rounded valleys ;
this is the granite region, which descends in several steep steps to the east.
Still further to the east, in the Umswasi mountains, near the river Ingwanya
we again meet, for the first time since leaving the high mountains, with
stratified rocks, sucli as quai’tz sandstone and friable black shales, both of
which closely resemble the rocks of the great plateau. The long chain of
the Lembobo mountains, which follows on the east, is composed of felsite
porphyry.

It is quite possible that the stratified rocks of the Umswasi mountains
correspond to the down-thrown outliers on the coast of Natal. Isolated
sandstone mountains in the midst of the plain were met with by Machado
to the east of the Lembobo chain, i.e. on its seaward side

While the Karoo beds are thus shai-ply bounded on the southern and
eastern side, their area becomes constricted to the north, and the western
margin is much brokep up by denudation. A description of the irregularities
of the western border is not, however, a part of my scheme. We have
already seen how the Palaeozoic rocks in Griqualand advance from the west
towards the eastern border of the Campbell range (Kaap Plateau of Jeppe).
The Karoo beds which rest in a horizontal position against this border
consist of friable shales, but here also the remains of Dicynodon are
known ^ ; within this region lie the most valuable diamond mines, which
extend into the Orange River Colony. The mines are worked in a vertical
direction in great pipes or necks filled with a mass of tuff, charged with
foreign fragments, and in this the diamonds occur. According to Chaper’s
description, this diamond-bearing mass was formed by eruptions in a pasty

' J. J. Machado, Gaminho de ferro de Louren 90 Marques a fronteira de Transvaal ;
Bol. Soc. Geogr. Lisbon, 1880, 2*^ ser., pp. 67-104, in particular p. 89.

® Lee, Geol. Msig., 1879, 2nd ser., VI, p. 192.



395


CH.VI] LIMPOPO AND ZAMBESI

condition or incompletely molten state ; Cohen compares them to the Maare
of the EifeP.

The Palaeozoic deposits probably extend without interruption from the
Campbell range to the west of the Haart river along the western border of
the Hohe Feld into the district between the Marico and the upper Limpopo ;
there, according to Hubner’s observations^, the granite comes out from
beneath them on the Kornkoppe south of the confluence of these two great
rivers. Great sheets of greenstone form the surface of the ground, both in
the south on the Pilandsberge towards Rustenburg, and towards the north-
west in the neighbourhood of Shoshong. The Archaean formations, however,
play a most prominent part in the structure of the extensive heiglits between
the Limpopo in the north and the Buschfeld and Olifant river in the south.
The eastern part in particular, called by Rchmann the Ingalalo plateau,
which extends as far as the great bend described by the Limpopo, seems to
consist of a great core of granite surrounded by a mantle of schists. These
schists, according to Rehmann, also form the Lcchlaba mountains, which,
although they lie very nearly on the prolongation of the great line of the
Quathlamba, must yet be regarded as parts of an independent mountain
system.

Outliers of sandstone do not reappear until we reach the northom border
of the Ingalale plateau in the Zoutpansberg, towards the valley of the
Limpopo, and here they must be included in the Karoo series.

On the other side of the Limpopo the structure of the country appears
to remain the same as far as the Zambesi. Granite and crystalline schist
everywhere crop out ; they include the gold-bearing district of Tabi, and only
here and there are covered by outliers of sandstone, which arc probably the
denuded remains of the transgressive deposits of the Karoo. Apart from
the patch occurring on the river Seronime in lat. 23J°S., which is probably
connected with the greenstone sheet of Shoshong, Hiibner encountered to
the south of Inyati, in lat. 20° S., horizontal beds oj| sandstone containing
some fossil wood, and probably belonging to the Karoo sandstones. Near
the Kraal Malisa, in lat. 19° 50' S., a similar horizontal outlier of sandstone
occurs on the upper Guay ; this contains intercalated sheets of greenstone.

Still further to the north extensive deposits of sandstone with Jiccom-
panying coal-beds occur on the Zambesi; these were first observed by
Livingstone and Thornton, and subsequently described in detail by Kuss.
They lie below the waterfalls from about 16° 40' to 15° 50'; to the south

^ E. J. Dunn, On the Mode of Occurrence of Diamonds in S. Africa, Quart. Journ.
Geol. Soc., 1874, XXX, pp. 54-60; M. Chaper, Note sur la region diamantifere de
lAfrique australe, 8vo, Paris, 1880, in particular p. 42 et seq. ; £. Goiien, Ueber die
sadafrikanischen Diamantfelder, 8vo, 1888, p. 5 (from the V. Jahresber. des Vereins fUr
Erdkunde zu Metz fiir 1882).

’ A. Hfibner, Geographische Skizzen aus Siidost-Afrika ; Petennann's geogr. Mitth.,
1872, XVIII, pp. 422-431, pi. xxi.



396 FRAGMENTS OP THE INDIAN CONTINENT [pabtii

of them, Kuss observed a large development of Archaean rocks, and in
many places some brown porphyry. In the Lupata mountains, which are
cut through by the Zambesi, this overlies red sandstone ; a large outlier of
sandstone also occurs further to the south near Senna ^

Thomson has shown that in the north, from about lat^ 12® to 10® S.,
a large flat-bedded plateau of sandstone reaches the sea; this has been
denuded by the river Kuvuma and so divided into two parts, Mavia and
Makonde. In the east along the coast the height of the sandstone plateau
only amounts to a few hundred feet ; it extends in the fonn of a wedge up
the river Kuvuma to about lat. 39® E., and attains on its inland side an
altitude of more than 2,500 feet. This vast table- land rests on granite, and
its exposed foundation, like the granite region of Dar-Fur and Kordofan, is
covered towards the interior with steep and isolated mountains. In a
restricted area, however, between Itule and Kwamakanja on the Lujende,
which flows from the south into the Kuvuma, a mass of coal-bearing shale
belonging to the sandstone series has b3en thrown down in a trough-
fault, and has thus, according to Thomson, been preserved from destruction
in the midst of the granite

Thus we approach the region lying between latitude 10° and 5® S., where
the same explorer has collected so much instructive infonnation, and within
which two great sandstone areas, an eastern and a western, may be
distinguished \

The eastern ai’ca lies near the coast, does not rise to peaks of any
considerable eminence, and is bounded towards the interior by a high
cliff, which marks the commencement of the Archaean region. The cliff
retreats furthest from the coast in about latitude 8® S., reaching almost to
longitude 36® E., and thus the sandstone here attains its greatest breadth ;
towards the north it becomes more and more restricted, and opposite Pemba
island is merely a narrow band. The sandstone is accompanied by coal ;
limestone beds also appear, and Thomson mentions fossils of the Carboni-
ferous period from two localities in the north of this area.

The lofty Archaean table-land extends as far as lakes Tanganyika and
Nyassa, and far beyond the latter to the west. But in Ujiji and Ukaranga,
on the north-east side of lake Tanganyika, and at some places on the west
side and at the southern end of the lake, the western area of sandstone
begins, and is continued for an unknown distance towards the upper Congo.

^ Livingstone and Thornton, Account in the Journ. Geogr. Soc., 1861, XXI, pp. 261,
291, et passim; H. Kuss, Note sur la constitution geologique d*une partiede laZambesie,
Bull. soc. geol. de Fr., 1884, 3® ser., XII, pp. 303-317 and geological map.

* J. Thomson, Notes on the Basin of the River Rovuma, East Africa ; Proc. Roy. Geogr.
Soc., 1882, new ser., IV, pp. 65-79 and map.

^ By the same, To the Central African Lakes and Back, 8vo, 1881, Appendix III ;
Notes on the Geology of East Central Africa, Vol. II, pp. 299-307 and geol. map.



TANGANYIKA AND NYASSA


897


c®. vi]

Thii9 sandstone is of great thickness and has on the whole retained its
horizontal position, although on lake Tanganyika it is traversed by faults.

Although the synchronism of these sandstones with those of the Karoo
has not been proved, yet the essential elements which enter into the
structure of the country, the Archaean foundation, associated with older
folded schists, and horizontal transgressive plateaux of sandstone, are
extremely similar to those of the south.

Let us cast a hasty glance at the two lakes. Nyassa is surrounded on
the north by an older volcanic region, surmounted by recent eruptive cones.
Tanganyika is let down into the horizontally stratified sandstone and its
foundation of Archaean rocks. Its southern half, from about latitude 7° 8'
to 8® 30' S., crosses an extensive region of ancient eruptive rocks. Since the
time that our knowledge of this lake has made some approach to exactness
it has been regarded as a down-thrown area. Stanley even believed that
the noi"thern half was of mOxO recent origin than the south, and that
alterations in the discharge oft the Lukuga bore witness to this fact.
Thomson also recognizes it as a sunken area. The precipitous descent of
the sandstone to the lake and the manner in which the latter cuts across
the eruptive mass about its southern half are adduced in support of this
view, and probably with reason *.

Indeed I do not see in what way these two great depressions, each
of which, althoTigh of very trifling breadth, is prolonged through about five
degrees of latitude, could have been produced unless by trough- faults,
and in my opinion their mode of origin was similar to that of the Red sea,
the Dead sea, and the Shotts.

The structure of the west of Africa is even less completely known
to us than that of the east. The map constructed by Lenz shows, how-
ever, how widely distributed the most ancient rocks are in this region

^ H. M. Stanley, Through the Dark Continent (German edition by Bottger), 8vo, 1878,
11, p. 37 : ‘ Kirungwe Point consists of perpendicular walls— /rom 50 to 200 feet high
above the lake - of a fine reddish sandstone with horizontal strata. Their peculiar
appearance may be imagined when the boat’s crew cried out : — “ Oh, mother, this is
a fort ! See, there are the windows and here is one of the gates.” Kirungwe Point
appears to be a lofty swelling ridge, cut straight through to an unknown depth. As may
be seen from a glance at the sketch of the “High Place of the Spirit Mtombwa,” on the
opposite side of the lake, there seems ground for believing that this ridge was once
a i^rolongation of the plateau of Marungu, as the ro(jks arc of the same material, and
both sides of the lake show similar results of a sudden subsidence without disturbance of
the strata.’ Also J. Thomson, On the Geographical Evolution of the Tanganyika Basin ;
Rep. Brit. Ass., Southampton, 1882, pp. 622, 623. Here we may recall the striking
marine forms among the Mollusca of Tanganyika and the occurrence of the Cretaceous
genus Pyrgulifera in this lake : Tausch, Ueber einige Conchylien aus dem Tanganyika-
See und deren fos.sile Verwandtc, Anzeig. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1884, p. 130. Near the
north-west side of Nyassa, on the Archaean plateau, Drummond has lately found deposits,
apparently of lacustrine origin, with fishes, Mollusca, and leaves : Nature, April 10, 1884,
p. 551.



398 FRAGMENTS OP THE INDIAN CONTINENT [pact n

also \ The conglomerate rocks of Pungo Andongo (lat. 9^ 24^ S.) in eastern
Angola, and the horizontal plant-bearing sandstones on which they rest,
strongly reminded Livingstone of the sandstones of the east. It is very
probable that similar conditions prevailed over the whole breadth of the
continent. —

We have thus been able to distinguish in Cape Colony, and thence to
the north of the Transvaal, an older group of folded rocks and a younger
transgressive group of flat-lying beds, composed chiefly of sandstone, and
correspouding in age with the Permian and Trias. These are the deposits
of the Karoo. In certain localities one of the latest stages of the Carboni-
ferous system appears to take part in the horizontal transgression. Further
to the north we have again found older folded rocks and outliers of trans-
gressive horizontal sandstone, but we have no direct proof that the latter
is of the same age as the sandstones of the Karoo. Nevertheless there
plainly exist two elements very similar to one another, and standing in
the same tectonic relation to each otherf which, according to the present
state of observation, compose the interior of the continent from the Cape
to below latitude 6® or 6® S.

There is yet a third tectonic element in South Africa, which however,
as we have already said, has only exerted a subordinate influence on the
structure of the great continent, and is so far only known in the
neighbourhood of the sea-coast; this consists of the marine deposits of
the second half of the Mesozoic period. However insignificant these
isolated patches may be in extent, yet the interest which attaches to them
in the geological history of Africa is by no means trifling. They lie at
great distances from one another and are of different age, but everywhere
contain marine fossils. They are without exception more recent than the
sandstone masses of the Karoo, and indeed than all the transgressive
sandstones of the interior, in which no trace of marine animals has as yet
been found. In certain cases even it is clear that some of the dislocations
which have determined the existing form of South Africa date from the
earlier part of the Mesozoic period.

The first group of these patches occurs on the west coast in two widely
separated regions ; it is of Cretaceous age, and was first made known by
Giebel, Lenz, and Szajnocha^. The first region lies to the north of the
Equator ; on the Elobi idands in Corisco bay, which only rise 8-10 meters
above the sea, horizontal beds of sandstone are met with which have
afforded a large number of Ammonites; the sandstone is continued on to

^ 0. Lenz, Geol. Karte von West-Afrika; Petermann's geogr. Mitth., 1882, pi. i.

* Giebel, Zeitschr. far die gea. Naturw., 1876, XLVIII, p. 58 ; Lenz, Geol. Mitth.
aus Weat-Afrika, Verb. geol. Reichsanat., 1878, p. 148 ; L. Szajnocha, Zur Kenntniaa der
mitielcretaciachen Cephalopoden-Fauna auf den Inseln Elobi in Weat-Afrika, Denkachr.
Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1884.



399


OH. VI] UTTENHAGE SERIES

the mainland. SMo&nbaclda inflata occurs here, and, according to Szajnocha,
that variety of it which predominates in the Ootatoor group of the
Cretaceous system in India. The second region lies more than 15 degrees
of latitude further to the south on Fish bay, south of Mossamedes. In
this locality richly fossiliferous beds were observed many years ago by
lieutemint Wolf, to the north of the Pillar of Bartolomeu Diaz Schloen-
bachia inflata is placed by German geologists in the Gault, in France it is
assigned to the lower Cenomanian.

The next group of these patches lies in the south and south-eastern
part of Cape Colony. It falls into two series, a Mesozoic and an upper
Tertiary or Quaternary.

The Mesozoic deposits bear the name of the Uitenimje series, are
horizontally stratified, and consist of more or less glauconitic beds of
sandstone and shale ; some of the beds contain plant remains, cycads, and
ferns, which differ from those of the Karoo sandstones ; other beds contain
marine shells, which for a long time were considered to be of Jurassic
age‘; but, according to the later investigations of Holub and Ncumayr,
there is increasing evidence to show that they belong to the Neocomian ^
These remarkable deposits, in which the alternation of beds containing
terrestrial plants with those containing marine shells reveals clearly enough
the proximity of some shore line, occur chiefiy in the valleys of the rivers
which flow into Algoa bay and the neighbouring bay of St. Francis. They
rest immediately upon the Palaeozoic deposits of the mountain ranges
which surroimd the Karoo sandstone, extend up the valley of tlie Sunday
river to the foot of this sandstone, and also appear further to the west
in some smaller patches still lying on the Palaeozoic. From this it is clear
that the denudation of the Palaeozoic formations in South Africa was
accomplished before the time of the lower Cretaceous *.

The deposits of the upper Tertiary or Quaternary period also occur

•

* (Lieut. Wolf), Narrative of a Voyage to explore the shores of Africa, Ai-abia, and
Madagascar, performed in H.M. Ships Lecen and BatTaeauta (directed by Capt. W. F. W.
Owen), 8vo, Lond., 1833, II, p. 231 ; fossils in sandstone to the north of the Pillar of
Bartol. Diaz in lat. 11® 53' 3" E., long. 15® 40' 7" S., between Port Alexander and Little
Fish bay; also Journ. Geogr. Soc., 1833, IH, p. 217.

* Stow, mem. cit.. Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1871, XXVII, j). 497 et seq. For the fauna
and flora in particular see Kraus, Ueber die geol. Verhilltnisse der ^stlichcn Kiiste des
Kaplandes, Amtl. Bericht iib. d. XX. Versamml. d. Gesellsch. deutsch. Naturforsch. u.
Aerzte, Mainz, 1842 ; and Ralph Tate, On some secondary Fossils from South Africa,
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1867, XXIII, pp. 139-175, pi. v-ix.

^ E. Holub and M. Neumayr, Ueber einige Fossilien aus der Uitenhage-Formation in
Sfld-Afrika; Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1881, XLIV, pp. 267-276, 2 plhtes.

* Stow has also sent Mollusca of the Uitenhage series to England, which are said to
come from the Zambesi (loc. cit., p. 505, note) ; Herr Holub, however, assures me that
these specimens were brought by dealers, and that this statement as to the place at
which they were found is of no value.



400 FRAGMENTS OP THE INDIAN CONTINENT [parth

chiefly in the neighbourhood of Algoa bay; they lie partly on the
Uitei^age and partly on the Palaeozoic beds. Isolated patches of this
kind are also said to rest on the ancient rocks near Bredasdorp, to the
north of Cape Agulhas. —

The third group of these patches appears on the coast of Natal and of
Zululand. We have seen that in the west of Natal the precipitous edge
of the horizontally stratified Karoo forms the declivity of the Quathlamba,
while towards the east, on the seashore, down-thrown outliers of the same
Karoo sandstones occur, dipping towards the sea. On the sea-coast there
now appear, from the southern end of Natal to the bay of St. Lucia,
isolated exposures of marine deposits belonging to the middle and lower
Cretaceous, which have been described by Garden, Baily, and Griesbach
They rest with horizontal stratification, and therefore unconformably, on
the inclined beds of the down-thrown Karoo sandstones, and thus show that
the great dislocation, the eroded border of which is represented by the
Quathlamba, is older than the Cenomanian stage. The Cretaceous forma-
tion here presents, in a clearly expressed manner, those characters which
we shall meet with again on the east coast of India.

The fourth locality in which marine Mesozoic deposits are known lies
further to the north, near il/oniiasa, on the coast of Suaheli. The first
indication of their existence, an Ammonite sent by Krapf to O. Fraas,
from Kisaludini, near Mombasa, suggested the upper horizon of the
Callovian; but a larger series of Ammonites, collected by Hildebrand’s
negroes and examined by Beyrich, represents a higher zone of the Jurassic,
the Kimmeridge, and this in the same stage of development as in India,
where it is known under the name of ‘ Katrol sandstone

Thus we have on the west coc^^st the zone of Sckloenbachia injlata ; in
the south the Uitenhage series, which we place on the horizon of the
Neocomian; in Natal and Zululand Cenomanian and upper Cretaceous;
and on the coast of fiaaheli the upper stages of the Jurassic. Up to the
present marine beds of this kind have nowhere been found in the interior
of the country, not even in those parts of the south which are best known.
The Archaean and Palaeozoic, together with the broad patches of Karoo
deposits which rest upon them, form the lofty plateaux of the interior,
which have not, at least as far as we can judge, been reached by these
Mesozoic marine deposits. The significance of the latter in the history

^ R. J. Garden, Notice of Home Cretaceous Rocks near Natal, South Africa, Quait.
Journ. Geol. Soc., 1855, XI, i). 453, and W. Baily, Description of some Cretaceous Fossils
from South Africa, tom. cit., pp. 454-465, pi. xi-xiii; Griesbach, op. cit., 1871,
XXVII, pp. 60-70, pi. iii. The first find was made by Fynn in 1824. On the river Umtata,
further to the south, the fossil remains of tortoises are said to occur.

® 0. Fraas, WOrttemb. Jahreshefte, 1859, XV, p. 356; E. Beyrich, Ueber jurassische
Ammoniten von Mombassa, Monatsber. Akad. Berlin, 8. M£lrz 1877, pp. 96-103.



THE INDIAN PENINSULA


401


OH. Vl]

of the Indian Ocean only becomes clear from a comparison with India.
This we will now attempt to make.

The Indian Penin&uZa. India is divided into two parts by the broad
alluvial regio -13 of the Indus and the Ganges; the more northerly of these
parts comprises the mountain chains, and when we speak of the Indian
peninevla we refer only to the southern part. This division, which is
marked in strong relief on the surface of the planet, corresponds in the
west, towards the Indus and north of Delhi, with a fundamental difference
in the structure and composition of the two parts of the country —
a contrast which is precisely similar to that between the Alps and their
foreland. Here the peninsula is the foreland. Strange to say, however,
the contrast is not so marked in the north-east; we shall see that the
same elements which compose the peninsula are continued into Assam,
south of the Brahmaputra, far to the east-north-east, and that even the
overthrust outer border of the high mountain chains presents in some
places a resemblance to the peninsula, if not in structure, yet at least in
the stratified sequence.

The Geological Survey of India, on which a number of the most
distinguished specialists are engaged, has already made such progress
that the chief structural features of the country may be clearly perceived.
The study of the voluminous Reports of the Survey has been greatly
facilitated by the general summary of their contents, published by
Medlicott and Blanford in 1879^, and most happily supplemented by
Waagen’s treatise on the distribution of the organic remains 2 . To these
works, and the publications of the Geological Survey subsequent to 1879,
we are indebted for the following facts.

Although mountains of considerable height occur in the peninsula, yet,
with the exception of the extremely ancient Ar&valli mountains in the
north-west, there is not a single chain the direction of which is deter-
mined by the strike of the rocks. All is table-land, either fractured
or worn by erosion. The Sahyfidri or western Gh4ts, the S&tpura
mountains on the south of the Narbada, like the Vindhya on the north,
are only the borders of great plateaux. The highest summits of the
Nilgiri, which rise in the air to over 8,000 feet, are fragments of the

' H. B. Medlicott and W. T. Blanford, A Manual of the Geology of India, 8vo,
Calcutta, 1879,2 vols., and map. In consideration of the extreme difficulty of attempting
a uniform orthography in a work like the present, I have adopted, in .the case of India,
the spelling of the Geological Survey ; in treating of the north I found this led to fresh
difficulties, especially as regards the sibilants ; in this case I have followed Richthofen’s
method (China, I,*pp. xxi and 170, note), but it was impossible to avoid inconsistencies.
The decimal system could not always be used in cases where a round number of English
or Russian feet was frequently mentioned.

^ W. Waagen, Ueber die geographische Yertheilung der fossilen Organismen in
Indicn ; Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1878, XXXIX b, pp. 1-21, and map.

D d


80LLA8



402 FRAGMENTS OP THE INDIAN CONTINENT [part ii

same table-land; the highest peak of the southern Sdtpura, Pachmarhi,
4,380 feet high, consists of horizontal beds of sandstone, and the loftiest
summit of the northern Sahyddri, Mahdbleshwar, 4,540 feet, is a fragment
of a horizontal sheet of basalt.

Several distinct elements enter into the structure of the peninsula.
The first of these comprises Archaean forraationSy consisting chiefly of
gneiss, with which is associated a great series of very ancient schists,
including that group of ancient masses of quartzite and schist named by
the Indian geologists the ‘ Transition ’ or ‘ Sub-metamorphic rocks,’ which
in their tectonic relations are also closely connected with the Archaean.
The Vindltyan grmp forms the second element; a series of strata
of sandstone, shale, and limestone, undoubtedly of detrital origin, which
probably correspond in age to a large part of the Palaeozoic aera, but
which, strange to say, have as yet furnished no trace of organic remains,
although in the high mountains of the north Palaeozoic fossils are not
wanting. The Vindhyan are followed the Qondwdna group. These
are sandstones containing remains of plants and reptiles, and sometimes
coal-bearing ; the lower stages are the equivalents of the African Karoo,
the upper extend beyond the period of the Karoo into that of the plant-
bearing deposits of Uitenhage, and like these include towards the sea-coast
intercalated marine beds. The sub-littoral deposits of South Africa are
repeated in India with slight but peculiar modifications. Finally, another
independent element extending over a wide area is formed by a very
great accumulation of eruptive flows and ashes, which are usually designated
by the general name of ‘ Deccan trap.'

The Archaean formations, exposed by denudation, occupy a considerable
part of the surface of the peninsula. They consist chiefly of gneiss, which
forms the island of Ceylon, Cape Comorin, and the western Gh&ts as far
as latitude 16®; it is exposed, except for comparatively short intervals,
over the whole east ^poast of the peninsula, as far as the bend described
by the Ganges. This mass of gneiss thus extends from Point dc Galle
through about 19 degrees of latitude towards the north. It includes
the whole of southern India and the whole of Mysore, sinks to the west
beneath the Deccan trap and the stratified rocks, and is continued into
Assam on the other side of the Ganges.

To this great dominant mass of Archaean rocks two smaller ones must
be added. The first, of an irregular semicircular form, is situated in
Bundelkhand ; its north-western end lies in the neighbourhood of Gwalior.
The second, distributed in long folds and ridges, forms the Ardvalli
mountains on the north-western border of the peninsula.

The Ardvalli present us with one of the most ancient folded ranges
to be seen anywhere on the globe. Their central and eastern parts,
between latitude 24® and 29® N., a distance of more than 500 kilometers, have



YELLAKONDA MOUNTAINS


403


CH. Vl]

been described in detail by Rackets The chain runs to N. 86° E. along
the eastern edge of the desert of R4jput4na, and is resolved towards the
north into isolated ridges which a little further on sink into low hills
amidst the desert; its last spurs reach the town of Delhi. Gneiss and
ancient schists and quartzites are the sole constituents of these folded
chains, the extreme antiquity of which is apparent from the fact that
in some localities horizontal beds of the Vindhyan group rest upon
them unconformably. Towards the south-east an extremely long fault
running parallel with the strike cuts off the Ar&valli from a broad
plateau of horizontal Vindhyan beds. This long fault follows the course
of the river Chambal in a more or less northerly direction, and is doubtless
prolonged as far as the Jumna above Agra.

That the strike of these primaeval folds is completely independent
of the trend of the existing great mountain ranges of India is a point
which may be emphasized in passing.—

The Vindhyan beds, wherever they have been met with in the north
of the peninsula, lie fairly flat, just as they do in the neighbourhood of the
Arivalli hills.

Far to the north, on both sides of the river Chcnfib, rise the isolated
Kor&iia mountains, with steep ridges striking north-east to south-west;
they arc composed of rocks which resemble the ancient quartzites and
schists of the Arfivalli, and attain a maximum height of 957 feet above
the plain. This little group is of great importance in connexion with the
remarks which are to follow, since it approaches to within 65 kilometers
of the outer border of the great folded mountains. —

To the north of Madras the eastern Ghfits stretch along the sea-coast
towards the lower course of the Kistna ; they consist of Archaean rocks,
and are here termed the Ghdts of Nellore or the Ydlalconda mountains.
This great ridge, as King and Foote have shown, is bounded on the west
by a fault, along which a great mass of Vindhyan i^cks has been thrown
down. The siinkeu area has the form of a crescent ; its northern end lies
almost in latitude 17° N., still to the north of the Kistna ; its southern end,
in about 13° 20', north-west of Madras. The western is more strongly
curved than the eastern boundary, which corresponds to the fault of the
Yellakonda. The downthrown mass, as shown by the intense folding
and overthrusting, is a fragment of a great and ancient mountain chain,
which, however, is younger than the chain of the Arftvalli, since the
Vindhyan beds are involved in the folding. The folding took place from
east to west 2.

I

’ C. A. Hacket, On the Geology of the Arvali Region, Central and Eastern ; Rec. Geol.
Surv. Ind., 1881, XIV, pp. 279-303, and map.

* W. King, jun.. On the Kadapah and Kamul Formations in the Madras Presidency,
Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1872, VIII, in particular pp. 259-265; R. B. Foote, Sketch of the

D d



404 FRAGMENTS OP THE INDIAN CONTINENT [paotk

This folded fragment, to which the wild quartzite scenery of the
NKgari and Tirupatti mountains near Madras belongs, is, in spite of its
great antiquity, the most recent indication of extensive tangential move-
ment on the whole peninsula; for southern India, like southern Africa,
has not been subjected to any extensive folding, at least since the Carboni-
ferous period. ^ much the greater in extent and importance are the
subsidences and faults. These disturbances also affect a part of the
superposed plant-bearing Gondw4na strata, the several subdivisions of
which we will now consider.

The series of Gondw&na deposits begins with the Tdlchir stage, composed
of extremely fine-grained silt-like shales and soft sandstones, in association
with beds of boulders; these vary in size from small pebbles to blocks
v^eighing 30 tons. The great blocks sometimes lie in the very finest silt ;
Blanford, Oldham, and Fedden have expressed the belief that they owe their
transportation to ice ^ The resemblance to the Dwyka conglomerate, which
forms the lowest division of the African Karoo series, is very striking.
Following Feistmantel’s classification, which is based on the examination
of the plant remains, we also assign to this lowest division the coal-
bearing stage of Karharbfiri. Gangamopteris is of frequent occurrence in
these lower deposits, and Glossopteris is richly represented®.

The next member consists of the plant- and coal-bearing Damiida stage,
in the highest subdivision of which, the Mfingli shales, a typical Labyrintho-
dont, Brachyops laiiceps, has been found.

The third is the Panchit stage, which has furnished the remains of
Dicynodon in addition to Labyrinthodon. With this stage the lower
Gondwina teminates.

These three chief stages correspond, as is indicated by many identical
species of plants and the genus Dicynodon, to the Dwyka conglomerate
and probably to the whole of the lower Karoo, the Beaufort and the
Stormberg stage in South Africa. No trace of marine animals has ever
been found in them. There are many reasons for regarding them as
synchronous with the whole period comprised between the Rothlicgende
and the close of the Trias or thereabouts.

Generally speaking, then, we correlate the lower Gondw^na with the
Karoo; in the uppen' Gond/w&na we meet •with several characters which
indicate a more recent age, although the genus Glossopteris, for example,
from the lower Gondwdna is also found here.

Work of the Geological Survey in Southern India, from the Joum. of the Madras
Lit. Soc., 1882, 50 pp., 8vo, in particular p. 18.

* W. T. Blanford, Description of the Geology of Ndgpur, Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind.,
1872, IX, p. 324, Oldham’s note in this ; F. Fedden, On the Evidences of ‘ Ground-Ice ' in
Tropical India during the Tdlchir Period, Bee. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1875, VIII, pp. 16-18.

* 0. Feistmantel, A Sketch of the History of the Fossils of the Indian Gondwdna
System ; Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, 1881, L, pp. 168-219.



OH. vi] DISCORDANCE WITHIN THE GONDWANA 406

In the lowest stage of the upper Qondwiina we meet with genera such
as Sphenopteris, Thinnfeldia, Taeniopteris, besides a large number of
Cycads, Palissya, Cunninghamites, See. In the somewhat higher deposits of
the Kota and .Maleri stage are found the remains of true crocodiles such as
Parasuchus, and &hes such as Dapedius, Lepidotus, Tetragonolepis, which
we are accustomed in Europe to find chiefly in the Lias. In conclusion
there follows a long series of still higher plant-bearing strata, and the
uppermost of these, the Umia beds, alternate, in the sub-littoral region,
with marine strata, which, as we shall see directly, are the equivalents of
the Uitenhage series of Cape Colony.

In South Africa we have seen the thick deposits of the Elaroo rating
horizontally on an older foundation ; they form the table mountains in the
interior of the country, and the great escarpment of the Quathlamba. No
younger strata rest upon them. At a lower level, at their foot as it wore,
lie much younger plant-bearing beds with the intercalated marine deposits
of Uitenhage. The discordance is complete.

The same discordance prevails between the lower and upper Gondw4na
in India. In addition to the difference in age between Uitenhage (Neo-
comian ?) and upper Gondw4na (Lias 1) there exists, however, the following
distinction between the two regions. The great patches of the lower
Gondwdna do not form here, as in Africa, a lofty continuous table-land ;
India has been profoundly affected by erosion, and the most important
visible fragments of the lower GondwfLna owe their preservation chiefly to
the fact that they are let down into the mass of gneiss, between trough-
faults which existed before the deposition of the upper Gondw4na. The
great denudation took place after these movements and before or during
the deposition of a part of the upper Gondwfina, so that a transgression of
the latter may be seen in very many places. Nor are the Gondwdna
deposits confined to the sub-littoral region ; they extend on the contrary
into the interior of the country. ,

The coal-bearing deposits of the lower Gondwfina thus recall in their
mode of distribution the patches and strips of Carboniferous and Trias
faulted down into the Archaean mass of central France, of which the
great trough-subsidence between Creusot and Montchanin furnishes so
instructive an example. For a long time the most experienced mining
engineers in Europe refused to believe in the original continuity of such
widely separated patches and in the existence of such stupendous faults, of
which there is often no indication whatever at the surface of the ground.
The long bands of in-faulted beds were regarded as local formations
deposited in separate valleys and bays ; and much actual proof by means
of boring and mining, was necessary to carry conviction to the contrary.
The more worthy of note is the fact that Blanford, with keen perception
had discovered the true interpretation in India many years ago.



406 FRAGMENTS OF THE INDIAN CONTINENT [part n

The most important exposures of the lower Gondwfina group, excluding
those in Assam and Sikkim, are as follows : first a long series of wedge-
shaped or irregularly elongated downthrown areas and bands, which begins
in the east near Bdniganj, north-west of Calcutta, at the edge of the gneiss
where it meets the alluvial land of the Ganges; at first this follows
approximately the course of the river Damiida, it then proceeds south of
HazfLribSgh through Chutid Nfigpur, and is continued to the west by the
vast coal region of south Rewa, which may be followed further in a west-
south- westerly direction towards Jabalpur, close to the northern edge of
the great eastern arm of the Deccan trap.

Proceeding from Jabalpur in the same direction towards the west-south-
west we reach, concealed at first for a short distance by the Deccan trap,
the great coal-field of S&tpura, which extending still to west-south-west,
south of the Narbada, finally disappears beneath the trap. Thus this series
forms a long, more or less continuous, curve running across the greater part
of the peninsula, from the middle course, of the Narbada to the alluvial
plains of the lower Ganges.

A second scries of great patches extends from Chutifi. Nagpur to
the south-east, includes there the coal-field of TAlchir, and reaches the
eastern edge of the gneiss near Cuttack and the estuaries of the
Mahdnadi.

A third series, in which we may perhaps include the area of Ellichpur,
in the middle of the trap region, emerges from beneath the eastern edge of
the trap, strikes to the south-east fairly parallel to the preceding series,
follows for a long distance the course of the Goddvari, and reaches the
edge of the gneiss near Rfijfihmahendri.

Let us select a few of these areas as examples, beginning with R£ni-
ganj, at the eastern extremity of the first series. It was here that Blanford
recognized, many years ago, the importance of the faults. He showed that
this coal-field, apart from other dislocations, is cut off on the south by
a powerful fault, with a downthrow of certainly not less than 9,000 and
probably of more than 12,000 feet. The older beds on the northern side of
the basin rest on the gneiss and dip to the south ; the more recent beds
succeed them in the same direction, and the whole of this great series of
strata ends abruptly along the southern fault \

The small but important coal-field of Karharbdri, in the vicinity of
Hazdrib&gh, is bounded, according to Hughes, both on the north and south
by faults running from east to west. It is thus a true trough, although
the throw of the faults is inconsiderable Generally speaking it appears

' W. T. Blanford, On the Geological Structure and Relations of the Rdniganj Coal-
field, Bengal ; Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1861, HI, in particular pp. 149-153.

* T. W. H. Hughes, The Kuhurbari Coal-field ; op. cit., 1871, VII, in particular p. 222
et seq.



LOWER GONDWANA


407


OH. vi]

that along the river Dam^da, as at B&niganj, the downthrow of the larger
patches is always to the south.

The south Rewa region, which extends from the river Son for more
than 800 kilometers to the south, is still little known. Its eastern pro-
longation, between the rivers Rer and Kanhar, points to its connexion with
the series of outliers of the Damdda, and is, according to Griesbach, a true
trough formed between two almost parallel faults in the north and
south In its western part, near the Son, the northern edge of this great
basin is rectilinear, directed to the east-south-east and determined most
probably by a fault; here the upper Gondwfina deposits extend trans-
gressively on to the older formations

The S&tpura region, exclusive of smaller patches of the Gondwfina
which crop out on the edge of the great Deccan trap, is about 180 kilo-
meters long ; it lies to the south of the Narbada and fairly parallel to this
river. The beds of the lower Gondwfina group are here, as in the west of
the south Rewa basin, inclined ip the north, and the northern edge is most
likely a fault ; the upper Gondw^na beds, however, lie transgressively over
those parts of the supposed line of fault which have so far been examined,
whence it follows that here also the great subsidence took place before the
deposition of at least a part of the upper Gondwfina \

It is not my intention to multiply examples ; those already cited are
sufficient to show the importance of the linear fractures, which affected the
great mass of the Indian peninsula after the period of the lower Gondwdna
and before the deposition of a part of the upper Gondwfina \

Let us now leave the coal-bearing regions of the interior, and turn our
attention to the sub-littoral zone of the east, which has furnished many
contributions towards a knowledge of the physical history of the peninsula.

Among the most remarkable results of the geological exploration of the
Indian peninsula is the proof that the eastern margin of the great region
of gneiss has formed a natural limit to deposition ever since the middle of
the Tertiary period. The lower horizons of the plant-bearing beds, down-
thrown remnants of which, preserved from denudation, we have just traced
in the interior of the country, are, so far as our knowledge extends, wholly
absent from the outer border, with the exception of a few small patches in
the extreme north: the series begins with the Rfijmah&l group, which

‘ Griesbach, Geologyof the Ranikola and Tatapani Coal-fields ; op. cit, 1880, XV, p. 141.
Medlicott and Blanford, Manual, I, p. 201 ; also Hughes, Notes on the South Rewa
Gondwana Basin, Rcc. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1881, XIV, pp. 126-138.

* Manual, I, pp. 215, 216.

* In the Talchir area on the Brahmani, north-west of Kuttack, tl\e north side is
faulted, and there is a general dip of the strata to the north, while the great Godavari
series, l^unded by straight parallel lines and intersected by faults within them, is yet
represented as a deposit between originally parallel rectilinear shores : W. King, The
Geology of the Pranhita-Godavari Valley, Mem. Geol. Surv. fnd., 1881, XVIIl, p. 169.



408 FRAGMENTS OP THE INDIAN CONTINENT [part h

corresponds to the base of the upper Gondw&na. The upper plant-bearing
beds are accompanied here and there by marine sediments, which is never
the case in the interior; finally, they are sometimes covered by still
younger marine deposits ; these also do not extend into the interior of the
country.

On the narrow plain which lies at the foot of the western Gh&ts, no
Mesozoic deposits are to be seen ; only near Quilon and to the south of this
town there appears a variegated sandstone of post-Tertiary fige ; in the east
it is called the Cuddalore sandstone. Another patch of it may be seen near
Nagarcoil, about 20 kilometers north of Cape Comorin ^ We will now
pass to the east coast, not forgetting to remark that Mesozoic deposits
have not yet been met with in Ceylon.

Not far north of Trichinopoli, in about latitude 11® N., the first deposits
of the Rfijmahdl appear, on the eastern edge of the gneiss. Upon them or
immediately on the gneiss rest marine Cretaceous beds, which extend nearly
as far as Pondicherri, perhaps even as fa/* as Sripurmattir, near Madras.
They gave the first impulse to Stoliezka's comprehensive investigations ^
from which we learn that the Cenomanian, Turonian, and Senonian of
Europe are here represented in three distinct stages, with a fauna which
differs in several essential respects from the Cretaceous fauna of Europe
and North Africa, but at the same time presents a striking resemblance to
that of Natal On the Cretaceous lie patches of the Cuddalore sandstone.

The patches of Rfijmahfil bqds extend northwards along the edge of the
gneiss and are widely extended near Madras beneath the recent alluvium.
Near Sripermatur badly preserved Ammonites appear with other fossils,
which Stoliezka held to be upper Jurassic, but which Waagen identifies as
Neocomian^

Traces of the R&jmah&l beds extend still further, past Nellore and
Guntfir®, until, between the rivers Kistna and Godavari, there becomes
visible above them a .more complete series of strata, which have been

* W. King, General Sketch of the Geology of the Travancore State, Rec. Geol. Surv.
Ind., 1882, XV, pp. 87-93 ; and by the same, The Warkilli Beds and reported associated
Deposits at Quilon, tom. cit., pp. 93 -102, map. I have passed over in silence the older
statements of Cullen on the presence of marine fossils in limestone near Quilon, in
consequence of the doubts which they have raised.

* H. F. Blanford, On the Cretaceous and other Rocks of the South Arcot and Trichi-
nopoli Districts, Madras, Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1865, IV, pp. 1-217, map ; F. Stoliezka,
Cretaceous Fauna of Southern India (Palaeontol. Ind.), 1865-1871.

* Medlicott and Blanford; Manual, I, p. 292.

^ R. B. Foote, On the Geology of parts of the Madras and North Arcot Districts lying
north of the Falar River, Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1873, X, pp. 63-124; W. Waagen,
Jurassic Fauna of Kutch (Palaeont. Ind.), I, p. 236 ; and by the same, Geogr. Verbr. foes.
Org., p. 12.

^ R. B. Foote, On the Geological Structure of the Eastern Coast fromlat. 15° northward
to Masulipatam; op. cit., 1880, XVI, pp. 49-84, map



OH. vi] BA JMAHAL 409

described in a most instructive manner by W. King, and to which we
now turn our attention \

The mighty God&vari flows through the gneiss in a deep ravine and
emerges from it near BAjdhmahendri in latitude 17® N., where its great delta
begins. To the west of the river the elongated Goddvari coal-field, distin-
guished by its rectilinear and parallel toundary lines, extends to the
south-east and reaches the eastern edge of the gneiss; it is formed of
the lower divisions of the Gondw&na group ; and extending transversely
across its axtremity lie in complete discordance the B&jmahdl beds of the
upper Gondwfina, which follow the course of the coast-line and the edge
of the gneiss. Here there can be no doubt that the edge of the gneiss was
formed after those Gondwina beds which are faulted down in the coal-
field, and before the Bfijmahdl beds which follow the sub-littoral zone.

In the lowest beds, which lie on the edge of the gneiss and across
the coal-field, only the R&jm.ahal flora has been found. Above them
follow shales with a slightly dliferent flora and badly preserved marine
fossils, as near Sripermattir, and then finally sandstone in which, besides
many other less distinctive marine Mollusca, Trigonia ventricosa and
Trigonia Snieei appear. The former is a characteristic fossil of the
Uitenhage; this furnishes a new and important link with Soutli Africa.
The Cretaceous deposits of Trichinopoli are not known in this locality;
on the other hand a fragment of a basaltic sheet appears near R&j&h-
mahendri in intimate association with richly fossiliferous marine deposits
of lower Tertiary or upper Cretaceous age; its extrusion therefore
doubtless occurred within that long period during which the far-distant
mass of the Deccan flows Was built up.

On the basalt rests the Cuddalore sandstone. —

The next great patch is situated on the border of the gneiss near
Cuttack, where the Mah&nadi emerges from the primitive rocks in about
20® 30' ; in this exposure only the plant-beds of th^ R&jmah&l are known
to occur \

The coast here leaves the edge of the gneiss, and the latter is con-
tinued inland towards the great bend of the Ganges. From the river
Mor in latitude 24® N. up to the Ganges in 25® 20' the edge of the gneiss is
bordered by plant-bearing beds, and these, with intercalations of older
basaltic flows, form the Rfijmahfil mountains, of which we have already
made frequent mention. The gneiss reaches the Ganges near Colgong:
its eastern edge, as shown by Ball’s observations, is determined by

^ W. King, The Upper Gondwanas and other Formations of the Coastal Region of the
Goddvari District ; tom. cit., 1880, XVI, pp. 195-264, and map.

* V. Ball, On the ‘ Atgarh Sandstones,* near Cuttack, Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1877, X,
pp. 63-68, map ; and 0. Feistmantel, On some Fossil Plants from the Atgarh Sandstones,
tom. cit., pp. 68-70.



410 fragments of the INDIAN continent [pakpu

faults. First appear small patches of beds belonging to the T41chir
group; then, extending transgressively over a part of the latter, the
Damdda beds, which like the Tdlchirs also belong to the lower Gond-
w4na ; and finally, covering a large area, the BijmahfU beds, to which
belong the basaltic sheets and dykes of this region. This northern part
of the edge of the gneiss is thus distinguished from the southern part
by the presence of small remnants of lower Gondw&na, by ancient flows
of basalt, and by the absence of marine beds. The conclusions to which
Blanford was led by an examination of the Bfiniganj coal region have
been confirmed by Ball: it thus appears that the basaltic eruptions in
Bengal are not only later than the lower Gondw&na, but also posterior
to the great faults of this region, that the plant-bearing RfijmahfLl beds
have hardly been disturbed since the time of their first deposition, that
faults in these beds are of very rare occurrence, and, finally, that the
lava flows to the south of the bend of the Ganges probably mark the
conclusion of a great period of disturbance,^.

Having followed the beds resting against the gneiss from Trichinopoli
to the Ganges, i.c. from latitude 1 1* to 25° 20' N., let us now turn our atten-
tion for a moment to the mountains of Assam, which lie beyond the basin of
the Ganges, outside the peninsula in the restricted sense of the word.

Just as the Bfijmahfil mountains rise within the sharp bend of the
Ganges, so a mountain range rises within the elbow of the Brahmaputra
to the east of the alluvial, plain, and there are certain circumstances
which lead us to regard this range as a continuation of that on the Ganges,
notwithstanding the great distance which separates them. On the maps
the range on the Brahmaputra is named, after the tribes which inhabit it,
the G&ro, Khasia, Jaintia, and Mikir mountains; its’length amounts to more
than 400 kilometera and most of its summits rise to between 4,000 and
6,000 feet. Its northern border follows the south bank of the Brahmaputra,
while its sharply defined southern border describes an arc, the successive
directions of which ai'e, in the west near the Brahmaputra to the south-east,
somewhat further on from west to east, and finally to north-east. We will
call this range the mountains of Assam, or, following Medlicott, the
Shillong platecm.

This mountain segment occupies a very peculiar position. To the north
of it rise the inverted folds of the outer border of the Himalaya ; on the
south it is approached by the folded outer border of the Barail and Pfitkoi
chains, forming part of the great Burman chain, which extends from this
point towards Arakan, Cape Negrais, and even much further to the south.
It rises aloft between these two great regions of folding, which converge
towards one another in the valley of the Brahmaputra, and its north-eastern

’ V. Ball, Geology of the Rajmehal Hills ; Mem. Geol. Surr. Ind., 1877, XIII, pp. 155-
248, map, in particular p. 221.



OH. vi] SHILI^NG PLATEAU 411

end disappears near Golfigh&t (in about longitude 91° E.) beneath the alluvial
plain of the great river.

We are indebted to Medlicott and Godwin- Austen for the most important
contributions to our knowledge of its structure

The northern flank which looks towards the Brahmaputra has a gentle
slope and is formed 'solely of gneiss and granite. It reaches the river in
many places, and several hills, which rise from the alluvial land to the north,
show that the same Archaean rocks proceed almost up to the outer border
of the Himalaya This gneiss is precisely similar to that which forms
so large a part of the peninsula. It rises towards the south, and there
supports rocks which are probably a continuation of the Yindhyan of
Behar (south of Patna). To the south a steep fault occurs in the neighbour-
hood of Shillong, accompanied by a vast mass of basaltic lava flows, which
are perhaps a continuation of the ancient basalts of Mjmah41.

Above* all these rocks, gnei.ss, Yindhyan and basalt, a series of much
more recent fossiliferous beds extends over the summit of the south side of
the table-land in horizontal transgression. This consists first of Cretaceous
beds similar to those of Trichinopoli and Natal, then of Nummulitic lime-
stone, and, as it would appear from several indications, some patches of
upper Tertiary nia,rine deposits. The character of the Cretaceous beds is
such as to suggest that the northern shore of the Cretaceous sea once
extended across this table-land.

All these horizontal transgressive strata are bent in a great flexure over
the abrupt southern edge of the plateau, and then dip steeply downwards.
To the south of the flexure some upturned and intensely folded fragments
of the recent Tertiary beds are visible. —

The west coast of the Indian peninsula differs essentially from the east.
From Cape Comorin to beyond Bombay it is formed by the Sahyddri or
western Ghdts, that is to say, by the edge of the table-land, and, with
the exception of the post-Tertiary Cuddalore sandstone near Quilon, in
the extreme south, no marine deposit rests against this great scarp. The

' T. Oldham, On the Geological Structure of a Portion of the Khasi Hills, Bengal,
Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1858, 1, pp. 99-210, map; H. B. Medlicott, The Goal of Assam,
op. cit., 1865, IV, pp. 387-442, and Geological Sketch of the Shillong Plateau in NE.
Bengal, op. cit., 1871, VII, pp. 151-207, map, in particular general section on p. 154;
further, Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1874, VII, p. 61 ; H. H. Godwin-Austen, Notes to
accompany a Geological Map of a Portion of the Khasi Hills near long. 9r E., Joum.
Asiat. Soc. Beng., 1869, XXXVIII, part 2, pp. 1-27, map, and Notes on the Geology and
Physical Features of the Jaintia Hills, tom. cit., pp. 151-156; Medlicott and Blanford,
Manual, II, pp. 682-703 ; T. D. La Touche, The Daranggiri Goal-field, Garo Hills, Assam,
Bee. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1882, XV, pp. 175-178, map. *

^ Mallet observed one of these bosses of hornblende schist on the left shore of the
Raidak river in 87^*47' E., only a few hundred yards from the upturned Tertiary deposits of
the foot-hills of the Himalaya : On the Geology and Mineral Resources of the Darjiling
District and the Western Duars, Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1875, XI, p. 44.



412 FRAGMENTS OP THE INDIAN CONTINENT [pabt ii

watershed of the peninsula for the whole of its long course lies always
near the coast, so that the rivers all discharge to the east, and only in the
south does a transverse depression of any importance extend into the
interior. Notwithstanding this continuity the scarp consists of two quite
distinct parts. From Cape Comorin in latitude 8° N., northwards to
latitude 16" N., it is formed by the great gneiss region of the east; and
from there to the gulf of Cambay, beyond latitude 20" N., by the vast
accumulation of the lavas and ashes of the Deccan.

Eight degrees of latitude on the west coast thus belong to the gneiss,
and four to the lavas ; the age of the latter corresponds approximately to
the interval between the Cretaceous and Eocene, and probably extends also
into the latter period The coast-line proceeds, continuously and without
any change of direction, from one region to the other. It does not, however,
foiin the western boundary of the lavas ; they are spread far and wide
through Kdthidwfir, and their last outliers extend even into the folded
mountains of Sind. To the north and east the great mass breaks up into
table-lands and outlying hills ; we have already met with fragments of this
kind on the east coast even near R4j&hmahendri. It is consequently not easy
to estimate even approximately the original extent of the flows : but to give
some idea of it, Indian geologists point to the fact that the railway from
Bombay to Nagpur, which is 825 kilometers long, does not leave the volcanic
rocks until close to Nfigpur, and that the lavas must be regarded as having
originally extended througli nearly 10 degrees of latitude and 16 degrees of
longitude

The volcanic masses attain their greatest thickness near Bombay. The
principal mass affords indications of land and fresh- water formations only ;
it was certainly not formed beneath the sea. Only its most remote outliers,
in Sind and on the east coast, are associated with marine deposits. The
cavity created by such discharges of lava as these must have been immense.

Where the gulf of ,Cambay separates the chief mass of the lavas of the
Deccan from the plateau of Kathi4w4r, marine transgi’cssions begin to
manifest themselves, partly beneath the edges of the lavas, partly above
them. The first transgression observed here belongs to the Cenomanian
stage. This- appears in the north-east of the bay, near Baroda, crops out
from beneath the western edge of the lavas, near Bfigh, and may be traced
into the interior, up the lower valley of the Narbada to the district south of
Indore. Its deposits are known as the ‘ B&gh beds

' Neumayr, Die Interfcrappean Beds im Dekkan und die Laramiegruppe im westlichen
Nordamerika, Neu. Jahrb. f. Min. 1884, pp. 75, 76 ; Duncan in Medlicott, Ann. Rep. for
1883, Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1884, XVII, p. 7.

^ Medlicott and Blanford, Manual, p. 300.

® W. T. Blanford, On the Geology of the Taptee and Lower Nerbudda Valleys ; Mem.
Gcol. Surv. Ind., 1869, VI, pp. 163-384, map, pi. i.



CH. VI] BAGH. PERIM. CUTCH 413

The Cenomanian beds of B&gh do not contain the same fauna as those
of Natal, Pondicherri, and Assam, but rather that of the Cenomanian
beds of Ras Fartak in Arabia, of Egypt and the Mediterranean region.
From this fact we may draw two conclusions. First, that since the
Cretaceous type of Natal and of the east coast of India is repeated much
further to the east, as for instance in Japan there must have existed at
the time of the middle Cretaceous a separation between two distinct marine
areas, one of which extended from the south of Europe across North Africa
and Arabia to beyond the gulf of Cambay ; the other, also of great extent,
was bounded in this direction by the south-east coast of Africa, the east
coast of India, and the mountains of Assam. Further, it follows that each
of these great seas enlarged its bounds by transgression during the Ceno-
manian period.

With the Cretaceous a series of partly marine and partly fluviatile
Tertiary deposits appears for the first time on the gidf of Cambay ; these
are more recent than the lavas. ^ They do not extend so far eastwards into
the interior of the country as the Cretaceous beds of Bagh, but they stretch
far to tlie north-west, and arc indeed only the outliers of those extensive
Tertiary formations which compose a large part of the folded chains of
Sind. They commence between the lower Tdpti and lower Narbada with
Nummulitic limestone of lower Tertiary age, which is followed by middle
Tertiary beds with Balanus ; on the. little island of Perim in the gulf of
Cambay sandstone occurs with the remains of Mastodon, Dinotherium,
Brahmathcrium, and other representatives of a great terrestrial fauna, which
has ten species in common with the Sivalik fauna of the foot-hills of the
Himalaya.

The lower members of this Tertiary series border the basaltic plateau of
Kdthidwdr on its south side, are continued thence to Cutch, and westwards
cacross the Indus into the great mountain chains of Sind.

Just as the whole series of strata, from the Cenomanian stage upwards,
which extend from the mountains of Burma, overlap the ancient gneiss
and Vindhyan beds of the mountains of Assam, so all the strata, from
the Cenomanian stage upwards, which extend from the folded mountains of
Sind, encroach upon the outer borders of the ancient rocks of the peninsula,
as far as the Narbada and the lower course of the Tfipti.

In Cutch however, nearer to the outer border of the chains of Sind,
marine deposits of Jurassic age appear beneath the outliers of the volcanic

' E. Naumann, Ueber das Vorkommen der Kreideformation auf der Insel Yezo
(Hokkaido), 8vo, Yokohama, 1880; Mittheil. d. deutsch. Gescllscli. f. Natur- und
Volkerkunde Ostasiens, Part XXI, 19 pp.— Szajnocha’a observation that Schloenbachia
inflata from the equatorial west coast of Africa occurs as a variety in the Cretaceous of
Pondicherri is at present too isolated to permit of any conclusion as to the western
extension of this sea*



414 FRAGMENTS OP THE INDIAN CONTINENT [pakth

sheets. They rise like islands from the alluvial land and are thrown into
several' folds ^ The folding begins simultaneously with the increased
development of marine sediments. The oldest visible beds belong to the
period of the Great Oolite. Their fauna, and in part even the lithological
character of their oolitic rocks, are of European type. It is a, very remark-
able fact and — in its bearing on the question of the limits of formations —
instructive in the highest degree, that a whole series of secondary zones in
the middle and upper Jurassic have been observed here by Stoliezka and
Waagen, which present the same characteristic species, succeeding one
another in the same order as in central Europe. One of these, the zone
of PeUoceraa acanthicum, or the Katrol sandstone, we have already
mentioned as occurring at Mombasa in East Africa. The series seems to
be continued with little interruption up into the Tithonian. Above the
obviously Jurassic zones, beds containing some species of the fauna of
Uitenhage occur; and above these others containing a number of species
of the Aptian of France *. „

The Jurassic deposits of Cutch proceed to the north along the outer
border of the spurs of the Ardvalli mountains, beneath the plain of R4jpu-
t4na, and are known even to the west of Jesalmer. With them we enter
a region which is distinguished from the peninsula both by folding and by
the development of the marine deposits, an intermediate area, as it were,
between the peninsula and the high mountains. But the remains of
terrestrial plants, intercalated at various horizons with the marine beds,
point to the fact that the coast was not far distant. —

Madagascar, Of late years the works of Grandidier and of the English
missionaries have greatly increased our knowledge of the structure of
Madagascar. The following main features may be recognized ® : —

^ A. B. Wynne, Memoir on the Geology of Kutch, Mem. Geol. Siirv. Ind., 1872,
pp. 1-293, map ; Waagen, Jurassic Fauna of Kutch, 1, 1875 (Palaeont. Ind.), Introduction
and pp. 224-238.

^ The succession of the European horizons observed in Cutch is as follows : Putchum
groups: Great Oolite (below, Trigonia, Corbula, and others ; above, Oppelia sen^igera) ; Zone
of Stephanoceras macrocephalum, of Perisphinctea ancepSy of PeUocems athleta, of Amalthem
Lanibertiy and of Ammonites cordatuSy of Peltoceras transversariumy of P, acanthicum (Katrol
sandstone » Mombasa in East Africa); on this lies the lower part of the Umia group
with species of the Tithonian and the Portland beds (Waagen, p. 234). Then follows
a great thickness of plant-bearing beds. The Umia horizon presents points of resem-
blance with the African deposits of Uitenhage ; Trigonia ventricosa of Uitenhage, which
appears with T, Smeet on the east coast, occurs here, and T, Smeei also appears fairly high
up in the plant-bearing beds (Manual, p. 259). These are covered in one locality by Aptian
beds. This is in complete accordance with what has been said in an earlier passage as
regards the age of the Uitenhage beds.

^ A. Grandidier, Madagascar, Bull. soc. geogr., Paris, 1871, 6^ ser., I, pp. 81-108, map ;
1872, 6* s4r.. Ill, pp. 369-371 ; La province d’lmerina, op. cit., 1883, 7^ sdr., IV, pp.
242-249, and map, and in many other places ; J. Mullens, On the Central Provinces of
Madagascar, Proc. Geogr. Soc., London, 1875, XIX, pp. 182-205, and Joum. Geogr. Soc.,



OH. VI] HIGHLAND OP MADAGASCAR 416

The central part of this great island, from its northern extremity down
to about latitude 22° S., is a great mountain mass of granite and gneiss, which
comprises in particular the two provinces of Im^rina and Betsil^. Its
height is about 1,500 meters. It is bounded on the east and west by abrupt
scarps, on the south by a transverse chain ; in Im^rina its breadth is about
180 kilometers, more to the south near Sirab^ 90 to 100 kilometers, and
only 56 kilometers in latitude 22°, where both sides of the mass are visible
from the top of Mount Kirianga, and its southern termination is not far
off. The watershed lies quite close to the eastern border.

Travelling from the east coast towards Antananarivo we find the face
of the scarp divided into three steps or teiTaces ; these are united in the
north, and at the place of union, in 17°20'-17°40', lies the great lake
Alaotra at an altitude of 900 meters. The inner step is the most
important, and is continued to the south. Along the scarp rise enormous
isolated table mountains, which form .strong natural fortresses, and have
played an important part in the^ histoiy of the island ; such, for example,
are the fortified mountain Isaha^vona on the boundary of the well-wooded
province Tan&la, which lies at the foot of the slope, and the famous Ikongo,
8 kilometers in length, which rises 300-500 meters above the plain, bear-
ing on its broad summit five towns and two rivers. The Zfifirombo
maintained it successfully against the Hdvas in two great sieges. To
the south of the Ikongo, near the head waters of the river M4titfinana, the
eastern side descends in a single step to a depth of over 800 meters, and
near the south-eastern comer rises the high solitary granite mountain of
Ivohibd.

In the north, within the bay of Bombatoke, the western side is
divided into four steps and is therefore easier to suimount than the
eastern side, which inins for long stretches in a continiious wall ; nevertheless
the H6va fort — Antdngodrahdja — in latitude 17° S., rises to a height of 1,500
meters on the edge of the western side. In latitucle 18° 40' this side also
becomes a single cliff, which is more than 800 meters high. In the south
the principal western step bears the name of Bdngo Lava.

The rivers of the central highland de.scend in great waterfalls over the
steps. The surface is very uneven, great granite shoulders rise above it ; the
valleys, and particularly the broad plains between the steps on the east, are
covered with a tliick layer of red clay, in which the water cuts deep furrows.
In B4ra, in the south-west, the granite, according to Cohen, foims the
foundation of a desert tract; this is followed to the west by a broad
depression with ten^aced sides), the bottom of a dried-up lake, and beyond

I

1875, XLV, pp. 128-152, map ; Recent Journeys in Madagascar, op. cit., 1877, XLVll,
pp. 47-72, maps ; W. Deans Cowen, Geographical Excursions in South Central Mada-
gascar, Proc. Geogr. Soc., 1882, new series, IV, pp. 521-537, map ; J. Sibree, The great
African Island, Chapters on Madagascar, 8to, London, 1880.



416 FRA.GMENTS OP THE INDIAN CONTINENT [part ii

it, in about latitude 22"^ 10^-22'' 25' S., rise the group of Isfilo mountains,
a range of sandstone table mountains, deeply eroded by water-courses \

The highland also bears volcanic mountains. To the south-west of
Antananarivo rise the group of Ankaratra, composed of five volcanic
cones; these are the highest mountains of Madagascar, and the loftiest
of them reaches, according to Johnson, a height of 2,873 meters. To the
north-west of these, on lake Itasy, comes an extensive volcanic district
comparable with the Phlegraean fields ; Mullens counted here forty craters.
Many others are scattered over western Im^rina, and the eruptive region
seems to be continued towards the north in this sporadic fashion as far
as the great volcanic table mountain Vdambdhitra, which stands at the
north-west edge of the highland, and thence to the Radama islands, to the
mighty volcano Katowla, within the bay of Passandaya, to Mount Amber
at the northern end of the island, and then to Mayotta, Johanna, and the
Comoro islands

The highland slopes down to the north and its rocks reappear in the
off-lying islands. Herland’s description of Nosd-Bi furnishes a good
example. The southern promontory of the island Lugubd is fonned, like
the island of Nossi-Komba, of granite and ancient schists. The northern
part, on the other hand, consists of ancient sandstone, of a red and yellow
colour. The whole centre of the island is volcanic and contains several
craters and seven crater lakes ^ On the east coast of Nossi-Bd lies a
fragment of Nummulitic limestone. This probably marks the commence-
ment of that broad band of Mesozoic and Eocene deposits which surround
the granitic highland of Madagascar to the west and south as far as Fort
Dauphin in the south-south-east, and which Grandidier believes to be the
relics of a once much more extensive sheet. The Eocene deposits have
afforded Nummulites, Alveolina, Vdates Schmideliana, and others; the
Mesozoic beds appear to be rich in fossils, particularly near the river
Onilahy, which flows into the bay of St. Augustin^.

^ Gowen, loc. cit., p. 530. Fossils are said to be contained in the sandstone, but
unfortunately no further details are known. Sibree (loc. cit., p. 34) describes stratified
yellow sandstone on the river Betsiboka; Buckland many years ago mentioned the
'New Red Sandstone’ of Port Louquez in the north of the island: Trans. Geol. Soc., V,
p. 478.

^ On the north-east coast also Goignet only found granite and basalt, and an insignifi-
cant patch of a more recent deposit, possibly of Tertiary age : F. Goignet, Excursion
sur la cdte nord-est de Pile de Madagascar, Bull. Soc. Geogr., Paris, 1867, 5® ser., XIV, in
particular p. 279 et seq.

^ F. Herland, Essai sur la topographic de Nossi-Be, sur sa constitution g^logique. See,,
Revue Goloniale, avril 1856, 25 pp. and geological map of Nossi-B4 and Nossi-Euma;
cf. also Ann. d. Mines, 1856, 5® ser., VIII. The sandstone of Nossi-Be is probably the same
as that on the north-west coast, described by Guillemin as coal-bearing : E. Guillemin,
Note sur une exploration geologique a Madagascar pend. Pann. 1863, Ann. d. Mines,
1866, 6® ser., X, pp. 277-319 ; cf. also op. cit., 1854, 5® ser., VI, pp. 570-576 for coal.

* Fischer, Note sur la geologic du sud de Ma^gascar, Bull. Soc. G4ol. de Fr., 1868,



INDIA AND SOUTH AFRICA


417


OH. Vl]

There is no such sedimentary belt present on the east coast ; only a few
small volcanic mountains rise from the littoral plain.

So far as we are acquainted with it Madagascar presents a great
resemblance to South Africa and India. The long, sharply marked, parallel
terraces with sca^ directed to the north-north-east which bound the
central highland give it the appearance of an ancient horst. Upon this
horst lie the sandstones of unknown age of the Isalo mountains, of
Nossi-B^, and other places. Volcanos are superposed upon it as upon
the mass of Bohemia and the Central Plateau of France. The band of
Mesozoic and Eocene deposits only girdles the west and south, and is
completely absent in the east. It is a remarkable fact that in Madag^car,
as in India, the rivers of the central mass find, their discharge on one
side only, and that here, as beneath the Sahyfidri, the Mesozoic girdle is
absent on precisely that slope the summit of which forms the watershed.

The Seychdlea^ situated far to the north-north-east, but precisely in
the trend of the great horst, consist of granite ^ ; Reunion, Mauritius, and
Rodriguez are of volcanic origin.

Svmmai^. An undeniable resemblance exists between the structure of
South Africa and that of the Indian peninsula. Each of these two great
regions has remained for a long time — Africa since the Carboniferous
at least, India probably since the same period — undisturbed by any
manifestation of tangential force; there has been no folding of the
mountains, each is veritable table-land. In both cases we find, resting
upon an older foundation, a mighty series of non-marine deposits which
extend from the Permian to the Rhaetic and perhaps into the Lias.
Throughout this long interval, a series of similar terrestrial floras, accom-
panied by peculiar land reptiles, flourished in both regions. Then came
collapse. A new ocean was created and the continents assumed other
forms. In the interior lofty table mountains formed of plant-bearing
sandstone, or fragments of such mountains, still remain engulfed in troughs
of the ancient foundation; the more recent formations which succeed,
marine in Africa, and, from the time of the upper Qondw&na, marine in
India also, are deposited around them at a lower level against the new
fractures. Out of the abyss of the ocean rises the great island of
Madagascar, presenting all the characters of a horst ; it likewise exhibits

2® 84r., XXV, pp. 398-400; a Nerinaea with a broad base, which Fischer believes to bo
Cretaceous; further: Gompt. rend., 1876, LXVI, p. Ill, Fhylloceras, Ljtoceras, and
Cosmoceras which pass as Jurassic; Sibree, loc. cit., p. 53: these' fossils found in
great quantity by Richardson in 1877 on the upper course of St. Augustine’s river
(« Onilahy) ; among them Ammonites, Nerinaea, Tcrebratula, and others#

^ L. Pelly, On the Island of Mahi, Joum. Geogr. Soc., 1865, XXXV, p. 231 : ‘A mass
of granite, emerging from a vast basin of coral growths C. V41ain, Mission de S. Paul,
4to, 1879, pp. 440-451. ‘All the Seychelles are granitic except two,* says Wolf,
Baracouta, II, p. 165.

£ e


BOLLAS



418 niAQMENTS OF THE INDIAN CONTINENT [pabt h

fragmentary masses of sandstone resting on a granitic basis, and it
likewise is bordered at a lower level by a selvage of Mesozoic deposits.

The theory of the original continuity of South Africa and India arose
with the first recognition of their most elementary features, and has
received for many years the support of the most distinguished authorities
in both countries, as, for instance. Stow in Africa and H. F. Blanford and
Griesbach in India

Confronted by the stupendous scarps of the Karoo sandstone, which in
so many places looks straight out to sea, Stow asks with justice. Where
then is the boundary of the great basin in which so many thousands of
feet of plant-bearing sandstone have accumulated? In India Blanford
points out that in the east the volcanic outflows of the Deccan lie hori-
zontal, but on the ocean side of the Sahyddri they dip so strongly seawards
that in Bombay island their upper divisions are found at the sea-level®.
In like manner Mcdlicott and Blanford point to the dissimilarity between
the Cretaceous deposits of B4gh and those of Trichinopoli

In quite another way, by comparing the distributional areas of existing
organisms, eminent zoologists have been led to imagine the existence of an
ancient continent on the site of the western half of the Indian Ocean, and
to this vanished land the name of ‘ Lcmuria ' has been given. Other
zoologists have rejected this hypothesis, adducing as one of the principal
arguments against it the great depth of the sea near Madagascar, which
frequently sinks to more than 2,000 or 2,600 fathoms.

I have, however, no intention of discussing here these difierences of
opinion ; this could at best result in the solution of a much more limited
problem, whether in the existing fauna and flora traces of an original
connexion may still be recognized. This question, which involves the
history of both continents, must first be approached by an examination
of the structure of the continents themselves, of their existing outlines, and
of the deposits which rest against their shores.

The analogy between the chain of the Quathlamba in the west and
that of the Sahyddri in the east is so striking as to need no comment.
Each represents the great fractured edge of a table-land. In detail, however,
the existing margins of the two continents present some differences. The
east side of the Indian peninsula is bordered by sedimentary deposits,
which begin with the lower Qondwfina and extend beyond the upper Greta-
ceous. The west side, up to latitude 20” N. and beyond it, has no border
of this kind. In Madagascar the case is different ; here the border is

^ W. Stow, On the probable Existence of an Ancient Southern Continent, Quart. Joum.
Geol. Soc., 1871, XXVII, pp. 546-548; H. F. Blanford, On the Age and Correlations of
the Plant-bearing Series of India and the former Existence of an Indo-Oceanic Continent,
op. cit., 1875, XXXI, pp. 519-542, pi. xxv, et passim.

^ A section of this kind is given by Clark, op. cit., 1847, III, p. 222.

^ Manual Geol. Ind., I, p. 297.



OH. Vii BOUNDARIES OP ANCIENT SEAS 419

absent on the east side, but is present in the west and south, and extends
from the Jurassic or Neocomian into the Eocene. In South Africa the
case is again different. In the east of Cape Colony the deposits begin
with the Uijbenhage beds, which we have assigned to the lower Cretaceous ;
in E[affraria they are absent; in Natal the upper divisions of the Creta-
ceous make their appearance.

Broadly taken the distribution of the marine formations is as follows: —

The middle and upper Jurassic, bearing European characters, proceed to
Mombasa in Africa, and Cutch in India ; their presence on the east coast
of Madagascar is still doubtful. The supposed fragments of Jurassic on
the east coast of India are also very doubtful, and perhaps belong to the
following stage. The lower Cretaceous with southern characters, the stage
of Uitenhage, appears on the east coast of Cape Colony, and vestiges of it
are met with on the east coast of India, but in Cutch and the Salt range
some indications are present (two species of Trigonia) which perhaps point
to an encroachment of the southern type on the northern region.

At the time of the middle and upper Cretaceous the broad open sea
extended from Europe over the desert, Arabia, and perhaps Somaliland,
and Cretaceous deposits of south European character proceed through the
valley of the Narbada into the interior of the Indian plateau. In the
south, in Natal and Trichinopoli, and far towards the north-east up to
the plateau of Shillong, between the Brahmaputra and Ganges, middle
and upper Cretaceous are also present, but with a different facies, that of
the southern hemisphere. Some species correspond with the European, but
the great majority differ. It is therefore very probable that during this
period no completely open communication existed between the seas of the
north-west and the south-east.

During the Eocene period the open sea still spread over Arabia; the
Nummulitic strata extend as far as Cutch and Guzerat, and to the east
they cross the region of the Salt range and the Himalaya and reach, in
the Shillong plateau, the region of the southern Cretaceous, which they
overlie: thence they proceed far to the south-east. Towards the south
they extend as far as the north-west coast of Madagascar, but they are
absent in the south-east of Africa, the east of Madagascar, the whole west
coast of India south of Guzerat, and the whole of its east coast; the
deposits of Rdj&hmahendri on the lower Godfivari, which are perhaps to
be assigned to the Eocene, depart too far from the normal type to enter
into consideration. —

Thus it follows that since the Eocene period also important alterations
must have occurred in the contours of the continents. '

The conclusions which seem to me at present deducible, subject of
course to modification by fresh observations, are as follows: —

India, Madagascar, and South Africa bear in common the stamp of

E e 2



420 FRAGMENTS OF THE INDIAN CONTINENT

a once oontinnons table-land. In India the down-break began between
the lower and upper Oondw4na, i.e. probably' daring or after the lias.
In South Africa the epoch of this event cannot be precisely determined,
but it is' certainly later than the Trias and earlier than the Neocomian.
Since then it has proceeded further. At the time of the middle Cretaceous
there still existed a barrier running from south-west to north-east, perhaps
not unlike that which further to the north now separates the fauna of the
Indian Ocean from that of the Mediterranean ; but the boundary between
the two faunas was not so sharply defined as at present. In the Eocene
period also, when according to Grandidier the Mediterranean deposits
extended as far as Madagascar, some sort of separation still existed.

The table-lands of Arabia and the Sahara, formed from the sediments
of the same Cretaceous and Tertiary seas, are now exposed as dry land.
In this vast region also an ascending and a descending scries, or in other
words a superposed and apposed series, must be distinguished as near Suez ;
the limit between them in this case, however, falls in a much earlier period.
Later on wo shall proceed to inquire whether the collapse of continents so
vast might not of itself produce a general lowering of the sea-level and thus
bring about the emergence of the table-lands.


The Syntaxis at the Foot of the Hindti-kush and the Himalaya.

(See Cap.VII.Notel.)


421


CHAPTER VII

THE SYNTAXES OP THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA*

The exterior chains of Iran. The Salt range. The Tertiary chains. The western
Himalaya. Mustdgh and Euenduen. Hindu Kush and Pdmir. The eastern Hirndlaya^
Burma, Malacca, Sumatra. Summary.

Since Alexander von Humboldt and Carl Ritter gave us the first outlines
of a geography of the interior of Asia, numerous praiseworthy attempts
have been made to determine more precisely the course and structure of
some of the greatest mountain rrjiges of the earth. It is only in the course
of the last few years that F. von Richthofen has described the structure of
the north of China, that Przewalsky’s adventurous travels have opened up
a large part of Tibet, that united efforts have determined the arrangement
of the crowded chains of the Pdmir, and that, as the result of many years
of devoted labour, Lydekker has published the geological map of the western
Himalaya from the plain of the Indus as far as the glaciers of the nameless
giant Kg in the chain of Mustdgh.

Nevertheless our knowledge of a great part of these mountains is even
still extremely incomplete, and it therefore seems advisable to begin with
the more generally known facts, and to be slow in drawing conclusions.
We shall treat in this chapter of that part of the Asiatic mountains the
structure of which is best known, and yet here too gaps are not wanting.

This region comprises the mightiest mountain ranges and the loftiest
summits in the world. Their height in figures can only be cited with
reserve, since it is believed that the numbers hitherto obtained aro'below
the truth in consequence of a correction required in the coefficient of
refraction, and it is also probable that to the north-west of Gaurisdnkar

^ The little map on Plate IV has been constructed from the maps published by the
Geological Survey of India; the Himalaya as far as the Jehlam are after Lydekker,
the Tertiary region east of this river after Medlicott, and the west after Wynne. The
lines of disturbance of the Tertiaiy region are marked as anticlinals, but many of them
are flexures dropped to the south ; A » Archaean ; p » ancient schista and Palaeozoic ;
m » Mesozoic ; =3 Eocene and Eocene volcanic sheets ; ■■ middle and upper

Tertiary ; (hy ^ 2 ^ older and more recent alluvial land. The areas left white NE.
and SW. of Abbotabad and S. of Eishtwar have not yet been mapped.' With regard
to the orthography employed in this chapter cf. note 1, p. 401 ; in treating of regions
so different it was impossible to avoid inconsistencies, except by introducing a forced
uniformity which would render the comparison of the original works more difBicult.
[The translator has in many cases followed the customaxy English spelling.]



422 SYNTAXIS OP THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [pabtii

[Mount Everest] peaks rise still higher than any which have hitherto
been measured ^

Tlie highest known peaks rise at no very great distance from the
plain of the Ganges in the southernmost gneissic chain of the Him&laya,
and the contrast between the great summits and the plain coincides with
a strongly marked contrast between folded chains and fractured table-land.
At the same time some opportunity is here afforded us of studying the
relations of great folded chains to one another and the manner in which
they congregate together \8chaarungy or Syntaxis 2 ].

The table-land has been discussed in the preceding chapter; there,
as here, the excellent work of the Geological Survey forms the chief
source of information. I should not, however, in spite of the abundance
of material contained in its reports, have attempted so difficult a task,
had it not been for the kind assistance I have received from many eminent
colleagues, both in England and Russia. This will be apparent from the
contents of this and the following chapter.ir-

We learn from the Alps that their several branches are much more
constant in course and structure on the arcuate outer border than on
the inner side ; we will, therefore, begin our study in this region also
with the outer border.

Four arcs advance towards the Indian peninsula.

The first of these outer borders begins in the mountains of Kurdistan :
it bounds the plain of Mesopotamia, follows the Persian gulf, trends more
and more towards the east, reaches the mouths of the Indus, and extends
thence to the north, almost following the river as far as the neighl)ourhood
of Tank, north-west of Dera Ismail Khan. This is the outer border of the
Iranian arc.

The second outer border differs in its structure from all other moun-
tains of the world. It advances towards the Indus in a sharp bend,
crosses the mountain* Sheik Budin towards Punifila, then it recedes
towards Kalab&gh, where it is broken through by the Indus ; on the other
side of this river it proceeds again towards the south and reaches the river
Jehlam near Jalalpur. This is the Salt range, the outer border of the
Hindu Kush It is the shortest of the arcs.

From the Jehlam the outer border of the Himdlaya strikes first to the
south-east, then more and more to the east, finally to east-north-east, pene-
trating into the valley of the Brahmaputra opposite the wedge-shaped
plateau of Assam. This is the third marginal arc.

^ W. W. Graham, Travel and Ascents in the Himalayas ; Proc. Geogr. Soc., 1884, new
ser., VI, pp. 68--70 and 429-447.

* [The English equivalent for Schaamng is trooping, or trooping together. As a literal
rendering would involve periphrasis, the word * syntaxis* has been adopted in the
translation. Note by Editor.]



OUTER CHAINS OF IRAN


423


OH. vn]

From the valley of the Brahmaputra to the south of the plateau of
Shillong the border of another mountain system appears; this at first
strikes nearly parallel to the Himalaya to the west-south-west, then it
bends to the south-west, and next fairly rapidly to the south, through
Arakan to Cape Negrais, the Andamans, and the Nicobars. We may term
the mountains to which this border belongs the Burmese chains, but they
form only a part of a curved line of extraordinary length which in tlio
north and north-north-west embraces Richthofen's ' System of Further
India ’ (hinterindisches System), and in the south a large part of the Sunda
islands ; we shall call it as a whole the Malay chain.

The outer chains of Iran, The western part of the outer chains of
Iran is formed of lofty mountain ridges which extend along the east side
of the Tigris to the Persian gulf with a south-easterly trend, and then
run more and more to the cast. The whole of that part which is
directed to the south-east we will distinguish as the chains of the Zagros.
Loftus has crossed them in inany directions and wo will follow his
descriptions

In the lowland of Mesopotamia there emerges here and there from the
alluvial plain a succession of flat-lying beds of middle Tertiary age, which
arc known as the gypsiferous series. They have a very wide distribution.
Loftus believes that they correspond to the gypsum and salt deposits on
lake Van, which, as wo have seen, may perhaps be the e(iuivalents of the
gypsum and salt deposits of the Carpathians, that is, of the Schlier.

This gypsiferous series consists of three parts : at the summit a deposit
of rolled pebbles, beneath this friable red calcareous sandstone, and finally
at the base variegated clays with gypsum and sometimes salt, Th(5 asphalt
which is found in the foot-hills of the Zagros also belongs to this series.

On the eastern border of the alluvial land rises the gypsiferous group,
its folded and upturned strata forming a broad belt at the foot oi. the
mountains, from Jezireh-ibn-Omfir above Mosul, ^ in latitude 36' N., to
Kazerun in 29'" 47'. Their basset edges stand boldly out and find their
prolongation in isolated patches which lie included in synclinal folds
high up in the mountains, as in Liirist&n, in the valley of the Kerkliah,
on the Pish-Kdh at a height of 6,000 feet, and at Kirrind to the west of
Kermanshah, where badly preserved marine shells are found at a height of
6,600 feet.

Below the gypsiferous series lies a great thickness of Nunimiilitic lime-
stone. It rises in lofty anticlinal folds which arc often many miles in
length and are cut through by deep transverse ravines ; here and there it
forms almost inaccessible ‘ Diz ’ or fortified mountains. Such is the mighty
Ban-i-Zardah between Bagdad and Sennah; on the south-west it ends

^ W. K. Loftus, On the Geology of Portions of the Turko-Persian Frontier and Districts
adjoining ; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1855, XI, pp. 247-344, geol. map.



424 SYNTAXIS OP THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [part ii

abruptly in the basset edges of a broken anticlinal, and on the north-east
in a fault which has thrown down the whole mass of the * Diz ’ separating
it from the succeeding synclinal of which it forms the anterior part. It
was on this block of Nummulitic limestone that Yezdijird, the last of the
Sassanides, made a final stand against the Moslim.

The Nummulitic limestone of the Zfigros reaches heights of more than
10,000 feet ; its folds traverse the whole length of the mountains, proceeding
from the north towards the south beyond the ruins of Fersepolis.

The next member of the series is the Cretaceous, also as a rule consisting
of hard limestone. It runs from the mountains of Kurdistan through
Ltiristfin, attains a great development in the Bikhtiyari mountains, and
then proceeds further to the south-east. A blue limestone which im-
mediately underlies the Cretaceous may perhaps belong to an older Mesozoic
group, but Loftus only suggests this as possible, and later observers, such
as Blanford, are doubtful with regard to it. In a single locality in the
midst of the B&khtiyarl mountains, an Ort^is of Devonian or Silurian age
was found in grey limestone. Finally, as the foundation of all these deposits,
Archaean schists appear in the eastern part of the mountains ; they accompany
a great granite zone coming from the north-west, which forms, on the
eastern border of the mountains next the plain, the loftiest summit of the
range, Mount Elwend, 13,780 feet high ; thence it proceeds without inter-
ruption as far as the low chain of Fdrajfibad in latitude 32° 16' N.

The chains of the ZAgros, with their prolongations to Shiraz, present an
asymmetric system of parallel folds formed by a movement from north-east
to south-west. On its eastern border rises the granite of the Elwend,
surrounded by ancient schists; towards the west follow the folds of the
Cretaceous and Nummulitic limestone, and on the outer border next the
plain the upturned gypsiferous series.

The succession of the strata presents a remarkable resemblance to that
which we have met wijbh in Arabia and in Egypt. In this respect there
exists no such contrast between the Zfigros and its foreland, as that of which
the Alps afford so striking an example, and we might be tempted to say
that the chains of the ZAgros are only a folded fragment of the desert
table-land.

On the inside of the chains of the ZAgros, other ranges arise with a
dominant trend to the south-east or east-south-east, and on the north side
of the lofty Koh-Rud, between KAshAn and IspahAn, Blanford and Tietze
have found granite, while the south side consists of limestone K

We shall confine ourselves here, however, solely to the structure of the

' E. Tietze, Bemerkungen fiber die Tektonik des Albursgebirges in Persien ; Jahrb.
geol. Reichsanst., 1877, XXVII, p. 407. According to V. von Mfiller’s investigations this
limestone may possibly belong to the Carboniferous: Ueber einige Foraminiferenffihrende
Gesteinc Persiens, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1880, XXX, pp. 580-586.



THE ZAGROS


426


CH. yn]

outer border of Iran ; that we can follow it still further to the south-east,
we owe above all to Blanford, who has visited the coast at many points as
far down as Cape Monze, has crossed the bordering chain of Gwadar on the
journey through Jalk and Bampur to Kerman, and has furnished a detailed
description of the ranges on the right bank of the lower Indus, which form
the south-eastern part of the bordering mountains of Iran

The coasts, as we learn from Blanford's account, are surrounded by
a very recent marine deposit, the * littoral concrete,’ which reaches a height
of only 20-25 feet above the existing strand; the next oldest member
, consists of horizontally stratified marine beds of great thickness; it is exposed
along the whole of the south coast from Makriln almost to Cape Monze, and
extends horizontally over the outer ridges and hollows of the mountains.
Blanford distinguishes these beds as the Makr&n group, and tliey appear to
him to occupy here a position similar to that of the third or fourth Mediter-
ranean stage in the basin of the Mediterranean; they are probably the
same recent marine deposits as tjiose which appear on the north coast o
the Persian gulf, and in particular on the island of Karak near Abushakr.

On the islands in the straits of Ormuz, and probably also on the
adjacent coast, variegated salt beds crop out in upturned strata from
beneath the Makrfm gi’oup; they arc doubtless a continuation of the
gypsiferous scries of Mesopotamia.

Towards the interior now succeed Nunmiulitic limestone. Eocene marl
and sandstone, and a great thickness of white Hippurite limestone. These
extend from Shiraz towards the south-east, form folded chains far and
wide, and then in Baluchistan proceed in long parallel chains running cast
to west piist Pishin to Jdlk and much further still. The Cretaceous is
traversed in places by eruptive rocks of the same age. The basement is
formed of gneiss, mica-schist, and tide schist ; these rocks are visible near
Saidfibad, south-west of Karman, and on the border of the great plain of
Narmashir, so that Blanford is led to suggest that^ they may extend in
a continuous zone from the Elwcnd through the whole region of the Zfigros
and thence as far as the frontier of Baluchistan.

Finally volcanic rocks of more recent date are largely represented. To
the north-east of the ancient rocks of -Saiddbad, just mentioned, they form
the lofty mountains which extend nearly as far as Karman ; tc^wards the
south-east, near Rdyin, the Ktih Hdzdr, which is 14,600 feet high, belongs
to them ; they extend between Bam and Bampur, and on the other side they
rise in the mighty but little known cones of Kiih-i-Basmah and Kiih-i-
Naushdda.

’ W. T. Blanford, Note on the Geological Formations seen along tfie Coasts of
Biliichistan and Persia from Karache to the Head of the Persian. Gulf, Rec. Geol. Surv.
Ind., 1872, V, pp. 41-45 ; Eastern Persia, An Account of the Journeys of the Persian
Boundary Commission, 1870, 1871, 1872, II ; the Zoology and Geology, by \V. T. Blanford,
8vo, London, 1872.



426 SYNTAXIS OF THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [pabt ii

Thus the bordering chains of Iran, so far as they are known to us,
present as far as Baldchist&n the same structure and the same succession
of rocks as in the north-west. There are, it is true, some indications,
particularly in the orographic sketches of St. John, which suggest that,
in the straits of Ormuz, two systems of outer folds, advancing in the
form of arcs, join one another in syntaxis, and that the form of this arm of
the sea is consequently determined by the course of the folds and by their
relation to the Arabian foreland ; in the strike of the inner chains no such
syntaxis is known. They approach with a south-east trend the chains of
Baluchistan, which run to the cast and form the conjunction with the folded
mountains of Sind

The mountains on the lower Indus, the structure of which also has been
made known chiefly by Blanford, begin with a short chain, running to the
south-west, which dips beneath the sea at Cape Monze ; of the other ranges
I will only mention first the Lakhe chain, which advances towards the east —
its northern end terminates near Sehw^n and its front determines the
bend which the lower Indus makes to the east — and next the long Khirthar
chain, which runs in a slight curve from south to north between latitude 26° 16'
and about 28° N. These are composed of simple folds of moderate height,
and in no part are rocks of greater age than the Cretaceous known. In
the Lakhe chain, in full sight as it were of the ancient table-land of the
Indian peninsula, the white Hippurite limestone crops out from beneath
the Nummulitic beds; in the south-eastern part of its high ridges the
outermost processes of the Deccan basalts appear ; they have shared in the
folding. Strata of the middle Tertiary period, in particular the marine
group of G&j, and the non-marine group of Manchar, which corresponds
with the Siwalik beds of the Himalayan border, so famous for their rich-
ness in mammalian remains, are also folded and form a large part of these
chains ; but the still more recent, horizontally stratified, marine group of
Makran does not extend as far as Cape Monze and is not known in the
valley of the Indus

It is much the same in the western part of these chains; in the long stretch
from Quetta to Keldt and to Gwujjuck on the Mushka in Makr&n, a distance
of about 380 kilometers, Cook has found no deposits older than the Creta-
ceous ; the Eocene is associated with serpentine or dioritic rocks, or rests
directly on them; their resemblance to those of south Arabia is pointed
out by Carter \

' 0. B. St. John, On the Physical Geography of Persia ; Eastern Persia ; An Account,
&c., I; in particular orographic map, p.6.

* W. T. Blanford, The Geology of Western Sind ; Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1880, XVII,
pp. 1-201, map.

® H. Cook, Geological Discoveries in the Valley of Kelat and surrounding Parts in
Beloochistan, in H. J. Carter, On Contributions to the Geology of Western India ; Joum.



427


OH.vn] KANDAHAE, TAKHT-I-SULAIMAN

The south-westerly trend of Cape Monze, the advance of the Lakhe
range to the east, and the northerly direction of the Khirthar chain
gives to the mountains on the lower Indus collectively an elongated
S-shaped form. North of Khirthar the much more important Sulfiimfoi
chain advances again towards the west, but it is composed of the same
rocks.

Griesbach going by way of the pass of Bolan and Kandahar penetrated
into Afghanistan as far as Girishk on tlie Halmand ; he crossed a large
number of chains running to the south-west, but here also no deposits
older than the Eocene and Cretaceous were met with. The Cretaceous
limestones are traversed by contemporaneous eruptive rocks, especially
near Kandahar; in some of the chains the Eocene is accompanied by
Flysch; the middle Tertiary group of Gdj is not folded, Imt it rests
unconformably on the rocks beneath, as far as the valley of Pishin, west
of Quetta. Griesbach therefore regards the Cretaceous and Flysch moun-
•tains of Afghanistan as part yf that vast region whicli, with an un-
changing succession of strata, extends from the Karst, Herzegovina, and
Greece through Syria and Persia up to the Indus

Blanford has examined all the outer folds from the sea northwards
as far as 30® 30' ; the oldest deposits belong witliout exception to the
Cretaceous In the north Griesbach has ascended Takht-i-Suldimfin,
the loftiest summit of the Suldimdn chain, 11,300 feet in height, and
here also no rocks older than the Cretaceous were discovered

The observations hitherto made on the structure of the bordering
mountains of Iran thus give a veiy definite and harmonious result.
We see that from our starting-point, Jezireh-ibn-Omdr above Mosul on
the Tigris, to our nearest approach to tlie Hindu Kusli near Tank, not

Bombay Branch Asiat. Soc., 1862, VI, pp. 184-194. I have been unable to follow the
example of other authors and to see in Cook’s statement of the occurrence of Orthoceras
in the Cretaceous limestone sufficient proof of the presence of ^Ider strata.

^ C. L. Griesbach, Report on the Geology of the Section between the Bolan Pass in
Biluchistan and Girishk in Southern Afghanistan; Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1881, XVIII,
pp. 1-60, map. The mode of intrusion of the eruptive rocks, which, near Kandahar,
contain gold in the zone of contact, strongly recalls Posepny’s observation that
intrusions in limestone frequently take place in systems of cavities formed long previously
by water.

* W. T. Blanford, The Geology of Western Sind, op. cit., 1879, XVII, pp. 1-210, maps;
by the same, Geological Notes on the Hills of the Neighbourhood of the Sind and
Punjab Frontier between Quetta and Dera Ghazi Khan, op. cit., 1883, XX, pp. 105-240,
maps ; also V. Ball, Geological Notes made on a Visit to the Coal discovered in the
Country of the Luni Pathans, Records, 1874, VII, pp. 145-158, mai).

* Griesbach in Mcdlicott’s Ann. Rep. for 1883, Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind., 18i!f4, XVII, p. 1.
The accounts of its further continuation in the country of the Wuziri are incomplete and
somewhat contradictory: Stewart and Oldham, Joum. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, 1861, XXIX,
pp. 314-320, and A. M. Verchere, Kashmir, the Western Himalaya, and the Afghan
Mountains, a geological paper, op. cit., 1867, XXXVI, part 2, pp. 18-20.



428 SYNTAXIS OP THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [pabth

far from the Dera Ismail Eh&n on the Indus, these bordering mountains
surround the higher country in such a way that only an insignificant
part of the waters of the interior finds its way into the sea ; next, that the
outer folds probably form a special syntaxis in the straits of Ormuz,
but the inner folds, however, are continued from the upper Tigris on
towards Baluchistan, and thence with a change of direction to the Takht-i-
SuWiinin ; and, finally, that in this great system of crescentic folds run-
ning from west to east, Hippurite limestone, Flysch, Nummulitic limestone,
and Miocene beds are the prevailing rocks. The middle and lower parts
of the Mesozoic system have not anywhere been observed ; only Palaeozoic
beds appear here and there, but as a rule the foundation, where it is
visible at all, consists of gneiss and ancient schists. In addition eruptive
rocks of Cretaceous, Tertiary, and even more recent age occur.

Deposits of recent horizontal marine strata apposed against older rocks
are only known on the coast of Makrfi,n and in the Persian gulf. In all
other parts of the bordering mountains jihe most recent visible Tertiary
deposits have been subjected to folding.

In front of the Iranian arc lies in the west the Arabian foreland, with
an almost identical succession of strata; in the east, on the other hand,
the arc is faced by the table-land of the Indian peninsula, totally different
in character and distinguished by the long series of lower Mesozoic
sandstones ; just as difierent also is the succession of strata in the syntactic
chains of the Hindu Kush.

The power and extent of the tangential movement may, as Blanford
points out, be clearly realized from the fact that the road from Gwddar
to JfLlk in Baluchistan, nearly 240 kilometers long, crosses only vertical
or almost vertical strata apparently of Tertiary age \

The Salt range. A common zone of folded Tertiary deposits encircles
all the great Indian arcs. The outer border of the Hindu Kush, however,
is distinguished froi^ that of the other arcs, indeed from that of all
other mountain chains known to me, by the fact that on its extreme
margin the older beds underlying the Tertiary foot-hills crop out in an
abrupt step^ traversal by numerous fractures. This step, with which the
fiat, alluvial land of the Punjab comes into direct contact, is the Salt
range.

The height of the alluvial land above the sea is about 750 feet, the
mean height of the step above it is over 2,000 feet ; the height of the
culminating point of the Salt range, the Sakesar, is 5,010 feet. This step,
which in many places resembles a broken antinclinal, is not rectilinear ; on
the contrary, towards Kfilabfigh, where the Indus enters the plain, it is so
deeply inflected that the higher land which is bounded by it is divided into
two plateaux, namely the high plain of Bannu, 1,000 to 1,500 feet high, and

^ Medlicott and Blanford, Manual, 1, p. liz.



CH.vn] THE SALT RAJfGE 429

•

the more extensive and almost equally elevated plain of Rawalpindi or the
Potwar. The structure of the Salt range has been described in detail by
Wynne, and Waagen has determined the age of its various strata \

. The oldest visible deposits are salt-bearing beds and red sandstone;
above them comes limestone with Productus and a great abundance of
other organic remains : this has hitherto been regarded as the equivalent of
the Carboniferous limestone ; it is succeeded by beds containing Ceratites,
which are assigned to the Trias ; fossils of the middle Jurassic lie at
a higher level, then follow black shales resembling the Jurassic Spiti shales
of the high mountain chain, then greensand with Neocomian fossils, and
finally the Eocene and the mighty series of Tertiary deposits. Several of
these members present a marked resemblance to the strata of the Himalaya,
and Waagen thinks that the whole series represents a transition from the
sequence near Cutch to that of the high mountains

The disturbances are extreircly important ; the strike of the separate
parts, which together form the tw^o arcs of the Salt range, changes rapidly
and is bent in some places in a sigmoid curve; in addition to this the
leaching out of the salt beds at the foot of the great step produces consider-
able local subsidences. In the west we first see a Tertiary chain running
to the south-east; a second chain, striking to the south-west, advances
towards it, and they meet in the south-west. At the southern corner rises
the mass of the Makkum GutkI or Sheik Budin (4,516 feet), presenting, as
a consequence of a fold inverted towards the south, a large fragment of
upper Tertiary embedded in the Jurassic. The fold going to the south-west
is bordered on the east by a parallel ridge, in the eastern part of which
the older formations are exposed ; the fold then bends round in a sigmoid
flexure, the convex border becomes concave, and the older formations appear
on this side. Thus it reaches Kfilabdgh, where the second arc which
surrounds the Poiwar begins ; the great horizontal dislocations and fractures
in this locality arc shown in Fig. 45. This second arc reaches the Jehlam
in the east near Jalalpiir, and is then continued to tlie north in the Tilla
chain, which is very irregular and is also curved in the form of an S
(PI. IV). Thus this short marginal fragment wedged in between the
Sul^im^n chain and the Himalaya exhibits the maximum of •disturbance
in the greatest variety of form.

The Tertiai'y foot-hills. Iji the western Alps a very sharp line separates
the region of the Molasse from the folds which lie towards the interior.
This region begins with the lower fresh-water Molasse ; the border is

^ A. B. Wynne, On the Geology of the Salt Range in the Punjab, Mem. 06ol. Surv. Ind.,
1878, XIV, p. 313 and maps ; the same, On the Trans-Indus Extension of the Punjab
Salt Range, op. cit., 1880, XVII, part 2, 95 pp. and maps ; W. Waagen, Salt Range Fossils,

. Palaeont. Ind., scr. XIII, 1879 ct seq.

* Waagen, Geogr. Vertheilung fossiler Organismen in Indien, p. 8.



430 SYNTAXIS OP THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [pakt h

inverted towards the exterior so that the Molasse dips towards the Alps ]
from this limit it ascends, forming one and perhaps even two anticlinals,
and becomes horizontal towards the plain. It has been repeatedly asserted
by trustworthy observers that the intercalations of conglomerates in the



Fia. 45. 2%« Sail Range near Kiilaibdgh (after Wynne) *.


Molasse appear at the mouths of existing transverse valleys, and from
this it has been concluded that these valleys date from an early part of
the Tertiary period, before the formation of the anticlinals and the
overfolding of the border line.

' The extent to which the application of the terms Carboniferous and Trias must be
modified will appear when Waagen’s palaeontological investigations have been concluded.


CH.VII] THE TERTIAEY FOOT-HILLS 431

In the eastern Alps two sharp limits of this kind exist. The first,
which, wherever it has been studied in detail, is also found to be
inverted towards the exterior, separates the great Flysch zone from the
inner folds. T!ie Flysch comprises Cretaceous and Tertiary rocks, and
on the Canisfiue in Vorarlberg the underlying Jurassic crops out in a
steep fold. The second sharp line separates the Flysch from the younger
Tertiary country which lies in front of it, but, owing to the destructi-
bility of the latter, this limit in the greater part of the northern border
of the Alps is only marked by the continuous curve of the outer slope.

In the Carpathians the case is similar. The inner line is absent, but
the underlying Mesozoic crops out in the series of Klippen as it does on
the Canisflue, and it is the outer line wliich separates the folded salt-
bearing series from the Flysch.

A similar and equally sharp boundary line appears in the southern
chains of the Hindu Kush and is repeated in the Himalaya. It separates
these chains from a common -one of Tertiary formations, varying in
breadth. This zone, which is everywhere sharply defined on the inner
side, surrounds lx)th these mountain systems. Its oldest member is the
Nummulitic limestone, which, however, also occurs within the interior folds.
All the stages of the Tertiary series which enter into tlie constitution
of this zone are already present in the chains of Sind, that is, in the
border mountains of eastern Iran, where they play an important part
in the structure of the heights, but there is no sharp limitation towards
the interior.

The line which separates the Tertiary zone from the chains of the
Hindu Kush runs first from west to east, south of tlie Afridi mountains,
then makes a slight deflexion on the Indus corresponding perhaps to the
great indentation in the Salt range near Kdlabdgh, then trends to the
north-east north of Rawalpindi (PI. IV) and finally runs directly north to
the syntaxis of the mountain systems near the Jehlani not far from
Muzaffarabad. To the south of this limit the Tertiary land forms the
already-mentioned plateaux of Bannu and the Potwar, which terminate in
the Salt range on the south.

In the Himalaya the boundary line runs in a regular arc from the
neighbourhood of Muzaffarabad far away towards the Brahmaputra, only
advancing a little towards the plain as it nears the Sutlej. The Tertiary
zone of the Hindu Kush crosses the Jehlam and is directly continued into
that of the Himalaya. It is at first of considerable breadth, then suddenly
becomes much narrower near the Sutlej, where the limit of the ancient
formations advances towards the south, remains narrow over a long stretch
and even disappears completely in Bhutan for a short interval, then reap-
pears and is well developed in the valley of the Brahmaputra, crosses the
latter above the mountains of Assam, and is continued in the Tertiary zone



432 SYNTAXIS OF THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [partii

of the Burmese chains with a sharp deflexion of the strike. The zone now
runs to the south-west and finally to the south, so that, retaining a con-
siderable breadth, it reaches the southern edge of the plateau of Shillong
and at the same time follows the western border of the Burmese chains as
far as the coast of Arakan. In Burma the same Tertiary deposits also
enter into the constitution of the inner chains.

The Nummulitic limestone is present in the whole region of the
Hindu Kush, and according to Medlicott, who has described the foot-hills
of the Himalaya in a most instructive manner, it is continued in isolated
outcrops as far as the above-mentioned constriction near the Sutlej. From
this point onwards it is absent, and only the younger deposits accompany
the mountains until far in the east the Nummulitic limestone reappears
All the Tertiary deposits which appear above the Nummulitic limestone
of the Hindu Kush and of the western and central Himalaya are of
non-marine origin.

The marine group of G/ij, which is not unlike the marine Molasse of
Switzerland intercalated between the upper and lower fresh- water Molasse,
is found only in the most southerly part of the chains of Sind, which are
elsewhere formed exclusively of extra-marine sandstone; it is only much
further to the east, on the plateau of Shillong and in the east of Bengal,
that marine deposits of middle Tertiary age again make their appearance.

The thickness of the non-marine Tertiary beds, which ai’c superposed
on the Nummulitic limestone, is extremely great ; they include at least two
distinct land faunas, and probably represent the whole period from the
Eocene to the present day. Many of the younger deposits, such as the
Siwdlik series with its abundant mammalian remains, present so remark-
able a resemblance to the most recent alluvium of the Indus and Ganges,
now in course of formation, that they have been described as folded
alluvial sediments of the existing river system. Concordant observations
show that, as in the^ Swiss Molasse, intercalated masses of conglomerate
appear near the mouths of the existing valleys. Lydekker remarks that
pebbles of the rocks which form the interior chains appear in the Tertiary
beds only at the mouths of those great valleys which at present penetrate
somewhat deeply into the mountains, and that the Tertiary conglomerates
which occur near the mouths of the shorter transverse valleys contain
rocks of the adjacent chains only.

^ Medlicotfc, On the Geological Structure and Relations of the Southern Portion of the
Himalayan Range between the rivers Ganges and Ravee, Mem. Gcol. Surv. Ind., 1864, III,
6, p. 208, map ; the same, Note upon the Sub-Himalayan Series in the Jamu (Jummoa)
Hills, Rec. Gcol. Surv. Ind. 1876, X, pp. 40-57 (map, p. 155) ; Wynne, Observations on some
Features in the Physical Geology of the Outer Himalayan Region of the Upper Punjab,
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1874, XXX, pp. 61-80, map ; the same. Note on the Tertiary
Zone and underlying Rocks in the North-West Punjab, Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1877, X,
pp. 107-132, map ; further, Manual, II, p. 517 et seq.



SYNTAXIS ON THE JEHLAM


433


CH. VIl]

The inner side of the Tertiary zone dips beneath tlic high mountains, in
consequence of a lateral movement coming from their direction, exactly as
in the overfolded outer border of the Swiss Alps ; and within the Tertiary
zone itself long lines of disturbance occur which present an obvious resem-
blance to the long anticlinal fold of the Molasse. Here, however, we
have the peculiarity that in the valley of tlie Jehlam two directions of
curvature meet. A comparison of the valuable results obtained by Medli-
cott in the sub-Himalaya and the valley of the Jehlam, by Lydekker on
the inner border of the sub-Hirnfilaya as far as MuzafFarabad, and by Wynne
on the deeply eroded plateaux of the Salt range, renders it possible to
study the mutual relations of these two curves. This is all the more
important, since we have some reason to see in these lines an expression of
the general movements of the two mountain systems.

The outer folds of the Hindu Kush in Harzara appear, as is shown on
Plate IV, to have pressed forwards somewhat further to the south than the
adjacent parts of the Himdlaya.^ We might, therefore, expect to find that
a mighty dragging and overriding of the syntactic mountain chains had
taken place in the Tertiary land of the Jehlam, but observations show us
nothing of the kind.

Tlie lines of disturbance arc antielinals, or flexures with a dropped
outer limb; both for long distances are frequently overfoldcd towaixls
the exterior, i.c. towards the south-west in the Himalaya and towards the
south-east in the Hindu Kush.

We will begin with the region of the Himalaya.

A long synclinal follows the outer border of the ancient formations ; it
runs past Punch, approaches near Uri the place where the Jehlam leaves
the ancient rocks, and appears to flatten out in front of Muzaffarabad,

Outside this line there rise at several places in the midst of the
Tertiary land isolated masses of older limestone which, following Lydekker,
we may regard provisionally as Mesozoic. Two ^such great masses in
particular appear on the Chendb: the first, T-^ipri, rises to a height of
9,914 feet ; the second, Sangar Marg, is only 6,676 feet high, but nearly
50 kilometers long. Sangar Marg is obviously the outcrop of a great fold
shoved towards the exterior, which is contiiiued towards the north-west in
similar outcrops. These are true ‘ Klippen ’ such as occur in the Carpathians.

Below the Sangar Marg two parallel lines of disturbance, of remarkable
length, cross the Chenab.

The first begins far in the south-east, crosses the Sutlej as a thrust
plane overridden to the south-west, reaches the Chendb below Sangar
Marg after a course of more than 300 kilometers, and thence proceeds as
far as the Jehlam. The second line lies nearly south of the first, and runs
parallel with it to the Jehlam. According to Medlicott all the facts
indicate that both lines, the one north of Mount Narh, the other south of

Ff


SOI.I.AB



434 SYNTAXIS OF THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [part ii

it, bend in a sharp curve and then pass uninterruptedly from the north*
westerly trend of the Himalaya to the south-westerly trend of the Hindu
Kush. Still further to the south a short arc, common to both systems,
appears to cross the Jehlam transversely.

West of the Jehlam the tectonic lines arc not so constant in their
course. A certain number follow the direction of the ancient formations,
and then, turning to due west, form the numerous parallel folds of the
Eocene salt-bearing region in the district of Kohfit. Wynne has followed
them as far as Thai on the river Kuram, where the Eocene beds
appear to bend sharply to the north around the Mesozoic mountain of
Kadimuk; this probably indicates a syntaxis with the Sul&im&n ranged
Another group of these lines trends more and more to the west-south -west.
One of them, under the name of the Bakrala chain, strikes into the Salt
range; in the southern part of its course the ancient strata of the Salt
range are exposed. The already-mentioned much-fractured Tilla chain
at the eastern end of the Salt range is simply one of these lines trending
towards the Jehlam. Towards the west, within the Salt range, other lines
emerge, which are directed towards the north-west and are consequently
perpendicular to the line of Bakrala, as though in these foot-hills and in the
first terrace of the Salt range an interference between the disturbances of
the Hindu Kush and those of the Himalaya had taken place.

‘ This arrangement,’ remark Medlicott and Blanford, ‘ exhibits in even
a more convincing manner a synchronous action in both directions of
disturbance. In this struggle for room this Salt range system seems to
have had the best of it; flexures belonging to it are more persistent in
overlapping the Himalayan series

The western Himdlaya as far as the Mustdgh range. The whole of
this region has been so admirably described by Lydekker that his work
on this subject must be numbered among the most important of recent
contributions to a knowledge of the structure of mountain ranges To
this we must add the attempt lately made by Godwin- Austen to furnish a
general account of the whole of the Himalaya ; this is based on so thorough
a knowledge of the subject that it will be found of very real assistance in

* Wynne, Ttie Trans-Indus Salt Region in the Kohat District, Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind.,
1875, XI, pp. 101-330, map; by the same, A Geological Reconnaissance from the Indus at
Kushalgarh to the Kuram at Thai on the Afghan Frontier, Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind. 1879, XII,
pp. 100-114, map. The remains of an ancient eruptive mass appears on the Kurak.
Further to the west our knowledge of the structure of the mountains is most incomplete,
and we are quite in the dark as to the nature of their syntaxis. Sikaram (15,620 feet),
the highest peak of the Safed Koh, consists of white quartzite ; serpentine occurs near
Ali Khel; near Jagdalak, east of Kabul, spinel is procured from white micaceous
limestone : Proc. Asiat. Soc. Beng., 1880, pp. 3, 4.

* Manual Geol. Ind., II, p. 568.

^ R. Lydekker, The Geology of the Kashmir and Chamba Temtories and the British
District of Khdgan ; MeiA. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1883, XXII, pp. 1-344, map.



436


CH. vn] PIE PANJAL

the task of mastering the mass of isolated observations now accumulated,
although it displays a somewhat too prominent tendency to construct long
continuous lines \

The first zone which we encounter beyond the Tertiary region shows the
dangers of a too systematic conception. While in the south-east on the
other side of the Sutlej a broad zone of less elevated mountains lies in
front of the great snow-covered chains, on the north-west the border of
the mountains advances somewhat further towards the Tertiary land, and
from a chain of ancient rocks, chiefly slates, rise lofty jagged peaks of
granite and granitic gneiss. Near Simla the mountain of Chor, 11,982 feet
high, rises at a little distance from the Tertiary border; the broad mass
of the Dhauladh&r is connected by a narrow process with the Pir Panjdl,
much in the same way as the Iffinger, near Bozen, with the granite of
Sterzing; at the same time the Pir Panjdl is very much elongated in the
direction of the strike, it attair a at its northern extremity in the Tatakuti
a height of 15,524 feet, and its c^ontinuation further is indicated by several
small granite masses. The slates are altered to a high degree; spotted
schists occur, and in the higher horizons numerous intercalations of
volcanic products. MacMahon has shown from the nature of the granites
of the Dhauladhdr that these are in all probability intrusive masses ; and
thus, as regards this first chain of the western Himdlaya, Indian geologists
have arrived independently at results similar to those obtained in divers
ways and by different observers in the Harz, in the Adamello, and many
other mountain masses

The course of this first chain, as may be seen on Plate IV, follows
closely the direction of the lines of disturbance in the Tertiary region,
and at the same time the whole range of the Pir Panjdl is overturned
towards the exterior, i.e. to the south-west, so that both north and south
of the granite chain the inclination of the strata is towards the north-east.
This tangential movement corresponds to the movements of the Tertiary
region, and thus we find in this first chain the first proof of a unity of
movement in the lofty mountain ranges and in the Tertiary foot-hills.

This chain may be followed as far as Kdgdn to the north-west, that is
to say nearly to the meridian of Muzaffarabad. —

The zone of the Pir Panjdl is followed towards the north by a zone
striking in the same direction and composed of upper Palaeozoic and
Mesozoic deposits; to this zone the great basin of Kashmir belongs. It

^ H. II. God win- Austen, President’s Address, Geogr. Section Brit. Assoc., Southport,
1883 ; also in Proc. Geogr. Soc., 1883, V, pp. 610-625 ; and by the same, The Mountain Sys-
tems of the Himalaya and Neighbouring lianges of India, op. cit., 1884, VI, pi>. 83-87, map.

^ C. A. MacMahon, On the Microscopic Structure of some Dalhousie Rocks, Rec. Geol.
Surv. Ind., 1883, XVI, pp. 129-144, yl. i; and the same. On the Microscopic Structure
of some Himalayan Granites and Gneissose Granites, op. cit., 1884, XVII, pp. 53-72, pi. ;
Lydekker, p. 270 et seq.


F f a



436 SYNTAXIS OF THE MOUNTAINS OF INDIA [part ii

begins in Chambra with a small synclinal, completely crushed towards the
south-west, and the whole southern side of the great basin consists, as
Lydekker has shown, near Islamabad in particular, of a long series of
folds uniformly overturned to the south-west. Outcrops of Mesozoic strata
occur along the borders of the basin, probably form its whole floor, and
are continued with the same strike to the upper Kishanganga and in the
direction of K&g&n,

Now we reach the broad and lofty gneissosc mass of Zdnskdr, 80 kilo-
meters across, which terminates in a blunt end towards Kartse on the
north-west and near this extremity reaches a height of 23,447 feet in
the Nun Kun. It is supposed that this mass is continued beyond Lahol
to the Nand Debi in the south-east and still further to the chain of the
Gaurisankar and the Kanchanjanga.

The north-eastern side of the Zdnskar meets that vast zone of fossili-
ferous deposits comprising all the strata from the Palaeozoic to the
Cretaceous, which in its long extended couj’se to the north-west constitutes
one of the strongest proofs of the tectonic unity of the western Himalaya.
Strachey has followed it as far as lake Manasarowar in Tibet, and
recognizes it as the foundation of the broad table-land of Hundes ; Stoliezka
has determined the succession of its strata in the Spiti, and demonstrated
the presence of a series of stages of the Alpine Trias; and Gricsbach,
completing these researches, has connected Strachey's field of observation
with that of Stoliezka, and has shown the concordance of all the beds up
to the Cretaceous

Illustrations of this gi'eat zone are given on Plate I (folding of strata
on an arm of the Bambadhura glacier) and Fig. 8, p. 109 (Mamrang pass).
It forms as a whole a colossal synclinal, traversed by subsidiary longitudinal
folds, and by numerous faults and thrust planes. Thus it embraces the
mass of the Zanskfir, bears in the middle of the synclinal, on th(i Pankpo
pass, its last traces of, Cretaceous, and, according to Lydekker, further to
the north-east, on an inaccessible summit, a patch of volcanic rock, perhaps
of Eocene age.

Near the river Sum, close to the end of the Z&nskdr mass, it appears to
terminate, btit Lydekker has shown that near Kartse isolated patches still
occur, and these form the connexion with a much more extensive Mesozoic
region, of triangular form, which continues the direction of the Zfinskdr
mass (PL IV). This region consists at first of an anticlinal and two

' R. Strachey, On the Geology of Part of the Himalaya Mountains and Tibet ; Quart.
Journ. Cool. Soc., 1851, VII, pp. 292-310, map, and section. For the first observation of
Alpine Trias, see Jeahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1862, XII, Verb., p. 258 ; F. Stoliezka, Geological
Sections across the Himalayan Mountains, from Wangtu Bridge on the River Sutlej to
Sungdo on the Indus, Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1865, V, pp. 1-154, pi., and in many other
places; Giiesbach, Palaeontological Notes on the Lower Trias of the Himalaya, Rec.
Geol. Surv. Ind., 1880, XIII, pp. 94-113, &c.



NANGA PARBAT


437


OH. vii]


synclinals ; the southern synclinal is overfolded to the south-west, and both
finally unite in a long narrow wedge, the prolongation of which may be
traced in isolated patches as far as the southern foot of the gigantic Nanga



Fro. 46. View of the Silakank (after Grieshsicli).

1, Gneiss, hornblende rocks, granito ; 2, Conglomerates and quartzite ; 3, Red qunrtzose
slates (Cambrian) ; 4, Coral limestone (lower Silurian) ; 5, ({uartzite, &c. ("upper Silurian) ;
6,Bluo coral limestone (lower Carboniferous) ; 7, Red crinoid limestone, andK, White quartzite
(upper Carboniferous); 3, Productus horizon (Permian ?); 10,0tocera8 beds, and ll,Musclielkalk
(lower Trias) ; 12, Halobia beds, and 13, Dolomite with green shales, Corbis, &c. (upper
Trias) ; 14, Dolomite, and 15, KOssenerbods and Lithodendron limestone (Rhaotie).

On the north slope, on the other side, Lias ; the Spiti shales of the Jurassic and Cretacooua
follow in a vertical succession.

Parlat (26,629 feet); thence it is probably continued acros.'^ the British
frontier towards Chilas\

» G. T. Vignes, Travels in Kashmir, Ladak, Iskardo, &c., 8vo, 1842, 1, p. 209, is quoted
for the north-western prolongation ; the passage appears to refer only to the neighbour-
hood of Gurez.


438 SYNTAXIS OP THE MOUNTAINS OF INDIA [pabt n

This arrangement of the Mesozoic rocks makes it seem very problible
that in the northern prolongation of the Z4nsk4r mass a regular covering
of sedimentary deposits exists ; although very much broken up and over-
folded to the south-west, this forms the connexion between the two
Mesozoic zones, that of Spiti (corresponding in great part to the Bara
Lache of Godwin- Austen) and that of Kashmir.

The zone of which I have now to speak is the most extraordinary of
all. Isolated patches of Eocene deposits appear west of the river Suru,
near Draas, and to the east of this river. A continuous zone of Eocene
sediments and eruptive masses, which extends far to the south-east in the
direction of the Indus, joins the Mesozoic zone where it begins its long course
to the south-east. The Eocene strikes slightly more to the east than the
Mesozoic zone, so that a wedge-shaped mass of ancient rocks, increasing in
breadth towards the south, comes in between and separates them. This
wedge-shaped mass comprises the Tso Morii in Rupshu and marks the
commencement of a fresh zone of great masses of gneiss.

The intercalation of this wedge-shaped segment shows clearly that the
Eocene zone represents an element absolutely distinct from the Mesozoic,
and that important tectonic changes must have preceded the Eocene period.
The Eocene zone has been followed for more than 300 kilometers, and
towards the south-east it certainly extends for an even much greater
distance ; near Leh its northern border shows every indication of having
been normally deposited on the gneiss of Ladakh : the southern edge, on the
other hand, is formed by a fracture : further to the south-east the structure
becomes complicated, owing to lateral pressure. The eruptive rocks belong
to the southern side only. The Nummulitic deposits rise to very con-
siderable heights : the Kanri or Stok, south of Leh, attains an altitude of
21 ,000 feet, and dominates for a great distance the mountains to the south.
Whiit changes are involved by the presence of this zone in the interior of
the Him^ilaya, far to the north of the trend-line of the Nanda Debi ! How
great is the object of our research ; how inadequate the conceptions with
which we are accustomed to approach it 1

The Eocene zone is followed by the broad gneiss and granite region of
Ladakhy whieh, accompanied by many subordinate infoldings of Palaeozoic
rocks, strikes across the plateau of Deosai towards Ronda and Gilgit.

Patches of Mesozoic deposits begin to appear again in Brulda. Granular
limestone, such for instance as is mentioned by Lydekker at the foot of
the Maskerbrum (25,676 feet), may doubtless be regarded, judging from
observations made in the Alps, as representing these zones. A continuous,
and sometimes fossiliferous, band of Carboniferous and Mesozoic rocks was
found by Godwin- Austen near Shigar in Baltistdn ; this strikes first east
and north-east, but according to Lydekker soon returns to the normal
north-westerly strike of the Him&laya, and extends in this direction to the



kArAkobam


439


CH. vn]

of Askola, BS a fold inverted to the south-west, and much altered by
pressure : it is then continued beneath the Biago glacier to the north-west,
and probably even further beneath fields of ice which descend towards
Hunga and Nagar^

Thus we have reached the northern frontier of the British possessions.
To the south-west of the Mesozoic band of Baltistdn lie Haramosh (24,286
feet), Baki Poshi (25,561 feet), and other giants of gneiss and granite
which must accordingly be assigned to the zone of Ladakh ; to the north
of this band lies one of the mightiest mountain ranges on the face of the
earth, the Mustdgh. This also consists of gneiss and granite : Masherbrum,
Ousherbrum (26,378 feet), above all the second highest mountain of the
earth, the anonymous double-peaked summit designated by the British
Survey Kg (28,265 feet), belong to this range. It also strikes to the
north-west, and the overthrusting near Askole, just mentioned, indicates
that up to this point the same tangential movement has prevailed as in the
TeHUiry hills of the southern bo rder.

Kdrdkoram and the western Kiienduen. All the zones of the Him&laya
hitherto discussed strike uniformly to the north-west or north-north-west,
and in many places overfoldiug to the south-west may be observed. The
Mesozoic band, which to the north-west of the great Zdnskfir mass grows
narrower like a wedge and is continued at the foot of the Nanga Parbat
only in isolated patches, is, as we have seen, continued a long way to the
south on the other side of the Suru. On the plateau of Hundes, in Tibet,
the gneissose chains, which lie to the north and south of it, diverge more
and more from one another, but the divergence of the great bands of gneiss
in this zone is slight compared with that which occurs in the north.

A limestone chain at first wedge-shaped gains so rapidly in breadth
towards the east, north of the Mustagh, that the next succeeding. line of
older rocks, the Kuen-luen, deviating more and more from the direction of
the Himalaya, assumes an easterly direction. It broadens out to the east,
and finally forms a wide limestone tableland bet'^freen the Himalaya and
the Kuen-luen. To this limestone region belongs the well-known pass of
Kdrdkoram.

We will begin in the east. ,

The southern border of the limestone mountains lies in Changchenmo,
a lateral valley of the Shayok. On the north side of the valley, near Qogra,
rise grey walls of limestone in which Dicerocardium and Megalodon are
found ; in the anticlinals this limestone is broken through by Carboni-
ferous limestone. Directly we reach the summit, on climbing the northern
side, we see stretching far and wide the high table-land. '

The table-land is almost uninhabited. Only the most western part,


* Lydekker, op. cit., p. 192.



440 SYNTAXES OF THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [part n

which lies to the north of the valley of Chan^henmo, has ever been visited
by Europeans. Adolf Schlagintweit was the first to cross this table-land ; he
was killed in Kashgar. Since then English geologists have explored it, but
have hardly reached long. 80® E. A very graphic description is given by
Drew. According to this, on approaching from the south, we first reach
the broad plain of Lingzithang (17,000 feet), then the mountain range of
Iiokhzung(up to 21,000 feet), then the plain of Kuen-luen (16,000 feet), and
finally the Kuen-luen mountains, which form the northern border and slope
down to the plain of Khotan (4,000 feet) \

Lingzithang is a broad horizontal lake bottom, covered with white clay,
within which lies the fioor of a second lake, only about 20 feet deeper ;
the clay contains the remains of aquatic plants. Strand-lines occur on the
slopes of the Lokhzung range, at least 150 feet above the plain; great
saline pools lie scattered over the surface of the ground.

The Lokhzung mountains, diminish in height towards the east : they
consist of parallel ridges which strike to the west-north- west, that is to say
nearly in the same direction as the principal ridges of the Kuen-luen. In
this chain Drew has distinguished grey crinoidal limestone in steeply
upturned beds, on which ferruginous sandstone and Hippurite limestone
rest unconformably; the latter also frequently present a highly inclined dip.

The plain of Kuen-luen is more varied than that of Lingzithang ; it is
formed of a collection of lake bottoms which make up in number what
they lack in size; nearly 4,000 feet above it rises the crest of the Kuen-luen,
which at the egress of the eastern Kardash presents first an outcrop of
schist and then of granite. The distance from the foot of the mountains
to Changchenmo is about 170 kilometers.

The mountainous regions which succeed to the west have been
traversed by F. Stoliczka along three routes which radiate from the
bottom of the basin of the Tarim and are continued across the
chains 2. The first of these routes runs from Sfinju (west of Khotan)
through Shahidula and the western extremity of the Lingzithang to
Changchenmo ; the second proceeds from Karghalik over the Yangi
Darwan, then towards the soutk-east, joining the previous route at
Aktagh, thei\ southwards through the K4r4koram pass and over the
plateau of Depsang; the third turns to the south-west and from Yangi
Hissar leads through Chenilgombaz, Chichiklik, and Tashkurgan to Ak-
tash in the eastern part of the Pamir. The first route was traversed from

» F. Drew, The Jummoo and Kashmir Territories, 8vo, 1875, pp. 331-354. On our
most generally used maps we find the name ‘ Thaldat this place lies at the north foot
of Lokhzung mountains. For this district cf. also G. W. Hayward, Journey from Leh
to Yarkand and Kashgar, Journ. Geogr. Soc., 1870, XL, pp. 33-166, map.
w A Results of the Second Yarkand Mission, based upon the Collections and

Notes of the late F. Stoliczka, Geology by W. T. Blanford, 4to, Calcutta, 1879.



441


coi. vn]


DEFLEXION OP THE KUEN-LUEN


south to north, the second from north to south, and the third in both
directions. In attempting a description of them I shall always start from
the north.

The first two routes cross the Kuen-luen and the limestone zone which
succeeds to the south ; the third, which penetrates into the Pamir, meets
the same rocks with a somewhat altered strike, a fact expressly and
repeatedly insisted on by Stoliczka and of especial interest, since it leads
to the important conclusion that it is the Kuen4uen itsdfy deflected to the
north-'Tiorth-west, which forms that great mountain range to the west of
Yarkand and Kashgar ^ usually known as the Kizilyart . —

We first encounter, near S&nju (6,070 feet) at the edge of the basin, red
Cretaceous sandstone and chloritic marl with Oryphaea vesiculosa, resting
unconformably against the steeply dipping older schist. Above Sfinju lies
a zone of Carboniferous limestone, then follow ancient schists, which are
partly chlOriti<j schists and partly genuine mica-schists ; near Tam, a patch
of Palaeozoic appears to be sunk into them: garnet-bearing mica-schist
forms the summit of the Sdnju pass (16,650 feet) ; then, at the bottom of
the Karakash, we meet with masses of gneiss, frequently syenitic, which
form the principal crest of the Kuen-luen. The district immediately
surrounding Shahidula is formed of this gneiss. Now we again meet
schists, in great part certainly of Palaeozoic age, which form the pass of
Suget (17,618 feet) and all the high land as far as the neighbourhood of
Kizil-Jilga west of Thaldat, consequently the whole region west of the high
plain of Kuen-luen, and here for the first time, near the camping-place
Shing-lung (also Dong-lung), limestone appears with Megalodon triqueter.
This point corresponds to the continuation of the Lokhzung mountains of
Drew, and from here the Mesozoic limestone extends as far as Gogra in
Changchenmo.

The second route meets a broad zone of very recent formations south of
Karghalik, then grey dolomite and limestone, shales and greenstone, and
beyond Chiklik the schist series of the Sfinju pass. To the north of the
Yangi pass the gneiss crops out. The pass itself, and the whole region as
far as Aktagh, is formed of the schists mentioned on the eastern route,
which are here accompanied by greenstone, while somewhat to the south
of Aktagh Carboniferous limestone begins. This is overfolded to the south
so that it overlies with a steep northerly dip Trias limestones rich in
Ammonites. The Mesozoic limestone now continues on, and Lias with Belem-
nites forms the summit of the Kdrdkoram. The Depsang plateau is probably
also formed of Lias, and the limestone zone extends southwards as far as
the Sasar pass, which lies on the line of strike of the great Mustdgh chain.

Thus in both sections the gneiss and syenitic gneiss do not appear on
the heights, but strike to the north of the passes of Suget and Yangi.

Stoliczka made the journey from Yangi Hissar to Pamir before that



442 SYNTAXIS OP THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [pakt^h

through the passes of Yangi and Elir4koram, but after that through S&nju,
which had given him a first glimpse into the structure of the mountains.
During the first two days he met with recent formations only, in part
perhaps of Tertiary age. As soon as these had been crossed he recognized
the schistose zone of Sinju and Tam of the first route, which is identical
with that of Chiklik of the second route, and is here, as near Chiklik,
accompanied by greenstone Traces of the red Cretaceous sandstone of
Sfinju also appear, and before arriving at Chiklik we reach the gneiss;
between the Eokmainak pass and Tashkurgan runs a zone of mica-schist
and hornblende schist. Then begins a second outcrop of gneiss and syenitic
gneiss, which as far as Kogashak, near Aktash, is overfolded to the south
or upturned against a ridge of Palaeozoic schist, which in its turn is
succeeded by a lofty limestone range.

We are now in the eastern Pamir, on the upper course of the Aksu^.
The limestone range just mentioned has afforded a whole series of fossils,
and includes both Carboniferous limestone and Trias. Stoliczka met with
it near Isstyk ; near Aktash it strikes nearly due east, in front of Kan-
shubar it bends to the south-east, forms the highest parts of the pass of
Neza-tash, and continues further to the south-east. When a little later
Stoliczka reached the northern border of the limestone mountains to the
north of the Kfir&korarn, he wrote in his diary, June 13, 1874: ‘ , there
is no doubt that this limestone extends to the south of Aktash.'

We arrive then at the following results : a fossiliferous Mesozoic band,
which sometimes probably includes the Carboniferous limestone, appears
in the eastern Pamir, striking nearly due east between Isstyk and Aktash ;
it soon tums to the south-east, crosses the Neza-tash, increases in breadth
between the Mustfigh and the Kuen-luen in the upper part of the Yarkand
valley, and extends finally to the south as far as the Saser pass and towards
Changchenmo. It includes within it Kfirakoram, the high plain of Dep-
sang, the Loklisung mountains, Lingzithang, and all the high land as far as
Kuen-luen, and is probably continued to the east into the Aksai Chin, i. e.
the White Desert, and towards the Yeshil Kul.

To the north of this limestone region the Kuen-luen describe an arc so
that they assume the direction of the Kizilyart ; it is continued by two
bands of gneiss near Chichiklik and south of Tashkurgan in those chains
striking to the north-north-west which surround the basin of the Tarim
on the west.

The correspondence between the curves thus obtained and the course of
the Tertiary lines of disturbance is very striking. Even from the plains, in

^ Op. cit. [note 2, p. 440], Diary of March 23 and June 3-8, 1874.

* Cf. Petermann's gcogr. Mittheil., 1884, pi. iv. Aktash means ‘white stone,* and the
name appears to indicate the presence of calcareous rocks, as on a smaller scale Piz Alv
in the Bernina.



HINDU KUSH AND PAMIR


443


CH. VIl]

latitude 83® N. onwards, we perceive that all the elements of which the chains
of the Himalaya are composed tend to the north-west, then they sometimes
bend round with a gentle curve into the direction of the Hindu Kush, at
others abruptly assume a trend to north-north- west, as though they had
been dragged out along a fault. The probability that this curvature of the
Kuen-luen belongs to the same system of disturbance as the lines of
dislocation of the Tertiary foot-hills is increased by the fact that not far
from Aktash places occur where the gneiss is overfolded to the south upon
the limestone,

HiTulu Kush and Pamir, Our closer acquaintance with the southern
chains of the Hindu Kush begins with the publication, in 1872, of the
investigations of Waagen and Wynne on Mount Sirban, south of Abbott-
abad \ This work showed that even in these first chains the succession of
strata observed in the neighbouring Salt range is no longer to be found,
but that a series of deposits jccura whicli corresponds to the Mesozoic
series of the Himalaya, that is o^i Kashmir and of the zone lying on the
other side of the Zdnskar, but particularly to that of the distant Spiti.
Here that well-stratified grey limestone with Megalodon and Dicerocardium
appears, which we have just traced far to the east of Ch4ngchemno on the
plateau to the west of Lingzithang and which recalls so forcibly the eastern
Alps. The Jurassic system is only represented by dark shales, as in tlie
Spiti, and is thus distinguished from the Jurassic of the Salt range; above
the lower Cretaceous lies an upper Cretaceous limestone, as in Chikkim.
This correspondence is the more striking since the next succeeding ridge of
the Himalaya, Pir Panjil with its elongated granite core, has furnished no
organic remains from the Mesozoic period which can be recognized. There
can be no doubt that these Mesozoic limestones, now folded and broken up,
which form the diflerent zones of the Himalaya from Tibet to the K&r^koram
and the east of Pamir, were once deposited in a common sea, and we now
perceive that this sea once also endjraced the southern region of the
existing Hindu Kush.

After investigating Mount Sirban, Wynne surveyed the southern chains,
and from his researches we borrow the following facts

The older rocks are shai'ply defined from the younger Tertiary land of
Bdwalpindi by a very long arc-shaped dislocation, to which secondary

^ W. Waagen and A. 13. Wynne, The Geology of Mount Sirban in the Upper Punj&b ;
Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1872, IX, pp. 331-350, map.

® Wynne, Observations on some Features in the Physical Geology of the Outer
Himalayan Region of the Upper Punjab, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1874, XXX, pp. 61-80,
pi. vii ; Note on the Tertiary Zone and Underlying Rocks in the NW. 'Punjab, Rec.
Geol. Surv. Ind., 1877, X, pp. 107-132, map ; Further Notes on the Geology of the Upper
Punjab, op. cit., 1879, Xll, pp. 114-133, with geological map of Hazara ; also op. cit.,
1882, XV, pp. 164-169; Waagen, Note on the Attock Slates, tom. cit., pp. 183-185;
Lydekker, op. cit., 1882, XV, p. 14, and others.



444 SYNTAXIS OF THE MOUNTAINS OF INDIA [part ii

dislocations run parallel for considerable distances. The arc-shaped domi-
nant line runs from Muzaffarabad first to the south, then bends more and
more to the south-west near Murree, passes into a westerly direction as it
proceeds to the north of Rawalpindi and reaches Kohat. The over-
thrusting towards the exterior is so marked on this liije, that, above
Rawalpindi for example, the Jurassic shales rest almost horizontally on
the Nummulitic limestone. In the south-east the outer border is formed
by the Margalla range, composed of frequently repeated bands of folded
Mesozoic and Eocene rocks; further towards the interior ancient schists
prevail, and it is these which at some distance below MuzafTarabad form
part of the syntactic chains and rise directly above the Jelilam to a height
of from 8,000 to 9,000 feet above the sea-level.

Within the zone of schists, masses of granitic gneiss rise up and form
the lofty mountains between Kunhar and the Indus and to the west of
the Indus. The older schists correspond to those of Pir Panjfil, and it is
asserted that the granitic gneiss also is identical with the intrusive masses
of the Dhauladhfir and the Pir Panjdl.

However this may be, it is certain that the general distribution of the
rocks, as well as their strike, is determined by lines which are in complete
accordance with the dislocations of the forelying Tertiary land, and that
overthrusting towards the exterior may everywhere be observed. As to the
east of the Jehlam the dip of the beds is towards the north-east, so to
the west its prcivalent direction is towards the north-west, that is, towards
the higher mountains. It is always the same impulsion forwards which
finds expression in (ill parts of theses mountains.

In its exterior form this mountainous region is distinguished by
a number of in-sunken plains, such as the plain of Pakli Dara in the north-
east, which is let down into the ancient rocks like tlie caldron of the
Hirschberg in the Riesengebirge ; and again the great plain of Haz&ra,
which is elongated in Jihe direction of the strike of the chain and separated
from the Indus by the band of slates forming the Gandgarh mountains :
this presents more resemblance to the plain of Laibach in the eastern Alps
than to the great synclinal of Srinagar.

Thus the first scries of chains forming the Hindu Kush have followed,
like the Himalaya, the same movements as caused the dislocations of
the Tertiary country : the plan and direction of the disturbances are the
same, but on a much gi’ander scale. —

The ravine of Kunhar above Muzaffarabad in which the syntaxis takes
place has been excavated in ancient schists and is surrounded by lofty
mountains from which Nanga Parbat is said to be visible, though this
already forms part of the gneiss chains of Ladakh. The structure of the
country lying to the north or north-west of latitude 34" 30' is unexplored.
But the lofty Kunar chain, which bounds Kdfiristan on the south, is known



CH. vii] PAMIE 446

to run to the north-east or east-north-east, in the same direction as that
taken by the great principal chain of the Hindu Kush, from Kuh Baba,
above Kabul, over the Khawak passes as far as the triple lino of passes
which lead from Chitral to Iskasliim. Here the height of the crest is
16,000 feet, that of the Tirach Mir on a southern spur 25,426 feet ^ From
this point the mighty chain continues without change of direction, forms
those snow-covered mountains, the northern slope of which faces the
upper Paendsh, sinks near the pass of Baroghil to 12,000 feet, and then
rises again, sending down great glaciers on the south towards Kunjud.

We have thus reached the upper course of the Oxus. As early as the
summer of 1874, F. Stoliezka wrote to his friends in Europe : ‘ Pimir, the
roof of the world, is not a plateau at all ; it is a congregation of chains.’
We owe it to the perseverance and devotion of llussian investigators that
we are already able to form a general conception of these chains as a whole,
and that their pai’allelism with those of the Hindu Kush is now definitely
established. The decisive obser\ations were made by Iwanow and his
companions during their journey *in the year 1883. 1 must here express

my thanks for the information with which they have kindly favoured
me

According to Iwanow the following may lui distinguished : the chain of
Wakhan between the Wachan Daria and the river Pamir ; the videf chain of
the Pamir between the rivers Pamir and Alitsehur ; the Alitsclmr chain
between this river and theMurghab; ihiiMunjhab chain which extends to
the east-north-east as far as the pass of Ulugrabat ; finally the Rantjkiil
chain, north of the lake of the same name, which in the east forms part
of the watershed between the Amu and the Tarim, and towards the west
joins the Karakul ramje, which comes from Kokuj-bel and Tachtagorum.

These chains all run nearly parallel to one another from west-south-
west to east-north-east ; in the south they are followed in the same
direction by the Hindu Kush, in the north by the chain of Sa- Alai and Alai.
Towards the south-west they die away, but that steep fall common to all,
which is marked on the maps l)etween lake Shiva and the plain, does not
exist ; on the contrary a spur runs down as far as llustak, west of Faizabad,
and since Wood expressly mentions the north-east to south-west direction

^ W. W. McNair, A Visit to Kafiristan; Proc. (jleo^r. Soc., 1884, Vf, p. 0.

* I owe particular thanks to Herr Iwanow for the communication of some still
unprinted accounts of a series of lectures delivered by him in the spring of 1884 before the
Imperial Geographical Society of Russia. For an explanation cf. Petennann’sgeogr. Mitth
1884, XXX, pi. iv, and Proc. Geogr. Soc., 1884, map, p. 176 ; these maps, as well as the
provisory map i^ublished in the Iswestjia, were, however, prei>arcd before (he return of
the expedition, and with regard to the points in question Iwanow gives his opinion
against the statements concerning the course of the river Ges (to the north-east) as well
as against those relating to the steep scarp with which Pamir is said to teimiinate towards
the south-west in the direction of Faizabad.



446 SYNTAXIS OP THE MOUNTAINS OF INDIA [part ir

of the lofty mountains of Khoja-Mohammed, I should be inclined to regard
this also as a continuation of the chains of the Pamir \

Let us now consider the eastern side.

Stoliczka has shown that the Mesozoic limestone region of E4r&koram
strikes across the passes Neza-tfish and Aktash, passing in a gentle curve *
from a north-west to south-east to an almost east to west direction, and thus
reaches Isstyk, that is to say the northern extremity of the chain of
Wakhan. Since Iwanow's observations are based not only on the direction
of the mountain ranges but also on the strike of the rocks, it follows that
the Hindu Kush, and with it the chain of Wakhan, lies to the south of the
point where the zone of Kdrfikoram meets the line of contact of both
systems of arcs, and that in the north of Kunjud the chief range of the
Hindu Kush must either unite in a continuous curve with the mightiest
chain of the western Himalaya, the Mustfigh, or else meet it at an acute angle.
The manner in which tlie boundaries of Kunjud and the upper Gilgit are
marked on the map of the English survey points to the former of these
hypotheses. Hayward indeed states expressly that the junction takes
place at the upper end of the valley of Gilgit at a place called Pusht-i-KJiar,
i.e. the Ass’s Back*. Directly south of this region lies the country of
Hunza and Nagar; up to their boundary, beneath the glaciers of the
southern slope of the Mustdgh, Lydekker has traced the continuation of
the Trias zone of Baltistiin *. It is between this limestone zone and that of
Kdrfikoram, Neza-tdsh, that the gneiss chains of the Hindu Kush and the
Mustigh must meet.

To the north of the limestone band of Aktash the case is different.
Here, as we have seen, the Kuen-luen describes a great arc to the north-
north- west and forms a long chain which, of no great height at first, rises
rapidly beyond the pass of Chichiklik till it attains a height of 25,500 feet
in the gneissose mass of the Tagarma (Mustaghata) situated above the
little Karakul, and on the other side of the lake it reaches 22,500 feet in an
unnamed summit, and still continues in a long series of lofty peaks. This
great chain, dircicted to the north-north-west and commonly called the
Kizilyart, is accompanied by one or two shorter parallel chains : we will
call it with Jwanow the chain of Kashgar.

The chains of the Pamir running to the east-north-east either abut
directly on those of Kashgar running to the north-north- west, or terminate
opposite to them.

^ Capt. John Wood, A Journey to the Source of the River Oxus, 2nd ed., 8vo, 1872,
p. 158. Beyond Rustak the lofty, isolated Umbar Koh near Kunduz might be added ; cf.
op. cit., p. 152.

* Hayward, tom. cit., p. 125. Hayward still includes the MusUgh under the name of
the Karakoram.

* Lydekker, Geol. of Dardistan, Baltistdn, &c.; Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind. 1881, XIV, p. 15,
map.



OH.VII] *.THE GREAT SYNTAXIS 447

From the pass of Kush-Bel, north-east of the pass of Kara Art, Iwanow
looked down to the south into the valley of the northern Ges, and saw it
bounded on the right side by beautiful mountain spurs, on the loft by the
lofty jagged chain of Kyrk-ku (Forty Peaks). The valley extends 70 kilo-
meters to the west-nortli-west and north-west. Kyrk-ku is covered far
down with snow, glaciers hang in every furrow almost down to the valley
bottom. This is the northern continuation of the principal chain of Kashgar.

To this abrupt encounter of the two mountain systems we must ascribe
the irregularity of the watershed between the Tarim and the Oxus ; it
passes across the region to and fro more than once.

General view of the great Syntaxis. If from the plain of India we
approach the line along which the arc of the Himalaya and that of the
Hindu Kush unite, we first encounter, near the river Chenfib, the mountains
of Korfina, a group of completely isolated hills advancing far into the
plain, which, in sight of the firLu folds of the high chains, are composed of
the rocks which form the table mountains of the peninsula.

These are followed to the west by the Salt range, a tier of land cut
through by faults, which reveals to view the bascmieiit of the Tertiary
foot-hills in front of the Hindu Kush. Then on the east and the west we
reach the Tertiary foot-hills themselves, which are traversed by extremely
long anticlinals parallel to the border of both systems, and by flexures
which for long distances are overfolded towards the exterior. These lines
meet in the neighbourhood of the Jehlam, and some of them appear to cross
the line of encounter without interniption and to curve round from the
south-easterly direction of the Himalaya into the south-westerly direction
of the Hindu Kush. In the west some interference seems to have occurred
owing to the encroachment of some lines belonging to the system of the
Himalaya.

The contact of the Hindu Kush with the Tertiary foot-hills is indicated,
as is that of the Himalaya, by long dislocations which also show over-
thrusting towards the ext<y:ior. In the Hindu Kush the arc described by
the mountains advances much further south than it does to the east of the
Jehlam, and below MuzafFarabad even the schist zone appears from beneath
the Mesozoic deposits and is visible for a great distance along the right
bank of the Jehlam ; the gneiss and granite masses of Amb which then
follow, appear in the Khagan above Muzaflarabad as the continuation of
the first chain of the Himalaya. This is the Pir Pan jrd, with its intrusive
granitic core, also overturned towards the exterior.'

In the west observations fail until we reach the principal chain of the
Hindu Kush, but in the east all the zones of the Himalaya, for the greater
part overfolded towards the south-west, run parallel to one another and to
the lines of dislocation in the Tertiary foot-hills towards the region of
contact. The first of these is the Pir Panjfil, then follows the Mesozoic



448 S YNTAXIS OP THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [part ii

zone of Kashmir, the gneiss zone of Z4nsk&r, the Mesozoic zone of Spiti
which reaches the British frontier to the south of Nanga Parbat, the gneiss
zone of Laddkh and the Mesozoic outcrops of Baltistdn which strike beneath
the glaciers of Mustdgh towards Kunjud, and finally the gneiss chain of
Must&gh.

Now we see the principal chain of the west, the Hindu Kush, meet in
conflict the mightiest chain of the east, the Mustdgh, and, as we said above,
this encounter must take place in Kunjud.

The limestone region of Kirakoram-Lingzithang, which increases so
rapidly in breadtli towards the east, now advances from the south-east over
Neza-tfish and invades the east of Pamir, again indicating the unity of
structure in the whole ; in the north, however, the Kuen-luen is deflected,
first to the north-west, then to the north-north-west, forming the chains of
Kashgar with the mighty Tagarma and the Forty Peaks.

In the west the Hindu Kush is joined by the long series of the parallel
chains of Pamir, which meet abruptly the chains of Kashgar ; the same
direction is followed by the chains of the Alai, which belong to the
Thian-shan. The chains of Thian-shan, however, proceed without deviation
directly across the direction of the Kashgar mountains, and with them the
great syntaxis terminates. —

The mutual relation of the great chains in this syntaxis resembles
that of the subordinate dislocations in the Tertiary foothills. The first
dislocation of the foot-hills appears to the west of the Jehlarn on the outer
side of the Salt range, in latitude 32'' 45' N. approximately ; the pass of
Kush-bel above the Ges lies north of 39® ; the syntaxis extends through
six to seven degrees of latitude. In the south it lies somewhat to
the west of the meridian 74®, in the north somewhat to tlie east of it ; its
course is therefore nortli, and some degrees to the east. It is indicated in
the south by the Jehlarn, but in the nortli there are long stretches without
a single valley to mark it. The mightiest chains appear to unite in
a common saddle. This fact in particular bears witness to the unity of the
movements. Like two shallow streams of lava, or two flows of slag
running side by side, the waves of which as they cool come into syntaxis
against a long line, now fusing completely together, now encroaching one
on another, so the chains of the Himalaya meet those of the Hindu Kush.

The carter ii HirtuUaya. Throughout the enormous length of the convex
outer border from longitude 73® on the Jehlarn to longitude 94° E. on
the Brahmaputra, and probably even further to the east, the border of the
mountains is as a rule overfolded and inclined in a contrary direction, i. e.
towards the interior of the chains ^ With this constancy of the most

’ This reversed succession has been sometimes taken for the normal superposition, and
the gneiss of Kanchanjanga has been regarded as younger than the lower Gondwana ;
sometimes it has been believed to show the original coast-line and subsequent collapse.



THE EASTERN HIMALAYA


449


CH. vu]

important and fundamental tectonic character^ the difference between the
various parts of the border as regards the nature of the deposits is the more
remarkable ; and although the observations so far made on this point are
extremely fnagmentary, yet they have already furnished results of no little
importance in the study of general questions.

From long. 73® to about 77® E. there extend the lofty and jagged
crests of the Pir Panjdl and the Dhauladhfir, a zone reversed towards the
exterior, composed of rocks in which as yet no fossils have been found and
penetrated by an intrusive granite core. To the east the outer zone decreases
in height, and is called by Blanford and Modlicott the ‘ Lower Him&laya.'
In this mighty series of apparently unfossiliferous sediments, known
from the point where they leave the Jelilam as the Krol and the Blaini
series, important bands of limestone and dolomite occur, which have been
assigned in part to the Trias, but without sufficient proof. Near Simla this
series, encroaching on the next zone which succeeds it to the north, attains
a great breadth. On the other side of Kumaon observations are wanting
for a great distance. Medlicott’rf expedition to Nepfil, which penetrated to
the shores of the Tirsuli Gandak, north-west of Katmandu, first threw some
light on the structure of this country, as a rule so inaccessible to Europeans.
The elements of which the outei’ zones of the great ranges are composed
appear to be essentially the same here as in Kumaon h

Once more we arc confronted by a great hiatus in the observations, and
it is only at the frontier of Sikkim that we reach the field of F. R. Mallet’s
investigations, which embrace the outer border of the mountains almost
from long. 88® to 90® E.^ We must now enter into some detail.

To the east of Darjiling the Ranjit joins the Tistfi, and the latter then
traverses the mountains, flowing from north to south. The transverse
valley is excavated in green and grey slates (Doling series), which separate
from one another the extremities of two great masses of gneiss, the Kan-
chanjanga (28,516 feet) in the west and the D&nkia (23,189 feet) in the east.
Darjiling is built near the border of the western maj^s. The slate, however,
not only separates these masses, it also borders both of them on the north
and on the south, where the gneiss advances very close to the plain, and
the slate dips on all sides beneath it..

Leaving the plain we see dipping steeply to the north-north-east, beneath
the slate which supports the gneiss, a series composed of sandstone and

Although in the case of many more recent deposits the coast may have been near, yet
those geologists who arc familiar with the border of the Alps have at once recognized the
universal overfolding, as, for example, Griesbach in Kumaon, Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1880,
p. 84, and L. v. Loezi in the neighbourhood of Darjiling, Foldtan. KfizL, 1883, p. 270.

^ H. B. Medlicott, Note on the Geology of Nepal ; Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1875, VIII,
pp. 93-101, map.

* F. R. Mallet, On the Geology of the Darjiling District and the Western Duars ; op.
cit., 1875, XI, pp. 1-96, maps.

Gg


80LLAS



460 SYNTAXiS OF THE MOUNTAINS OF INDIA [part ir

^psile carbonaceous slate, in which many years ago Hooker discovered the
first traces of plant remains. It is indeed a part of the lower Gondw&na
(Damuda) deposits of the peninsula, which dipping beneath the zone of
slates and consequently also beneath both the gneiss masses of Eanchan-
janga and Doling, helps to form for a considerable distance the outer border
of the mountains. The adjacent Tertiary zone, which is somewhat incom-
plete, is inclined here, as indeed everywhere, towards the interior of the
mountains. The limestone bands of the Krol series have disappeared. —

The dip of the lower Gondw4na beds and the slates towards the gneiss
was at first interpreted as indicating a synclinal fold ; it corresponds, how-
ever, to the inversion, which manifests itself in almost every locality where
the border of the mountains has been studied. Since the northern girdle
of slates similarly dips in a contrary sense towards the south, it is probable
that both the masses of gneiss mentioned above possess a fan-like structure,
and thus that the great outer mountain cores of - the Himalaya are
structurally similar to some of the great mountain cores in the outer zone
of the western Alps, e.g. Mont Blanc. —

The Gondwfina beds of the outer border of the mountains disappear
again to the cast; to the east of Joldoka limestone bands are seen, not
unlike those of the Krol series of the west, and in long. 90® E. we encounter
a fresh gap in the observations.

Much further to the east, in long. 93® 90' to 94® E., where the river Dikrang
emerges from the Daphla mountains, the limestone bands are again lost ; on
the other hand the coal-bearing GondwAna beds reappear. The observation
of this remarkable fact is due to Godwin-Austen b The Tertiary foot-hills
extend in long folds with a north-east strike, and rise in the Gorusutia to
a height of more than 3,000 feet above the Brahmaputra, presenting towards
the plain of this river a scarp visible from afar. These folds are succeeded
on their inner side by the coal-bcaring GondwAna series, with a steep dii>
and very much compressed, particularly at the bottom of the longitudinal
valley of the middle Dikrang ; then follow immediately mica-schists, gneiss,
and granite. —

Thus in the west and as far as Kumaun massive bands of limestone take
part in the formation of this outer zone of the high mountains ; this is also
the case in central NepAl; in Sikkim the limestone disappears and is
replaced by the coal-bearing beds of the peninsula; on the frontier of
Bhutan the bands of limestone resume their position; in the Daphla
mountains these are absent and the coal-bearing beds reappear. —

If we now consider the mountains, not in a longitudinal, but in a
meridional direction, i.e. with regard to the adjacent regions in the south,
then the general structure may be represented as follows : —

^ H. H. Godwin-Austen, Notes on the Geology of part of the Dafla Hills, Assam ; Joum.
Asiat. Soc. Beng., 1875, newser., XLIV, jjp. 35-41, pi.



OH.vn] THE BURMESE CHAINS 461

The highest known peaks of the Him&laya belong to the most southerly
zone of gneiss, and this, at least in Sikkim, is divided into masses by bands
of schist, like the gneiss of the Swiss Alps. On both sides of the Tista we
must admit the existence of fan structure. The southern border of the fans
of Kanchanjanga and Dfinkia forms at the same time a part of the over-
folded exterior border, which consists in part of lower Gondwina and
younger Tertiary beds. The adjacent alluvial land of the Brahmaputra
is diversified by isolated bosses of gneiss, and south of the river rises the
gneiss of the long wedge-shaped plateau of Shillong, which, however, on
the north side attains heights of only trifling elevation. An outflow of
trap contemporaneous with the Gondw&na lies against the gneiss in the
south; the middle and upper Cretaceous overlie both horizontally; still
further to the south follows the Nummulitic limestone, and finally kho
whole of the sedimentary series thus arranged descends in a great flexure
to the south and south-east. At its foot lie, badly disturbed, the later
Tertiary beds, and in front of Uj stand the folded chains of Burma.

The Bui^mese chains. The* chains which I now propose to briefly
discuss form one of the most extensive series of folds in the world.

According to existing accounts a number of parallel chains proceed from
eastern Tibet, in the region about the head waters of the Irawadi, the
Salwln and Mekong, and run from west-north-west to east-south-east ^ ;
they form Richthofen's ‘ System of Further India ' (‘ hinterindisches
System'). Their relations to the eastern end of the Himalaya are not
known ; but while they continue in the direction of Ta-li-fu and Momein,
chains appear in the west, below the curve described by the Brahmaputra,
which evidently belong to the same group ; they form here the mountains
of Ndga, the Patkai and Barail chain al)OVC Cachar, and a long series of
other ranges, which strike first north-east to south-west, and then with
a somewhat sudden deflexion north to south ; one of these, the long range
of Arakan, extends as far as Cape Negrais.

Tb'* whole of Burma is traversed by an extremely well-developed scries
of longitudinal valleys running north and south ; at the same time the course
of the Malay peninsula and of the islands continuing its direction gradually
undergoes a great and general deflexion from north and south to north-west
and south-east as it proceeds southwards. The geological structure of this
region, so far as it is known, is in accordance with these exterior features,
and thus we are able to distinguish three great zones: a western zone,
comprising the chains enumerated above, from the Ndga mountains in
lat. 27° 30' N. to the Great Nicobar in lat. 7° N. and, as we shall see directly,

I

' Cf. the map by C. H. Lepper, The Singpho-Kampti Country or Neutral Ground
between India and China, Proc. Asiat. Soc. Beng., March, 1882, pi. 1, and the map
completed by B. Hassenstein, after Colborne Baber, Petermann’s geogr. Mitth., 1883,
XXIX, pi. 1.


G g 2



462 SYNTAXIS OF THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [part ii

still further to the south; a median zone, formed by the plain of the
Irawadi and the adjacent sea ; and an eastern zone which embraces all the
mountains east of the towns of Ava and Mandalay and of the river Sit-
taung, as well as the whole of the Malay peninsula. The oldest rocks of
the western zone are regarded as Trias ; those of the middle zone do not
extend further down than the Tertiary ; the eastern zone is composed of
much older rocks, principally Archaean.

Here too it is the structure of the exterior border which claims particular
attention.

Mallet has studied the margin of the mountains along the Brahmaputra
from lat. 20' N. to lat. 26° 30' N. It consists of a coal-bearing series of
middle Tertiary age and an older series of unfossiliferous shales and
quartzite (Disang group) which proceeds through the whole of Arakan
(Negrais group in the south). Both of these throughout their course dip in
a contrary direction, i.e. to the south-east, and even if we assume with
Mallet that the more recent coal-bearing series is separated from the older
series by a long fracture, yet the reversed dip of both these tectonic elements
again bears witness, as on the border of the Himalaya, to the extraordinary
foi'ce of the tangential movement

The Burmese border is separated from that of the Himalaya only by
the valley of the Brahmaputra, and we have now before us a case in which
two mountain chains approach one another, urged by tangential movement
in opposite directions. To the north of the Brahmaputra the prevailing
inclination of the strata is to the north-west, to the south of the river to
the south-east ; at the same time the convex sides of the arcs described by
the two chains face one another, as well as the intervening wedge-shaped
area of Shillong. In this region therefore we see complete antagonism in
the tangential movement.

We now approach the plateau of Shillong ; the outer arcs of the Burmese
chains are at first separated from it by the valley of the Dhansiri, which
flows round the north-east extremity of the plateau, before discharging
itself into the Brahmaputra. It is at this point that R. D. Oldham has
made known to us the folded zone in its entire breadth up to the great
depression of ihe Irawadi. Several parallel chains exist here. The middle
Tertiary reaches considerable heights ; beds which are probably Cretaceous
appear beneath it, then the older group of sandstone and shales, and towards
the eastern l)order, that is to say, towards the border of the great depression,
a long band of serpentine is seen \

^ F. R. Mallet, On the Coal-fields of the N&gd Hills, bordering the Lakhimpur and
Sibsagar District, Assam ; Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1876, XII, pp. 269-363, maps. In the
case of a fault the more recent series would also have been dragged upwards, not in this,
but in an opposite direction.

- R. D. Oldham, Report on the Geology of parts of Manipur and the Ndga Hills ;
op. cit., 1883, XIX, pp. 217-242, map.



CH. vii] BARAIL CHAINS. ABAKAN 463

Recent Tertiary deposits extend from the outer slope of the Barail chains
up to the plateau of Shillong, and even in the south-west, where the
heights diverge towards Cachar, a horizontally stratified region of Tertiary
beds appears between them. Their thickness is very considerable ; many
years ago it was suggested by Mcdlicott and Blanford that they may have
been formed of ancient debris derived directly from the Himalaya, and
that it was the compulsion of these sediments into the strike of the Burmese
chain, in other words their incoi-poration into this system of folds, which
caused the defiexion of the Brahmaputra to the north side of the plateau
of Shillong^.

The mountains of Lushai run to the south ^ in very regular parallel
ranges as far as Pegu ; Theobald has made a survey of this district, which,
in spite of much uncertainty with regard to the age of the sediments, affords
us very valuable information

We will confine ourselves for the present to the western chain or the
chain of Arakan. It is a singAv> long fold, which proceeds from the northern
chains down to Cape Negrais ; its height sinks already in 17" 30' to about
1,400 feet, and towards the south becomes still less. An older series is
present, which from the presence of Halobia and Cardita is correlated with
the Trias of the Himfilaya ; Cretaceous, as indicated by Schloenbach ia inflata,
occurs on the western flank near Sandoway ; a considerable thickness of
shales devoid of fossils, massive sandstone, and some lithographic limestone
(Negrais series) forms a large part of the chain, then follow Nummulitic
limestone and more recent Tertiary beds.

The chain as a rule is a simple anticlinal ; the Trias crops out along its
axis from the British frontier to about 19", but just here the arch is broken
towards the east, so that Nummulitic limestone comes in contact with the
Trias; to the south the fracture disappears and with it the Trias, so that
the normally constructed arch extends as far as Cape Negrais ; the most
southerly rock, Puriain Point, east of the mouth of the river Bassein,
consists of Nummulitic beds. At the same time on the east side long
bands of serpentine make their appearance, evidently in continuation of the
band, which commences on the eastern border in 25" 10' N.; these lie approxi-
mately between 19° 20' and 17° 25^. But it is not only tlie»course of the
folding and the great longitudinal extent of the serpentine bands which

* T. D. La Touche, Notes on a Traverse through the Eastern Khasia, .Faintia, and
N. Cachar Hills, op. cit., 1883, XVI, p. 203 ; Manual Gcol. Ind., II, p. 699.

^ * Both to north and south the remarkable parallelism of the chains apijcars. . . . The
peaks of the Uiphum chain, of which Klang-Sang (2,600 feet) is one of the highest,
stand in a wonderfully straight line, so that a single plane table sight meets all the
prominent points for many miles to the south, . . .’ Capt. Tanner, The Lushai Expedition ;
Proc. Geogr. Soc., 1873, XVII, p. 49.

* W. Theobald, On the Geology of Pegu ; Mem. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1873, X, pp. 189-359,
map.



464 SYNTAXIS OP THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [pabt ii

reveal the connexion between these chains: on the upper course of the
river Dahing, which flows out of the N&ga hills, in 27"* 30^ salt springs and
petroleum are known, and these recur in several places, as for instance on
the island of Bardnga, at the mouth of the Kolemin, on the islands of
B^mri and Cheduba, where they are accompanied by mud volcanos, and as
far as Cape Negrais. They are also present on the east side of these chains.
Near Minbu on the Irawadi (lat. 20^ N.) a mud volcano is known, and
a large number of salt and petroleum springs occur as far as the sea. On
both sides of the mountains they appear to belong to the Nummulitic beds
or the middle Tertiary

The combination of these characters, the long band of unfossiliferous
sandstone and shales, at most of Cretaceous age, the salt springs, the
occurrence of petroleum, the mud volcanos and the serpentines so forcibly
recall the Carpathians, the Caucasus, and certain parts of the Apennines,
that in Europe such a chain, notwithstanding the local outcrops of Trias,
would be assigned to the Flysch. Among the mountains of India it is the
chains of Sind which, with all their differences, resemble it most closely.
The chain of Arakan does not, however, reach its termination at Cape
Negrais. All observers, who since the time of Bink have studied the
islands of the bay of Bengal, agree that it is continued through Preparis
island and Cocos island on to the Andaman and the Nicobar islands. The
strike is the same, the rocks also are the same, serpentine (here often
associated with gabbro and greenstone), sandstone, shales, and younger
Tertiary deposits, in broken folds, and surrounded by coral reefs forming
these islands.

* W. Theobald, Salt Springs of Pegu, op. cit., 1873, VI, pp. 67-73, map ; Mallet, Mud
Volcanoes of Rdmri and Cheduba, op. cit., 1878, XI, pp. 188-223, maps ; and Note
on a recent Eruption in Ramri Island, op. cit., 1879, XII, pp. 70-72. Petroleum also
appears in the Punjab and at isolated points in Sind ; in conclusion we must mention
the mud volcanos of the sea-coast west of the mouths of the Indus, but the zones are
nowhere so continuous as in, this chain.

* F. Stoliezka, Die Andamancn, Verh. geol. Reichsanst., 1868, p. 192 ; V. Ball, Notes on
the Geology of the Vicinity of Port Blair, Andaman Islands, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Beng., 1870,
XXXIX, pp. 231-239, and Brief Notes on the Geology and the Fauna in the Neighbour-
hood of Nancowiy Harbour, Nicobar, tom. cit., pp. 25-37; Medlicottand Blanford, Manual
of the Geology "of India, II, pp. 732-736 ; G. E. Bulger, A Visit to Port Blair and
M. Harriet, Andaman Islands, Canad. Nat., 1876, VIII, pp. 95-103 ; further: H.Rink, Die
Nikobarischen Inseln, 8vo, Kopenhagen, 1847, map, and F. v. Hochstetter, Beitrftge
zur Geologie und physik. Geographic der Nikoba]>lnseln, Reise dcr Fregatte Novara,
Geol. Theil, II, 1866, pp. 83-112, map; C. Schwager, Fossile Foraminiferen von Ear
Nikobar, tom. cit., pp. 187-268, pi. Lydekker shows that the teeth of Diodon which occur
in the Tertiary of the island of Ramri correspond with those of the sandstone of Fort Blair,
Andaman Islands : Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1880, XIII, p. 59. Hochstetter (p. 98) has
correlated these serpentines with the Tertiary serpentines of Italy, and Neumayr
compares the whole chain to the Greek Flysch : Bittner, Neumayr, and Teller, Ueberblick
der geol. Verhaltnisse cines Theiles der Aegftischen Etistenl&nder, Denkschr. Akad. Wise.
Wien, 1880, XL, p. 405.



CH. vii] BUBMESE VOLCANOS 465

In following this western zone of the Burmese chains, we have passed
from lat. 27® 30' to lat. 7® N. ; we will now leave it for a time and turn
our attention to the central zone. By this we understand the whole
region between the east border of the chain of Arakan, discussed above,
and the eastern bank of the Sit-taung and of the Panboung, which flows
into the Irawadi near Ava. It is, however, extremely probable that this
zone is continued to the north, scarcely altered in breadth, far beyond the
region of Bhaino; towards the south it comprises the whole of the sea
basin lying between the Andamans and Nicobars on the west and the
Malay peninsula on the east.

The first feature to arrest attention is a series of recent volcanos.

In the midst of the plain of the Irawadi there rises, not far from
iat. 21° N., north-east of the petroleum springs of Y^nfin-Kyoung, and
east of Pagdn, the mighty isolated volcano Ptvppddoung^ which reaches
a height of about 5,000 feet t:bove the sea, while the height of Pag4n on
the Irawadi is only about 300 feet. The ascent has been made by Blanford.
The crater sinks to a depth of albout 2,000 feet ; its wall is breached on the
north side. Ash and lavas spread like a mantle over the adjacent part of
the highland \

Far away to the south, in lat. 16® 22' to the south of Nga-pu-tau on the
lower Bassein, there rises above a stream of water bordered by old Tertiary
beds the C1u)uk-talon, or ‘lonely stone,’ a small rock of trachyte which
represents a dyke or a subsidiary eruptive centre

The further continuation of this line is formed by the well-known
volcanos of Narconditin (13° 24') and Barren island (12® 17') •*.

Apart from these volcanos the middle zone consists of three parts,
namely, the valley of the Irawadi, that of the Sit-taung, and the long Pegu
Yomah, which separates these two valleys.

The whole of the Pegu Yomah, the highest part of which, situated in
17° 55', is said to reach 2,0(K) feet, consists, according to Theobald, of
younger Tertiary beds thrown into gentle folds, ancf traversed by the eroded
river valleys. Near the sea the deltas of the two rivers meet, the Pegu
Yomah terminating near Kangoon ; but in proportion as the plain of the
rivers becomes narrower towards the north, the Tertiary, range grows
broader, so that from about lat. 19® it forms the whole of the central
zone.

These Tertiary deposits are rich in marine shells; but we must

^ W. T. Blanford, Account of a Visit to Fuppadoung, an extinct Volcano in Upper
Burma; Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bcng., 1863, XXXI, pp. 215'- 226, pi. Anderson quotes a volcano
still further to the north in 25'’ ; this lies, however, outside the region Vhich 1 propose
to discuss.

^ Theobald, (leologj of Pegu ; tom. cit., p. 142.

* G. V. Liebig, Barren Island, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1858, X, pp. 299-304, pi. ;
V. Ball, Barren Island and Narkondam, Rec. Geol. Sui-v. Ind., 1878, VI, pp. 81-90.



456 SYNTAXIS OP THE MOUNTAINS OF INDIA [part ii

distinguish them from a more recent series which, while it contains true
sharks’ teeth, bearing witness to a communication with the sea, yet also
includes a great quantity of silicificd trunks of trees and the remains of
a terrestrial fauna comparable to that of the Siwdlik hills. From the
description given by Theobald it would appear that this, more recent
stage rests against the marine beds at a lower level. —

From these facts we may conceive the past history of the Burmese
chains to have been as follows: —

The formation of the depression which separates the Flysch zone of
Arakan from the ancient rocks in the east must date from the middle
of the Tertiary period. The sea which deposited the sediments of the
Pegu Yomah extended very far to the north, forming a prolongation of
the existing gulf of Pegu. During the subsidence of the strand the
fluviatile and estuarine deposits were formed, in which the fauna of
Siwfilik is enclosed. This fauna corresponds most closely in age with
that of the Pontic period. With further subsidence the existing state
of things was brought about. The height at which the sea originally
stood above the land cannot however be determined, since the elevation
of the Pegu Yomah has been produced in part by folding ; Bhamo on the
Irawadi, more than 8 degrees of latitude north of the mouth of the river,
lies only 430 feet above the sea.

Some resemblance may be found here to a much more limited region
in Europe; the middle zone of Burma may be compared to the intra-
Alpine depression of Vienna, which, partially separated from the outer
region of the Alps by the fragments and spurs of the Flysch zone, must
have resembled during the middle Tertiaiy period the ancient gulf
of Pegu.

The eastern zone has been much less explored. We know, however,
that the first chain, the Poungloung range, which rises to the east above
the river Sit-taung, consists of Archaean rocks, l)ut that near Moulmeiri
on the Salwin an extensive mass of Palaeozoic deposits appears. The
limestone rocks whicli belong to the upper stage of these deposits have
furnished Carboniferous fossils. It seems, according to Theobald, as
though these. Palaeozoic beds, isolating the Poungloung chain, are con-
tinued far to the north in the valley of Salwin, and in the south find their
further prolongation in the steep limestone rocks which form the Mergui
archipelago \

The Archaean rocks, which are known in Tenasserim east of the
Palaeozoic zone of Mergui, form the isthmus of Krau, and all existing
descriptions seem to indicate that the whole south of the peninsula is
formed of granite, Archaean schist, and Palaeozoic beds. In any cfilse.


' Theobald, Geology of Pegu ; tom. cit., p. 223, Manual Geol. Ind., II, p; 709.



SUMATRA


467


CH. vii]

according to Tenison-Woods, the general structure of the country does not
.coincide exactly with the strike of this southern part. On the contrary,
a western group of parallel chains occurs in Perak, which begins in the
state of Kedah, and produces the broadening out of the peninsula: this
group includes also Penang and the Dinging islands ; it runs north-north-
east to south-south-west and rises to a height of almost 7,000 feet. To
the east of the river Perak a shorter chain succeeds, running north and
south ; to the east of this again rises the principal chain Near Singapore
granite occurs, accompanied by other massive rocks, ancient sandstones
and shales; the direction is north-west*.

Sumatra. The sea of Pegu, the continuation of the great Tertiary
gulf of the Irawadi, narrows towards the south; the great island of
Sumatra juts forth, and upon it the rocks of the Nicobar islands find a
meeting-place with those of the peninsula of Malacca, as we can perceive
from the works of Dutch geologists.

Indeed the valuable researches of Ycrbcck and his colleagues show us
that few new elements appear in Sumatra ^ Extensive masses of older
schists are present, more recent intrusive granite, shales and limestones
of the Carboniferous system, a series of eruptive greenstones, particularly
diorite and diabase, a fairly diversified Tertiary series, finally middle
Tertiary andesites and great modern volcanos.

The whole line of the islands to the west, from Pulu Babi and the
island of Pulu Nias, famous for its rich beds of coal, through the Mentawei
islands as far as Pulu Engano, consists of Tertiary deposits, and thus forms
an independent exterior zone. On Sumatra itself, of which it is true the
southern and central parts alone are known in detail, the rocks mentioned
above are thrown into numerous folds and intensely fractured. These
rocks are traversed by two very long volcanic lines trending in exactly
the same direction as the island itself, i.e. to the north-west. The first
of these runs close to the west coast ; it is of Miocene^age and is marked by
a long series of outcrops of andesite. The second line is the great axis
of the existing volcanos. This extends over the whole length of the
island, which amounts to 1,117 kilometers, and from lat. 6° S. to lat. T N.,
or as far as detailed observations extend, it is crossed by no less*than twelve

' J. Errington de la Croix, Le Royaumo de Pcirak, Bull. Soc. geogr., 1883, 7‘* scr., IV,
pp. 333-352, maps ; J. E. Tenison-Woods, Geology p the Malayan Peninsula, Nature,
1884, p. 76, and Mountain System of the Malayan ^ ^ninsula, tom. cit., p. 264.

* J. R. Logan, Notice of the Geology of the Sf j,its of Singapore ; Quart. Journ. Geol.
Soc., 1851, VII, pp. 310-344, map. L. v. Ldezi says that the appearance of the sediments
which overlie the granite near Singapore resembles that of the Alpine ^^lysch: FOldt.
Kdzl., Sitzg. ung. geol. Ges. v. 5. Jan. 1881.

* We will only mention the last and most important work ; R. D. M. Verbeek, Topogr.
en geol. Beschrijving van un Gedeelte van Sumatra’s Westkust, 8vo, Batavia, 1883, Atlas
in 8vo and 4to. The petroleum springs of the north recur on Sumatra.



468 SYNTAXIS OF THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [pabt ii

short transverse clefts, which resemble those of the volcanic zone of
central America (Fig. 5, p. 93), though not so regularly arranged.
Standing over. this system of fissures as far as lat. 2° N. are fifty-nine
volcanos at present known to us, and if we include those of the first
transverse cleft, which runs past Erakatoa to the Goeneng Pajoeng at
the north-west comer of Java, the number rises to sixty-six. Of these
eight are known to be active, among them the notorious Erakatoa, Dempo,
3,167 meters in height, Eorincha, about 3,600 meters, and others. In addition
several other eruptive centres certainly exist in the north of the island \

Here we have a case not of caldron-like in-breaks on the inner side of
a folded chain, but of longitudinal fracture of the chain itself, and that
on the grandest scale. The older line of fracture dating from the middle
Tertiary period lies to the west of the present zone of volcanos, and conse-
quently outside it, for both lines are distinctly convex towards the south-
west, following the direction of the great Malay arc. The modern volcanos
rest on the previously formed folded mountains, and the foot of their
ash cones adapts itself to the valleys eroded in them, a conclusive proof
that their appearance is a much later phenomenon, subsequent to
the folding of the mountains, or at most accompanying only its latest
phases.

The network of fissures, however, seems to indicate that the whole
island will one day be broken up, as its prolongations have been already ;
and if this general collapse should really take place and these or perhaps
fresh volcanos should continue to build up their ash cones from the bottom
of the subsidence, then nothing finally would be left to view on the site
of the folded mountains but a number of volcanic islands, like Barren
island and Narcondam.

Java is indeed a double series of such volcanos, superposed on a
Tertiary base, with some Flysch and serpentine; many years elapsed
before even isolated traces of the older schists of Sumatra were discovered
on this great island 2 . To the east of Java the destruction of the great
arc-shaped chain has advanced even further, and its fragments extend
beyond Timor. Their detailed investigation does not now concern us. —

Martin not unjustly points out that the line drawn by Wallace on
faunistic evidence to the east of Bali and Borneo as the boundary between
Asia and Australia finds no confirmation in the geological structure of the
islands

Quite as little, however, in the case of the West Indian islands, does the

^ Verbeek, op. cit., pp. 398 et seq., Atlas, 8vo, pi. xii.

‘ Verbeek and R. Fennema, Nouveaux faits g^ologiques observes k Java; Arch. N4ert.,
1881, XVI, pp. 48-64.

’ K. Martin, Die wichtigsten Daten unserer geolog. Kenntnisse vom Niederlandisch-
ostindischen Archipel ; Bijdr. tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenk. en Ned. Ind. uitp. t. Geleg*
van het VI. Intern. Congress d. Orientalist, te Leiden, s'Gravenhage, 1883, p. 27.



469


cH.vn] SUMMAEY: THE INDIAN SYNTAXES

boundary between Anguilla and St. Christopher, indicated by the terrestrial
Mollusca, coincide with a geological boundary. There, too, the dividing line
passes transversely across chains of islands which form parts of the same
mountain range. This is characteristic of separation caused by subsidence,
and is in accordance with an earlier asscrtion^of Wallace, that the Malay
archipelago ‘ presents the characteristics of a broad continent with special
fauna and flora, which has been gradually and ii^egularly broken up
Under these circumstances, and considering the great depth of the sea
between these islands, very little importance must be attached to the very
general but inconsiderable oscillations of the strand-line, which belong to
another group of phenomena. This is the same result which we obtained
by another method in the case of the Mediterranean.

Summary. Four great arcs advance towards the south, which we
have termed the Iranian arc, the arc of the Hindu Kush, the arc of the
Him&laya, and the Malay arc. They meet in face of the Indian table-
land, which stands opposed to ^them as a foreign mass and separates
them. The movement towards the south is most strongly expressed
in the two middle curves and indeed in the overthrusting of the
whole stratified series, which thus appears inverted for great distances.
In the southern parts of the Iranian arc on the Indus, as well as in the
southern part of the Malay arc in Arakan, only long anticlinal folds have
been formed without overturning; in the valley of the Brahmaputra,
however, opposite the border of the Himalaya ovcrfolded towards the
south-east, an overfokling of the Malay border has taken place and in
the opposite direction, namely to the north-west.

Similar as arc these arcs themselves in their course and character, yet the
areas they lx)und, which fonn as it were their hinderland, are not precisely
homologous.

The plateau of Iran, as far as it is known, presents the same succession
of strata as the outer curve. In the west there is complete parallelism
between the north-west continuation of the Albourz and the Zdgros
chains, and we shall soon sec that on the south-east shore of the Caspian
sea two gently curved interior arcs meet one another. The Iranian
arc is thus only the outer part of a great plain traversed by folds
arranged in a uniform manner, and this plain is homologous with the
border itself.

The chains of the Hindu Kush — from the Salt range and the Tertiary
folds and flexures of the south through Hazfira, and the lofty chains which

* ‘Gradually and irregularly broken up:’ A. R. Wallace, On the Physical Geography
of the Malay Archipelago, Journ. Geogr. Soc., 1863, XXXIII, p. 233. According to this
view the Philippines were first detached, Java much later, a little later still Sumatra and
Borneo ; finally the islands south of Singapore as far as Baiica and Biliton : Wallace,
Island Life, 8vo, 1880, p. 362.



460 SYNTAXIS OF THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA [part ii

succeed them so far as they arc known, through these to the P&mir and
the Thian-shan — likewise reveal themselves as parts of a great general
system of folds, which extend from the far north to the low-lying plain of
the Indus, in a state of extreme compression, to which the frequent changes
in trend of the Salt range bear witness.

The Himalaya also belong to a very broad region, which has been
subjected to a uniform movement, and the overfolding of its outer border
is repeated, at least in its western part, far to the north, even on the
southern border of the Mustfigh, to the north of Kfirdkoram, and even it
would seem as far as the point where the north-west part of the limestone
zone of the Kdrdkoram enters the Pdmir. In this folded region we also
include the western Kuen-luen, but where this swerves to the north-west
transgressions of Cretaceous deposits occur at its northern foot, and these
afford grounds for the conjecture that it is a foreign mass with a different
succession of strata, situated beneath the valley of the Tarim, which has
caused the deflexion of this mighty chain and its divergence from the
Thian-shan.

Further to the cast, however, this divergence no longer exists. Prze-
walski has shown how north of the Kuen-luen the mighty chains of the
Altyn^Tagh and Nan-shdn insert themselves, and the picture which this
enterprising traveller has drawn of the country between the meridian of
Lob Nor and that of Kuku Nor, and from lat. 32® to 46° N., shows (through
10 degrees of longitude and 18 degrees of latitude) a uniform development
of nearly parallel chains. Subsidiary parallel chains occur even in the
middle of the desert of Gobi. This vast region comprises a part of the
Mongolian mountains, the eastern Thian-shan, the desert of Gobi south
of Chami, Altyn-Tagh and Nan-shan with the Humboldt mountains,
the South Kukumor chain, Kuen-luen with its ancillary chains and the
mountains to the south of it. Tan-la and also Ssamtyn-Kansyr of the
Tibetan Himalaya. All these chains run to the east and slightly south,
with secondary deflexions to the east or east-north-cast, whereby occasional
intersection results, and an elongated more or less net-like arrangement, in
which, however, the great general direction to the east, somewhat south, is
still clearly • manifest. Only the Ritter chain, a short isolated transverse
branch on the south side of the Nan-shan, appears as running to the
north-east

The explorations of the Pundits — especially those of the intrepid Nain-
Ssing, who obtained Cretaceous fossils from Lake Namcho, 120 kilometers
north of Lhassa — show, however, that it is the same system of folds which,
assuming an arc-like form, extends to the outer border of the Him&laya,

' N. Przewalski, Third Journey into Central Asia, IV : from Lake Saisan to Tibet (in
Russian), 4to, Petersb., 1883 ; the map also appeared on a reduced scale in Petermann's
geogr. Mitth., 1883, pi. ix ; also Przewalski, Northern Tibet, tom. cit., pp. 14-23.



THE PACIFIC SYNTAXIS


OH. vn]


461


where it forms, in the meridian of Lob Nor, the overfolding of the lx)rder
in Bhutan

This region probably possesses the greatest breadth of any uniformly
folded region in the world; measured perpendicularly to the folds it
extends from Bhutan into Mongolia, i. e. through more than 22 degrees of
latitude or about a quarter of a terrestrial quadrant. —

The Burmese chains advance very far to the north-north-west; the
way in which they encounter the great east to west chains is not known,
but we hope for information on this point from Szechdny and Lciczi, who
have travelled through their northern part. This remarkable journey led
the explorers into the great folded region on the nortliern declivity of the
Nan-shan and on the Kuku Nor, of which we have just made mention, and
Kreitner*s preliminary report lends confirmation to the view that a large
part of the chains seen by Przewalski, which run to the east-south-east,
and especially those between the Himalaya and the Kuen-luen, bend from
east-south-east to south-east and south-south-east, and finally to the south
towards Ta-li-fu and Bhamo. In* this case there would be no syntaxis of
the Himalaya with the Malay arc, but the Malay arc would be the
prolongation of the interior chains of Tibet

We. know that in the north a considerable number of closely crowded
parallel chains occur, while further to the south a part of these has disap-
peared beneath the plain of the Irawadi and the sea of Pegu. In the
interior of the Malay arc, however, Mesozoic plant-bearing beds appear,
which correspond to a part of the Gondwfina scries of the Indian penin-
sula®. Many circumstances seem to indicate that Cochin-China and
Tonkin are ancient table-lands. It is by this that the Malay arc is funda-
mentally distinguished from the western arcs. A fresh difficulty thus
arises in tracing the connexion of the mountain ranges. Added to this is
the subsidence of great chains beneath the sea, and the incomplete state of
our knowledge. Australia is a table-land surrounded by a mountain arc
of which only the ruins are visible as New ZealandT and New Caledonia;
these fragments appear under peculiar conditions, and the direction of the
arc is different from that of those previously considered. In eastern China,
Richthofen has made us acquainted with extensive table-lands ; •n the other
hand the course of the islands off the coast indicates new syntactic ranges ex-
tending from Formosa through the Liu-Kiu islands to Kiushiu,then through


' 0. Feistmantel, On the Occurrence of the Cretaceous Genus Omphalia near Namcho
Lake, about 75 miles north of Lhassa ; Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind., 1877, X, pp. 21-25.

* G. Kreitner, Im fernen Osten ; Reisen des Grafen B. Szechenyi in Indieii, Japan,

China, Tibet u. Burma, 8vo, Wien, 1881, pi. iii. '

* Ratte, Note sur ITndo-Chine, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1876, 3;^ ser., IV, pp. 509-521 ;
Petiton, Carte geol. du Cochin-Chine, op. cit., 1883, 3’ ser., XI, pi. viii ; K. Fuchs,
Comptes rend., 10 July, 1882, p. 107, and Zeiller, tom. cit., 24 July, 1882, p. 194;
Zeiller, Flore du Tonking, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1883, 3^ ser., XI, p. 436 et scq. et pasBim.



462 SYNTAXIS OF THE MOUNTAINS OP INDIA

Nipon to Yesso, thence through the Kuriles to Kamschatka, finally through
the Aleutian islands and Alaska towards Eenai.and to the syntexis with
the north-west extremity of the American mountain chains.

A series of syntactic arcs thus advances from north-west, north, and
north-east towards the North Pacific Ocean in the same way as a similar
series advances towards the Indian peninsula. A very remarkable tectonic
homology exids between the tabledand of India and the northern part of the
Pacific Ocean

For several reasons, however, I shall reserve a more detailed discussion
of eastern Asia for a later chapter. To facilitate this task we shall precede
it by a description of the best known table-land occupying a position
between mountain chains, namely the Colorado Plateau in North
America, and by a preliminary account of the peculiar features of the
stratified succession in some other table-lands. Then it will be possible to
consider the borders of the Pacific as a whole and to study the remarkable
contrast they present to those of the Atlantic Ocean.


AU



The Relation of Europe to Asia.

t See Cap.VI.Notel )


CHAPTER VIII


THE EELATION OF THE ALPS TO THE MOUNTAINS

OF ASIA'

The object of this chapter. Thian-shan by J. Muschketoif. Western branches of the
Thian-shan. Nuru-tau, Scheich-Djeli, Mangischlik, Coal-field of the Donetz. Paro-
pamisuB, Ehorassan, Kopet-dagb, Balkan, Caucasus, Crimea. Matschin. Balkans and
Carpathians. Albourz, Iranian-Tauric syntazis. Dinaric chain. Explanation of the
vortical arrangement of the Alps. Ural, Fae>choi, and Timan. Summary.

We now approach the most difficult part in our comparative study of
the course 6f great mountain chains. Two extensive regions have so far
been discussed, the system of the Alps in the west and the Asiatic arcs in
the east, both of which have received their form from tangential movements,
but the arrangement of the trend-lines in these two regions is, in appearance
at least, entirely different. The question thus arises, In what way do these
two systems of trend encounter each other?

We must first consider more closely the principal latitudinal chain of
the interior of Asia, the Thian-shan, and trace the course of its western
ramifications towards Europe. We must then inquire whether with the
termination of the Carpathians in Transylvania we have really reached the
end of those lines which form part of the vortical arrangement of the Alps.
Finally we must turn our attention to the south, and seek to determine
whether the Iranian arc is really the most westerly of the syntactic arcs, or
whether we shall meet with a further repetition of this feature in Europe.

* The orthography of the names of places adopted in the preceding chapter, in
conformity with the English literature, on which that chapter was principally based, has
been abandoned here, where Russian and German sources have been drawn upon.
I admit the inconsistency arising from this method of procedure, but there was no means
of avoiding it; cf. Bull. Acad. Petersb., 1861, pp. 158-175. Further, for the sake of
clearness, I have considered it necessary to call the volcanic summit of the Caucasus
Elbrus^ and the mountain range of North Iran in contradistinction Alhtfi's, The little
map, PI. V, indicates in rough diagrammatic lines some of the most important trend-
lines of the Asiatic-European mountain ranges. It is intended to show approximately
the manner in which the earliest outlines of the Mediterranean (/, /), of the Sarmatian
sea, and the latest subsidences are related to these lines. We observe the significance
of the tripartite Caspian, and the position of the Sarmatian sea outside the area of the
Aegean subsidence. The Ural has not been represented, in order not to interfere with
the general view of the branches of the Thian-shan, already distorted b'y projection.
The Tauric-Iranian syntaxis is indicated only by a few lines ; the ranges are too much
covered by volcanic formations for complete representation. [In the case of well-known
place-names the translator has adopted the customary English spelling. Elbrus is
modified into Elbruz, and Alburs into Albourz.]



464 EUROPE AND ASIA [oh.viii

From this analysis it will, I hope, be possible to show in what the essential
nature of the Alpine arrangement consists. In conclusion the Ural, Pae-
choi, and the Timan range will be discussed.

The way is long, but there exists none shorter ; by this method alone
can the peculiar relations of the great mountain chains of this continent
be illustrated and the significance of the intervening chains, such as the
Caucasus, Taurus, Balkans, and Pindus, explained.

With so vast a subject the description must be strictly confined to
ascertained facts, and even of these only the most important can be
discussed.

Thian-shan will serve as a starting-point, and here I retire with pleasure
in favour of a specially competent authority, and insert a description of the
chief features in the structure of this extensive and lofty chain, which
Professor Muschketofi*, who is best qualified to speak on the subject, has had
the kindness to communicate to me.

Thian-ahan {by Profesaor J. Musckkeloff) ’ . ' Under the name Thian-shan
is comprised a whole system of differeift mountain chains striking as a
whole from west-south-west to east-north-east. This system has its origin in
the desert of Gobi, near the town of Barkul, as a comparatively low narrow
chain, which however stands out in sharp relief from the desolate plain
around it. Towards the west it constantly increases both in height and
breadth, while it splits up into several nearly parallel chains ; at the same
time it gives off branches in a north-westerly direction which may often be
regarded as independent chains.

‘ Near the head waters of the Kunges, almost opposite Yuldus, the range
of Eiran-Chabirgan or Boro-khoro branches off, and this, together with the
Dzungarian Ala-tau, occupies the whole of the northern half of the district of
Kuldja. It is connected by the Burlik-tau with the north-western Tarbatagai.

‘To the west of the peak Tengri Khan (22,500 feet) branching and
at the same time an increase in breadth may bo observed in a still
greater degree ; these attain their maximum on the meridian of Kashgar,
where the whole breadth of the Thian-shan amounts to not less than
300 kilometers. In this region not less than four nearly parallel chains
may be dijjbinguished, apart from some unimportant ranges: these are
(1) the Trans-Ilian Ala-tau, (2) Kungei Ala-tau, (3) Terskei Ala-tau, and
(4) Kokshal. The fii-st of these, near the celebrated defile of Buam, joins
the mountains of Tchu-Ili or Suek-tubc, which, like the Boro-khoro, run to
the north-west. It terminates at the southern end of lake Balkash.

^ The communication here produced in full was kindly addressed to me by Prof.
Muschketoff as early as 1881, not long after his return. 1 have lately had the pleasure
of receiving further and more detailed accounts of this range, which will be found in the
work on Turkestan now being passed through the press by Prof. MuschketofT. They
have proved a rich source of information, and I have made use of them in some of the
following passages.



OH. vni] THE BRANCHES OP THE THIAN-SHAN 466

* The second range, Eungei Ala-tau, bears further to the west the name
of Alexander mountains, and near the town of Aulie Ata unites with the
n6rth-westem chain, Kara-tau, which runs parallel to the Tchu-Ili range.

' The two last-named chains, namely Terskei Ala-tau and Kokshal, begin
near the Tangri Khan and diverge from one another towards the west like
the prongs of a fork : the intervening space is occupied by mountain ranges
of the second rank which attain in places an extremely great height, as for
example the Ak-Shjrak covered by many glaciers and the mountains of
Son-kul, Baural-bash, At-bash, &c. Of the valleys which separate these
chains that of the Naryn, the upper river of the Syr Darja, is distinguished
by its great extent.

* The Terskei Ala-tau is continued in the Susamir-tau and terminates to
the west in a whole series of parallel chains, Talaskei Ala-tau, Chotkal,
and the Namangan mountains. Kokshal is continued under the names of
Kurpe-tau and Suek-tau as far as the Alai chain, the connecting link between
the system of Thian-shan and the Pamir.

‘ The Ferghana mountains, oh the meridian of Suek, run in a north-
westerly direction between the Alai and the chains of Namangan and
Chotkal just mentioned. They form the eastern boundary of the district
of Ferghana, while the Namangan and Chotkal limit it on the north and
the Alai on the south. Towards the west they also run out to the north-
west, like the little range of Kasj-kurt and the long Nura-tau, a branch of
the Turkestan mountains, which in their turn must be regarded as a con-
tinuation of the Alai range.

‘ Parallel to the Alai range run the Sa-Alai (Trans-Alai), and further to
the west the Hissar mountains and the mountains of Peter the Great.
They all break up into a number of radially diverging ranges of trifling
extent and height, which advance into the plain of Bokhara. The radially
divergent western branches of the Thian-shan system lose themselves
gradually in the depression of Turan.

‘ All these numerous ranges may be comprised in fliree groups : (1) those
which strike east-north-east ; these are by far the larger part and deter-
mine the direction of the whole system of the Thian-shan ; (2) those with
a north-westerly direction ; they form the western branches ^f the prin-
cipal chains ; and (3) those running to the west, few in number and only
occurring as ranges of the second order. Where ranges of the first group
encounter those of the second, they regularly bend away from the latter,
with their convex side turned to the south ; at the same time the slopes
facing the north are steeper than those on the south ; the northern slopes
present a greater development of massive rocks than the southern, which
in their turn show a more regular system of folds. These relations more-
over hold generally for all the chains of the Thian-shan in their whole
extent, but it is at the points of union that they are most clearly displayed.

■OLLAS U h



466


EUEOPE AND ASIA


[PABT II


'In the composition of the mountains Palaeozoic formations, including
the Carboniferous limestone, play the largest part, and next metamorphic
and massive rocks ; isolated deposits of younger formations occur to a slight
extent in the mountain valleys and always rest unconformably on the
Palaeozoic. The following have been recorded : Trias, Jurassic (rich in coal),
Cretaceous, and Tertiary: the last named is represented by friable lime-
stones, sandstone, and siliceous conglomerates.

‘All these sediments, like the Eocene of Ladakh in the Him&laya, have
been observed at considerable heights in the mountain valleys (in the Alai at
an elevation of from 10,000-11,000 feet), but they are chiefly developed at the
foot of the mountains, next the plain, and may be seen very clearly exposed
in the river valleys, e.g. in the Ferghana region, in Euldja, &c., and in the
south-west of Bokhara and in Hissar, where they form whole mountain
ranges. They are distributed over the entire adjoining plain, towards the
west as far as the sea of Aral and the Caspian, towards the east as far as
the Lob Nor ; they surround the whole of the Thian-shan in a continuous
girdle, and it is only at the extreme eastern end, near the town of Barkul,
that they have not yet been recorded ; but this locality is still unexplored
by geologists.

‘ These sediments play an important part in central Asia, since the friable
Tertiary sandstones furnish material for the shifting sand, which is spread
by the wind over vast areas and gives to the deserts their peculiar character ;
and some interest attaches. to the fact that it was the combustion of the
thick beds of Jurassic coal which led Humboldt to assert the existence of
active volcanos in central Asia, an error which has unfortunately survived
to the present day. At every spot where the great naturalist, trusting to
the reports furnished by the Chinese, has indicated the existence of volcanos
or solfataras, burning Jurassic coal-measures have been- observed, as for
instance in Euldja, Urumtchi, Turfan, Eutchi, &c., i. e. both to the north
and south of the Thian-shan.

‘As regards the massive rocks, in the Thian-shan they are of most
various kinds and occur between the metamorphic and Palaeozoic regions,
but with an extension and development which varies in the diflerent chains.
Thus, granitp, granitite, syenite, granite porphyry, orthoclase porphyry,
felsite, gabbro, &c., predominate in the massive chains running to the
north-east; diabase, mclaphyre, dolerite, teschenite, porphyrite, &c., in
those running to the north-west; diorite, gneiss, &c., in those directed
from west to east. The crystalline rocks prevail almost everywhere on the
steep and concave slopes facing the north ; thus, on the north slope of the
Trans-Ilian mountains, felsite porphyry, orthoclase porphyry, spherulitic
and quartz porphyries occur; the same is the case in the Tchu-Ili
mountains; syenite and diorite appear on the north slope of the Terskei
Ala-tau; mclaphyre and diabase on the north slope of the Aigjr-tau;



467


CH. vm] EOCKS OP THE THIAN-SHAN

melaphyreonthe north-east slope of the Kara-tau ; augite porphyry on the
north-west slope of the Talas Ala-tau mountains and on the north slope of
the Sonkul mountains ; diabase on the north-east slope, augite porphyry
and andesite on the north slope of the Kara-teke and near Suek ; further
to the south on the river Toyun, basalts occur.

' With regard to the latter extrusions I may observe that although the
rocks which appear to the south of lake Tchatyr-kul are undoubtedly of
volcanic origin, yet this fact in no way affects what has been said above as
to Humboldt’s views, since these rocks were not erupted in recent times,
but by ancient volcanos of Tertiary age ; the same is true of the dolerite
of the Eiren Chabirgan, of the Karakasyk in the Alai mountains, the
toschenite of the Kasj-kurt, &c.

* The occurrence of volcanic rocks to the south of the Thian-shan seems
to contradict the general statements which have been made as to the
distribution of the massive rocks ; but this is only in appearance, for these
rocks occur on the north slope of the Kokshal or Suek-tau and on its
western prolongation, that is, under the same conditions as all the other
massive rocks in the Thian-shan. In the same way teschenite appears on
the north slope of the Kasj-kurt; gabbro, melaphyrc, and granite on the
north slope of the Alai mountains; so that everywhere in the Thian-shan
the same relations prevail, save for a few exceptions in ranges of no
importance.

‘ As regards the age of the Thian-shan mountains, the massive nortJi-east
chains are older than the others, but the epoch of their formation can
scarcely be more remote than the Trias; the more recent north-west chains
probably arose after the close of the Tertiary period, simultaneously with
an important increase of the already existing elevations, since, as we have
said above, Tertiary deposits appear at very considerable heights. It was
thus not till after the Tertiary period that the Thian-shan received its final
form, and certain indications lead us to suppose that elevation is still
proceeding at the present day ; these indications are,*however, only indirect
and open to doubt.

' In conclusion it follows from the account we have now given that the
Thian-shan stand in reversed relations to the Alps. In the latter the trend
of the chains- is convex to the north, in the Thian-shan to the south ; tliere
the southern slopes are steep, here the northern ; there massive rocks
prevail on the southern slopes, here on the northern. But the connexion
which has been shown to exist between these various phenomena in the
Alps, Carpathians, and other chains is no less manifest in the Thian-shan ;
which likewise present a great uniformity in the strike of the folds
and the direction of curvature. The massive rocks have played a purely
passive part in the formation of the Thian-shan ; a line joining the various
places of intrusion coincides in no way with the direction of the crest. As

H h 9



468


EUROPE AND ASIA


[PABT II

regards this point numerous observations have been made in the Thian-shan
analogous to those made by yourself and Professor Heim in the Alps/ —

Thus far MuschkctofTs description. It leads above all to the important
result, that the tangential movement of the syntactic Indian arcs, having
on the whole a direction to the south, is also manifested in the long ranges
of the Thian-shan, and that in the whole interior of Asia this movement to
the south is the dominant factor; to this, indeed, the continent owes
its form.

Of the branches of the Thian-shan enumerated as running to the north-
west, two do not come into consideration here, since they do not reach
Europe; these are Boro-khoro with the Tarbagatai, and the Trans-Ilian
Ala-tau with Suek-tube. It is open to inquiry whether the isolated folds,
which appear in the peninsula of Kulandy, on the north-west shore of the
Aral, and the mountains of the Astrakan steppe, which run to the north-
west, such as Tschaptschatschi, for example, and the group of the Great and
Little Bogdo, are not perhaps prolongations of the Eara-tau, which proceeds
from the Alexander mountains in a north-westerly direction ; but these
chains are separated by such a great distance from one another that it
is difficult to decide this question.

On the other hand the continuation to the north-west of that branch of
the Thian-shan which succeeds on the south is particularly clear.

Nura-tau — Mangishlalc. Nura-tau, coming from the Alai, proceeds as
a high snow-covered range with a north-westerly trend towards the steppe
of Kizil-kum and separates the Syr Darja from the Amu Darja. Its further
continuation is formed by the range of Sheich Djeli or Sultan-Ujzdagh, 60
kilometers in length, which reaches the Amu Darja below Khiva. It
consists, according to Barbot, of granite, gneiss, talc schist, chlorite schist,
as well as calc-schist with epidote (pistazite) and marble ; its strike is north-
west (hor. 6-7), its dip very variable, frequently vertical, and the Cretaceous
beds extend unconfonnably up to the summit of the chain \

Remains of the Crfitaceous spared by erosion rise from the delta of the
Amu Darja ; they are the outposts as it were of the Ust-Urt. On the west
side of the great tixble-land, however, a prolongation of the mountains
trending north-west makes its appearance. This forms the peninsula of
Manghhlah It is a regular anticlinal, striking north-west; the middle
region, consisting of unfossiliferous quartzite and clay slate, forms the
Kara-tau ; in the valleys to the north and south the Jurassic formation
and the Cenomanian horizon of the phosphorites crop out ; the two Ak-tau
(i. e. White mountains) to the north and south belong to the upper
Cretaceous. On the summit of the Kara-tau, Barbot observed a horizontal

' N. Barbot do Marny, Letter in Neues Jahrb. f. Min., 1875, pp. 858-861. The calc-
pistazite schist of the Sheich Djeli is described by Inostranzeff in the Verb. russ. Min.
Gesellsch., 1874, 2, Folge, IX, pp. 88-92.



MANGISHLAK


CH. vin]


469


patch of Sarmatian^. This fold would thus be more recent than the
Sheich Djeli.

In connexion with the Mangishlak, Karpinsky distinguished a broad
zone in south Russia, in which dislocations occur in a somewhat north-west
or west-north-west direction ^ ( 7 ^, m, PL V). The first and most striking
example is the folding of the Carboniferous deposits of the Donetz, which
lies precisely in the line of continuation of the Kara-tau on Mangishlak.
The strike for a great distance is to the north-west; borings show that
this coal basin proceeds as far as the river Orel. Other cases of dislocation
with the same strike are known in the governments of Kharkov an<l
Ekaterinoslav, at Isatshki (district Lubny, in the government of Poltava),
and, according to Feofilaktoff, at Kanef on the Dnjepr (government of Kiev);
indeed, this observer includes in the same zone of parallel disturbances the
Sandomir mountains in Poland, which lie in folds striking to the north-
west, but are situated several hundred kilometers distant from Kanef, the
most westerly of the points mendoned.

Whether this assumed connexion should prove to be well grounded or
not, it is at least certain that from the Alai through the Nura-tiiu, Sheich
Djeli, Mangishlak, and the coal-field of the Donetz, a number of subsidiary
disturbances take the same direction. Cretaceous beds also take part in
these disturbances, and Karpinsky justly emphasizes the fact that although
thpy occur in the immediate neighbourhood, yet the Silurian on the Dnjestr
and the Devonian in Orel and Voronezh remain horizontal. Generally
speaking, however, we may distinguish a group of very ancient disturbances
striking north and north-east in^ the Archaean complex — these have been
abraded down to one level and subsequently covered by horizontal Palaeozoic
sediments ; next a group running north-west, parallel to the Caucasus to
which Mangishlak belongs — these are of various age, but certainly of common
origin ; finally a group, perhaps still more recent, represented by the hills of
Ergeni, which run almost meridionally or north-north-east.

It is this second group which corresponds to tho*great Asiatic ranges.

Paropamisus — Caucasus. The gentle curve of the Paropamisus is con-
tinued in a straight line to the north-west through the mountain ranges
of Sarakhs, the Kopet-dagh, and the Kuren-dagh. The letter range is
2,000~3,000 feet high; Sievers, who crossed it near the fortress of Kizil-Arvat,
found Sarmatian foot-hills and, at the summit of the pass, light grey


^ Barbot, loc. cit., p. 859; also G. v. Helmersen, Notiz aber die Bergc Aktau und
Kara*tau auf der Halbinsel Mangyshlak, Bull. Acad. Petersb., 1870, XIV, pp. 529-535;
E. V. Eichwald, Geogn.-pal. Bemerkungen fiber die Halbinsel Mangishlak und die Aleut.
Inseln, 8vo, Petersb., 1871.

* A. Karpinsky, Bemerkungen Cber den Charakter der Dislocationen der Felsarten in
der S. H&lfte des europ&ischen Russland ; Gornoi Journ., 1883, pp. 434-445 and plate.
The author includes the group of the Bogdo mountains in this zone.



470 EUEOPE AND ASIA {parth

limestone belonging to the upper Cretaceous; no older rocks are so far
known

The Kuren-dagh is immediately followed by the Little Balkan, and
then at a short distance by the Great Balkan and the group of mountains
on the bay of Krasnovodsk.

According to Koschknl’s investigations the mountains of the bay of
Krasnovodsk forai, together with the Great Balkan, a single anticlinal,
striking to the west-north-west, exactly in the direction of the Caucasus ;
its south limb is for the most part faulted down. The Great Balkan^ on
the western border of which the Dagh-dirim-burun rises 5,650 feet above
the Caspian, is the eastern part of the south limb left standing ; its beds
dip to the south. The middle of the saddle lies beneath the bay of
Krasnovodsk and the bay of Balkan, and is continued on land in the
direction of the fortress of Tash-arvat-kala, at the north-west foot of the
Great Balkan. The deepest visible rocks form the low foot-hills, trending
from cast to west, in the neighbourhood of Krasnovodsk; Koschkul
describes them as granite and greenstone;* the latter is regarded by Dolter
and Tietze as an older porphyrite. The ranges which succeed to the north,
the Kuba-dagh, continued by the island Dagh-ada, the long range of
Kjurre and its eastern prolongation, the Kosha-seira, form the north limb
of the anticlinal and the beds dip to the north. In the Kuba-dagh
gypsiferous beds appear; Kjurre consists of clay-slate and glauconitic
sandstone, the same probably as that which Sievers describes as Cretaceous
in the Kosha-seira^.

This small group of mountains is remarkable in two respects ; in the
first place it forms, as is clearly indicated by a submarine ridge, the con-
tinuation of the Caucasus, and thus connects it with the long ranges which
run to the Paropamisus ; and next, as Karelin showed many years ago, the
ancient mouth of the Oxus lies in its neighbourhood. The mighty river
flowed between the Great and Little Balkan, and then appears to have
divided into two armS, at the head of the great delta, which at present
forms the flat peninsula of Dardscha. This has been deposited upon the
down-thrown southern limb of the anticlinal, that is, over the subterranean
continuation jof the Great Balkan.

^ G. Sievers, Die russ. militilr. Expedition nach dem alten Oxus-Bette, dem Kjurjandagh-
Gebirge u. d. Atrek-Thale, August to December, 1872 ; Petermann’s geogr. Mitth., 1873,
XIX, pp. 287-292. For the Balkans I must refer the reader once for all to the beautiful
map, pi. XV, which accompanies this treatise.

‘ F. V. Koschkul, Report on the Geological Investigations made between Nov. 1869 and
March 1870 in the neighbourhood of the Bay of Krasnovodsk and the Island of Tcheleken,
Iswest. geogr. Ges. 1870, VI, pp. 181-213, plate (in Russian) ; E. Tietze, Ueber einen kurzen
Ausflug nach Krasnowodsk im W. Turkestan, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1877, XXVII,
pp. 1-6 ; A. Konschin, Description of the Ozokerite and Petroleum Localities of the Transr
Caspian region, Gornoi Journ., 1883, Pt. 1, pp. 134-150, plate (in Russian).



0H.vm] THE MESKIAN MOUNTAINS 471

To the south of the dry bed of the Oxus, and extending as far as the
sea-coast and the island of Tchelekcn, as well as further towards the south,
lie the deposits of this region which produce petroleum. —

We have now reached the Caucams^ and the question arises whether in
this mighty range the tangential force is directed to the south, as in the
chains of central Asia of which it appears to be the continuation. The
answer is that the Caucasus presents a very peculiar structure, very
different from the simpler constitution of other chains. We are indebted
for our knowledge of it to Abich’s prolonged and comprehensive investiga-
tions K It is indispensable that we should enter into his statements in
some detail, since they are of great importance for the study of mountain
formation in general ; we shall then see that the conception of the Caucasus
as a unilateral chain simply moved to the north and north-east, which
I at one time believed might be deduced from Favre's investigation of
these mountains, is indeed justified in a certain sense, but fails to take into
account the most characteristic feature of its structure

In two regions ancient cry«italline rocks, principally granitic, occur,
which may be regarded as the Archaean foundation. The first of these
belongs to the great chief crest of the Caucasus and extends from the
source of the Kuban to that of the Terek ; this is the high snow-covered
region between the Elbruz and Kasbek. The second region of Archaean
rocks lies far below at the southern foot, and there forms the watershed
between the Pontus and the Caspian. Its strike is directed to the
north-east and is thus completely different from that of the Caucasus ;
the accompanying sedimentary beds correspond in character to those
of Armenia; on the eastern side middle Cretaceous beds lie transgres-
sively on the Archaean. These are the Meskian mountains. We regard
them as a mountain system alien to the Caucasus, and shall return to
them later on. —

Having thus separated off the Meskian mountains, let us attempt to
approach the Caucasus from the north. We first encounter the Sarmatian
table-land of Stavrapol, which rises to a height of 2,500 feet, then the
district of Piatigorsk, rich in mineral springs and including the isolated
eruptive mass of the Besh-tau; further to the south-east, between the
Terek near Mosdok, and Vladikavkas, rise two long ridges, which run
parallel to the Caucasus, and, according to Kosclikul’s sections, have been
produced by folding of the Sarmatian "

* The principal work on this subject is by H. Abich, Vergleich. gebl. GrundzCge der
kaukasisch-armenischen und nordpersischen Gebirge, Prodromus einer Geologic der
kaukasischen Lender ; M4m. Ac. P^tersb., 1858, 6® s^r., VII, pp. 361-365, and plate.

‘ E. Favre, Recherches geol. dans la partie centrale de la chatne du Caucase, 4to,
Geneve, 1875, 117 pp., map and section ; E. Suess, Entstehung d. Alpen, p. 47 ; cf. above,
p. 137.

* F. Koschkul, in the Gomoi Joum., 1879, c, pi. iz.



472 EUEOPE AND ASIA [part h

The first zone of the Caucasus consists of a thick conformable series
which includes sediments ranging from the Lias to the upper Cretaceous,
and in places even some superposed Flysch. As a general rule this zone
is normally inclined to the north-east. In the meridian of the Elbruz the
dip is slight and very regular ; even at a distance of 60 kilometers north of
the crest of the mountains erosion has laid bare the Archaean foundation
beneath ; the surface of this has also a gentle inclination to the north, and
it may be regarded as the floor on which the Lias sediments were originally
laid down. Towards Vladikavkas the zone narrows away, but further
to the south-east in Daghestan its breadth increases; here it is folded in
parallel saddles and troughs, which recall in many respects the structure
of the Jura. The whole folded zone ascends towards the south with
constantly increasing height; looking south also are the long successive
scarps formed by the steep basset edges of the various subdivisions of
the stratified series. Isolated table mountains rise in front of these escarp-
ments to a height of 8,000 feet, and finally, in the tabular zone of the
Shach-dagh, even to 12,041 feet. It is here that the Sarmatian deposits,
wliich invade the valleys excavated in the older sediments, have been carried
up to a level of 7,170 feet above the sea.

From the heights of the Shach-dagh the south-eastern Caucasus
descends southwards in mighty step-faults to the basin of the Kura.
Here lies the great seismic region of subsidence, extending from She-
maka and Nuka to Elisabethpol and Shusha. Here also this single zone,
inclined and folded to the north and fractured to the south, forms the
whole Caucasus. No Archaean rocks are visible ; the folding of Daghe-
stan has evidently been produced by lateral pressure directed to the
north \

Thus far in the whole of the south-east the conception of a chain
folded to the north and thrown down on the south corresponds to the
facts. It is otherwise in the north-west.

The Archaean roqks, which form the crest of the high mountains
between Elbruz and Kasbek, descend to the south in precipitous walls
crowned with snow ; below them a thick belt of ancient schists crops out,
and east of the Adai-choch (12,260 feet) even overtops the granite, which
retreats to the north side of the mountains. This belt of ancient schist
dips to the north-east heneath the granite, so that the whole mass of this
part of the Caucasus reveals itself as a colossal fold overturned to the
south-west

The masses of schist on the south side present the same dip to the
north-east as the Jurassic and Cretaceous beds of the north slopes, and

^ H. Abicb, Verzeiebniss einer Sammlung von Verateinerungen von Daghestan, mit
Erlauterungen, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1851, III, pp. 15-48, and Sur la structure et
la g4ologie du Daghestan, M4m. Acad. Petersb., 1862, 7 ^ ser., IV, pp. 10, 12.



CH. in] STRUCTUEE OP THE CAUCASUS 478

Abich is therefore right when he says ^the fundamental law of the
CaucaeuB is isoclinal dip to north and noHh-eastK'

The schists when contiguous to the granite are mica-schist and chlorite
schist; the main mass is clay slate, whicli Favre regards as Palaeozoic,
while Abich emphasizes the entire absence of fossils and appears inclined
to assign it in great part to the coal-bearing Lias. Further south, towards
the upper Ingur, the inversion of the schist gives place to fan structure
and finally to sharp folding, which certainly already involves the Lias.
This is followed by a steep fault on the upper Rion, and a new series,
beginning with the Sarmatian stage and dipping to the north, forms
the orographic connexion with the Meskians, but under complex con-
ditions into which I cannot undertake to enter. This northwards dipping
series, however, no longer presents the Caucasian character, but the southern
facies of the Tauric- Armenian deposits, which arc distinguished by their
resemblance to those of the eastern Alps.

Thus the Caucasus consists of two parts of different character, which,
however, are structurally disti^iguished only by the fact that in the
north-west part the basis of the whole northern series of Jurassic and
Cretaceous beds remains exposed to view as a fold overturned to the
south, while in the south-east part this basis has subsided beneath the
plain of Kur.

Here and there eruptive rocks have been extruded along the fractures.
The principal chain is crowned by the two miglity masses of the Elbruz
(18,453 feet) and the Kasbek (16,553 feet). Many years ago, when the
researches of geologists were influenced by conceptions of a very different
nature, Abich perceived that the great volcanos of Armenia stand on
areas of subsidence, and he clearly recognized that the Elbruz and Kasbek,
although placed on the crest of the Caucasus, were yet formed subsequently
to the elevation of the mountains, and even after the excavation of
a part of the valleys. So clearly did this observer perceive even at that
early date the sequence of events, that he was able to show how great
masses of lava had poured out into a valley eroded in the slate, hail
consolidated there, and how then by gradual destruction of its walls this
valley of the schist zone was transformed into the volcanic table-land of
Keli.

What we have said with regard to the volcanos of Sumatra is, however,
also true of these volcanos which surmo Jnt the Caucasus ; it is the chain
itself which breaks up, and here this is the less surprising since in the
south-east so large a part of this same chain has already actually dis-
appeared by fracture and subsidence. •

So, too, on the other side of the Caspian we have seen the monoclinal of

' H. Abich, Vergleichende gcol. Grundztkge, p. 459. Favre explains the inversion as
the result of a great subsidence to the south, loc. cit., p. 71.



474 EUEOPE AND ASIA [partii

Krasnovodsk inclined to the north-east under the same conditions as the*
much greater series of the Daghestan. —

The north-western part of the Caucasus sinks near Anapa as a band of
Flysch beneath the Black sea, having previously given off a ridge to the
north-north-west, the extreme and lowest part of which fofms the south
side of the Liman of Temrjuk on the sea of Azov.

A great number of Sarmatian folds now appear, running across the
peninsulas of Taman and of Kertch; for our knowledge of these we are
also indebted to Abich, and they afford material for several conclusions of
a general nature \

The northern folds run from east to west ; two of them cross the strait
and proceed north and south of Kertch, so that this town is situated on
the intervening synclinal. Towards the south however, and beginning
at the Liman of the Kuban on Taman, these folds gradually bend to
the south-west ; to these also belongs the mountain of Opuk (the ancient
Cimmcrium), 670 feet high, on the south coast of the peninsula of Kertch.

The gradually increasing importance the direction to the south-west
I interpret either as the first indication of a new chain or as a bending of
the Caucasus itself; it is the direction of the mountains of the Crimea.
According to Abich’s sections even the Pontic Cardium beds of Kertch
appear to have taken part in this folding.

In cither case the folds of Taman and Kertch form the connexion
between the Caucasus and the Crimea.

In the south-east of the Crimea a mountain segment rises to a height
of about 1,500 meters; its strike is to the south-west and the general dip
to north-west. The oldest rocks belong to the Lias, which forms the
south-east coast of the peninsula and, like the Lias of the Caucasus,
contains numerous remains of terrestrial plants. This zone might at once
be recognized as the continuation of the northern zone of the Caucasus,
were it not for two essential points of difference observed by E. Favre. In
the northern Caucasus, as far as Daghestan, all the sedimentary formations
from the Lias upwards succeed one another in complete concordance; in
the Crimea, on the contrary, the Lias is strongly folded and dips to the
north; the ^Jurassic limestones rest upon it in great broken fragments,
and a conformable series does not begin till the Neocomian. The Neo-
comian has thus been preceded by a great disturbance, which did not
affect the Caucasus. Furthermore, in the Crimea the Cretaceous is succeeded
by the Nummulitic limestone, and this is absent in the northern Caucasus.

For these reasons Favre compares the Crimea, not with the northern,
but with the southern Caucasus, i.e. the Meskian mountains, which we

^ H. Abich, Einleitende Grundziige der Geologie der Halbinseln Kertsch und Taman,
M4m. Acad. Petersb., 1865, 7^ a^r., IX, pp. 1-80, plate; and by the same, Karten
und Profile zur Geologie der Halbinseln Kertsch und Taman, Tiflis, 1866.



MATCHIN


475


CH. vin]

however have recognized as a chain running to the south-west and alien
to the Caucasus. Favro at the same time emphasizes the original con-
nexion between the Balkan and the mountain fragment of the Crimea.
In support of this view, which is also adopted by Lagorio, it is stated that
the zone of fracture along which, according to Hochstetter, the Balkan
from Pirot to cape Emineh sinks to the south would, if continued, meet
the south-east coast of the Crimea, and that beneath the Black sea, from
cape Emineh as far as cape Saritsch, a rapid descent, from depths of
70-80 meters to 1,000-1,800 meters, occurs within a comparatively trifling
distance. The subsidence is assigned to the Miocene period

The Tnountaim of Matchin. A transgression of the upper Jurassic
extends over the Russian Platform; Neocomian and Gault are absent,
and middle and upper Cretaceous extend horizontally over the flat-lying
Jurassic. The same succession appears in that part of the Russian Platform
in Galicia which is exposed in the neighbourhood of the Carpathians by
deep river channels. The middle and upper Cretaceous rest on the hori-
zontal red sandstone, but in some places in the valleys of the Dnjestr and
the Zlota Lipa calcareous sediments containing many fossils of the Kim-
meridge and Portland stages of north Germany and France lie between
the Cenomanian and Devonian. The character of these Jurassic stages
is completely different from that of the Jurassic near Moscow, and it is
only with the highest parts of the latter that they can be compared as to
age, but the mode of occurrence is the same. This phenomenon is repeated
in one part of the Dobrudja, viz. on the Danube between R&isova and
Hirsova, on the sea-coast in the neighbourhood of Kustendje and in the
intervening districts. Beds of upper Jurassic with Nerinaea, Pteroceras,
and Diceras crop out on the right bank of the Danube in horizontally
stratified reefs of considerable size; they are overlaid by the middle and
upper Cretaceous. This Jurassic limestone plateau does not, however, rest
here on horizontally bedded Palaeozoic strata, but against the remains of
the pre- Jurassic folded chain, the north-western end* of which causes the
sharp bend of the Danube above its delta opposite Braila and Galatz.
This fragment has been described by Spratt and Peters^.

At Kara-kioi, north of Kustendje, we meet, coming froio the south,

^ E. Favre, £tudc atratigr. de la pariie S. 0. de la Grimeo, 4to, Geneve, 1877, 71
map ; A. Lagorio, Yergleichende petrogr. Studien ^iKer die mossigen Geateine dcr Krym,
8vo, Dorpat, 1880, in particular pp. 16-26 ; for the connexion with the Balkan, T. Spratt,
Comparison of the Geological Features of Bulgaria and the Crimea (in Geology of
Varna), Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1857, XIII, pp. 79, 80.

* T. Spratt, On the Fresh-water Deposits of Bessarabia, Moldavia, Wallachia, and
Bulgaria, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1860, XVI, in particular pp. 290-292; K. F. Peters,
Grundlinien zur Geogmphie und Geologic der Dobrudscha, Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien,
1867, XXVII, pp. 3-64 and 145-207, map ; further by the same, Die Donau und ihr
Oebiet, 8vo, 1876, pp. 334-342.



476


EUEOPE AND ASIA


[pAKPn

the first traces of steeply dipping green schist, which, extending from here
towards the norfch-west as far as Petcheniaga on the Danube, crops out in
ridges of considerable size, frequently accompanied by diabase tuff. Along
the sea-coast the strike of the green schist is west-north-west, becoming
north-west next the Danube. Towards Babadagh the Cretaceous extends
over the schist and proceeds to the south-east as far as the great Rasim
lagoon. A second much shorter rocky range, distinguished by rugged
outlines and composed of gneiss and granite, rises near Matchin, east of
Braila, with a north-westerly trend : to this belongs the isolated mountain
of Garbina, south-east of Galatz.

Finally a third zone lies to the north of the gneiss chain of Matchin
and the Cretaceous of Babadagh, and occupies, although frequently con-
cealed for long distances by recent sediments, the whole space as far as the
Danube near Isaktcha and Tultcha and Dunavez in the delta. Here Verru-
cano, various stages of the Trias, red Lias, and traces of Jurassic appear. It
is the Verrucano which forms the ‘Rock' on the Danube near Tultcha;
and Serpent island, far out in the Blrfck sea, also consists, according to
Spratt, of an ancient rock \ Popin island in the Rasim lagoon is composed
of Mjischelkalk ; and the Trias, by its great eruptive masses of melaphyre
and the occurrence of Halobia LommeLi^ Arcestes, &c., recalls the southern
Alps. The strike is west-north-west.

This range is a completely unsolved problem. While the succession of
the rocks points as we have said to the Alps, the strike of the green schist
north of Kustendje, as well as of the Trias near Tultcha, is that of the
Caucasus. The gneiss of Matchin strikes a little more to the north. The
direction is thus in sharp contrast to that of the next adjacent part of
the Carpathians. In like manner the horizontal position of the upper
Jurassic on the green schist is opposed to all that is known concern-
ing the comparatively recent age of the movements which have given rise
to the Carpathians.

The range of Mattshin is thus a fragment of a once larger folded chain,
having the trend of the Caucasus or one slightly more to the north, the
stratified sequence of the Alps, and an origin which is anterior in time to
the upper Jurassic.

CarpathiaTis and Balkans. It has only lately been possible, thanks to
the efforts of our colleagues in Hungary, Roumania, and Servia, supple-
mented by the results of earlier researches in Austria and valuable local

* T. Spmtt, Remarks on Serpent Island, Joum. Geogr. Soc. Lond., 1857, XXVII,
pp. 220-224. As regards the nature of the rock of which this island is formed I must
confess that I have not been able to arrive at a definite opinion. Spratt says it appears
to be a spur of the schist mass of the Dobrudja, consisting of siliceous beds with great
crystals of quartz, sometimes passing into red jasper, the beds being separated by
schistose layers and inclined 10°-20^ to the east. The island is 130 feet high.



477


OH. vni] CARPATHIANS AND BALKANS

investigations in Transylvania, to follow the numerous chains connected
with the arc of the Carpathians, as well as the intermediary links between
these and the Balkans. We arrive at the conception of a peculiar tectonic
phenomenon, which nowhere else in the earth’s crust, as at present known
to us, is displayed in such clearness or exhibited on so grand a scale ; but
here again it is indispensable to enter a little further into detail.

We have shown that according to the observations of Loezy there
exists within the arc of the Carpathians, and indeed within the bend of the
river Maros in Transylvania, a fragment of an independent arc, which has
been thrust to the east, south-east, and south (pp. 219, 232). We will
now first attempt to trace the conditions under which the outer curve is
continued, as far as our present knowledge of the structure of the
Roumanian slope permits. For the south-east of Transylvania wo have
a series of excellent descriptions by Meschendorfer, Hauer and Stache,
and Herbich ; with regard to th:. south I shall follow principally the data
of Stefanescu \

The Carpathians present in the east the normal structure of a simple
chain folded towards the exterior and collapsed on the interior. A great
arc-shaped band of ancient rocks, chiefly mica-schist, extends from the
sources of the Theiss through the south of Bukowina, a part of Moldavia,
and the north-east of Transylvania, and terminates in the Csik, near the
head waters of the Alt. This range is 230 kilometers long ; it strikes in its
northern part to the south-east, and then bends more and more to the
south-south-east. In its southern part in Transylvania there rises on the
western inner border the isolated mass of the Piritske near Ditrd, formed
of elaeolite syenite, and this is followed on the west by the long trachyte
I'ange of Hargitta, which runs parallel to the band of schists. In the east,
resting against the ancient rocks, is a short rugged range of Trias and
Jurassic deposits ; it includes the Nagy Hagymfis, and is followed in turn to
the east by the broad wooded zone of repeatedly folded Flysch, which
sinks gently down far away into the plain of Moldavia.

Further to the south all the interior zones disappear; the Flysch,
which is here chiefly Cretaceous, alone remains, accompanied by limestone
of the same age. The strike passes rapidly from south-south-q^t to south,
and finally becomes south-south- west. On the Dimbovitza, between Kim-
pulung and Tingovisti, the whole of this broad Cretaceous zone has
vanished beneath the Roumanian plain, aiid* is followed towards the west

' As the principal sources of information I may mention: J. MeschendOrfer, Die
Gebirgsarten im Burzenlande, Verhandl. u. Miitheil. d. siebenbiirg. Verein^f. Nuturwiss.,
1860, XI, pp. 236-249 and 255-287; F. R. v. Hauer and G. Stache, Geologic Siebon-
buigen's, 8vo, 1863, map ; F. Herbich, Das Szcklerland, 8vo, 1878, map (also Mitth. k.
ungar. geol. Anstalt, V, Heft 2) ; Stefanescu *s observations in the Annuar. Biur. geol.
Bucuresci, 1884, I, in particular pp. 17, 18 and 47-63.



478


EUROPE AND ASIA


[PABT n

by patches of Eocene only, of which we shall speak later. Meanwhile
fresh traces of the underlying beds crop out in the west. Outcrops of
Jurassic limestone, striking south-west, form the neighbourhood of Kron-
stadt; they are continued to the south-west, so that the pass of Tomos
coincides for a certain distance with the eastern boundary, between them
and the Flysch zone ; at the same time they increase in importance. The
mighty mass of the Bucsocs, which separates the northern approaches of
the Tomos and Torzburg passes, is chiefly Jurassic; another part belongs
to a great mass of conglomerate of unknown age. Over La Strunga the
Jurassic limestone is continued towards Boumania, but at the same time
the rocks below it crop out. Mica-schist, striking to the south-west, forms
in the north a narrow band at the foot of the high Jurassic mountains, but
becomes broader in Boumania, and according to Stefanescu composes, along
with hornblende schist, the mass of Monte Leota ; towards the south-west
it again disappears, as does the Jurassic limestone.

To the west of the range of Monte Leota, a zone of Jurassic limestone
and Cretaceous beds again appears ; itS most notable feature is the pre-
cipitous mass of the Konigsberg. This zone rests against the eastern border
of thp Fogaras mountains, a frontier chain separating Transylvania from
Boumania; it is formed of ancient rocks. Close to the north foot of the
Konigsberg, Hcrbich describes the broad outcrop of a Cretaceous series,
striking north and south and dipping to the east ; from the frontier chain
onwards this forms all the lesser heights below the Torzburg pass.

These Jurassic and Cretaceous formations arc continued northwards,
but extend beyond the general contour of the mountains, and form a long
independent oflshoot which projects from the north-eastern end of the
frontier chain to the north : this is the Persdny range.

The Persfiny mountains are formed by a fold striking north and south,
cut through transversely by the river Alt ; the Trias, and in its southern
part even the mica-schist, is visible beneath the Jurassic. Hcrbich has
shown that the MeSbzoic deposits on the eastern border of the frontier
mountains are continued into the fold of the Persfiny mountains ; but in
this case we must regard the outcrop of the ancient basement beds of the
Persfiny inctuntains simply as the continuation of the frontier chain itself,
sharply bent to the north. That this view is correct we shall sec directly
from the structure of the frontier mountains.

For the present, however, we recognize the following facts. The great
band of mica-schist in the Moldavian arc has disappeared in the Csiks. Its
outer zone of Trias and Jurassic disappeared still earlier. The great
Carpathian Flysch zone has turned completely round to the south-south- west
or south-west, and has vanished beneath the surface before reaching the
Diml)ovitza. A Jurassic range, and within this, the range of ancient
schists of Monte Leota, between the pass of Tomos and that of Torzburg,



FOGAEAS RANGE


479


CH. vra]

have appeared within the Flysch zone striking south-south-west or south-
west, and have also disappeared to the south-south-west. Then west of these
the Jurassic range of the Konigsberg has appeared together with the
Fersfiny mountains and has also vanished towards the south-south-west ;
the outcrops bf mica-schist in this range, however, seem to be continued
in the north-cast corner of the frontier range ; and it is this latter which
we mu^t now consider in detail. —

The Fogaras or Transylvanian-Rimvianian frontier range follows, if
we judge by its outer form, the direction from east to west ; but some time
ago Herr Beila von Inkey, who has examined the structure of that part of
the chain which lies to the west of the pass of the Red Tower, i. e. west
of the transverse valley of the Alt, was kind enough to direct my attention
to the remarkable fact that this range consists of several folds, which
diverge from one another towards the west'.

The excellent representation given by Primics of that part of the
range included between the Dimbovitza and the river Alt also shows
clearly how little the structure coincides with the outer form.

According to Hauer and Stache the strike in the eastern part of the
range is north-east to south-west, and gneiss here enters largely ii^to its
constitution Somewhat further to the south-west, but in the same line
of strike, on the Papusa, in the upper bend of the Dimbovitza, west of the
Mesozoic mass of the Konigsberg, and nearly midway across the chain,
there begins, according to Primics, a long band of gneiss, which, striking to
the south-west, traverses the range obliquely. Far to the east of the Alt
it reaches the southern border, which it then forms, and flanked by Eocene,
continues for a long stretch beyond the river {On^ Fig. 48).

At the same time there appear in the north of the chain a number of
bands of schistose limestone and marble with tremolite, also rocks con-
taining staurotide and garnet, and amphibole schists, which form the axis
of the mountains, but do not follow the strike of the gncissic band.

Primics’ map shows that in the north-east these bands, which recall so
strongly certain rocks of the St. Gotthard mass, bend sharply round to the
north, so that they return in fact to the direction of the Persfinys,
while on the west they follow a westerly direction, and thus in the
transverse valley of the Alt are already far removed from the band of
gneiss ®.

* This important observation has since been published by B. v. Inkey, Geo-tektonische
Skizze der W. Hiilfte des ungarisch-rumanischen GrcnzgebJrges, Foldt. KOzl., 1884, XIV,

pp. 116-121.

* Hauer and Stache, op. cit., pp. 264, 265. '

’ G. Primics, Die geol. VerhJiltnisse der Fogarascher Alpen und des benachbarten
TumSinischen Gebirges, Mittheil. aus d. Jahrb. d. k. ungar. geol. Anstalt, 1884, VI,
pp. 283-315, map ; also S. Stefanescu, Mem. rel. la Geol. Judet. Argesiu, Ann. Biur. geol.
Bucuresci, 1884, No. 2, pp. 115-147.



480 EUROPE AND ASIA [paotii

At the bottom of the transverse valley, near the confluence of the
Lotru with the Alt, a large patch of Flysch appears as the wedged-in core
of a synclinal, but it is probably only a remnant of an ancient mantle of
Eocene, traces of which are known on the northern border, and in yet
stronger development on the southern border, where they •form isolated
hills nearly as far as the river Schyl, east of Tirgu-Jiuliu ^

We now approach the mountains on the right bank of the riyer Alt
and follow the observations of Inkey,

The northern ridge, composed to a great extent of limestone, curves to
the north-west, loses its orographic importance, and forms the outer



Fio. 47- Diagram of the trend Ainos of the Carpathians and the Balkans,


border of the Miihlenbach mountains. We will call it the Fogaraa
range,

A strongly compressed synclinal, visible near Kineni on the Alt, now
rises on the west, forms the long lofty crest of the mountains, and
terminates on the river Strell.

Another group of folds, less strongly marked on the Alt, ^unites in the
west into » single great anticlinal, which, bent on Mont Turcsino in a
sharp S-shaped curve, forms the mountain of Mundra (2,520 meters), the
principal mass of the Pfiring range. This branch, particularly towards
the west, shows a tendency to swerve to the west-south-west. It is the
Mundra range.

We have now reached the patch of Flysch on the Alt near its con-
fluence with the Lotru, and at the same time the southern band of gneiss.

^ On the north the fossiliferous locality Porcsesd, situated at the entrance of the Alt
into the transverse valley, must be referred here ; in the south S. Stefanescu has found
Nummulites near Salatruca, east of the point where the Alt again emerges.



481


cH.vin] COZIA EANGE AND THE BANAT

This does not form a high mountain range. Near Monte Cozia, still on
the left bank of the Alt, it occurs as an arch descending steeply to the
north, gently to the south; it forms the southern foot of the Pdrings,
where, however, only the northern half of the arch is visible ; the southern
half having disappeared beneath the plain. We will call this the Cozia
range.

The patches of Mesozoic limestone which now make their appearance
leave no doubt as to its further course. The Mundra range, which is
continued beyond the transverse valley of the Schyl in the south-westerly
trending Str4cza mountains, and consequently forms the south side of
the valley of the Wallachian Schyl, is accompanied beyond the watorslied
by patches of Mesozoic ; these, following the valley of the Cerna far to the
south-west and south-south-west, finally strike to the south, and tlius
reach the neighbourhood of Orsova. Thus while the Fogaras range
runs to the north-west, the Muxidra range is turned from the south-west
and south-south-west towards Orvova. It is succeeded by the Cozia range,
which soon disappears beneath the plain.

While, however, the branches of the mountains thus tend to diverge
widely from one another. Mount Rctyezat inserts itself between them like
a wedge, separating the upper Schyl from the bend of tlio Strell. Inkey
regards this mountain as a substituted fold, places the point of divergence
of the branches nearly on the watershed between the Wallachian Scliyl
and the Cerna, and observes that at the triplex confinium the strike
begins to pass from west to west-north-west.

The significance of Inkey's observations will at once appear if we glance
at Dr&ghic^nu’s geological map of north-west Wallachia \ The Cerna is
indeed a true longitudinal valley, one of the few cases in this region in
which the configuration of the ground corresponds with its structure. We
have now entered that remarkable series of mountain ranges which are
crossed by the Danube, between Alt-Moldova and the Iron Gate. In thc^
course of the last few years they have formed the* subject of numerous
investigations by Kudernatsch, Schlbnbach, Tietze, then by Ilofiinann,
Bockh, Halav^ts, Roth, and others ; but into the details of these it is not
my intention to enter. ^

Our knowledge of their prolongation into Roumania now i>crrnits us
to form a much more complete idea than was possible before of the general
plan on which this remarkable series of tnountain ranges is constructed.
For the present we will leave the numerous volcanic idienomena of eruption
and intrusion entirely out of consideration.

The series is usually known as the Banat mountains. It is preceded
in the west by some hills of gneiss and mica-schist, which rise out of the
Hungarian plain, c.g. the Lokva mountains, on the Danube between

' M. M. Dr^hicenu, Carta geologica a Judetului Mchedinti, small fob, 1882.



482


EUROPE AND ASIA


[past n

Weisskirchen and Moldova, the hill rang^e of Wershetz, the heights
south of Dogndcska, and others. These we do not include, but take the
Bonats to begin along a line running nearly in the meridian, drawn from
Alibeg, east of Alt-Moldova on the Danube, northwards and somewhat



Fio. 48. The curvature of the strike on (he lower Danube. Gn, The gneiss band of the frontier
mountains ; Aj Archaean and granite^; p. Palaeozoic ; m, Mesozoic ; ^1, Eocene.

to the east of Rcshitza. To the east the chain extends as far as Gura
Van, on the Danube, above Tum-Severin; thence to the north-east it
forms the border of the Roumanian plain.

An Archaean foundation is present and a long series of sedimentary,
principally calcareous deposits, which range from the upper Carboniferous
to the upper Cretaceous ; but the series is not complete, and Trias lime-


BAPIDS OP THE DANUBE


483


‘CH. vra]

stone, for example, has not yet been observed. The Lias contains coal.
The whole Banat complex consists of a succession of alternating bands, one
set exhibiting the Archaean foundation, the other wedged -in limestone cores.
At the junction between them normal superposition is sometimes observed,
sometimes folding, or overfolding, at others fracture. The last case is
probably the most frequent. Generally speaking the bands on tlie west
are broader than those on the east. They are not parallel ; those on the
east run in arcs curved to the south-west, those on the west, on the other
hand, are straighter and run more nearly from north to south. They thus
meet and cut each other off at acute angles on the lower course of tlie
Cema in the neighbourhood of Mchadia.

Let us begin our description with the eastern part. The first band
is only represented, according to Draghiednu’s map, by two fairly long
patches of limestone, which separate the arc succeeding immediately to
the west from the recent Terl/iary land.

The second band is Archaean; it rises iruhipcndently from the plain to
the east of the upper Motru and tuns south7Wcst towards the Danube.

The third is limestone : according to the data given by Stcfanescu it
begins near the border of the mountains at Dobritza on the upper S\ieliodol,
and runs after a short interruption in a curve through Baia de Arama
towards Verciorova on the Danube.

The fourth band, composed of Archaean rocks, becomes narrower north
of Baia de Arama, is traversed by the river Bahna, and its western edge,
shortly before reaching the Danube, crosses the lower course of the Cerna
above Old Orsova.

Now the cutting oS begins. A great band of limestone, the fifth band,
meets the seventh on the left bank of the Cerna, and so cuts off the sixth,
which is none other than the great Archaean ridge, which we have
followed as an anticlinal under the. name of the Mundra range from the
river Alt up to the summit of the Paring mountains and then on the south
side of the Wallachian Schyl. The cutting off then becomes more freciuent,
and it is not worth while to trace the process further in detail. Then
follows in the west the broad band of Archaean rocks which runs from
Karansebes to the Danube; within this the subsided basin o£tlie Almas is
let down, and we may therefore call it the zone of the Almds ; finally the
broad limestone zone of Steyerdorf, as the last and most westerly band,
concludes the series.

The Danube now cuts through this remarkable complex in the grandest
erosion valley of Europe. Stormily the stream forces its way through the
narrow defiles and falls foaming over the rocky barriers ifa its course,
smooths itself out again in the broad reaches, and plunges anew over
fresh reefs. Seven cataracts, corresponding to as many reefs of rock, cross
the Danube; they are formed of granite or gneiss, gabbro, Lias sand-

I i 2



EUEOPE AND ASIA


484


[part n


stone, or white Jurassic limestone, according to the nature of the bands
which strike across the river towards Servia.

We do not possess any connected geological survey of the adjacent part
of Servia, although the fact that the ore-deposits of the Banats extend
towards this country, along with the mountains themselves, jhfas for a long
time led mining experts to visit it. The most valuable information is
contained in Herder’s Itineraries and a new and compendious book of
travels by Tietze ^ ; and this, if we are content to confine ourselves to the
course of the Archaean and limestone bands, is at least sufiicient to guide
us to some general results.

First of all it is certain that the limestone zone of Steyerdorf is con-
tinued very far within Servia ; Tietze recognized it near Majdanpek and
on the Stol, and both these places occur on its eastern edge ; according to
Andr^e the western edge runs in the neighbourhood of the mining town of
Kuchaina From this region it proceeds, probably split into two, and
certainly very much narrowed, to the south-east over the Rtanj and then
on to the Osren above Alexinatz, as Hcrd6r informs us.

The Archaean band of the Alm4s, the broadest of all, crosses the
Danubg, occupies the whole space between Milaiiovatz and Majdanpek,
runs to the south-east to the Deli Jowan, and probably unites there with
a band coming from the east ; to the south we meet the same rocks in
Zajear.

In Servia the eastern arcs are as yet only incompletely known. To the
west of Negotin they all appear to have vanished ®.

If we review the arrangement of the several elements of which the
Banat mountains are composed and their probable continuations to the
south, it is evident that the more strongly curved and narrower bands of
Roumania on the east which strike to the south-west, gradually cut each
other off and disappear, in part to the north, in part perhaps a little to the
south of the Danube; while the broader, less arched western bands are


^ S. A. W. Freiherr v. Herder, Bergm&nniBche Reiso in Serbien, 8vo, 1846, pp. 43 et
seq.; £. Tietze, Geol. Notizen aus dem nordCstlichen Serbien, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst.,
1870, XX, p. 697.

* T. Andree, Pie Umgebung von Majdan-Kucaina in Serbien, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst.,
1880, XXX. p. 12, pi. i.

’ North-west of Zajear, near Gamsigrad, limestone again appears, but a broad mass of
older rock, which Herder encountered tdong the little Timok, makes it probable that
the limestone band is here split in two, and a fresh strip of Archaean makes its appear-
ance. Herder and Tietze have shown that the valley of Porecka, south-east of Milanovatz,
is accompanied by a band of limestone striking north and south. The high ridge of the
Strbatz, east of Mosna, may be regarded as a continuation of the Roumanian arcs;
it consists ‘of mica-schist; on its crest limestone is said to occur. Even in the depres-
sion west of Brsa Falanka, Herder mentions mica-schist, but on the way from Negotin
to the mountains only the horizontal shelly limestone, evidently the Sarmatian
deposits.



cH.vni] TORSION AND INJECTION 485

continued a long way towards Servia^ their direction passing gradually
from south-south-west or south to south-south-east or south-east \

We have seen how the great Flysch zone of the Carpathians, then the
mass of Monte Leota, and next the gneissose range of Monte Cozia,
constantly directed to south-west or south-south-west, dip finally beneath
the plain ; how the long range of the Mundra is cut off and terminates on
the lower Cema ; and now the Roumanian arcs of the Banat mountains
directed to south-west, south-south-west, or south similarly disappear.

From the pass of TomSs onwards, new orographic elements constantly
make their appearance on the west, to again disappear, and it is only the
most westerly of the bands of the Banats which accomplish the full sweep
to south-south-east or south-east. The whole mountain system extending
from the south-east of Transylvania^ around the jplain of the Danube, and
down through the east of Sei^ia has been subjected to a general torsion.

The fissures arising from this torsion, especially those of the outer
bands, and particularly where the Archaean meets the limestone, have
been injected at various placed by volcanic rocks, such as have been
described as syenite, timazite, banatite, but are now more generally known
as diorite. •

Whatever name may be chosen — a competent authority, G. von Rath,
points out a resemblance to the tonalite of Monte Adamello * — it remains
in any case certain that these rocks have profoundly altered the Cretaceous
limestone at the zone of contact and have surrounded themselves with bods
of ore ; they are, therefore, more recent than the Cretaceous formation, and
the great distance to which they are prolonged to the south is test seen
from the circumstance that the first specimens described in any detail,
Breithaupt's timazite, were obtained from the neighbourhood of Zajear in
Servia. With amazement G. von Rath describes ‘whole mountains of
garnet,' which have been fonned by contact. The most important of .the
volcanic lines is shown in Fig. 21, p. 162 and the way in which it swerves
off from the boundary of the limestone at a very acute angle as it
proceeds to the north is in complete accordance with the character of
a fracture produced by torsion.

Let us, however, return to the strike of the individual bapds.

Hitherto we have regarded them simply as tectonic elements of the
mountains, but they often possess a highly complex structure of their own.
Eudernatsch has shown that the north part of the limestone zone of

' The fundamental features of the arc appear with fair distinctness on Toula's map,
Geol. Uebei-sichtskarto der Balkan-Halbinsel, Petermann*B geogr. Mitth.i 1882, pi. xvi.

* G. V. Rath, Vortr^ge und Mittheilungen ; Sitzungsber. d. Nied.-Rhein. Ges. f. Natur-
u. Heilkunde zu Bonn, Sitz. v. l3. Jan. 1879, p. 39.

* On this little map the names of the two towns Moravicza and Dogndcska have been
accidentallj interchanged.



486 '


EUEOPE AND ASIA


[part II

Steyerdorf is traversed by two erect anticlinals striking to south-south-
west, or rather by two * distensions of the earth’s crust burst open along
their longitudinal axis,’ and with an inverted eastern border ; and in the
south part Bockh has described in detail the occurrence of great longitudinal
faults ; the eastern boundary of the limestone itself is there* formed by a
dominant fault, which brings the Cretaceous into contact with the granite.

In like manner Hauer and Stache have shown that the sedimentary
band of the brook Sirinnia, which lies near the eastern border of the
Archaean zone of the Alrnfis, is overthrust to the ca^t \ In all these cases
it is scarcely a question of simple folding, like that produced by
tangential movement in the Jura, but rather of those complex phenomena
of fracture, bursting, and crushing, which must necessarily result from
great torsion. The repeated overthrusts to the east correspond to the
direction of the torsional movement.

Let us now return to the south.

In following the band of limestone across the mountains of Rtanj and
Osran, and tracing the older formations ib far as Zajear, we have reached
the limits of that region, with which Toula’s extensive researches in the
western Balkans have made us acquainted. Through these researches the
great extension of the Archaean rocks of the Balkans to the north-west,
through the Balkans of Etropol and Berkovitza as far as the immediate
neighbourhood of Adljd and Zajear, first became known ; they are supple-
mented in the west by the surveys of Zujovic, which extend to beyond
Kurshumlje The result may now be read on the map. We see that the
limestone zone of Steyerdorf extends in the west over the Rtanj and Osran
and then, perhaps accompanied by a secondary chain in the east, into the
great limestone zone of Pirot, a fact which was recognized by Bond and
confirmed by Toula \ We see besides that the Archaean band of the Alrnfis,

^ J. Kudernatsch, Geologio des Banater Qebirgszuges, Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien,
1877, XXIII, p. 40 ct aeq.; J. B^)ckh, Gcol. Notizen von der Aufnahme d. J. 1881 im
Comitate Krassd-SzSr^ny, Jahresber. d. k. ung. Geol. Anstalt f. 1881, p. 8 ; P. v. Hauer,
Eohlcnvorkominni836 von Berszaazka, Verb. geol. Reichsanst., 1870, pp. 167, 168;
K. Tietze, Geol. und pal. Mittheilungen aus dem S. Theile des Banater Gebirgsstockes,
Jalirb. geol. Reichsanst., 1872, XX, pp. 94-99.

® In particular, F. Toula, Grundlinien der Geologic des westlichcn Balkan, Denkschr.
Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1882, XLIV, pp. 1-58, and map ; Geol. Untersuchungen im westlicben
Theile des Balkan, X, von Pirot nacb Soda, Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1883,
LXXXVIII, pp. 1279-1348, and map,* and for parts of the Balkan lying further to the
east, preliminary report by the same in the Anzeig. Akad. Wiss. Wien, Oct. 23, 1884,
pp. 197-202 ; further : J. M. Zujovic, Contributions to the Geology of the Kingdom of
Servia, I (in the Servian language), 8vo, Belgrade, 1884, map.

’ ‘ It is this band of Cretaceous rocks which, striking from south-east to north-west,
runs from Bulgaria through the east of Servia and the country east of the lower Morava
(which forms the western boundary), reaches the Danube, and there joins the eastern
sedimentary band of the Banat mountains, as may be seen from the representation given
by Boue on his manuscript map.’— Toula, Grundlinien, p. 40.



CH. Yiii] THE EIM OF THE BOUMANIAN PLAIN 487

united with a number of ranges which join it on the east, now reaches
the Archaean zone of the Balkans, so that the principal zone forms towards
the south-east the Swati, Nikola, and Berkovitza Balkans, and finally accom-
plishes in the Etropol Balkan the full sweep from south-east to due east and
west, i. e. into the normal direction of the principal chain of the Balkans.
At the same time the hills of mica-schist to the west of the limestone range,
in the Wershetz and Lakva mountains of Hungary, correspond in position
to the mica-schist of Erushowatz, and to the ancient schist on the west
of the Rtanj, near Alexinatz, which extends to Nish and the west of
Pirot.

The connexion between the Carpathians and the Balkans is effected by
a general torsion in the trend of the mountains . —

The mountain frame around the Roumanian plain strongly recalls the
arc-shaped enclosure of the western Mediterranean formed by that distant
branch of the Alps which mns from North Africa past the Rock of
Gibraltar to the Betic Cordillera*. The resemblance is the greater since
there it is the straits of Gibraltar which profoundly influence the
physical nature of a not insignificant part of the earth's surface, and here
it is the valley of the Danube which determines the drainage of a great
part of central Europe, while neither of these transverse furrows are in
any way indicated in the original scheme of the mountains. The resemr
blance is nevertheless merely superficial. In the western Mediterranean
the folding of the mountains is directed towards the exterior, the bottom
of the sea itself is a sunken area like that of the northern Carpathians.
In the Balkans the case is reversed. The torsion has caused the several
bands of the mountains to disappear one after the other, and the Balkans
are faulted down on their southern flank which looks away from the plain,
while their sedimentary girdle slopes down on the north towards the plain.
The western Mediterranean is bordered by the inner side of the mountains,
the Roumanian plain by their outer side. As a consequence the margin
of the Mediterranean is marked by recent volcanos^ as at the Cabo di Gata
and elsewhere — indications of local subsidence, or it may bo of the region
of marginal fractures ; but no such crowning with eruptive centres occurs
around the Roumanian plain ; on the contrary, the lyasaltic hills which do
occur are found on a transverse line, running from Sistow lo the south, as
has been pointed out by Toula.

The torsion explains also the structare’of the Balkans. This is clearly
shown by the manner in which they join with the adjacent chains on the
north. In the Berkovitza Balkan spotted schists, such as we are
accustomed to find in regions of volcanic contact, have been, recorded, and
Toula does not omit to mention the resemblance of certain eruptive rocks,
such as those of the Isker, to the banatites. Towards the north a sedi-
mentary zone rests against these most westerly masses of the Balkans. It



488


EUROPE AND ASIA


[part II

begins near Rabis and Belogradchik, where Permian, Trias, Tithonian, and
Cretaceous beds occur within a narrow space. Further to the east the
Cretaceous deposits increase rapidly in breadth and form the whole outer
slope of the exterior chain and the basement of the plain, so that they
already crop out on the bank of the Danube, at the confluence ^f the Isker.
This sedimentary covering is the counterpoise to the sunken Cretaceous zone
north of the Carpathians ; owing to torsion it crops out gradually from the
plain, from Bclogradchik onwards, with a flat and as it were twisted surface.
In some places it lies in longitudinal folds, but is nowhere inverted. To
the south it is succeeded by a poorly developed zone of older Mesozoic
sediments, chiefly Jurassic ; then comes a band of Palaeozoic deposits still
more feebly represented, and finally the crystalline zone of the Balkan.

With these rocks we reach that remarkable zone of fractures which,
according to Hochstetter, follows the whole southern border of the Balkans,
from Pirot to cape Emineh on the Black sea. It is 450 kilometers long,
traverses rocks of the most varied description, and is accompanied by
numerous hot springs and long bands of eruptive rocks Fritsch has
urged, not wholly without reason, that the relative heights of the sedi-
mentary rocks are not consistent with the existence of so great a ‘ fault,'
and I also think that this designation is hardly suitable to the dislocation^.
But the fractured zone, bent at its western extremity towards Pirot, exactly
fits into the group of groat torsional lines, and it is impossible to say to
what dimensions disturbances might not attain as a consequence of this
great deflexion in the course of the mountains. —

Hitherto we have only spoken of the principal chain of the Balkans.
To the west of Sofia, however, on the north side of the Vitosa, there rises
the andesite mass of the LUnllin and Visker mountains, and hereabouts
the great limestone band of Pirot bifurcates. According to the precise
data furnished by Hochstetter, one branch proceeds west of the Vitosa
down towards Kustendil and Dubnitza to the Karasu, but of its further
course nothing is known. On the Vitosa itself, however, a long train of
syenitic masses begins, which at first runs parallel to the south border
of the chief chain of the Balkans, and then bends more to the south-east.
Hochstetter regards tlicse masses as ‘decidedly eruptive,' and includes
among them tKe masses of Samakovo in the Istrandsha mountains, that
of Bujuk Darbend on the left bank of the Tundsha, and of Vakovo on its
right bank, of Tmovo on the Maritza, of Philippopolis, the magnetite rich
syenitic mass of the Slakutsha mountains on the Isker, and finally the

' Hochstetter mentions the places— Misiwri, Aidos, Karnabat, Sliwno, Kisanlik, Kalofer,
Kai'lowa, Slatica, Pirot: F. v. Hochstetter, Die geolog. Verhilltnisse des 0. Theiles der
europaischen Tdrkei, Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst., 1870, XX, p. 399.

C. V. Fritsch, Beitrag zur Geognosie des Balkan ; Vortrag gehalten in der Naturf.
Gesellschaft zu Halle, 15. Nov. 1879, pp. 9, 10.



OH. VIII] CONNEXION OF BALKANS AND CRIMEA 489

mighty syenite mass of the Vitos. The manner in which this remarkable
line of syenitic intrusions (also about 460 kilometers long) is connected
with the great torsion cannot be determined in the present state of our
knowledge ; the Vitosa at its western extremity is driven forwards towards
the north-we^t in the direction of the great torsion. —

Let us now glance at the more recent formations. The Eocene appears
to have rested in transgression on the frontier chain of Transylvania, but
on the Lotru it is nevertheless crushed in consequence of later mountain
movement. The next deposit definitely recognized within the region of
torsion is the second Mediterranean stage; it is only to be seen near
Plevna, where, according to C. von Fritsch, it rests directly upon the
Cretaceous. Then follows the Sarmatian stage, which lies horizontally
against the inner arcs, and then the series of more recent, not marine
deposits, which are found chiefly in the northern part of Roumania. —

The Balkans present, as we have seen, a broad border of sedimentary
deposits, chiefly of Cretaceous age, which slope gradually down towards
the north. All the inner zones dflaappear to the east beneath the eruptive
mass of Burgas; cape Emineh consists of Cretaceous limestone. The
lower Cretaceous presents a Carpathian, i.e. a south European faqies, as
in the Crimea ; the upper Cretaceous, on the other hand, resembles that of
north Europe, again as in the Crimea. It is succeeded near Varna by
the Nummulitic limestone, already lying horizontal, once more as in the
Crimea, while sporadic exposures of the second Mediterranean stage and
the wide extension of the Sarmatian deposits equally recall the Crimea.
This part of the stratified sequence is thus in close accordance in both
regions, and so far as this sequence can bo taken as a sign of tectonic
connexion at all, it certainly leads us from the Balkans to the Crimea.

The upper Jurassic, which lies beneath the Neocomian, also appears to
be closely related to that of the Crimea. But the unconformity below the
Neocomian and the great development of the Lias shales are so far not
known in the Balkans. On the other hand, sttll lower and clearly
characterized members of the sedimentary series appear in the Balkans,
which are not known either in the Crimea — where the beds below the
Lias are not visible — nor in the Caucasus. To the north of the hypo-
thetical line of connexion the mountains of Matchin present themselves
with a completely divergent trend, and with a different stratified sequence,
distinguished by the marked development of the marine Trias.

Nevertheless the correspondence in the disposition of the beds, in the
strike, and in the stratified sequence above the Jurassic is so great that I do
not hesitate, while awaiting further information, to adopt the hypothesis,
supported by Spratt, E. Favre, and Lagorio, of the original continuity of
the Balkans and the Crimea.

We must not, however, overlook the fact that the Balkans still show



490


EUEOPE AND ASIA


[part n

in the folds of the northern zone^ unimportant as these may be, some
traces of the general European movement towards the north ; the northerly
dip of the folds in the Sarmatian on Kertch and Taman outside the great
mountain ranges also indicates a certain movement to the north, as like-
wise does the folding of the northern zone of the CaucaiSus, especially
in Daghestan, and as well the outer Sarmatian folds to 'the north of
Vladikavkas.

Beneath this sedimentary zone, inclined to the north, and in places also
folded in the same direction, the Caucasus reveals, however, that mighty
inversion to the south which is the distinctive character of its great
southern slope. It forms, as Abich says, a great monoclinal fold, and the
dip of the Lias shows that the inversion to the south cannot have occurred
before the Mesozoic period. But the exterior surface of this fold, turned
towards the north — originally, no doubt, a level plain of deposition —
nevertheless bears a series of sediments, which have been pushed to the
north. In no othelr mountain chain is such a peculiar twofold expression
of the tangential movement known; afid here we are precisely in that
region in which the limit between the Asiatic movement to the south and
the European movement in the opposite direction must be sought.

The syntaada- of the Iranian-TauHc chains. The outer Iranian chains
afford indications of a subordinate syntaxis only at one point, on the
straits of Ormuz. With the inner chains the case is different. The
Paropamisus with its convexity turned to the south forms in north
Afghanistan the inner arc corresponding to the eastern part of the outer
Iranian arcs, but as it proceeds with an undeviating north-westerly
direction through the Kurendagh to the Caucasus, it completely leaves
the region of the Iranian folda In its place a second arc appears, which
corresponds to the western part of the outer Iranian chains; the
northern border of this at the same time bounds the Caspian sea, but, as
we shall see directly, also shows a 'tendency to prolong the branch, which
runs to the north- we^. This second arc is the range of the Albonrz.

As to the manner in which the Paropamisus and Albourz meet we
possess some noteworthy data. First of all the north-western prolongation
of the former is followed by those very regular parallel chains of eastern
Khorassan, which have been recently explored by Lessar; as the off-
shoots of these we must regard the chains of slight elevation encountered
by Sievers on the Atrek. The "^corresponding part of the Caspian coast
appears to be occupied by the petroleum-bearing Tertiary beds, which we
have already met with on the declivities of the Balkash. Ach-Tepe,
north of Tchikishliar on the lower Atrek, is a mud volcano \

^ P. M. Lessar, Bemerkungen fiber Transkaspien und die benachbarten Landstriche ;
Fetermann’s geogr. Mitth., 1884, XXX, pp. 281-296, pi. xi. The northern of these
chains have famished the lower Cretaceous Ammonites mentioned by Neumayr, Verb.



ALBOURZ


491


OH. vra]

The parallel ranges of the eastern Khorassan are thus completely
flattened out towards the Caspian sea, but towards the south another
parallel segment appears, which, although orographically united with the
Albourz, must be distinguished from it in structure.

From Tietze’s study of the structure of northern Persia, which, with
Qrewingk's earlier description, is the chief source of our knowledge of this
region, it appears with the greatest clearness that between Ashref and
Asterabad a range directed to the north-west reaches the shores of the
Caspian sea and abruptly ends there. It includes the heights on the
south border as far as Shahrud and Dch i Mullah and is, at least in part,
overturned to the south-west, so that on the south border of the mountains
and near Tash the coal-bearing beds of the Lias plunge to the north-east
beneath a Palaeozoic zone, which proceeds towards Asterabad, where it
stands vertically. The oldest rocks of this mountain segment are found
in the north-east near Asterabad ; the most recent are probably represented
by a Cretaceous zone, which strikes from the Caspian near Ashref into
the mountains*. *

Tietze is entirely right in regarding the Albourz as ‘a repetition on
a small scale of the features which determine the configuration of the
continent of Central Asia.’ We here see an arc moved to the south like so
many others already mentioned, and all the results obtained by Muschketoff
for the chains in the interior of Asia are applicable to the Albourz. The
front of the arc lies west of Firuskuh, and in this region ranges also appear
running from east to west. That part of the arc which trends to the
north-east terminates near the Cretaceous band of Ashref, in a manner not
yet precisely known to us in detail. As in the case of so many chains of
the interior of Asia, the branch which runs to the north-west is much longer
than the other. The Archaean foundation is only visible on the north side
and only on the longer north-western branch, for an isolated and locally
limited exposure of syenite on the south slope in the Keretch valley west
of Teheran can hardly be regarded as representing this fourtdation. • Not-
withstanding the occurrence of Archaean rocks on the north side of the
arc, the stratified sediments present as a rule a contrary dip to the north,
and this although the beds are not inverted but in normal sucoession. This
points to the presence of imbricated structure in certain parts of the Albourz.
In this way too the form of the outer border, finds an explanation. Tietze

geoL Beichsanst., 1881, p. 325. 0. Sievers, Die rnssische militilrische Expedition nach
dem alien Oxus-Bette, &c., Petermann's geogr. Mitth., 1871, pp. 287-292.

* E. Tietze, Bemerktingen fiber die Tektonik des Alburegebirges in Peraien, Jahrb.
geol. Beichsanst., 1877, XXVII, pp. 375-430 ; a few data as to this phenomenon even so
long ago as 1853 in C. Orewingk, Die geognost. und orogr. Verh&ltnisso des nfirdlichen
Persiens, 8vo, Petersburg, 1853, 148 pp. and map (from the Verb. Min. Ges. Petersb.^
1852, 1853).



492 EUROPE AND ASIA [partii

describes it as a broken arch with the beds dipping to the north. The
foot-hills of Sliah-Abdalusim to the south also present a steep slope to
the south and the beds are inclined to the north ; this is also the case in the
Siakuh. In considering these monoclinal foot-hills, we must, however, not
overlook the fundamental difference which exists between thfe outer border
of the Albourz and that of the Himalaya or the Carpathians. To the south
of the Albourz we stand, not on a tabular and alien foreland, but in the
midst of the Iranian folds, of which the Albourz itself forms part, and
further to the west this unity of the Iranian folds becomes still more
unmistakable, owing to the intercalation of several parallel ranges, which
extend as far as the chains of the Zfigros.

This conception of the Albourz as an arc moved to the south reproducing
the central Asiatic type is not affected even by the position of the colossal
Demavend, the volcanic cone of which, superposed over the middle of the
arc, rises about 20,000 feet above the sea. Tietze has clearly shown that
this stupendous accumulation is of a later formation than the orographic
arc on which it stands, and that the gAieral plan of the existing valleys
was already determined before Mount Demavend was built up Here we
may €^pply all that has been said on an earlier page with regard to the
great volcanos of Sumatra and the Caucasus, and especially as to the
relations which exist between them and the foundations on which
they rest. —

The first great parallel range which accompanies the north-west branch
of the Albourz is the Karaghan Dagh, from 8,000 to 9,000 feet in height.
It has been crossed by Wahner and found to consist of syenite, porphyry,
and other eruptive rocks associated with deposits, which, so far as is
known, are not older than the Eocene ; the petrographical composition is
thus such as we have so often met with before in other mountain chains.
On both sides of the range the first Mediterranean stage and the salt-
bearing series are present ; they have also been involved in the Iranian
folding^.

The ranges between the Albourz and the chains of Zfigros now increase in
number ; they run through Aberbijan, and great volcanic mountains, such
as Sawalan .and Sahend, rise between them ; they reach the ‘Araxes, and
here new folded ranges appear even to the north of the line of the Albourz,
as though the ranges which have sunk between Ashref and Asterabad
into the Caspian sea, and those which have disappeared on the Atrek
beneath the steppe, were again coming into view \

^ £. Tietze, Der Vulkan Demavend in Fersien ; Jahrb. gcol. Reichsanat., 1878, XXVIII,
pp. 169-206, map. Stebniizky, in opposition to other observers, does not admit a greater
height than 18,600 feet (according to trigonometrical measurements from the Caspian
sea).

* F. Wahner, Letter in the Anzeig. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 22 June, 1882, pp. 143-145.

’ Khanykof in Abich, Bull. Acad. P^tersb., 1858, XVI, pp. 340-352. In determining



ARMENIA AND ARARAT


493


OH. vnt]

In Armenia, however, the volcanic ejectamenta and lava flows attain
such dimensions that they determine the form of a great part of the
surface. The folded chains are faulted down and covered up, so that the
fundamental features of the structure are completely masked. For deeper
insight many^years of devoted labour were required, a great problem was
•propounded; it found the master who was to solve it in Hermann
Abich^

In the following paragraphs I hope to give with sufficient exactitude
the chief results of Abich’s numerous treatises on this region.

The west Iranian chains (Zfigros and Albourz) proceed from the south-
east towards Armenia ; another series, equally important, advances from
the south-west. These are the Tauric chains. They occupy the whole
region comprised between the southern border of the Taurus and the shores
of the Black sea, near Trebizond; the two longitudinal valleys of the
Djoroh which unite near Beiburt, mark the general direction of the trend
from east-north-east to north-east. The two chains, the west Iranian
and the Tauric, tend to unite, but iiere the result is not, as on the Jehlam,
syntaxis, either in an arc or at an acute angle ; the region of syntaxis has
c'ollapsed, and it is here precisely that the mightiest volcanic regions are
found, as, for instance, the volcanic table-land from Ardahan to lake
Tchildir, the plateau of Kars, that of the Alagdz, the broad base of Ararat,
of Tandurek, and others. The Meskian mountains, however, composed of
Archaean rocks, which east of Kutais extend with a north-east trend to
the foot of the Caucasus and form the watershed between Bion and Kur,
arc a part of the Tauric chains. —

I cannot here enter into detail as to the manner in which the subsidence
of the syntactic chains has taken place, but I will by way of example at
least attempt to describe the chief features of the country between Ararat
and lake Goktehai, as they appear from Abich*s descriptions

The cone of Ararat rises 16,926 feet above the sea and descends on
the north and north-east to the valley of the Araxas, which in this part
of its course has an altitude of 2,500-2,600 feet : the height of the cone
itself therefore exceeds 14,000 feet. It rests on a basis of in-sunken
Devonian and Carboniferous formations, which crop out at the bottom of

the directions of the mountains it is necessary, in order to find the true strike of the
folds, to exclude the volcanic regions from consiclcratiion.

' H. Abich, Das Meschische odor KarthlMmerctinische Griinzgebirgo in gcol. und
climat. Beziehung, Bull. Acad. Petersb., 1851, IX, pp. 29 45 ; Gcol. Bcobachtungen
auf climat. Reisen in den Gcbirgslandern zwisclien Kur und Araxes, 4to, Tiflis, 18()7 ;
also, Geol. Forschungen in den kaukasischen Liindern, II, Geol. des armen. Hochlandes,
Westhiilfte, 4to, Wien, 1882, particularly pp. 5-11, and in many other places.

* H. Abich, Der Ararat, in geneiischcr Beziehung betrachtet, Zeitschr. Deutsch. geol.
Ges., 1870, XXII, pp. 69-91, pi., and in particular Geol. Forschungen in den kaukasischen
Lender n, II, Atlas, map ii.



EUEOPE AND ASIA


494


[PABT n


the valley and also on the south-east side, where they form the shoulder
of the Maku mountains.

On the other side of the Araxes, the same Palaeozoic formations appear;
their beds dip to the north and form a steep scarp on the Dsynserly-dagh,
and then serve as the basement of the ne^t chain of folded sediments.
Dsynserly-dagh, however, is itself a part of the south Karabagh, one of
the west Iranian parallel chains which run down from the south-east.

The south Karabagh sinks, before reaching the Goktchai, beneath the
broad volcanic plateau of the Agmangan; this rises in the Aghdagh to
11,711 feet, and its east side forms the south-west margin of the lake, while
the west side slopes down to the Araxes. — The second parallel chain is
completely buried under the volcanic plateau of the central Karabagh. — ^The
third parallel chain, the northern Karabagh, terminates at the south-east
comer of the lake. — ^The next chain, the Ganja and Goktchai mountains,
also closely packed against tho preceding ranges, forms the north-east shore
of the lake, and shows a tendency to leave the north-westerly direction* of
the preceding chains and to pass through an arc into a westerly direction.
Indeed the western prolongation of the Pambak mountains does attain an
almost due east to west strike ; this chain is suddenly broken off, to the
west of the north end of the lake, opposite the ash cone of the Alagaz,
13,436 feet in height. To the north the mountains of Besorbdal running due
east and west meet the offshoots of the Pambak, which are directed to the
west ; near Alexandrapol the crescentic parallel chains sink beneath the
widely-extended volcanic accumulations in which the upper Arpatchai
has excavated its bed.

Thus the Iranian arcs seek, as it were, to unite with the Tauric
arcs, and if we look at Abich’s beautiful map of Russian Armenia we shall
be tempted to make a comparison with the ‘ Lagem,’ the eastern spurs of
the Jura, although the Lagem are only ramifications and not syntactic
arcs.

This is even moira applicable to the spur which further south rans
across from the Tauric chains as the Tchatin-dagh. In order to properly
define its pasition, we must return to Ararat.

The volcanic ridge of Ararat lies directly south of the curve connecting
the chains ranning to the north-west with the spurs directed to the west.
A similar curve is indicated in the alignment of the volcanos. Abich
emphasizes the fact that the line in question rans to the north-north-west
from the Little to the Great Ararat and to the Kipgoell, while from the
Kipgoell the mighty chain of volcanos turns due west to lake Baluchgoell,
as though these volcanos stood on a cleft in the strike of the syntactic
chains. Towards the south they descend to the plateau of Bajuzid, and
this is followed on the south by the volcanic series of the Tandurek, which
also rans to the west.



THE TAUBUS


OH.-vni].


'495


To the north of Baluchgoell, however, i. e. north of the western end of
the Ararat series, there rises out from beneath the volcanic accumulations
the - extremity of that great spur, the Tchatin-dagh. It is the most
characteristic of the syntactic arcs. It encloses the region of the sources
of the Murad, separates it from the Araxes, and proceeds far to the
west-south-west. —

The Caucasus, with unaltered course, runs obliquely past the region of
syntaxis, just as the Thian-shan passes the syntaxis lying in front of it on
the south; and now we are able to recognize on the map those places
where the contour of the inland seas is determined by the structure of the
land. The southern shore of the Caspian corresponds with the arcs of west
Iran ; that of the Pontus, in the bay of Trebizond, with the Tauric arcs, and
the promontories of Apshcran and Taman coincide with the trend of the
Caucasus.

Striking as the contrast between the direction of the mountains of
Kashgar and that of the Thian-shan may be, yet I know of few examples
on the whole surface of the earth of a contact between two different
orographic directions, so intimate as that on the upper Bion between
the north-easterly trending Meskian mountains and the south foot of
the Caucasus. On the outer border of the Carpathians we have seen the
folds of a great mountain range approach towards and even advance over
another range — the Sudetes, in which the succession and character of the
sediments are essentially different. In the Caucasus we now witness
the encounter of two folded ranges having a different trend as well
as a fairly different development of the strata. It is particularly the
Subdivisions of the Cretaceous system rich in Actaeonella and Hippurites
(recalling the valley of Gosau), and the richly fossiliferous older Tertiary
beds, which appear in the Meskian mountains and further to the south,
with characters such as distinguish our Alps but are alien to the great
zone of the Caucasus.

The Tauric chains are not strictly parallel. The most northerly ranges,
of which the shores of the Black sea near Trebizond form part, are
deflected, in their course from Batum through Lasistan, from south-south-
west to south-west and west-south-west. The more southerly ranges
preserve the gentler curve with which we became acquainted in the
Tchatin-dagh, and* which recalls in so many respects the Tertiary arcs on
the Jehlam (PI. IV) ; their prevailing direction is west-south-west *. Un-
fortunately neither the excellent works of Russegger and Tschihatscheff,
nor Kotschy's travels, afford us more than an incomplete knowledge of the
structure of the Anti-Taurus and the Bulgardagh. We know, however,


* The direction of these chains is most clearly seen from the little map of Tschihatscheff
in the Bull. Soc. g^ol., 1851, 2* sdr., VIII, pi. vi.



496 EUROPE AND ASIA [pakt h

that the chain continues in a west-south-west and south-west direction
to Tarsus on the coast, and that parallel ranges of forelying hills terminate
on the lower Orontcs.

Cernik gives a general survey of the southern region of syntaxis ; from
which we learn that in the valley of the Euphrates, the cHys containing
asphalt extend far beyond Deir, and that in Syria gypsiferous Tertiary
strata occur between Homs and Palmyra, probably identical with the
‘ gypsiferous series ’ of Loftus already met with on the border of the
Zagros and evidently widely distributed in Mesopotamia. Somewhere
in the locality where the outer borders of the Iranian and Tauric chains
should meet lies the broad basalt mass of the Karadja-dagh, and on
a north-eastern spur there rises the sombre town of Djarbekr, partly
constructed of basalt. A curious question is suggested, however, by the
observations of Russegger and Cemik. A range of considerable importance,
the Jebel Scnayeh, runs down from the east side of the Anti-Libanon in
a north-east direction, and passes beyond Palmyra. At the same time the
Libanon and Anti-Libanon diverge perceptibly from the meridional line of
the Jordan valley, and run to the north-north-east, as though they were
about to enter into relation with the Taurus, of a nature which must for
the present remain indeterminate

In a corresponding manner the structure, the nature of the rocks, and
the position of Cyprus show that in this island we have before us the con-
tinuation of the Taurus. Cyprus consists of two arc-shaped mountain
masses, separated by the plain of Nicosia. The northern ridge, which
forms the whole north coast as far as cape Andreas, consists, as we know
from Gaudry and Unger, of Cretaceous limestone and Flysch, with intru-
sions of gabbro, greenstones, and serpentine. The great southern chain, the
Troodos, consists exclusively of the latter rocks, exactly like the mountains
of Antioch. Recent Tertiary deposits lie in the basin of Nicosia K

^ J. Cernik’s Techn. Studien-Expedition durch die Gebiete dea Euphrat und Tigris,
edited by A. Preih.**v. Scfeweiger-Lercbenfeld ; Petermann’s geogr. Mitth., 1875, J876,
Erganz.-llefte 44 and 45, maps, in particular I, p. 10; also the little map in Fuchstein,
Sitzungsber. Akad. Berlin, 1883, I, p. 29. The serpentine in the valley of the Tigris has
been described by W. Smyth, Geological Features of the Country round the Mines of the
Taurus in the Pij^halic of Diarbekr, Quart. Journ. Gcol. Soc., 1845, I, pp. 330-340.

* A. Gaudiy, Gcologie de ITle de Chypre, Mem. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1859, 2® s^r., VII,
pp. 149-314, map ; F. Unger and T. Kotschy, Die Insel Cypern, 8vo, Wien, 1865. Cyprus
appears indeed to be simply the continuation of the two bands of serpentine, Euphotid
and Cretaceous limestone, which under the names of Mussa-dagh (Amasus) and Jebel Okrah
(Cassius) reach the Mediterranean on both sides of the Orontes ; this supposition is only
opposed by the fact that the north part of the Jebel Okrah presents, according to Russegger,
a strike in the opposite direction (Keisen, I, pt. 1, p. 450). The relations of Libanon to
the Taurus are an open question and fresh investigations are much to be desired. The
Tertiary beds of gypsum appear to run from Schugr on the upper Orontes and to reach
the sea ; according to Pruckner they occur on the summit of the Jebel Okrah. Antioch
stands, according to Ainsworth and Russegger, on serpentine.



THE DINARIC RAl^GE


497


c?H. vra]

The Dinaric range. Our previous descriptions of the Alps have shown
that the relations of the Dinaric range are ^peculiar and even abnormal.
We have been unable to include it in the diagrammatic representation
which we have given ‘of the trend-lines (pp. 232 and 480). The peri-
Adriatic faults and flexures of the southern Alps, which arc overthrust
from the north-west, north, and north-east, meet the Dinaric flexures and
faults, which are overthrust from the north-cast. The latter determine the
course of the Dalmatian coast ; they run towards the south-east or south-
south-east. In the same direction strikes that series of long folds which
begins already in the neighbourhood of Laibach, includes the Karst, and
in Bosnia, Herzegovina, and Montenegro exposes Palaeozoic rocks in broad
anticlinals.

To the north-east of these Palaeozoic rocks, there lies a zone of Flysch
and serpentine which makes its first appearancjo in the south of Croatia.
This, as Mojsisovics has shown, is held fast, as it were, against the Save by
isolated granite bosses which protrude along its outer border; it then
proceeds to the south-east and east-south-east. To the south-west of the
Palaeozoic formations, a zone of Cretaceous limestone and Flysch extends
along the margin of the Adriatic sea, travei'sed by faults and flexures
which take the same course: it is this zone to which wo have already
called attention as occurring in fragments on the Italian coast.

Tietze’s latest treatises on Montenegro, and the older works of Bond and
Viquesnel, show that the Dinaric chain is continued with the same trend
still further to the south-east. From the investigations of Neumayr,
Bittner, Teller, and L. Burgerstein in the north of Greece, as well as those
of Boblaye in Morea, we learn besides that this same direction is maintained
with only very trifling deviations through tlie Acroceraunian mountains
and Acamania, then parallel to these, through the Pindus, the Gabrovo
mountains and the Actolian Alps, as well as through the whole of the
Morea as far as capes Matapan and Malia.

More recent investigations in the north of Greece, atid especially the
synthesis of the tectonic features by Neumayr, teach us, however, still
more

The whole country is thrown into folds. But while on the west Pindus
and the Aetolian Alps continue the I^naric direction to the south-east and
south-south-east, on the east of these mountains all the folds exhilat
a tendency to bend in an arc to the* south-east and east, and finally
leven to the east-north-east and north-east. As arcs of this kind wo may
mention Othrys and its prolongation as far as the gulf of Volo, where
it is completely bent round to the north-east ; then Octa and Saromata,

I

^ The works in question are contained in Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1880, XL ;
M. Neumayr, Tektonischer Theil, Uberblick Ober die geologischen VerhSLltnisse eines
Theiles der ilgaischen Eastenlilnder, II, pp. 383-395.

K k


SOLLAS



498 EUROPE AND ASIA [partii

Parnassus, Helicon, and the transverse chains of Euboea ; further,
Cithaeron, Fames, and agaifi the transverse chains of Euboea. To these
must be added the fragmentary arc of Gerania near Megara, the island of
Salamis, Aegaleos, the hills of Athens and Pentelicus. Parallel to the
arch of the Pentelicus runs the arch of Hymettus. Thus t|^e direction in
tlie west of northern Greece is towards the south-south-east, but in the east
towards the east-north-east and north-east.

Tlie folds bend away in an arc; but the faults repeat those of the
Dalmatian coast, preserving the Dinaric direction across the successive arcs.
This at least is the case with several of the longer faults. The result is that
the arcs are cut up. An example of this is furnished by the fault-line which
runs along the eastern border of the coast range of Thessaly and the islands
of Euboea, of Andros, Tinos, Mykonos, Amurgos, and Astropalia. By these
and similar faults the islands and peninsulas are bounded round about.
Thus then arises that remarkable contrast between the structure of the
mountains and their external contour, which finds its strongest expression
according to Teller in Euboea and the bordering mountains of Thessaly. —

All these Greek mountains consist of Cretaceous limestone and Flysch,
as well as diorite, gabbro, and serpentine ; in Attica crystalline schists are
intercalated like contemporaneous formations between the Cretaceous
beds ; older crystalline rocks appear only at a few points. As Spratt
and Raulin have shown, precisely the same rocks form the island of
Crete^f where they strike almost due east and west. It would seem
that on this island as on Cyprus the fragments of two parallel
chains are present, and if so one would extend from the eastern
end of the island to the bay of Messara, the other from the western end
to the bay of Mirabella. The three promontories in the north-west of
the island, Grabusa, Spadha, and Melekha, perhaps belong to a third
range.

Notwithstanding the correspondence of the rocks, I should hesitate, in
face of the complete difference in strike, to regard Crete as a continuation of
the folds of Greece, were it not for the sharp bending round of the eastern
folds, with which we have just become acquainted. This renders it
extremely probable that a • similar deflexion affects the chains of the west
of Greece, and with this the position and structure of Crete would certainly
correspond. I believe therefore that the principal Dinaric range in the
west is l)cnt in the same dire^tioii as the inner chains, and that Crete lies
in the continuation of some of its folds. The Dinaric branch would thus
be continued in a similiar manner through Crete, as the Taurus through
Cyprus, and we should have before us the remnants of a great arc, repre-
sented in tlie west by the Dinaric chain with Crete, and in the east by the


' V. Raulin, Description physique de File de Crete, 8vo, Paris, 1869, 2 vols., map.



499


CH. vni] SPIRAL ARRANGEMENT EXPLAINED

Taurus with Cyprus, the intervening portion having disappeared by
subsidence. This we will call the Dinaro-Tauric arc. It is constructed on
the same type as the Iranian arc.

In this way a new region becomes marked out, which includes the west
and south of^ the Balkan peninsula and the whole of Asia Minor ; at the
same time the strange insertion of the Dinaric branch in the Alps finds its
explanation.

Thus the Asiatic arcs are joined by a fresh arc, and a type of structure
is repeated such as we have so often met with before. Hochstetter had
suspected this as early as 1876. After discussing Iran and Armenia he
says : * And for the third time the branches separate, forming on the one
hand the chains of the Taurus, on the other the bordering mountains of
Anatolia, to embrace once more on the peninsula of Asia Minor a plateau
of steppes on a still smaller scale — the Salt steppe of Anatolia. Thus we
see the fundamental plan of central Asia twice repeated in miniature in
the regions of nearer Asia

The subsequent discovery of ^he very recent origin of the Acigean sea
enables us to unite the mountains of Greece with those of Anatolia, and
Neumayr, after describing the deflexion of the folds of eastern Greece,
writes in 1879: ‘With this [deflexion] we must in all probabilitj^ bring
the numerous chains into connexion which appear in western Asia Minor
with an east to west trend; it is indeed not impossible that we are dealing
with the extreme ramifications of the I'aurus of Asia Minor

Explanation of the (spiral arrangement of the Alps. The peculiar
arrangement of the several branches of the Alps determines the outline of
the western Mediterranean and the configuration of the whole of southern
Europe. The uniform direction of the tangential movement finds expres-
sion in the Jura, in the main stem of the Alps together with the Car-
pathians, in the Mittelgebirge of Hungary, on the south-east border of
the Transylvanian Erzgebirge, and in the Apennines. Wo have, however,
already observed (p. 233) that the Pyrenees have beeii movij<l.in an opposite
direction to that of the spiral system; the Dinaric branch being an alien
range may be disregarded.

In central and western Asia two groups of mountain ranges may be
distinguished with comparative clearness, namely, those which are convex
towards the south and form the syntactic arcs and those to the north of
these, which are curved in the same difcctfon but are much less convex
and run out in long straight branches. Sometimes the two groups are
united by intermediate folds, as to the east of Lob Nor; sometimes the
contrast between them is sharp and striking, as between the Kashgar

^ F. V. Hochstetter, Asien, seine Zukunftsbahnen und seine Eoblenschatze, 8vo, Wien,
1876, p. 24.

* Neumayr, loc. cit., p. 391.


E k 2



EUROPE AND ASIA


600


[part II


mountains and Thian-sliaii, or between the Meskian mountains and the
Caucasus. .

It the Dinaric range really corresponds to n part of one of these
syntactic arcs, then we might regard the main stem of the Alps as the
continuation of the northern chains, that is, of the western ramifications of
the Thian-shan.

We do in fact see two branches of the Thian-shan extending towards
Euro])e.

Tlie first is indicated by the line Alai, Nura-tau, Sheich Djeli,
Mangishlak, and perhaps by the coal-field of the Donetz and by disturbances
lying still further to the north-west.

Tlu'. second runs from the Paropamisus through Kuren-dagh and
Kopet-dagh to the Great Balkan and the mountains of Krasnovodsk, then
transversely across the Caspian sea to the Caucasus. The Sarraatian anti-
clinals form the connexion between the Caucasus and the mountain
fragment of the Crimea; this is most probably continued into the Balkans,
and h(ire we now reach that extremely violent twisting of the trend which
leads us from the Etropol Balkan and the Berkovitza Balkan, through the
Baiuit mountains and the frontier chain of Transylvania-lloumania to the
Carpathians, and finally to the main stem of the Alps. At the same time
we observe as a remarkable phenomenon that from the Caucasus onwards
the tangential movement is not, as in the Asiatic chains, directed to the
south but to the north, that the convexity of the Alpine arcs is also
directed to the north, and that on the northern border of the Carpathians
all the indications appear of an extensive overthrusting on to two fore-
lands of completely difFerent structure, the Russian Platform and the
Sudotes.

In India we have seen the Salt range, the outer border of the chains of
the Hindu Kush, squeezed in and twice sharply bent in S-like form across
its strike. Similar phenomena, but on a far larger scale, are presented by
the line which runs from the Balkans to the Alps. It would seem as if in
Asia tangential movement or lateral compression had occurred almost
exclusively in the direction of the meridians of longitude, but that here
it had taken place also in the direction of the parallels of latitude, and it
is precisely in this region that the Carpathians are driven out towards the
north in so striking a fashion.

Thus the spiral arrangement of the Alps appears to be resolved. But it
is scarcely possible at present to extend these comparisons further. The
Pyrenees might certainly be regarded as a further continuation of the main
stem of the Alps sharply bent once mor^ acrass the strike, and the direction '
and behaviour of the strike does indeed to some extent recall the Caucasus;
but at present we can offer no sort of proof in favour of such a connexion.
The Apennines, together with the chains of North Africa and the Bctic



URAL


501


CH. VIIl]

Cordillera, present a remote resemblance to the great Asiatic arcs, but the
course of these mountains is evidently influenced by the Spanish Meseta.

Ural^ Pae-khoi, and their foot-hills. Far in the east, on the other side
of lake Balkash, Tarbag-atai is continued in the low chains of the Tcliingh-
tau, and MusohketoflT, as I learn from communications he has had the kind-
ness to make me, considers it probable that south of Karakalinsk a further
fold exists analogous to that of the Tarbag-atai, of inconsiderable height, and
more than 200 geographical miles in length ; its flat ridge forms the watershed
between the sea of Aral and the Irtish. Neither a direct syntaxis nor
a gradual conjunction with the Ural has, however, so far as I know, yet been
directly observed, and thus the Ural for the present stands opposed to tlu;
chains which come from the Thian-shan as a completely foreign element.

Its structure is nevertheless completely similar to that of those
great chains. It also presents two long and almost straight branches
which unite at a swelling of the mountains in a uniform and slightly
curved arc; here also the structure is throughout unilateral ; the tangential
movement too is everywhere dii'e^ted from the interior of the arc toAvards
its outer side, and its inner border is also accompanied by ancient eruptive
rocks.

The length of the whole chain of the Urals amounts to not li\ss than
21 i degrees of latitude; the rising ground Avhich coincides witli tlic^ point
of bending lies near the mountain Pareko betAveen about lat. 64*^ IW and
65® N. ; not far from this locality most of the lofty peaks occur, in
particular Toell-poss, 5,540 feet high, situated in lat. 63" 54'. two

branches of the arc arc of uiieipial length. Huj northern branch trends first
north -north-east, then north-east, extends through only 3.1 di^grecs of
latitude, decreases rapidly in height, and terminates in lat. 6H" 20' in the
Konstantinov-Kamen. The southern branch runs for a long distaiuje in
the direction of the meridian, then splits into three branches Avhich show
a tendency to diverge to the south-south -Avest, and finds its further
continuation in the meridional double range of Wie Mwgodjavs, which
consist of older crystalline rocks, augite porphyry, and other eruptive
rocks.

Green Cenomanian sandstone lies horizontally and unccyiforin.-ibly on
certain parts of the JVfugodjars, a proof of their great anticjuity. A ridge
of this flat-lying green sandstone, situated near the liead wabu’s of the
Tchassan, represents, as Ssewcrzow and Borszczow liavo shown, an orogra-
phic, though not tectonic, link of connexion between these low ancii nt ciiains
and the horizontally stratified table-land of the Ust-Urt ; and along this line
of union lies the Avatershed between the sea of Aral and the Qaspiau \

^ N: Ssewerzow and J. Borszczow, Geol. Beobachtungen angestellt in d. w. Thcile der
kirgis. Steppe, Bull. Acad. Petersb., 1860, II, p. 202 ; SsewerzoAv, 1st der Ust-Urt eine
Fortsetzung dea Ural-Gebirges ? op. cit., 1862, IV, pp. 483-487. A section of the more



502 EUEOPE AND ASIA [part ir

The southern branch of the Ural in its entire length up to the Ust-Urt
extends over 18 degrees of latitude.

After what has already been said as to the unilateral structure of the
Ural, it will be readily understood that all the mineral treasures, which
hav(^ made this region so famous, belong to its eastern side.^ The west is
formed by long folded ranges composed of Palaeozoic rocks. In these
the tangentitil movement has produced such marked effects that Karpinsky's
sections, from tlie 51st and 52nd degree of latitude, show considerable over-
folding, inverted bedding, and a contrary easterly dip in the folds
situated to the cast; normal folds do not appear till we proceed further
to the west. Thus inverted flakes appear to occur, especially between
the rivers Tka and Ulak. This inversion is continued through the
central Ural, where its extent long ago attracted the attention of
Murchison b

Further to the north, between 56° and 58®, Karpinsky found coal-
measures lying in long meridional folds, and extending as far as the* east
side of the mountains ; these are transformed for considerable distances into
grapliite. The associated plant remains remove all doubt that might be felt
as to tljis transformation. It is the same phenomenon observed by Toula in
the eastern Alps, and must be regarded as the result of extreme pressure ?.

Those parts of the Ural, however, which afford important material for
comparison, lie much further to the north in a region which has been
described in a imxsterly manner by E. Hofmann ^ whose account, though
s(^mevvhat antiquated, I now follow.

Hofmann includes in his investigations the northern part of the meri-
ilionally directed Ural, the region of deflexion, the northern branch as far as
the Koiistantiriov-Kamen, and next on the north the chain of Pae-khoi down
to the sea. On the Tchoval, in lat. 60° 50', the whole stratified series
which lies next the crystalline schists dips to the east in a reversed
direction beneath the schists, and these themselves also dip to the east.
This is the same inversion as that which we have already mentioned as
occurring far in the south ; it appears again on the Kolva in lat. 61° 20',
on the Unja, where the Carboniferous beds lie beneath the Silurian, and
•

northerly part of the Mugodjars is given by Jakowlcw, in Helmersen, op, cit., 1883,
XXVIII, p. 364 et seq.

* A. Karpinsky, Geological observaticnis in the Government of Orenburg, Verb. russ.
Min. Gesellsch., 1874, 2. Ser., IX, pp. 212-310, map and plate (in Russian) ; Murchison,
Verneuil, and Keyserling, The Geology of Russia in Kurope and the Ural Mountains,
4to, hondoni 1845, p. 463.

® Karpinsky, Geological studies and search for coal on the east side of the Ural;
Gornoi Journ., 1880, pt. i, pp. 84-100, map (in Russian).

* Ernst Hofmann, Der N. Ural und das Kustengebirge Pae-choi, 4to, Petersb., 1856, II,
])p. 207-281, atlas; also A. G. Schrenk, Reise nach dem N.-O. des europaischen Russland,
8vo, Dorpat, 1854, 11.



THE AECTIC UEAL


603


CH. VIIl]

on the Shtchugar; everywhere the stratified series dips to the east,
while on the Iltysh forelying folds are known with an inclination to west
and east. On the Toell-poss the ancient schists are vertical or dip steeply
to the west. Between lat. 63° and 64° a great mass of granitite makes its
appearance ; this rock predominates when the chain becomes broader, on
the eastern side, while towards the west diorite prevails. In the region
of curvature granite and gneiss appear to be present over considerable
areas. Near the Pareko, on the brow of the bend as it were, at the west
foot of the main chain, the talc schists are seen again inclined with reversed
dip to the east ; a similar dip is shown by the Palaeozoic deposits, situated
in front next the western plain, and as well by the whole western border
of the north branch, which now bends off to the north-north-east. In
66° 30', where the direction of the chain passes in a curve from north-
north-east to north-east, serpentine and Palaeozoic limestone occur inclined
to the east, in lat. 67° and 67° 30' the Palaeozoic range of Jenga-Pae
occurs with a similar inclination, and in the Pae-Putna-jalia in 67° 22'
richly fossiliferous Carboniferoiii limestone dips in the same direction.
Here the mountains, rugged, wall-like, and treeless, rise out of the level
tundra. Finally wo reach the precipitous Konstantinov-Kamen, in
68° 29'. It consists of grey quartzite and schists resembling talc-schist and
chlorite schist ; on its crest lie blocks of red granular quartzite. The strata
dip towards the south-east. On three sides it is surrounded by shallow
lakes of the tundra ; the sea is only 30 to 35 kilometers distant.

This chain forms the sharply defined northern end of the Ural. At its
foot in lat. 68° rises the parallel range of Paemboi, which runs from south-
west to north-east. The dip towards the east which pi’ovails over the
whole distance observed, from 60° 50' to 68° 29', establishes the fact that
in the northern as in the central and southern Ural the tangential move-
ment has been so considerable that whole zones have been overturned in
the direction of Europe. This inversion, howevef, is exhibited not on the
outer border of the Ural, but rather at those places where the lowest
basement beds crop out. —

Beyond the Konstantinov-Kamen a new chain begins. To the north
ranges of rocky hills composed of ancient schists rise one a^ter another in
the middle of the tundra. They run from east-south-east to west-north-
west, and thus take a direction almost perpendicular to that of the Ural.
Their height al)Ove the tundra scarcely* exceeds 150 feet, and they extend
as far as the mouth of the Oi-Jaha. To the west of these and of Kon-
stantinov-Kamen there rises a range of more important heights, that of
the Jodenei, also running to the west-north-west, and this represents the
beginning of the principal range of the chain of Pae-khoi, Its direction
soon changes from west-north-west and passes more and more to the
north-west; its beds become vertical, and it forms the Siwa-Pae in the



604 EUROPE AND ASIA [parth

Shar (strait) of Jugor, which is here only 8 kilometers broad. The rocks
appear to be very much the same.

The Pae-khoi now crosses the strait, traverses the island of Vaigatch,
and is continued into Nova Zemhla. This point has been placed beyond
doubt by H. Hofer, the companion of Wilczek ^ ,

Nova Zembla, says Hofer, is a mountain ridge which runs from 72® to
75® 30' N. lat. in a south-south-west to north-north-east direction, and
attains its greatest height between 73® and 74®. From parallel 75® 30' the
crest-line bends sharply to east-north- east and the range decreases in
height; below 72® the terminal ridge bends to the south-east, and then
flattens out rather rapidly. The strike of the rocks and the course of the
coasts experience the same change of direction as the crest-line. Silurian,
Devonian, and Carboniferous limestone are ki^own to occur; augite
porphyry is intercalated with the Palaeozoic deposits in the south-west
part of the island.

The whole island presents, according to Hofer, a unilateral structure,
but since hero also the strata along the‘west coast are said to dip very
generally to the east, and since Hofer points out the flattening of the coast
towards the interior as particularly characteristic, it appears aS though the
overfolding of the Ural were also about to find expression in this arc.

The Shar of Jugor, the straits of Kara, and the Shar Matotshkin
are thus transverse furrows, like the straits of Gibraltar. They cross
a uniform mountain arc, which begins with the Jodenei and ends in the
tundra in front of the Konstahtinov-Kamen, where it meets in syntaxis the
northern Ural and its frontal chain, the Paemboi, —

The principal chain of the Ural, running from north to south, is
ac ompanied on the west by numerous parallel chains which are known
as Parma, and distinguished as the High Parma, Idschid Parma, and so
on. These Parma, as far as they are known, are frontal folds, and mark
the dying away of the folding as it proceeds towards the plain ; they can
only appear in fr6nt ofrsuch hills as are preceded by a country of the same
nature as themselves. If a plateau of alien nature stretched before them,
there would be no Parma.

The best proof, however, of the tectonic unity of the folded Ural and
the table-land in front of it is furnished by a peculiar feature, which
deserves our full attention.

At the Poljudov-Kamcn near Tcherdyn, in about lat. 60® N., a long
ridge proceeds from the Ural, which extends beyond the arctic circle;
this is the Timan range. It runs at first to the north-west, rapidly

' Graf Wilczek’e Nordpolarfahrt im Jahre 1872 ; H. Hofer, Ueber den Ban Nowaja
Scmlja’s, Petermann*8 geogr. Mitth., 1874, pp. 297-305 ; F. Toula, Eine Kohlenkalkfauna
von den Barents-lnseln, Sitzungsber. Akad. WisB. Wien, 1874, LXXI, pp. 527-608,
and plate.



TIMAN RANGE


505


CH. VIIl]

diverging from the Ural, then to the north. Together with the Ural it
bounds the river basin of the Petchora. At many points it presents
outcrops of ancient clay slate ; of the Palaeozoic deposits the most widely
distributed is the Devonian. The range does not exceed 850 feet in its
highest part. » Keyserling was the first to recognize its importance ; Schrenk
and Stukenberg have described it in greater detail ^

Beyond the arctic circle, near the watershed between the rivers Sula
and Wolonga, this long range assumes sharper contoura, bends suddenly to
the north-west, and reaches the sea in the north-east of the bay of
Tchcsskaja. In structure it is an anticlinal : its axis consists of granite ;
this is succeeded on each side by clay slate, then follows some Silurian, and
with a broader outcrop Carboniferous; a thick sheet of dolerite is inter-
calated with the Palaeozoic beds. These rocks form the capes Rumaiiishni,
Barmin, and Tchaizyn. The long spur of Svjatoi Noss is formed by the
Carboniferous limestone of the north flank. This is overlaid towards the
interior by a patch of the Inocevamus clay of Simbirsk, a witness to the
age of this part of the fold. According to the statements of the botanist
Ruprecht, the range is continued obliquely through the peninsula, from
cape Mikulkin to Kanin Noss

As Stukenberg quite rightly points out, although the long ridge of
Timan is nowhere parallel to the Ural, yet the course of the segment
which lies beyond the deflexion exactly corresponds to that of the
Pae-khoi. We can, indeed, hardly fail to recognize that the deflexion on
the Sula may to a certain extent be regarded as a repetition of the
syntaxis of the Ural and Pae-khoi, and once more we see reproduced
on a large scale lines similar to those presented by the Tertiary land
on the Jehlam. On the shores of the Arctic Ocean the funda-
mental tectonic features are the same as in the sunny plains of the
Indus; and the great folded ranges have been developed in a similar
manner, here before the ui)per part of the Jurassic, there after the upper
Tertiary. The direction, it is true, differs wholly :• while over the whole
distance from Asia Minor to the Sunda islands we have recognized
a tangential movement, directed, in spite of all local deflexions, mainly to
the south; here the movement is directed to the west in Jthe Ural, and
in the Pae-khoi even to the north-west.

Summary. Five great arcs turned towards the south align themselves

' A. Graf Keyserling, Wissenschaftliche Beobachtungen aiif einer Reise in d. Petschora-
land, 4to, Petersb., 1846, pp. 337-406; Schrenk, op. cit., I, i)p. 634-702,; A. Stukenberg,
Report on the Geological Expedition into the basin of the Petschora and the Timan
Tundra, Material, z. Geol. Russlands, 1875, VI, pp. 1-125, map and plate (in Russian).

* This 1 derive from Schrenk and Stukenberg; Ruprecht’s publi cations *on this subject
only show that in the north-west part of Kanin heights of at most 1,000 feet occur:
Beitrftge zur Pflanzenkunde des russischen Reiches, II, 1845 ; Flores Samojed. Gisuval.,
p.5.



506


EUROPE AND ASIA


[part It

one after the other across the continent ; these are the Malay arc, the arc of
the Himalaya, the shattered outer arc of the Hindu Kush, the Iranian
and the Dinaro-Tauric arc. To these must be added still another, that
^which, distinguished by somewhat different characters, surrounds the
western Mediterranean. #

These arcs separate the table-land of North Africa and Arabia, and that
of the Indian peninsula, from the folded regions in the north. The Malay
arc, and perhaps that of the Himalaya, also surrounds fragments of table-
land.

Since these arcs are decidedly more curved towards the south than the
folded chains which succeed them on the north, several segments of circles
are defined, of which some are highlands, others, however, in-sunken areas,
in part covered by the sea. In the arc of the Hindu Kush alone does such
considerable constriction take place towards the south as to produce
a different conformation of the surface.

Within the table-lands thus marked out regions occur without outlet
to the sea, as, for instance, that within Vhe arc of the Himalaya, of the
Iranian arc, and of the eastern half of the Dinaro-Tauric range. The
extent of these closed basins diminishes considerably towards the west.

The Malay arc and its ‘ backland ’ have been partly broken down and
sunken in ; the same is true of the central part of the Dinaro-Tauric arc.
In both cases there appear within the sunken areas islands with strange
chiragratic forms, such as the Celebes and Halmahera, Chalcidyce and
Morea. We know from Neumayr and Burgerstein that each of the three
peninsulas of Chalcidyce possesses a different structure : Hagian Oros is
an anticlinal of crystalline schists and limestone broken across trans-
versely; Longos is formed of gneiss, Cassandra of Tertiary deposits.
This shows that the outlines are independent of the structure of the
land, and have been determined by subsidence.

On the outer border of most of these arcs, from Burma as far as the
Mediterranean, • middle!* Tertiary strata are met with either folded or
overfolded. On the coast of Makr&n more recent marine strata lie un-
conformably and horizontal. —

The folds the Thian-shan strike to the north of these arcs towards
Europe. The Paropamisus runs through the Caucasus to the Balkans and
Carpathians ; violent bendings^ of the strike occur ; the folding is here no
longer directed to the south but to^the north; it appears as though the arc
of the Carpathians had been driven out northwards over the Russian
Platform and the Sudetes.

The Nura-tau is continued through Sheich Djeli as far as Mangishlak,
and towards the Donetz.

This arrangement is clearly marked in the form of the Caspian sea, for
its outline on the south is determined by the Albourz, i. e. the Iranian arc;



)


SUMMAEY


607


cH.vni]

the peninsulas of Krasnovodsk and Apsheron correspond to the course of the
first of the just-mentioned branches of the Thian-shan, that of the Man-
gishlak to the second of these branches. The Caspian sea, as we have seen
on an earlier page, is a survival from extremely ancient times, while the
Pontus is a recent inbreak, and it is not altogether without significance
that the outline of the Caspian gives expression to the course of the
folds, while that of the Pontus does not. The Aegean sea has broken in
across the folds of Greece; the outer arcs, however, exhibit themselves
in the outlines of Crete and Cyprus.

In the outer border of the Alps and the Carpathians middle Tertiary
beds bear witness to the fact that the tangential movements were continued
into the period they indicate, and this is also the case further to the east.
In Slavonia even the Paludina beds of the Levantine stage are upturned ;
in Kertch the Sarmatian, and probably the Pontic deposits also, take
part in the folding ; in the eastern Caucasus Sarmatian beds occur at very
considerable heights and form fhe folds north of Vladikavkas. Even
much further in the east, however, on the south border of the Thian-shan,
towards the depression of Kashgar, we know from Stoliczka of the presence
with reversed dip of the Artush series, probably of middle Tertiary age ;
and Muschketoff has met with similar Tertiary deposits, as he has had the
kindness to inform me, in the Thian-shan, at heights of from 10,000 to
11,000 feet, on the Tchatyr-Kul, for example, and near the pass of
Taimurum. They extend in beds of red conglomerate and sandstone across
the Alai and Suek towards Fergana and Turkestan. —

Thus we see that since the middle Tertiary period, and up to still more
recent times, important tangential movements have taken place, and have
thrown into folds a sea-bottom which extended through the middle of
Europe and Asia, while the table-land in the south has remained as unaffected
by these movements as the horsts and ancient fragments of central and
western Europe. The latter, it is true, have also been moved to the north-
west, north, or north-east, and this movement •finds expression with
particular clearness in the Belgian coal-fields ; but the folding of the Alps
was accomplished independently, and is checked or deflected by these
masses. ^

Diflferent again is the behaviour of the isolated mountain segment of
Matchin on the Danube. The upper Jur^sic and the Cenomanian lie
horizontally on its upturned strata. No connexion with the long folds we
have just mentioned is to be recognized.

Equally different in age and direction are the Ural, together with the
Pae-khoi, as far as Vaigatz and Nova Zembla, and the Timai^ range with
the peninsula of Kanin. Here, too, syntactic arcs are present, but the
upper Jurassic lies horizontally on the slopes of the Ural, and similarly the
Cenomanian on the heights of the Mugodjars.



608


CUAPTEB IX
SOUTH AMERICA

The Brazilian maFS. The Argentine chains. The Andes of Bolivia and Chili. The
coast Cordilleras and Patagonia. Peru. Ecuador. North Granada and Venezuela.
Summary.

The Brazilian mass. Let us now approach the broad continent of
South America from the Atlantic ocean.

Tlie islands lying off its coasts are but few, and on those volcanic rocks
predominate. Fernando Noronha consists of phonolite and basalt; even
on the Ahrolhos a volcanic rock, probably basaltic, occurs intercalated
with beds which presumably belong to );.lic Cretaceous system. On the
continent, liowcver, with the exception of a few extrusions of igneous
rocks, which at the latest extend into the Cretaceous, no trace of recent
eruptive activity is anywhere to bo seen.

Since the opening decades of the last century, when a more detailed
knowledge of the structure of Brazil was furnished by Austrian miners and
travellers, geological observations have been multiplied in this vast region,
and the efforts of Hartt,too early lost to science, and tliosc of his successors,
have made us acquainted with the outlines of its structure ^

We will land in the famous bay of Rio, then, after a hasty glance at the
interior, approach the jirovinces on the cast coast ; after this we will
.consider the structure of the great basin of the Amazon, and, finally,
passing beyond the boundaries of Brazil, that of Guayana as far as the
Orinoco. Here on the Apur^ and Orinoco wc reach the northern limit of
a great uniformly constructed portion of the earth's crust, which may be
designated the Brazilian mass.

Rio do Janeiro is surrounded by the oldest rocks of the continent. Far
to the south, along the whole of its course through the province of Sao
Paolo, the Seri-a do Mar breaks oft’ abruptly on the side facing the sea.
The Parahyba collects its waters in a longitudinal valley parallel to the
coast, «and, then cutting across the strike of the ancient mountains of
gneiss, finally reaches the sea; but on the other side of this valley the
waters flow inland and the watershed of the vast continent lies close to its
coast. It is as though on leaving the sea we liad climbed the edge of
a basin, as in the parallel case of the GhAts in India.

Further towards the interior, in Serra Mantiqueira and far away to the

* C. F. Hartt, Geology and Physical Geography of Brazil, 8vo, Boston, 1870.



THE BRAZILIAN MASS 609

north and north-west, a great variety of rocks is met with, unfossiliferous
schists and quartzites, hornblende and talc ipcks, granular limestone, and
the itacolumite series, which many geologists regard as the upper sub-
division of the Archaean succession, but others, including Hartt, as in part
at least lower Silurian \

On these rest gi*eat horizontal masses of Devonian and Carboniferous
deposits, and then, finally, a thick covering of unfossiliferous sandstone
broken up into table mountains.

The province of Parand to the south of llio affords, according to the
description of Orville Derby, a good example of this succession of rocks.
On account of the rare beauty of its scenery, the Serra do Mar is here
known as the Serra Graciosa. It rises abruptly from the sea, running east-
north-east, with steeply inclined strata. It consists of granite, porphyritic
rocks, and schistose gneiss, as.sociated with very ancient eruptive rocks.
Further to the west, we meet with serpentine and marble, talc-schists, quartz-
ites and itacolumite, and all the members characteristic of tlio more recent
series, wliich proceed through Bahia and Minas Geraes, and probal)ly also
through Rio Grande do Sul. About 50 kilometers west of Curia-tyba
a steep cliff runs transversely across the province of Paranfi from north to
south. Its lower part consists of the same later Archaean or lower Sihn-ian
series, in steeply inclined beds; the upper part, on the other hand, of
horizontal beds of coarse white sandstone, whicli is traversed by numerous
dykes of greenstone. Still further to the west shales are intercalated
containing Devonian fossils. On the Irahy a siliceous limestone of
Devonian age also appears. The Carboniferous system is probably also
represented. The surface of the ground sinks a little, and we encounter
a second cliff, the Serra de Esperanya, with a height of 1,040 meters above
the sea. This runs transvei'sely across the whole province. The lower
part consists of soft red sandstone, the up])cr of a sheet of amygdaloid,
100 meters thick or over. This great covering, which is probably of
Mesozoic age, appears to approach the Serro do Man on the south and to be
very widely distributed in UiTiguay

Exposures of Devonian and Carboniferous are continued, on the one
hand, through Rio Grande do Sul, on the other through Saq Paolo ; hi the
Maranhao and Matto Grosso, on the Guapord, and on the upper Paraguay,
Carboniferous strata are said to occur. Horizontal, or at least very
gently inclined beds of unfossiliferous "sandstone appear in Minas Geraes
and Sao Paolo, as the remnants of a once-continuous covering of sandstone,

^ An attempt to determine these formations still further and to compare them with
the mountains of North America has been made by W. 0. Crosby, On the Age and
Succession of the Crystalline Formations of Guiana and Brazil, Proc. Hoston Soc. Nat.
Hist, XX, 1880, pp. 480-497.

• Orville A. Derby, The Geology of the Diamantiferous Region of the Province of
Parana, Brazil; Proc. Am. Phil. Soc., Philadelphia, 1879, XVIII, pp. 251-258.



610 SOUTH AMERICA [pabt ii

now broken up into isolated Chapadas, i. e. table mountains. They attain
heights of 2,000 to 3,000 rfeet above the sea, become broader towards
Matto Grosso, and then unite between the river Tocantins and Rio Sao
Francesco, to form a great continuous sheet, from which the Archaean rocks
* often project only in the form of islands ; they reach the north coast
through the provinces of Piauhy and Ceara.

The age of this sheet of sandstone is not known ; it may indeed include
deposits of different ages. —

At some places in the eastern provinces, as for instance near Estancia
in Sergipc, and in the mountains above Rio de Contas, we again recognize
the red sandstone and marl of Mesozoic age, already met with on the Serra
de Esperan^a in Parang. It is compared by American geologists to the
Trias of the eastern United States; it also recalls the similar deposits
beneath the transgressive Cretaceous on the Spanish Mescta.

On the east coast, near Camamii, south of Bahia, there occurs resting on
gneiss a friable rock, rich in petroleum, which is called turba. In Bahia
the lowest bed immediately above the gneiss is a fresh-water deposit with
Crocodilus, Melania, Vivipara, Unio, and Estheria; not far from Bahia
a bone bed, with remains of Dinosaurus and Crocodilus, occurs on the
same horizon. These beds, to which perhaps the turba of Camamii also
belongs, are regarded as the equivalents of the Wealden or Neocomian.
Above them lie marine beds of middle Cretaceous age, with Buchiceras ;
then upper Cretaceous with Inoceramus, and at the summit a deposit with
Mosasaurus. According to Hartt marine transgressive beds of the Creta-
ceous system occur in Piauhy, Ceara, Parahyba do Norte, Pernambuco,
Alagoas, and south of Sergipe as far as Bahia, probably indeed as far as
the Al)ro]hos ^ It would appear that these Cretaceous sediments underlie
the whole basin of the Amazon. The most southerly locality in which
Cretaceous fossils are found in the east is Bahia.

Very far to the west, in the Argentine Republic, we shall again meet
with fresh- water beds, containing Melania and bearing petroleum ; these
deposits crop out from beneath the west edge of the plateau of Matto
Grosso, and it is believed that they correspond to those of Bahia. Such
a remarkably wide distribution is certainly hard to understand. —

We now ent(ir the basin of the Amazon, and again follow a very
instructive description by Orville Derby, who has collected together the
results of previous investigations in this extensive depression \

^ S. Allport, On the Discovery of some Fossil Remains near Bahia, South America,
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1860, XVI, pp. 263-268 ; llartt, op. cit., pp. 263, 346, 355, 556
et passim.

^ Orville A. Derby, Contribui93eB para a geologia da regiao do Baixo Amazonas, Arch,
do Mus. Nac. do Rio de Janeiro, 1877, II, pp. 77-104 (an English translation is given
in the Proc. Am. Phil. Soc., Philadelphia, 1879, XVIII, pp. 155-178) ; also Hartt, Contri-



AMAZON


611


CH. ix]

So low does this basin lie that, far in the west, even near the eastern
slope of the Bolivian Andes, on the upper cc^rse of the Purus, Chandless
met with no height of more than 1,088 feet. From north and south the
ancient rocks advance to the great river. The oldest visible members
probably belong to the lower Silurian series. From Guay ana they are*
exposed along a line which begins on the Atlantic coast in about lat. i ° N.
and extends nearly as far as the. confluence of the Rio Branco with the Rio
Negro in lat. S. In the south the same rocks give rise to the rapids
of the southern tributaries, and the northern limit of the areas over whicli
they are exposed crosses the Tocantins in lat. the Tapajos in
and the Madeira in 8^-9° S. The Madeira appears for a long distance to form
the western boundary of their visible extension.

To the north of the Amazon a fairly broad girdle of upper Silurian
meets these older rocks in the valleys of the Trombetas, Curua, and
Maecuni, and probably along the whole length of the line. These beds
correspond to the Medina sandstone of the Niagara group in North
America. On the south side ot the Amazon this zone is not known ;
possibly it only awaits discovery.

The next zone, broader than the Silurian, belongs to the Devonian and
is divisible into several groups. It is well developed to the north of the
river, along the Silurian zone, and to the west as far as the Uatuinfi,
a little river between the Trombetas and the Rio Negro. On the south
side only traces of this zone have been recognized, but it is exposed in the
midst of the alluvial land of the Amazon, to the west of ]\ronte Alegre, as
the disintegrated outcrop of an anticlinal which strikes from east to west.

The Carboniferous deposits occupy a much larger area. On the north
side of the Amazon they extend to the east at least as far as Prainha, they
reach the river bed itself near Alemguer, an<l stretch to the west at least as
far as Uatuma. In the south thej^ extend probably from the Tocantins to
the Madeira, and are particularly well expose<l on the Tapajos.

The Palaeozoic deposits thus form a symmetri^^al basip, the centre of
which is occupied by Carboniferous beds ; and it is only the anticlinal nmr
Monte Alegre which brings Devonian deposits into view in the alluvial
land of the Amazon. —

A very remarkable gap in the Series now occurs. The next oldest
deposit, above the preceding, which has yet been recognized in this vast
basin, is a coarse sandstone. From the vicinity of Erer^ and as far as Monte
Alegre it lies on Devonian strata and contains plant remains, which are
usually assigned to the Cretaceous period. Still further iip Cretaceous

I

butions to the Geology and Physical Geography of the lower Amazonas, Bull, Buffalo
Soc. Nat. Hist. 1874. I, pp. 201 23*5 ; Rathbun, The Devonian Brachiopoda of the
Province of Para, Brazil, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., 1879, XX, pp. 14-39.



512


SOUTH AMERICA


[part n

deposits are largely developed ; west of the Madeira, on the Aquiri, in the
region of the Puriis, remain^j. of Mosasaurus and tortoises have been found
in them.

Thus during Cretaceous times the region of the Amazon appears to
* have formed a vast bay bounded by Palaeozoic rocks. Near Ererd eruptive
rocks are intruded into the Cretaceous beds.

Beds of variegated sandstone represent the later part of the Tertiary
period, and are especially well displayed on the lower course of the river
between Prainha and Almeirim. At the base of these deposits a blue clay
containing fossil shells is found at Pebas in Peru, near the mouth of the
Ambayacii. Boettger, who has examined this fauna, which has brackish
water characters, explains the beds of Pebas, on account of their peculiar
facies, as ‘formations of the lower course of the ancient Maranon, dating back
certainly from the Oligocene, and perhaps even from the Eocene period

All that is so far known of the geological structure of the country north
of the basin of the Amazon shows it to be a repetition of the regions to
the south. Archaean rocks, among which granite may bo specially
mentioned, form, it appears, the whole foundation ; they are still visible
even as far north as the confluence of the Caroni with the Orinoco. Mighty
masses' of horizontally stratified sandstone resting directly on this founda-
tion are described by Sawkins in British Guiana, between lat. 4° and 6® N.
According to the accounts of the same observer a gigantic table mountain
of this kind, traversed by numerous dykes of greenstone, forms the
horizontal summit of the Rorairna, which rises on the Venezuelan frontier,
7,500 feet high and surrounded by steep cliffs

Beyond the Orinoco, however, there lies, as we shall see directly, a land
of different structure. —

The Argentine Chains, The high ranges of South America consist of
two parts, which enter into syntaxis at an obtuse angle, in the south of
Peru and in Bolivia east of the bay of Arica. In making a detailed
examination of their j^tructure we will begin with the southern part and in
the Argentine Republic, where under Burmeister's leadership a school of
investigators has grown up, and research is more advanced than in any
other part of the great mountain region which extends from the Caribbean
sea to cape Horn.

From the Bolivian highland several pai'allel chains run from north to
south into the west of the Argentine Republic. The most westerly of

' 0. Boettger, Die Tertiftrfauna von Pebas am oberen Maranon ; Jahrb. geol. Reichsanst.,
Wien, 1878, XXVIII, p. 503.

® J. G. Sawkins, Geological Observations on British Guiana; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,
1871, XXVII, pp. 419 *433; also Atwood, A Contribution to South American Geology,
op. cit., 1879, XXXV, pp. 582 588. H. Whitely has published his views on the lofty
table mountain Rorairna and its neighbour Kukenam in Proc. Geogr. Soc. Lond., 1884,
pp. 458 and 461.



SALTA AND JUJUY


513


CH. IX]

these align themselves along the principal chain of the Andes, the most
easterly are surrounded by the Pampas. Several observers however, and
among them Stelzner, who has contributed so much to our knowledge of
these regions, have pointed out that the ranges, which rise much further in
the south-east, between Buenos Ayres and Bahia Blanca, and run to tlie
south-east, must also be included among the west Argentine sierras, as is
shown by the correspondence between their rocks \

Thus our first glance at the Andes leads us to the east, and towards
Cabo Corrientes. —

The most northerly part of the Argentine chains, extending approxi-
mately from lat. 2T to 25® S. through the provinces of Salta and Jujuy, has
been studied by Brackebusch. This is the region of the head-waters of
the Rio Vermejo. To the west, in the interior of the high ranges, it is
followed by a region having no outlet, the Salinas de la Puna. The
usual cartographic representations of this country are very erroneous, and
according to Brackebusch, whom i here follow, the position of Oran must be
earned probably a whole degree further to the west

From the Gran Chaco, near the cast foot of this northern range, there rises
first a thick scries of beds, which are characterized by their richness in
petroleum and rock-salt. They consist of variegated sandstone with dolomite
and gypsum ; contain fish remains, and in some places a great number of little
gastropods; Chemnilzia {Md&nia) Potosends, d’Orb,, appears in crowds.
Opinions as to the age of these beds are widely divergent ; Brackelmsch
places them between the J urassic and Cretaceous systems, and observes that
the quartz porphyry, which crops out here and there in the provinces of Salta
and Jujuy, is always found in association with the variegated sandstone
These petroleum-bearing dcjposits have a remarkably wide distribution ;
they probably form the subsoil of the Gran Chaco, and extend far to north
and south on the eastern border of the mountains ; Bnickebusch is inclined
to connect them with the petroleum-bearing and fresh-water beds already
mentioned as occurring on the east coast near Baliit^

These deposits, however, not only constitute the subsoil of the plains ;
they have also shared in the formation of the mountain ranges, and
appear both at tlie l)ottom of the valleys between the parallel ranges,
as long meridional bands, which advance far towards Bofivia, and also

^ A. Stelzner in R. Napp, Die argentinische RepuMik, 8vo, Buenos Aires, 1876, p. 71.
The course of these chains may be seen on the mai> in H. Burmeister, Die sudamerikan.
Republiken Argentina, Chile, Paraguay und Uruguay, Petermann’s geog. Mitth., Erg^n-
zungshefb 39, 1875.

^ L. Brackebusch, Estudio sobre la fomiacion petrolif. dc Jujuy, Bol. Acad. nac.
Udrdoba, 1883, V, pp. 137-184, and by the same, Viaje a la provincia de Jujuy, op. cit.,
pp. 185-252, map.

’ Brackebusch, op. cit., p. 181 ; for Aconquija sec also Euss, Notes sur les filons de
quartz auriferes de I’Atajo, Ann. d. Mines, 1884, XLVIll, pp. 341 et seq.

L 1


tOLLAB



614


SOUTH AMERICA


[part II

at a great height on the chains themselves, at about 5,000 meters for
instance on the Sierra de Zenta, which bounds the great longitudinal valley
of Humahuaca on the east. '

The chains consist principally of quartzite, shales, and greywacke, in
• steeply upturned beds which contain fossils of the primordial fauna and of
the lower Silurian. The principal band of Silurian rocks rims from the
great mountains of Bolivia, in the provinces of Potosi and Tarija, down
through Jujuy and Salta, and finally forms the not very high Sierra de San
Javier on the east side of the Nevado de Aconquija, west of the town of
Tucuman. Its most important parallel ranges to the west are : the Sierra
del Aguilar, which, rising from the plain of Puna to a height of 5,300
meters, brings to light the granitic basement, and next the Sierra de
Cochinocha and Sierra de Cabalonga, abounding in mines, both of which
run towards Bolivia ; the latter range is surrounded by the great trachyte
masses which form the frontier mountains. The Nevado de Aconquija
consists of granite and gneiss, and is continued northwards between the
Silurian chains ; its spurs appear on the west side of the Salinas de la Puna
and, as already mentioned, at the foot of the Sierra del Aguilar.

On the east side of tlie principal chain Silurian ranges ai’e also present ;
one of ''these, the most easterly, deviates from the general parallelism, is
deflected to the north-north-east, forms the SieiTa de Santa Barbara and
Sierra de Maiz Gordo, and dips beneath the Gran Chaco before it reaches
the Rio Vermejo.

The Silurian bands are traveled, especially in the west, by very
numerous dykes and bosses of trachyte. —

We know from Stelzner that these ranges are continued far to the south,
even down to latitude SS"" S.^ They are long and narrow, often rugged and
of considerable height, and deviate but little from a meridional direction.
On the west they are generally somewhat more closely crowded together,
on the east they stand further apart. The dip of the beds is steep. A part
of these chains consists of crystalline schists, gneiss, and granite; extensive
extrusions of porphyritic rocks, trachyte, and, more rarely, basalt are also
present. To the west of San Juan a longhand of limestone runs from north
to south. It is of lower Silurian age, as Kayser has shown from an examina-
tion of the specimens collected by Stelzner along its outcrop for a distance
of 150 kilometers. East of the Sierra Famatina runs a parallel chain,
likewise of lower Silurian age^. •

On the eastern slope of the same sierra and of its continuation to the
south, as well as at several places in the provinces of La Rioja, San Juan,

^ Stelzner, Neues Jahrb. fiir Min., 1872, pp. 193-198, 630-636; 1873, pp. 726-744.

^ E. Kayser, Ueber primordialc und untersilurischc Fossilien aus der argentinischen
Republik (also under the title Beitrage zur Geologie und Palaeontologie der argen-
tinischen Kepublik, edited by A. Stelzner).; Palaeontographica, Supplem. 1876, III, pp. 1-5.



SIEEEA DE LA VENTANA


515


OH. IX]

and Mendoza, bituminous sandstone and shales occur in long meridional
bands. These are the continuation of the; petroleum-bearing deposits of
Jujuy and Salta, but here they are of' Rhaetic age as is shown by
included plant remains.

In the sierras which occur further to the east, between San Luis and '
Cordoba, Silurian fossils have not yet been found. The most easterly
chains, and those in particular which rise near the city of Cordoba, namely,
the Sierras Ischilin, Achale or de Cordoba, and Cerezuela, consist solely of
gneiss, Archaean schists, marble, and intrusions of granite and trachyte
We now reach those chains of the province of Buenos Ayres which run
to south-east or east-south-east, and form part of Burmeister’s ‘ system of
the southern Pampas.’ There are here two chains, the Sierra Tandil,
which forms the Cabo Corrientes, and to the south of this the loftier
Sierra de la VentaTta^ which reaches a height of 1 ,030 meters. Parchappe,
the companion of d’Orbigny, and Darwin have visited them, and subse-
quently Heusser and Claraz, but it is only since the description by Doering
that it has become possible to give an account of their structure in detail
Both chains consist of the same rocks, and both are monoclinals flexed
in the same direction ; the dip of the beds is to the south-west, and the
oldest members are visible on the north-cast side.

The north-eastern border of the Sierra Tandil is formed of granite ; this
is followed by gneiss dipping somewhat steeply to the south-west, and on
this there rests unconformably, and with a much genthir inclination, a series
of talc schists, clay slate, dolomite, and well-bedded quartzite ; the petro-
graphical correspondence of this series with the Silurian deposits of the
meridional chains of the west Argentine is recognized by all the authorities
best acquainted with the country. The south-eastern declivity of the
sierra is a very gentle slope ; sometimes indeed the quartzite lies nearly
horizontal, and is broken up by erosion into table mountains.

The second range consists of several parts, generally comprised under
the name of the Sierra de la Ventana. The first payt is the long Sierra de
Cura-Malal, which comes from the west-north-west; it is continued into
the chain of Pilla-Uuincc}, to the east-south- east ; where these chains unite
' the loftier Sierra de la Ventana branches off at a very acute angle, and

^ H. B. Geinitz, Ueber rhiitisebe Pflanzen- und Thierreste in den argcntinischen
Provinzen La Rioja, S. Juan und Mendoza, op. cit. •

* Brackebusch, Informe sobre un viajo geologico por las sierras de Cordoba y de S. Luis,
Bob Acad. Cdrd., 1876, II, pp. 167-216; Steizner, in Napp, Argentinische Republik,
pp. 71 et seq. ; also republished in part in 0. Wien, Die Sierra von Cordoba, Zeitschr.
f. allg. Erdk., Berlin, 1882, XVII, p. 57 et seq., map.

* Informe oficial de la comision cientffica agregada a la expedicion al Rfo Negro bajo
l’6rd. del general D. Julio A. Roca, 4to, Buenos Aires, 1883 ; III, Geol., por el Dr. Ad.
Doering, pp. 299- 400. For parts of the Sierra Tandil cf. also Holmberg, Act. Acad. Cord.,
1884, V, pp. 28-30 and 58.



616


SOUTH AMEEIOA


[part 11

runs somewhat more to the south-east. The Sierra de Pilla-Huincd
consists, so far as it is known, of gneiss; both the other chains are
quartzite. This, however, is much more steeply upturned than in the
Sierra Tandil, often even standing vertical, and the jagged sharp edges
'of the fissured walls of quartzite present a curious contrast to the vast
plain of the Pampas, out of which they rise.

The suggestion that these sierras running to the south-east are merely
the deflected continuation of the meridional sierras, which are composed of
the same rocks, receives confirmation from the fact that further to the
west, on the banks of the Chadi-Leuvii (Rio Salado), granite and porphyry
project from the plain, and are continued to all appearance, according to
Doering, by a scries of isolated bosses as far as the pre-Cordilleras, i.e. the
eastern collateral chains of the Andes. This series runs from the Sierra
de Chorque-Mahuida, which rises in 38° 5' lat. S., on the north side of the
Rio Colorado, about 100 meters alcove the plain, is continued to the Sierra
de Lihud-Calel, about 60 to 70 kilometers to the north-north-west, near the
great Lago Urre Lauquen, then to the Si/^rra de Luan-Mahuida, which lies
50 kilometers further to the north-north-west, and by other bosses to the
Sierras of Luan-c6 and Auca-Mahuida, which are connected with the lofty
meridional chains of the pre-Cordilleras.

Still further on the east coast, near San Antonio, in the Bahia de San
Matias, an isolated rock of porphyry rises aloft.

The Patagonian table-land is formed of horizontal beds of Tertiary age,
and of others even more recent. Far to the south, at the extremity of the
continent, the bending of the Andes is completed in Staten island. This
<leflexion takes place in precisely the same direction as that of the meridional
sierras of the west Argentine towards the Sierra Tandil and Calx) Corrientes,
and towards the Sierra de la Ventana and the bosses of Choique-Mahuida,
which is indicated by a correspondence of features already considered. This
concurrence in direction shows how general the movements must have been,
and we are led to the conclusion that the branches of the Andes, on the south
and south-east, diverge from one another in the same way as the western
branches of the Thian-shan.

Over the wide plains formed by this virgation recent sediments extend
with approximately horizontal bedding. Even from Sante Maria in Cata-
marca (about lat. 26° S.), Stelzner mentions sandstone with bivalves as
a possible indication of a marine Tertiary deposit \

The Sierra de Maiz Gordo (lat. 25° to 24° S.), which runs to the north-
north-east in the province of Salta, may perhaps indicate a similar
virgation in the opposite direction.

The Arides of Bolivia and Chili. The chains of the Andes run in the
south of Peru and Bolivia to the south-east, in Chili to the south, and are
^ Stelzner, Neues Jalirb. f. Min., 1873, p. 728.



617


CH. ix] ANDES OP BOLIVIA AND CHILI

deflected in Patagonia first to the south-east and then to due east, in the
direction of Staten island. The course of thi!$ coast follows these changes
of direction very closely, and the bay of Arica, as well as the outline of
the southernmost part of America, curved so curiously to the cast, owes its,
significance to this fact.

In the south of Peru there are two very high chains and several
other parallel chains of less importance. Of the two principal chains, the
western, which forms the watei-shed towards the Atlantic Ocean, is known
as the Cordillera of the Andes, in the restricted sense, although the eastern
Cordillera, to which Illimani and Illampu belong, attains a greater altitude,
especially in its southern part. This chain is traversed by transverse
valleys, which open towards the east.

In Chili the Cordillera consists only of one principal chain, which, as
we shall see directly, must be regarded as the continuation of the western
chain of Peru. But west of this, next the sea, some very peculiar features
may be observed. Close to the com b run a number of independent mountain
segments, for which we will employ the general term Coad Cordilleras.
Between these and the eastern slope of the Andes there lies in the north
the desert of Atacama, further to the south the great longitudinM;! valley
of Chili ; still further to the south again, along the bay of Corcovado
and the Moraleda channel, the principal chain of the Cordilleras dis-
appears.

If we now compar(*. the Features represented in Domeyko's orographic
description of the province of Aconcagua with those obtained by the hydro-
graphic surveys of Captain Simpson in the south, we discover the following
relations. In the province of Aconcagua a series of deep valleys i*un from the
Andes, across the Coast Cordilleras, directly to the sea ; but on the summit of
the ridges which separate these transverse valleys is a series of shallow
saddle-like hollows, which <3ccur at a nearly uniform height of 1,200 to 1,300
meters, and along a line running from north to south, 'fhe continuation of
this line extends through the great longitudinal valfey of Chili. We miglit
almost feel inclined to suspect that, in Aconcagua, a younger system of
transverse valleys has been superposed on an older longitudinal system, so
that the position of the older longitudinal valley can -no longer be
recognized, except by the hollows which cross the summit of the transverse
ridges. In the south the case is modified. . The sea has entered into the
prolongation of the longitudinal valley, and the transverse valleys, steeply
inclined and filled with glaciers, closely correspond in position with the
straits which separate Chiloii and the various islands on the south one
from another, as though the system of transverse valleys, whioh here also
once crossed the longitudinal valley, had like it been submerged —

* J. Domeyko, Estudio del relieve, &c., Anal. Univ. Chile, 1875, XLVII, pp. 51, 60;
£. M. Simpson, Esploracion hidrografica de la Chacabuco, op. cit., 1872, p. 427, and



518 SOUTH AMEBICA [partii

The Coast Cordilleras are represented already in Peru by some frag-
ments occun*ing along the ^oast, but these do not become continuous till
some distance further south. In Chili they form chains of some importance,
.and are continued into Chiloe, the Chonos, and other islands. They form
finally the whole terminal part of the South American Ranges. The
sudden interruptions of the coast line by rectangular projections are very
peculiar; they occur also at Morro de Mejillones, south of Coquimbo, and
in the bays of Talcahiiano and Arauco. —

The syntaxis of the chains in the bay of Arica takes place very
gradually; zone by zone the mountains pass from the south-easterly
direction of Peru into the meridional direction of Chili. This may already
lie recognized in the most ancient of the sedimentary systems.

Tlic lofty eastern Cordillera of South Peru and Bolivia, the chain of
tlie Illimani and Illampxi^ with summits rising to 6,400 meters, consists,
as D. Forbes has shown, of thick Palaeozoic deposits, dipping to southr
west : at its north-east foot the underlying granite is exposed \ Strata of
Silurian age form these colossal masses, ahd nearly all the great ranges as
well, which run from the north of Cuzco through the Cordilleras of Carabaja
and Apollobamba towards the Argentine frontier. We have already
encountered the prolongation of this great Silurian zone, in the west of the
Argentine Republic, and in numerous meridional chains which extend
through the provinces of Jujuy, Salta, Tucuman, Catamarca, Rioja, up to
Mendoza.

In Peru and Bolivia the Silurian is followed on the south-west by
a Devonian zone, and this is overlaid in the neighbourhood of Lake
Titicaca by folded Carboniferous limestone. The distribution of this lime-
stone is very extensive ; it has been observed by Raimondi far towards the
north-west, near Uuanta, and by Toula in the south-east to within about
10 geographical miles of Cochabamba

In the Andes of Bolivia the next member, which immediately succeeds
the Carboniferous limestone, is a very thick series of red sandstone and
conglomerate, in many places rich in copper, sometimes associated with
gypsum, and frequently, indeed nearly always, accompanied by porphyry.
The only organic remains as yet furnished by this scries are silicified trunks
of coniferous trees, badly preserved leaves, and traces of reptiles. It has
been placed on the same horizon as the Rothliegende of Europe ; a reference

Memor. de la Marina, 1872, p. 379. This peculiar phenomenon will be again discussed
in a later passage.

^ D. Forbes, On the Geology of Bolivia and Southern Peru, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,
1861, XVII, pp. 7-62, pi. i-iii; J. W. Salter, Fossils from the High Andes, collected by
B. Forbes, op. cit., pp. 62-73, pi. iv, v.

* A. Raimondi, Letter to Gabb, Proc. Galifom. Acad., 1867, III, pp. 359, 360; F. Toula,
Ueber einige Fossilien des Kohlenkalkes von Bolivia, Sitzungsber. Acad. Wiss. Wien,
1869, LIX, pp. 433-444.



ACONCAGUA


519


' CH. IX]

suggested by many indications, but we shall* soon encounter in Chili rocks of
the same petrographical character which belonj ; to a much more recent period.

In south Peru this Rothliegcnde is the most recent member of the
eastern Cordillera and at the same time the basement of the western
Cordillera. The latter forms the watershed, and is termed, but in this*
region only, the Cordillera of the Andes.

The western Cordillera is formed of a variety of Mesozoic deposits,
principally Jurassic and lower Cretaceous. It is crowned by mighty
volcanos, superposed upon it as foreign structures.

Just as the eastern Palaeozoic chains of Bolivia correspond in constitu-
tion to the chains of the Argentine Republic, so the western Cordillera
of Bolivia corresponds in the south to the principal chain of the Chilian
Cordilleras. The oldest fossils furnished by the Bolivian Cordillera are
a species of Avicula, and some plant remains of Rhaetic age. The marine
deposits, which next succeed, bel( ng to the Lias, and the series is continued
with a marine character up to t)' i nuMdle or upper Cretaceous. Thus a
zone of Jurassic and Crotaceou." is present, which extends througli Peru,
Bolivia, and Chili as far as lat. 35“ S., and perhaps even still furtlicr K

On this zone, in the south as in the north, the volcanos are superposed.
Their ashes and flows have covered a very large part of the Mesozoic
series. The Jurassic and Cretaceous limestones are often traversed by
trachyte or otlicr eruptive rocks, and the richest deposits of silver are
associated with tlicse intrusions.

The line of volcanos runs across tlie north of Bolivia. In lat. 24“ 45' S.
Llullaico rises to a height of 6,175 meters. Then follow to the south the
volcanos del Chaco, de Dona Inez, del Azufre, and the series terminates in
about lat. 26“ S. Through eight degrees of latitude, as far as 34", recent
volcanos, according to Pissis, are absent, but still volcanic rocks occur in
this interval; thus they are found, according to Oiissfeldt’s investigations,
at a great height on Aconcagua ; and it is an open (juestion whether this
mountain, 6,970 meters in height, does not bear a crater-.

’ 1. Domeyko, Sur la geologie du Chili, et particulierement 1“ Sur le terrain de
porphyree stratifies dans les Cordilleres ; 2^ Sur le rapport qui existe entre les filons
metalliferes et les terrains du systeiiic des, Andes, Ann. des Mines, *1846, 4" sor., IX,
pp. 3-34, pi. i and ii ; and by the same, Sur la constitution geologiquc du Chili, op. cit.,
pp. 365-540, pi. iv vii, et passim ; C. Dai-win, Oeological Observations on the Volcanic
Islands and parts ol South America, 2nd ed., 1876, 'in particular pp. 470-603 ; A. Fissii,
Recherches sur les systemes de soulevement de rAmerique du Sud, Ann. des Mines, 1856,
5® ser., IX, pp. 81-146, pi. iii, iv; by the same, Sur la constitution geologique de la
chalne des Andes entre le 16® et Ic 53® degre de lat. sud, op. cit., 1873, 7® ser., Ill,
pp. 402-426, pi. ix, x ; E. Concha y Toro, Analogias entre la formacion geoldgica de
Chile y de Bolivia, Anal. Univ. Chile, 1872, pp. 538-555 ; and A. Remond de Corbineau,
Lista alfabetica de las fdsilcs que se han hallado en Chile, &c., op. cit., 1867, pp. 99-141.

® P. Gussfeldt, Der Vulcan Aconcagua von NNW., Zeitschr. deutsch. u. fist. Alpenver.,
1884, pp. 404-406, pi., and Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, 1884, p. 922.



520


SOUTH AMERICA


[PABT II

On the western slope and at the foot of the volcanic chain there lie
in the north the Salinas de Atacama and de Funta Negra, the Lagune del
Pedemal, and others, and to Ihe west of these the Jurassic and lower Cre-
taceous limestone zone of the Andes makes its appearance, forming the
eastern border of the desert of Atacama. The zone extends ,to the south
through Caracoles, the Cordon de Varas, beneath Dona Inez, and the Lagune •
del Pedernal. In front of the Jurassic chain the desert of Atacama slopes
down to the sea and to the Coast Cordillera, but isolated patches of red
sandstone occur, according to Pissis, as far as Paposo close on the coast,
and isolated outcrops of Mesozoic limestone as far as the eastern border
of the Coast Cordillera, especially to the east and north-east of Chafiaral \

When Burmeister, starting from Copocovana, in the north of the
Argentine Republic (lat. 28 " S.), crossed the end of the Bolivian highland from
the northern spurs of the Serra Famatina, he came upon red sandstone
with g3rpsuni accompanied by porphyry and trachyte near the frontier
of Chili, and finally, near Juntas on the Rio Copiapd, the mighty Jurassic
limestone zone, which extends to the soutti from the eastern border of the
desert of Atacama \

The Jurassic system has been recognized in many localities extending
in a long series down the Andes as far as the region in which Aconcagua
is situated. In this locality also the mountains, with the exception of the
most easterly parts, consist of rocks which are not older than the Permian,
or, judging by Steinmann’s results in the south, not older than the Rhaetic
period. Pissis has shown that on the western slope of the Andes the
richly fossiliferous Jurassic limestone extends through the province of
Aconcagua nearly as far as San Felipe and Santa Rosa de los Andes, and
that a Jurassic outcrop stretches along the eastern slope of the high range
of the Cerro de la Ramada to the north of Aconcagua down to the Cerro
del Juncal to the south of it \

The summit of Aconcagua itself lies somewhat to the east, outside the
principal range, .and conaists, as we have said, of volcanic rocks.

It is this Jurassic band which Steizner met with in two places, north of
Aconcagua, in the pass of los Patos (Espinazito) near the Cerro de la

^ A. Pissis, El desierto dc Atacama, su jcolojia, sus producciones i minerales, Anal.
Univ. Chile, 1877, pp. 573-597 ; geological map of Atacama by Villanueva, op. cit., 1878 ;
F. A. Moesta, Ueber das Vorkommen der Chlor-, Brom- und Jodverbindungen des Silbers
in der Natur, ein Beitrag zur Kenntnlss der geolog. und bergbaul. Vcrhaltnisse von Nord-
Chile, gr. 8vo, Marburg, 1870; likewise G. Steinmann, Zur Eenntniss der Jura- und
Kreideformation von Caracoles (Bolivia), Neues Jahrb. f. Min., &c., 1881, 1. Beil.-Band,
pp. 239-301, pi. ix-xiv ; R. Zeiller, Notes sur les plantes fossiles de la Ternera (Chili),
Bull. soc. geol. de Fr., 1874-1875, 3® ser., Ill, pp. 572- 574, pi. xvii.

* H. Burmeister and C. Giebel, Die Versteinerungen von Juntas im Thale des Rio
Copiapd, from the Abhandl. Naturf. Ges. Halle, 1861, VI, 4to, 34 pp., 2 plates.

’ A. Pissis, Descripcion topografica i jeoldjica de la provincia de Aconcagua; Anal.
Univ. Chile, 1858, pp. 46-89.



CH. ix] JURASSIC OF COQUIMBO AND COPIAPO 621

Bamada just mentioned, and south of it, at the bridge of the Incas in the
pass of the Cumbre. At both places the underlying rock apparently
consists, proceeding to the east, first of great masses of porphyry, then
of granite. At the first locality Stelzner collected those fossils which
enabled Gottgehe to identify a whole series of horizons with those of the *
Jurassic system as it exists in Europe. At the second place he came to the
conclusion that the eruptive rocks visible within the Jurassic system must bo
regarded as intrusive sills of trachyte, and not, as was formerly believed,
interbedded porphyry flows. It Avould thus be a case of intrusion along
the bedding planes, such as has been described in the north, by Moesta,
in the silver mines of Chanarcillo

This conclusion is not supported by the results subsequently obtained
by Steinmann in the Cordilleras of Coquimbo and Copiapd. According
to Steinmann, a very much altered limestone, containing a species of Avicula,
rests directly on ancient crystalline rocks. Then follows, alternating with
a system of porphyry and porphyry sandstone, a series of conglomerate,
sandstone, and shale, with a flora of Rhacitic character; tlien Gryphaea
limestone of the Lias, containing Arietites, Gryphaea arcuata, &c. ; upon
this the upper Lias ; then several stages of the inferior Oolite of Europe,
especially the zones of Jlarpoceras Murchisonae, 11. Soiverhy i, and Siephano-
ceras Sauzei Upon this last zone lies a great system, thousands of feet in
thickness, of porphyry sediments and porphyry, which range up to the
Cretaceous in age. Near Chanarcillo middle Neocomian and ITrgoniaii are
represented by limestones, also of European type ; they thin out as tlicy
become intercalated with porphyry sediineiits

It would thus seem that the beds of variegated sandstone with
porphyry, which Brackebusch observed on the summit of tlie Silurian
chains of Jujuy and assigned to the petroleum-bearing zone, should be
regarded as belonging to the Mesozoic series of the great Cordillera.

The Jurassic system now extends towards the south ; it is known to
occur beneath the volcano San Jose, also beneath that of I’inguiririca, and
indeed on both sides of the pass ‘ de las Damas.’ According to an observa-
tion by Domeyko the granite is visible at the bottom of the valley of the
Tinguiririca, on the west side of the Cordillera \ ^

Throughout the province of Colchagua, and thus down to 35' 21', the
Mesozoic strata, according to Pissis, arc confined on the west to the highest
summits of the Andes ; they attain thdr greatest d(ivelopment on the east

^ A. Stelzner, Neues Jalirb. f. Min., &c., 1872, j)p. 193-198, 630 636, and 1873,
pp. 726-744; Gottsche, Ueber jurassischc Yersteinerungen aus der a^gentinischen
Cordillera, Palaontogr., 1878, SuppU III, 51 pp., 8 plates.

* G. Steinmann, Reisenotizen aus Chile; Neues Jahrb. f. Min., 1884, pp. 199-203.

* J. Domeyko, Excursion geologica a las Cordilleras de S. Fernando ; Anal. Univ. Chile,
1862, pp. 22- 42.



622 SOUTH AMEMCA [part n

sicle^. In accordance with this Strobcl found Jurassic fossils in greenish
sandstone in the upper vall^^ ‘ de las Lehas amarillas/ nearly two days’
journey to the east of the watershed on Argentine territory. There, to
^ the east of the Andes, granite crops out, and trachyte attains an extensive
development. Trachytic detritus forms the surface of a great part, if not
the whole of the Gran Pampas del Sur, south-west of San Rafael^.

Traces of Mesozoic fossils have been found on the western slope of the
Andes much further to the south ; they are said to occur even in Chiloe.
Steinmann records Trigonia transitoria, probably of lower Cretaceous age,
from Caracoles in Bolivia, from the Cordillera of Chilian (lat. 36® 18' S.),
and even from the neighbourhood of the volcano Antuco (lat. 87"’ 16' S.). The
other accounts from these regions which are available to me are extremely
scanty, and probably relate exclusively to Cretaceous outcrops, of which
we shall soon have to record othens in the south. —

As a general result it appejirs that the principal chain of the Cordilleras,
in its course from the south of Peru through Bolivia and Chili, is built up
of sediments, which, save for some Ardhaean exposed in the south, are
certainly not older than the Permian, probably not older than the Rhaetic
period. ^ These sediments present, stage after stage, with a regularity abso-
lutely astonishing, the character of the Jurassic and Cretaceous horizons of
Europe. In the north they are chiefly developed on the west side of the
great range. To the south they are known on many passes between the
volcanos, and are found at great heights around Aconcagua, but south of
the volcano Planchon they appear to pass more and more to the eastern
slope. It would almost seem as though the universal deflexion of the
Andes to the south-east were alx)ut to find expression in the course of
this zone.

The zone supports extensive ihasses of volcanic lavas and ashes of
recent date. Great independent mountains of trachyte rise from these
or stand beside them, or in the intervals between their several parts. The
active volcanos -are sitimtcd, as we have said before, upon two distinct lines.
The northern series, from Bolivia down to lat. 26® S., is entirely superposed
upon the Mesozoic zone. ’The southern begins in lat. 34® in the same zone,
but while the t Jurassic beds appear to swerve towards the south-east, the
volcanic line continues its course to the south.

l^he Coad Cordilleras and Patagonia, The principal chain of the
Andes in Bolivia and Chili presents itself as the Jurassic zone of an
extensive system of more or less parallel chains; but when we pass to
the longitudinal depression which follows it on the west we are met with

^ A. Fissis, Descripcion topografica i jeolojica de la provincia de Colchagua ; op. cit.,
1860, pp. 659^715.

^ P. Strobel, Beitrage zur Kenntniss der geognostischen Beschaffenheit der Anden
vom 33° bis zum 35° s. Br. ; Neues Jahrb. f. Min., 1875, pp. 56-62.



CH. ix] COAST (JORDILLERAS 623

difficulties arising from the scarcity and not altogether concordant char-
acter of existing accounts, so that it is not ^asy to obtain a clear idea of
the nature of this feature.

According tcv Pissis the beds underlying the desert of Atacama consist^
(apart from the above-mentioned deposits of red sandstone and Mesozoic
limestone, which extend as far as the west side) of eruptive rocks of
different age, so arranged that the oldest rocks appear on tlie west, and
successively younger ones towards the east. In the west of the desert,
near the Cordillera of the coast, and forming part of it, ranges of syenite
are quoted by Pissis. Tliese become rarer in the direction of the great
depression, and are replaced by augite porphyry and amygdaloids, which
in their turn give way to trachyte towards tluj oast. Still furtlier to the
east, on the summit of the Andes, recent trach^^tc, lavas, and pumice occur ^

In the soutli nothing similar Inis been observe*!. Pissis states that in
the northern continuation of tht longitudinal valley of Chili and in some
of the southern parts of the valley itself, as in the provinces of Santiago
and Colchagua, the red, probably Mesozoic, sandstoms forms the greater
part of the western declivity of the Andos and a good d(‘al of the sides of
the valley. In many places the slope of the Amies is covererl by the lavas
and ashes of the volcanos. Near Teno in the province of Colchagua a great
lava stream from the Andes crosses the longitmlinal valley ami divides
it in two. A considerable part of the depression is filled with an unstrati-
jfied sheet of sandy clay, which conteins Madodon Andkmi, and presents,
according to Domeyko, great resemblance to the clay of tin? Brazilian
Pampas \

The structure of the Coad Gordilleratf is typical of that of the
great Pacific chains in general. We have already observe*! that in the
north these cliains are only represented by fragments, but that they become
continuous as they proceed to the south. Tlie rocks of which they are
composed are very much disturbed in position, often intensely folded,
and always present an ancient appearance. Emihent Chilian geologists
see in them the representatives of the richly fossiliferous Silurian an*l
Devonian formations of the high mountains of Bolivia. But in th(i whole
region of these chains no determinable trace of organic remains of Palaeo-


* Pissis, Atacama ; Anal. Univ. ChiL, 1877, p. 576, We may probably regard the
syenite as part of the Coa.st Cordilleras, thcr porphyry as Jurassic intercalation, the
trachyte as the forerunner i^nd foundation of the active volcanos.

^ I. Domeyko, Algunas palabras sobre el terreno en que se Italian huesds dc Mastodonte
en Chile ; Anal. U niv. Chil., 1868, pp. 369-374. Branco also describes Mastodon Andi inn from
far in the north, in the high table-lands of north Ecuador, which, as we shajl see directly,
occur on a line in many respects homologous to that of the longitudinal valley of Chili :
W. Branco, Fossile Siiugethierfauna voii Punin bei Riobamba, in Dames und Kayser,
Palaont. Abh., 1883, 1, p. 134. It is a species which is widely distributed, and Branco
places the deposits of Punin on the horizon of the lower Pampas fauna.



624 SOUTH ^^ERICA [paktu

zoic age has as yet been found in sitn^ and this supposition cannot therefore
be considered as established by evidence.

D’Orbigny, it is true, states that he found in the north, in the Morro
de Arica, fragments of Productus in blocks of limestone enclosed in
* porphyry, but D. Forbes, who subsequently described the Morro, did not
consider that there was sufficient proof of its Carboniferous age. He met
there with an alternation of curious porphyry and altered shales, as well as
a thin layer of limestone with verj^ doubtful organic remains, but did not
venture to form any opinion as to their age \

Further to the south gneiss and granite also appear, as well as mica-
schists and quartzites. This is already the ease in Atacama, but the black
cliffs near Cobija consist of a dark hard rock with disseminated epidote,
which D. Forbes is inclined to regard as an argillaceous sedimentary rock,
perhaps containing lime, altered by the proximity of the diorite or porphyry.

Near Mejillones granite occurs, and more to the south it frequently
reappears on the coast. To the north of Valparaiso we meet with gneiss on
the coast ; above it lies quartzite, sometimes accompanied by talc schists, and
there then follows, as the highest and most extensive member of this highly
folded and dislocated complex, a series of slates, jasper-bearing beds, and
quartzite.

Still further to the south, on the northern tributaries of the Rio Rapel;
the Coast Cordillera breaks up into a series of low but rugged hills ; soon,
however, a fresh chain with , more rounded summits comes in close to the
coast. The mountains thus proceed to the south, cross the straits of
Ancud, and form the scries of islands which lie in front of the bay of
Corcovado.

Isolated patches of a marine Tertiary formation already occur far to the
north, where they are found on the slopes facing the sea, but these only
attain a certain amount of continuity in the south, where occasional
exposures of the upper or middle Cretaceous appear among them. These
patches of Cret€w;fcous amd Tertiary rest directly on the gneiss, quartzite, or
schists of the Coast Cordilleras, and the coal mines which are worked in
them reveal the presence of numerous faults.

The most important outcrops of this kind are the green sandstone
with abundant Baculites of upper Cretaceous age, found at Tom^ in the bay
of Talcahuano and the coal-bearing Tertiary beds of the bay of Arauca; these
form the twofold indentation of the coast; they have already been mentioned
above (p. 99, Fig. 6). To the north and south of this region more recent
strata are repeatedly met with. Concha y Toro assigns approximately to
the middle Eocene period the Tertiary beds which rest against the Coast
Cordillera and descend towards the sea in the province of Santiago, and


' D. Forbes, Bolivia and South Peru; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. 1861, XVII, pp. 35, 36,



CH.IX] NAHUELBUTA. GHILOfi, CHONOS * 626

M .

particularly those which occur between Bio Maipo and the promontory of
Topocalma \

The Cordillera of Nahuelbuta runs through Arauco as a part of the
Coast Cordilleras. According to Philippi it increases towards the south both
in height and breadth, attains an altitude of 1,500 meters, and is formed of*
granite and mica-schist. On the west it is bordered by a plateau about
150 meters high, which consists of the coal-bearing Tertiary deposits K

In the bays of Talcahuano and Arauco we perceive clearly that the
patches of recent sediments follow the same direction as the Cordillera and
the coast ; we also know from Darwin that a number of small outlying
islands consist of marine Tertiary beds : jis instances of such islands we may
cite Mocha (38® 20'), Huafu south-west of Chiloo, Ypun (44° 36'), and,
according to Simpson's observation, probably also Huamblin (Socorro),
situated to the south-west of Ypun, jis well as Leniu (45° 12'). It would
therefore appear that extensive Imnds of Tertiary are present which follow
the direction of the coast.

Our knowledge of the extreme south-western and southern parts of
America rests chiefly on the observations made by Darwin now nearly
seventy years ago, and on the imporbint investigations of Steinmann, un-
fortunately only as yet made known in abstract. The general features of
the structure, so far as I can gather, appear to be as follows ® : —

From Valdivia a zone of mica-schist proceeds which forms the whole
of the west and south of Chiloe, while the middle of the island is said to
consist of granite and greenstone : in the noi*th volcanic foniiations appear,
and the east is almost entirely covered with beds of boulders and
pebbles.

In the Chonos islands we again see mica-schist and clay-slate, as well
as some ancient eruptive rocks. On the mainland Simpson, who pene-
trated up the lower course of the Rio Aysen to about lat. 45° 20' S., received
the impression that the mountains to the south, and probably also to the
north of this river, no longer formed a continuous gordillora, but consisted
of isolated mountains only united by the formation of recent alluvial land.
To the north of Aysen, at the foot of Slonte Macfi, the same observer marks
a little inactive volcano

•

^ Concha y Toro, Carbon fdsil. Anal. Univ. ChiL, p. S58 ; also Mallard et Fuchs,
Notes sur quelques points de la geologie du Chili, Ann. dcs Mines, 1873, ser., Ill,
p. 91 et seq. • *

* Philippi, Bemerkungen tiber die chilenische Provinz Arauco, Petermann’s geogr.

Mitth., 1883, pp. 453-460; also J. P. Sieveking, Geognostischc Skizzen aus der chileni-
schen Provinz Arauco, op. cit., pp. 57-61 ; the same granite range also in Pissis, Chaine
des Andes, Ann. d. Mines, 1873, p. 413. ^

’ Darwin, Geological Observations, p. 435 et seq.; Steinmann, Reisenotizen aus
Patagonien, Neues Jahrb. f. Min., 1883, 1, pp. 255-258.

* £. Simpson, Reconocimiento del rio Aysen, Anal. Univ. ChiL, 1870, p. 128 ; map of
this region in Petermann*s geogr. Mitth., 1878, pi. 24, and 1880, pi. 8.



626 SOUTH AMERICA [parth

Rocks similar to those of the Cnonds islands also form, according to
Darwin, the promontory of Tres Cerros (46® 50'); the mica-schists are
accompanied by lustrous schiets and a somewhat anthracitic schist : a great
deal of quartz is present. The mean strike is N. 19° W.

• A broad zone of sedimentary rock, which Darwin refers to as * clay-slate,'
is said by Steinmann to l)e distinguished from the rocks generally known
under tliis name by numerous intercalations of hard sandstone. It com-
mences }is far north as Valdivia, according to Steinmann, and extends along
the cast side of the mountains. This zone reaches the waters of the straits
of Magellan in the peninsula of Brunswick, forms on the south-east both
sides of Admiralty Sound, then reaches the Beagle channel nearly east of
its point of bifurcation, forms both its shores as far as the straits of Le
Maire, and, south of the Beagle channel, the entire island of Navarin, and
the eastern half of the island of Hostc and the peninsula of Hardy,
Against the northern border of this great zone there rest in Tierra del
Fuego horizontal beds of Tertiary and even more recent age : these form
the whole table-like land as far as St. Pol^ycarp's bay.

The whole of this great mountain zone is of Cretaceous age. Even far
in the north, between the Ijaguna Argentina and Laguna Rica, Steinmann
observed two horizons distinguished by different species of Inoceramus;
further south, at the foot of the Cerro Pain^ (about 51° 30'), he found
Haploceras, Ananchytes, and other upper Cretaceous fossils; finally,
two degrees more to the south, on the Rio San Juan in the peninsula of
Brunswick, he again found Specimens of Inoceramus. On Mont Tam and
at Port Famine dark calcareous beds are present ; here lower Cretaceous
fossils were found, first by Hombron and Orange, and then by Darwin :
Ancyloceras dmplex, dUrb., occurs here. Finally in the south-east part of
this zone, in Nassau bay, Dana came across great numbers of that singular
fossil, belonging to the Belemnitidac, which he called Ilelicei^s fuegends

This Cretticeous zone assumes in places a Palaeozoic appearance. The
slates are traversed by 'dykes, frequently even by great masses of an
ancient eruptive rock containing a good deal of hornblende. Old eruptive
rocks of this kind play a considerable part in the formation of the
Wollaston, Hermite, and Hoorn islands. The outlying islands, Ildefonso
and Ramirez, seem, from specimens collected by Wedell, to consist of an
ancient porphyritic lava. More recent volcanic material is entirely absent
in Tierra del Fuego.

To the west of the bifurcation of the Beagle channel, says Darwin, the
ancient volcanic rocks disappear, and we sec the clay-slate passing into
a zone of lustrous schists and fine-grained gneiss, which is followed by
a great band of garnet-bearing mica-schist. The western part of this
region appears to be formed solely of gneiss and hornblende-schist, which
^ Dana, in Wilkes, Exploring Expedition, Geology, pp. 601-606, 720.



OH. ix] ' TERMINATION OPiO'oAST CORDILLERAS 627

rest on barren granite mountains, iana it is probably these rocks which are
continued to the north through Desolation Land. The most westerly series
of islands on its coast consist again of ancient .eruptive rocks ^ —

We observe that the American mountains bend right round in tlie
south, first to the south-south-east, then to the south-east, to the east, and •
finally even, according to Darwin, to east-north-east.

Further, these southern mountains are not to be regarded, as we are
generally inclined to assume, as a continuation of the principal chain of
the Cordilleras ; they correspond to the Coast Cordillera. Judging from
descriptions, the Morro de Arica, far in the north on the coast of
Bolivia, and perhaps the cliffs of Cobija, are those which, among all the
features hitherto mentioned, present the greatest resemblance to the
mountains of Tierra <lel Fuego.

Darwin was somewhat inclined to regard the bands of gneiss and mica-
schist as altered Cretaceous rocks ; Stcinmann lias up to the present treated
this important question with groat hesitation and reserve

It has been shown that the eastern sierras of the Argentine Republic,
formed of very ancient rocks, are bent out of the meridional direction and
are continued to the south-east in Sierra Tandil and Sierra Ventana. There
are some indications which suggest that the Jurassic zone is similarly
deflected, and now we have before us a long mountain range, which must
be regarded as the continuation of the Coast Cordilleras, likewise bent
round in the same direction. The recent volcanos do not follow this deflexion.
We might perhaps hope to gain further light from a study of the Falkland
islands ; these, however, are of a completely different character, and consist
of foljded strata, with Palaeozoic fossils 'K

Peru, The high mountains of Potosf and Cochabamba slope down on
the east to the broad plain, covered by the primeval forest of Santa Cruz
de la Sierra. Two great rivers rise on the slope not far fi’om one another :
the Rio Grande, which flows north to the Amazon, and the Pilcomayo, which
flows south to the La Plata, The watershed between the two is, however,
so feebly marked that the Rio Parapiti, which rises here, loses itself in the
swamps of the virgin forest, and only finds an outflow during floods.

Far and wide the forest-covered plain surrounds the eastern foot of the
high mountains, till near the boundary of Matto Grosso a long low chain
emerges from it running parallel to the Andes ; the south-eastern extremity
of this reaches the alluvial land of the Paraguay. It consists, as d’Orbigny

^ B. Bossi, Exploracion de la Tierra del Fuego con el vapor oriental Charrua, 8vo,
Montevideo, 1882, pp. 17, 27, 37, only states in general terms that the whole outer chain
from Desolation to Wollaston and Staten island consists of granite, gneiss, and quartzite,
and forms the continuation of the Andes. i

* Darwin, op. cit., p. 446 ; Steinmann, p. 256.

• Darwin, On the Geology of Uie Falkland Isles; Quart. Journ, Geol. Soc., 1846, II,
pp. 267-274.



528


SOUTH


[ERICA


[part n

has shown, of gneiss, ancient schist, 4nd^quartzito It seems to stand in
the same relation to the Andes as the Argentine Sierra de Cdrdoba.

Let us now turn to the high mountains of the west. —

We began our description of the main range of the Cordilleras with the
• Andes of Bolivia, not because any particular change of structure makes
its appearance in tliis region, but on account of the more exact 'knowledge we
possess of it. We cannot, however, deny that towards the north a gradual
change of relations very slowly sets in.

In the south wc have seen the parallel chains of the Argentine Republic
rise towards the inteiior of the continent ; they are compoLied of Archaean
and Palaeozoic rocks, and arc followed towards the sea by the Jurassic
zone on which volcanos are set: on the shore rising in front of this are
the ridges and cliffs of the Coast Cordillera, in which no fossiliferous strata
are known of greater age than the Cretaceous.

Further to the north, the Bolivian Andes present a very similar structure
notwithstanding a slight deflexion of the strike to the north-west. The
Silurian Sierras of Salta and Jujuy fimj their prolongation in the lofty
mountains of Illampu and Illimani ; in front of them lies first a zone of
Devonian, and then of Carboniferous limestone which runs from Cochabamba
through lake Titicaca towards Carabaja and Cuzco. This is followed
towards the sea by porphyry and red sandstone, then by the Mesozoic zone
with its volcanos, and finally by the reefs of the Coast Cordillera near Arica
and at other places.

The districts of Ayacuchb and Hiiancavclica and the neighbourhood of
Lima already show, according to CrosnieFs description, some change of
structure

We may start from the strand near Ica, and ascend to the argentiferous
region of Castro Vireina, on the west slope of the western Cordillera, or,
again, we may start from Lima and proceed up the valley of the Rimac ;
but in either case we shall first come upon the broad, often gold-producing
granite ridges of the ^ Coast Cordillera, and these are accompanied by
upturned beds of limestone and sandstone, which appear to belong to the
lower Cretaceous. The same strata form the little promontory of Chorillos

and the island of San Lorenzo near Lima \

•

’ A. d’Orbigny, Voyage dans I’Amerique meridionale, 4to, 1842, III, 3, Geologic,
p. 181 et scq.

® L. Crosnier, Notice gcologique siir lea dexmrtcments de Huancavelica et dAyacuebo,
Ann. d. Minea, 1852, S*' s^r., 11, pp. I^IIS, pi. i; also Pfliicker y Rio, Ueber den Minen-
district Yauli in Peru ; Kerl u. Wimmer, Berg- u. IKittenm.-Zeitung, 1884, XLVIII,
p. 841 et seq.

Gabb has described an Ammonites Eaimondianus from Raimondi's collections at the
Cerro del Salto del Frayle near Ghorillo. He compares it with the Amm, cymodoce^ d'Orb.,
from the upper Jurassic. Professor Neumayr agrees with me that the form represented
is most closely allied to the Hoplites of the Neocomian. The rock is said to correspond



CH. ix] ' ''

After crossing the granite, vfe mall find above Lima stratified rocks,
resembling porphyry, similar to those which play so important a part in
Chili, and these are followed by abrupt walls x)f steeply upturned Mesozoic
limestone, which extend as far as the head of the pass, over 4,800 meters
high. This mass of limestone forms for a great distance the ridge of the'
western Cordillera, as it does also in north Chili. On the eastern declivity
the limestone is again followed by another band of the so-called stratified
porphyry, then by a great mass of stratified coal-bearing sandstone and
quartzite, in which the longitudinal valley of the Oroya has been eroded.

The observations of Crosnier permit us to continue this transverse
section over a more southerly part of the longitudinal valley, namely from
Ischuchaca across the Pampas towards Cochabamba, at the east foot of the
eastern Cordillera. Beneath the carbonaceous sandstone dark limestone
and porphyry conglomerate crop out ; then follows, with complete change
in the forras of the mountains, a band of clay slate and green chloritic
schist, until near Cochabamba a long ridge of granite appears.

We will now make a short digression to consider the carbonaceous
sand«*tone which runs between the first and second Cordillera. It is this
sandstone which carries the rich silver mines of Huancavelica, situated on
the east side of the western Cordillera.

In the quicksilver mine of Ventanilla, south of Huancavelica itself,
Crosnier observed a bed of coal. The cinnabar has penetrated into the
interstices and fissures of the sandstone. The sandstone and the shales
which frequently accompany the coal contain Ammonites. In this region,
in the longitudinal valley of the Oroya and Jauja, the beds frequently
afford fossils, as for example near Tingo and in the Quebrada of Huari.
The coal-bearing beds of Pariatambo and of Cerro della Ventanilla also
occur here, but there is a difference of opinion as to their age. (Jabb
places them in the Lias ; Steinmann, probably with greater reason, in the
Cretaceous h

This coal and quicksilver bearing horizon is aljjeady Luown in Bolivia,
near Puno, that is on the inner side of the great Mesozoic zone
towards lake Titicaca, and here too it appears on the east side of the

to that of the island of San Lorenzo. From the hill near the Hacienda del Imperial,
near Canete, also in the coast zone,Gabb further describes Cardita exotica, d’Orb., a form de-
scribed byd’Orbigny from imiierfcct specimens foundpin the Cretaceous of Columbia: Gabb,
Description of a Collection of Fossils made by Dr. A. Raimondi in Peru, Jourii. Acad. Nat.
Sc., Philadelphia, 1877, new ser., VIII, p. 268, pi. 37, fig. 2, and p. 287, pi. 41, figs. 1, 2.
The locality of the bods mentioned here, Tingo in Jluari, must not be confounile<l with
the Lias beds of Tingo, west of Chachapoyas, which lies much further north ; cf.
Habenicht’s map in Petermann’s geogr. Mitth., 1879, pi. iii. '

’ G. Steinmann, Ueber Tithon und Kreidc in den peruanischen Anden, Neues Jahrb.
f. Min., 1881, II, pp. 130-153, pi. vi-viii; and Ueber Jura und Kreidc in den Anden,
op. cit., 1882, 1, pp. 166-170.


BOLLAB


M m



630 SOUTH [part ii

limestone zone which forms the grettep- part of the western Cordillera.
From Huancavelica it extends for many miles along the eastern slope of
the western chain, and Peruvian miners even assert that it is prolonged
without interniption, hut with variable richness, through the whole of
•north Peru. —

For the ranges to the north of Lima the works of ilaimondi are
a mine of information, in particular his comprehensive description of the
department of Ancachs There now appear, to the east of a low chain
which borders the coast, three great Cordilleras and three longitudinal
valleys. The first Cordillera we will call, with Raimondi, the Cordillera
Ncyra] it slopes eastwards down to the first great longitudinal valley,
the Callejon de Huaylas. The Callejon is bent on the north towards the
sea in a great bow, the front of which lies in about lat. 8" 40' S'. ; it cuts
through the Cordillera Negra ; the river which flows through it, known in
this region as the Rio do Santo, reaches the sea in lat. 9° S, — The second
chain is the Cordillera Nevada ; it is united with the Cordillera Negra in
the south, and runs parallel with that cjiain to the north-north- west ; it
slopes westwards to the Callejon do Huaylas, eastwards to the Maraflon,
and thus forms the watei'shed between the two oceans. — To the east of the
Maranofi, between this river and the lluallaga, lies the. third chain; we
will term it the eastern Cordillera] we possess only the most meagre
information regarding it.

If now, making use of Raimondi’s data, we trace the structure of this
country from the sea towards the interior, we shall find first that the zone
which runs in the immediate neighbourhood of the strand is formed of low
hills of syenite, or granite, or of a greenstone which is frequently covered
by a red layer due to weathering. Along with these ancient-looking rocks
there appear in several places, just as in the south, patches of unfos-
siliferous sandstone and shale, as for instance in the harbour of Casma and
on the Culebra, and in the latter place these strata are bent into such
striking serpentine fojds that Raimondi thinks it possible the name
‘ Culebra ’ may have been suggested by this circumstance.

This range, which in the whole region of Ancachs rises from the sand of
the coast district, sometimes in isolated hills, sometimes, as between Casma
and Nepefia, in continuous ridges, forms without doubt the continuation
of the Coast Cordilleras of the south.

The Cordillera Negra consists almost exclusively of Mesozoic strata,-
having a general inclination towards the sea ; they are composed
almost exclusively of sandstone and shales; limestone is visible only in
very small quantity, and no continuation of the limestone range which

^ A. Raimondi, El departimiento de Ancachs y sus riquezas minerales, published by
£nr. Meiggs, large 8vo, Lima, 1873, in particular pp. 267-301.



631


CH. ix] COiiJST COETQtlliiEBAS OF PEEU

rises above Lima is to be foi4nd'® here. These beds of limestone and
shale contain coal. They correspond no doubt to a large extent with the
coal-bearing deposits of Pariatambo. *

The Cordillera Negra is traversed in many places by a recent diorite,
which constantly accompanies the silver ores of this range. *

The Callejon owes its existence chiefly to erosion. The western flank
of the Cordillera Nevada is formed of beds of coarse white or bluish
sandstone, which although steeply upturned dip in the same direction as
the series of the Cordillera Negra; the whole mass of the latter therefore
overlies the beds of the Cordillera Nevada.

Towards Huaraz and Caraz the sandstone beds of the western Cordil-
lera Nevada arc accompanied by marl and limestone which form subordinate
chains.

The highest summits of this mighty chain consist of superimposed
masses of trachyte. Granitic rocks are certainly mentioned, but Raimondi
repeatedly emphasizes the fact tliat they ai’C difficult to distinguish from
trachytes and that they are of recent age.

The greenstones of tlie Cordillera Negra hardly attain so great a height
as the summits of the Cordillera Nevada ; on the other hand, isolated
-fmasses of trachyte, particularly trachy tic conglomerate, appear in Horizon tal
beds even on the summits of the Cordillera Negra; Raimondi thinks it
probable that these are derived from eruptive centres on the Cordillera
Nevada and date from a period when the Callejon, the erosion valley
which at present separates the chains, did not yet exist.

No active volcanos are known either on the Cordillera Negra or on the
Cordillera Nevada.

On the east side of the Cordillera Nevada, beyond the trachyte sum-
mits, we find in the provinces of Huari and Pomabamba steeply upturned,
probably also folded beds of altered sandstone extending up to the snow-line.

In the south of Huari, however, and a large^ part of Pomabamba this
sandstone is overlaid by more recent, but similarlj^ disturi^xl beds of shale
and sandstone with coal; these are no doubt a recurrence of the coal-bearing
deposits of the Cordillera Negra.

Whether the coal-bearing horizon belongs to the Jurasf^c system or to
the Cretaceous, there is no doubt as to the existence above it of a recent
Cretaceous marl lying unconformably, in which many Echinoids, as well as
Actaeonella, Ostrea, Neithea quinquecostata, and species of Buchiceras,
bccur. It is found on both slopes of the Cordillera Nevada, on the one
!r^ \.hand in the district of Cajatambo, on the other as far as the Marahon.

On the south side of this slope, near the head-waters of tl}e Marafion,
lies the place called Huallanca, from which Steinmann has described
PerisphiTictes senex of the Tithoniani as well as Brancoceras aegoceratoides
and Acanthocerem Lyelli from the horizon of the Albian or Gault. —

Mm2



632 SOUTH APIfiEICA [pabt ii

The course of the Maranon do& not correspond altogether to the
strike of the strata. In one part of its upper course its bed is excavated
in ancient gold-bearing talc •schist, which, accompanied by granite from
the lofty eastern Cordillera, crosses over near Uca, somewhat south of
lat. 9° S., to the left bank of the river. Further to the, north, near
Puerto di PuiTiay, the river has sunk its bed in thick" beds of red
sandstone and marl with gypsum and salt; they are bent into an anti-
clinal, and are regarded as Trias ; above them lies limestone presumably
of Jurassic age and then the* Cretaceous marl. The red sandstones
probably form the basement of the whole stratified series of the Co^jdillera
Nevada and the Cordillera Negra.

The slope of the eastern Cordillera, which is situated on the other side
of the Maranon, consists of gold-bearing talc schist of Palaeozoic or even
greater age. In the neighbourhood of the town of Pallasca, near the
boundary of Ancachs and Libertad, this ancient auriferous schist crops out
in a single locality, from amidst the Mesozoic deposits of the northern
Cordillera Nevada. — ,

In this part of Peru the structure of the mountains is thus somewhat
as follows : —

The general trend of the beds and the chains, of the sea-coast and the
great river valleys, is directed to the north-north-west.

On the coast, rocks occur having a very ancient appearance ; they are
followed by shales and sandstone, which resemble those of the Coast
Cordilleras of Bolivia and Chili,

The Cordillera Negra and Cordillera Nevada, that is, all the mountains
which extend as far as the Maranon, consist of Mesozoic strata, which pro-
bably belong for the most part to the Cretaceous system. The summits
of. the Cordillera Nevada and some of the summits of the Cordillera Negra
are crowned by trachyte.

At one locality on tliQ Maranon red sandstone with salt and gypsum
crops out from beneath Alie strata of the Cordillera Nevada.

To the east of the Maranon lie the great masses of ancient schist and
granite, so that the high mountains which, from the Illimani and Illampu,
form the Cordillera of Carabaya and the chains of Cuzco, can only find
their continuation between the Maranon and the Huallaga.

In conclusion I will mention that Raimondi records traces of comparatively
recent volcanic rocks at two i)lacCs in the immediate neighbourhood of
the coast, namely, basalt near the Culebras and a lava south of Casma.
This is the more noteworthy, since in the adjacent parts of the sea many
indications of volcanic activity arc known, and quite recently, in the
year 1881, not very far from this place, a new volcanic island is said to
have formed in lat. 7° 48' S., long. 83° 48' W., 188 knots from Punta Aguja

^ Note in Nature, Oct. 3, 1881.



533


CH. ix] THE INTRi^fANDEAN EEGION

The descriptions given by Orto& oi‘ the geological structure of the most
northerly part of Peru, and his section from Facasmfijo to the Huallaga, do
not appear to me to be sufficient to enable us to determine the main
features of the structure of this region with any degree of certainty^.
They probably repeat in a general way those of Ancachs. The occurrence
of the genus Buchiceras, observed by Hyatt at Cachiyacu west of the
Huallaga, then at Cayamarca, and north of it near Celendin, indicates
a continuation of the Cretaceous beds beyond the valley of the Amazons
Orton and Hyatt cite Lias fossils from Ipishguaniina (Piscoguanuna)
between the Marahon and the Huallaga, and from Tingo near Chacha-
poyas.

Ecuador^ Columbia^ and Venezuela. During the last few years the
structure of the south of Ecuador has been made known in greater detail
by the admirable investigations of T. Wolf

From the southern boundary of this state to about lat. 2‘'S. the Andes
consist of two parallel Cordilleras which are frequently united in the south.
The eastern Cordillera is comp )sed of gneiss, mica-schist, chloritic schist,
and other ancient crystalline rocks ; these strike, like the Cordillera itself,
from south to north ; their extension towards the east is not known. The
western Cordillera, on the other hand, is formed of ancient eriip£ive rocks
of great variety, which are described as * porphyries and greenstones ' ;
some granite masses also crop out among them. Towards the north
conglomerates and rocks resembling Flysch appear as an additional
member.

On the west side of the western Cordillera, Cretaceous deposits appear
in the direction of the sea ; the gulf of Guayaquil restricts the region they
occupy, but to the north of it they reappear with an imposing breadth and
extend thence far to the north. Eruptive greenstones accompany the
Cretaceous, especially in the provinces of Guayaquil and Manabd'*.

The boundary region between the eastern ^nd western Cordillera runs
between the meridians of 79° and 80°, and is termed by Wolf the intra-
andean region. It is of the greatest tectonic importance. Within it, south
of the town of Loja and also near the town itself, lie two depressions filled
with recent leaf-bearing beds. Somewhat further to th^ north, near the
head- waters of the Rio Jubones, there appear in this intra-andean region,

^ J. Orton, The Andes and the Amazon, 8vn, Srd ed., 1876, in particular p. 551 ct seq.

* A. Hyatt, The Jurassic and Cretaceous Ammonites collected in South America
by Prof. J. Orton, with an App., &c. ; Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., 1874-1875, XVII,
pp. 365-372.

* T. Wolf, Viajes cientificos por la Republica del Ecuador, 3 Heft^ (Loja, Azuay,*
Esmeraldas), 8vo, Guayaquil, 1879 ; and Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1876, XXVIII,
pp: 391-398, map.

* T. Wolf, Geognostische Skizze der Provinz Guayaquil; Neues Jahrb. f. Min., 1874,
pp. 385— 896*



634 SOUTH AMllRICA [part ii

succeeding each other along a line ru:4ning from south, somewhat west, to
north, somewhat east, the first forerunners of the great volcanos of northern
Ecuador. These are formed •chiefly of andesite. They appear in three
regions: on the upper Jubones, then south of Cuenja, and, lastly, north of
fhis town in Azuay. ^ ,

Between the two last-named volcanic masses there appears, north-east
of Cuen(,"a in the intra-andean region, a curious mass, the ‘Arenisca de
Azogues,’ which consists of sandstone with quicksilver. It is bluish grey
in colour, weathers spheroidally, is bleached by the alteration of the iron, and
is accompanied by shales. The stratification is very much disturbed ; the
strike corresponds to that of the intra-andean region. The remains of old
woi’kings for quicksilver are found in it and it affords asphalt and other
bituminous materials. From this description the idea is at once suggested
that this is a continuation of the great quicksilver zone of Peru.

Crossing southern Ecuador from east to west we thus meet, in the east,
with gneiss and ancient crystalline rocks ; then in the intra-andean region
leaf-bearing deposits, the first masses of andesite and the patch of sandstone
with quicksilver and asphalt, and, in the west, various porphyries and
greenstones which are succeeded towards the sea by the Cretaceous
formation. —

The continuation of these chains towards the north may be traced by
the observations given in the works of Beiss

The eastern Cordillera in this region also consists of gneiss and other
ancient rocks, which, in the case of a few summits, reach a height of 4,500
meters, and on the Saraurcu in the north even of 4,800 meters. The intra-
andean region of the south is here represented by the high plateaux of
Riombamba, Latacunga, and Quito covered with lavas, tuff, and ash. The
western Cordillera is formed of soft, chiefly black, shales traversed by
various greenstones, and of massive beds of sandstone. Towards the west
it descends steeply to the sea. Shales and sandstone extend, according to
Reiss, far to the noi*th and the south, and are correlated, like the equivalents
of the same rocks in Columbia, with the Cretaceous. They recall in many
respects the Flysch of Europe. In this western Cordillera we recognize
the continuation* of the Coast Cordilleras of the south.

Volcanos stand as ‘ completely independent structures' on the monotonous
crest of these Cordilleras, as we^l on the e^ustern as on the western range.
On the former there rise Altar, Tunguragua, Cotopaxi, Antisana, and


* ^ W. Reiss, Bericht iiber eine Reise nach dem Quilotoa und dem Cerro Hermoso in den

ecuadorischen Cordilleren, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1875, XXVII, pp. 274-294 ; by the
same, Die geol. VerhS.ltnisse der Fundstellcn fossiler Saugethierknochen in Ecuador (in
Branco, Ss^ugeth.-Fauna von Punin bei Riobamba), Dames u. Eayser, Pal&ont. Abh.,
1883, 1, pp. 41-56, map, et passim.



CH. ix] SIERRAS DE BOifrOTA AND DE MERIDA 636

others. On the western Cordil'Jbra they are still more numerous; here
I need only mention Chimborazo, Quilota, Iliniza, Corazori, and Pin-
chincha. —

We now reach on the north that region in which the several branches
of the Andes^diverge from one another, and where in particular a mighty arc
is detached east of the Magdalena river, which proceeding far to the north-
east forms the Sierra de Bogota and the Sierra de Merida. These branches
are not accompanied by active volcanos. Granite and gneiss -arc found in
them. It is only quite recently that they have afforded some traces of Lias \
Asa rule, however, the sedimentary series begins with the lower Cretaceous,
which in this region also is represented by shales, thick beds of sandstone
and dark bituminous limestone, occasionally accompanied by ancient
eruptive rocks, as in the western Cordillera of Ecuador. The rich fauna
of these deposits has been made known by L. v. Buch, d’Orbigny, Forbes,
and in particular Karsten ; according to Uhlig the beds are shown l)y
a series of forms to correspond to the deposits of Barreme in the south of
France, and of Wernsdorf in the Cari>athians

Karsten mentions, as a remarkable fact, ‘ that the steep slopes of this
lower Cretaceous region, which trends almost in an arc to the north-east,
are directed towards the mountains of Guayana, the rounded granitic
summits of. which, as far as these mountains are known, rise from the
Tertiary plain like islands from the ocean.* These great drains thus appear
to be unilateral in a direction turned away from the Brazilian mass, and
the same character seems to obtain, according to Karsten*8 observations, in
the Sierra Santa Marta, which follows to the north; at the south foot of tliis
sierra copper-bearing eruptive rocks predominate, and in its continuation,
near the lakes of Maracaibo, petroleum wells up out of the Cretaceous beds®.

We may represent to ourselves the Brazilian mass as engirdle*! by the
arc of the Sierra de Bogota and Sierra do Merida, and the rocks of this arc
as dipping generally towards the exterior ; but more to the north-east the
relations are essentially different. — * ^

From the observations of Karsten it already seemed probable, and the sub-
sequent investigations of Sawkins, Wall, and Crosby have since established
the fact, that the great mountain range, which runs from west to east and
forms the north of Venezuela and the island of Trinidad* is composed of

^ Steinmann, Ueber Jura und Kreidc in dgn Anden; Neues Jahrb. f. Min., 1882, pt. 1,
p. 169.

* H. Karsten, Ueber die geognostischen Verhiiltnisse des W. Colurabien, der heutigen
Republiken Neu-Granada und Equador, Amtl. Ber. iib. die 32. Versamml. deutsch.
Naturf. u. Aerzte zu Wien, 1858, pp. 80-117, map ; V. Uhlig, Die Cephalopodcn-Fauna dor*
Wernsdorfer Schichten,* Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1883, XLVI, p. 15& et aeq.

^ A large number of facts certainly point to the greater independence of the Sierra
S. Marta in accordance with the older view of Humboldt ; so particularly Acosta, Bull.
Soc. g4ol. de Fr., 1852, 2^ s^r., IX, p. 396, and in part also Comette, tom. cit., p. 509 et seq.



636


SOUTH AM\f3RICA [pabt n

rocks very similar to those of the sierifjts Aiehtioned above, but arranged in
inverse order. Its oldest rocks lie towards the north and form the steep
coast of the Caribbean sea \ •

From Valencia to the north-eastern extremity of tho island of Trinidad
there runs a long range of schist mountains, frequently garnetiferous, in
which gneiss and cclogite occur in places apparently as intercalations. This
range is somewhat broader in the west and there attains a height of
8,000 feet ; it surrounds lake Valencia and the neighbourhood of Caracas,
is interrupted by the bay of Barcelona, and forms, on the other side of the
bay, the promontory of Araya, which lx)unds the bay of Cariaco on the
north; it then forms the peninsula of Paria, and finally the whole north
coast of Trinidad. Here its height has decreased to about 3,800 feet.

On this zone of schist there rests in the west, south of lake Valencia,
a great band of ancient eruptive rocks, which appear to be not less various
than those of the western Cordillera of Ecuador ; with these there appear
on the north masses of rock resembling diallage and serpentine. There
then follows to the south a long zone of fluartzite, slate, and limestone of
the lower Cretaceous. On both sides of the bay of Barcelona the lower
Cretaceous may be seen in direct contact with the ancient zone of schists ;
it strikefcf through Cumana towards the east, but docs not, however, quite
reach the western side of the gulf of Paria. Beyond this gulf it again
crops out, and traverses the island of Trinidad in two parallel ranges from
west to east.

At several places within this zone the lower Cretaceous fossils of Bogota
have been found, and Karsten distinguishes besides a more recent division
with Hippuritca., To the south of this lie marine strata of upper Tertiary
age, which enter the country through the bay of Barcelona and dip beneath
the llanos which slope down to the Orinoco. —

Thus the northern coast range from Valencia to Trinidad is not con-
structed on the same fundamental plan as the other ranges of South
America, at Icast^ as far ^s we are able to judge of them. In this case we
have a long unilateral range which, like so niany European chains, turns
its oldest rocks and most of its steep cliffs towards a sunken area, the
Caribbean sea. ^ The chain is not only broken off ; in-breaking has also
occurred, namely, in the bay of Barcelona. The gulf of Paria, which the
Orinoco is silting up, is connected with the Caribbean sea by a strait, which,
according to Guppy, has been caused by a fault with downthrow on the

^ Karsten, Beitrage zur Kenntniss der Gesteine des N. Venezuela, Zeitschr. deutsch.
•geol. Ges., 1859, XI, pp. 345-361, map; G. P. Wall, On the Geology of a Part of
Venezuela and of Trinidad, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1860, XVI, pp. 460-470, map;
W. 0. Crosby, Notes on the Physical Geography and Geology of Trinidad, Proc. Boston
Soc. Nat. Hist., 1878, XX, pp. 44-55; further, the Reports Geol. Surv. West. Ind. of
Sawkins and Wall.



537


CH. IX] COURSE OP S. ^AMERICAN CHAINS

east, but, according to Crosby, by jhc more southerly position of the
mountains of Trinidad. The statement that Palaeozoic sediments also
occur here requires confirmation. In structure and position this range
resembles, above all, the north African chain between Gibraltar and cape
Bon, the Mediterranean corresponding to the Caribbean sea.

The great earthquakes of Cumana and Caracas are propagated from
the fractured border of this range. Towards the south it is separated
from the Brazilian mass by the broad valley of the Orinoco, which here
occupies a position similar to that of the lower Rhone or of the Guadal-
quivir.

Summary, South America presents in a higher degree than any other
■^art of the world all the features of a homogeneous structure. In the
east and in the centre lies the broad Brazilian platform wiOi flat-lying
Palaeozoic sediments characterized by a discontinuity in the strccession of
the marine deposits such as we he /e already encountered in several other
table-lands.

If we approach the great mountains from the east we first meet with
short chains, wholly or at least chiefly of Archaean age, as for instance
the sierras west of Cordoba, and the mountain range in the oast of
the Bolivian Andes. The Palaeozoic chains, principally Silurian, form
a continuous zone of much greater length. It has been traced from
the south of Peru through Bolivia as far as Mendoza. The Jurassic
deposits extend still further, both to the north and south ; they include
the principal chain of the Cordilleras, together with the greater part
of the recent volcanos. Finally, on the west coast, where we should
expect in Europe to find the Flysch-zonc, there rises the alien series of
the Coast Cordilleras, formed of rocks bearing an Archaean stamp, such
as gneiss and mica-schists, of various old eruptive rocks, and finally
of deposits of sandstone and shales generally devoid of fossils. They
are represented along the whole coast, from ,Peru and Bolivia, from
Casma and Nepena (lat. 9*" 10' to 9° 30' S.) to the (Julebia, ^rom Ica to tlie
Morro de Arica, and to Cobija and Mcgillones, now by isolated summits,
now by longer ranges. In Chili they form continuous chains which
accompany the coast. Further to the south they compose .the west coast
of Patagonia and the islands bordering it, and even when the Andes
have disappeared they continue far to the^ south, and describe a great
curve from south to south-east, east i!nd east-north-east through Tierra
del Fuego towards Staten island.

The scanty traces of fossils found in Peru point to the Cretaceous
formation : in the Patagonian mountains also only Cretaceous, fassils are
known.

The same structure is repeated in the north. The great sierras which
run northwards from Ecuador and then diverge iti virgation, especially



638 SOUTH aAeRICA [PAET 11

the great arc of the Sierra de Bogotaf anU Sierra de Merida, which runs to
north-east, are formed almost exclusively of Archaean rocks and Cretaceous
deposits. *

The long coastal chain on the north of Venezuela and Trinidad con-
* sists of the same formations, but its tectonic importance, can only be
estimated in connexion with the West Indian islands. —

As we proceed to the west the zones of the great mountain system
of South America become longer and the sediments more recent. Whether
the rocks of Archaean character which appear in the Coast Cordilleras
are really of Archaean age or not is a great unsolved problem. Darwin
doubted it in the south : it is the same difficulty which presents itself
in Greece, in the Taurus, on the Andaman and Nicobar islands, and will
shortly confront us again in North America. —

In the north the chains diverge in virgation through New Granada and
towards Venezuela, and this is also the case in the south from Cabo
Corrientes as far as Staten island. The syntaxis in Arica is marked by
a moderate curvature of the chains ; ita. influence on the distribution of
the sediments and the plan of the whole is but slight. This plan,
in so far as we are dealing with the western part of South America, is
more or^ less concentric. The contrast between the south European and
the South American mountains results from the circumstance that in the
Alps, Carpathians, and Apennines the backland has subsided, and in the
Alps and Carpathians the foreland is still visible, while in South America
the Brazilian mass occupies the place of the backland within the arc, and
the foreland lies beneath the ocean.

The arrangement of the volcanos is also essentially different from that
of the volcanos of the western Mediterranean, or of the extinct volcanos of
the Carpathians. They do not rise from an inner fractured border, but
from the very midst of the mountain summits, like Demavend, Elbruz, and
Kasbek. In Ecuador t^iey sometimes stand, like Chimborazo, on the
western Cordilbra, which we must regard as the continuation of the Coast
Cordillera; sometimes, like Cotopaxi and Altar, on the eastern Archaean
Cordillera ; and to the south, down to the Rio Jubones, south of Cuen 5 a,
they arc situaj^ed on the boundary between these two Cordilleras in the
intra-andean region. Still further south, through Bolivia and Chili, their
great ash cones rest for the greater part on the Jurassic zone.

The volcanos do not follow th6 deflexion of the chains either towards
Venezuela in the north, or towards Tierra del Fuego in the south. They
continue to follow the Pacific coast.

Fernando Noronha, which rises to the east of the Brazilian mass from
the depth of the Atlantic Ocean, consists of basalt and phonolite. The only
considerable group of islands in the neighbourhood of the west coast, that of
the OcUdpagos, is also volcanic, and its lavas are basaltic. Numerous craters



CH. IX] THE GALAPAGK)S 639

are present. T. Wolf rightly pHtcet^ these islands among the grouped
volcanos as opposed to the serial volcanos of the mainland, and empha-
sizes the petrological contrast between them and the volcanos of Ecuador,
which consist chiefly of trachytic and andesitic rocks K

The volcanic groups of Italy, such as the Lipari and Ponza islands, are
on the other hand distinguished by acid lavas. —

Several of the islands, which lie very much scattered to the soutli of the
GaWpagos, have been visited by Lopez : he found Sala-i-Gomez to be 30
meters high, its major axis only 1,200 meters long, and the isthmus which
connects the two halves of the island in the middle only 120 meters broad:
the great waves of the equinoctial storms probably wash right across the
island. It consists of porous basalt with olivine, but a white earth, produced
by decomposition, and pitchstonc are also mentioned.

Mas-a-Tiera and Maa-a-fuera are two much larger islands ; the latter
is formed by a single volcanic mountain, 1,837 meters high —

The region of the South American Andes, with its long and lofty
mountain ranges, its imposing voh^anos, frequent earthquakes, and littoral
terraces, has been made the subject of many investigations, resulting in
numerous attempts to explain the formation of mountain ranges : it is
strange that the contrast between the horizontal strand-lines jind the
inclined strata of the Cordilleras, and the contrast this involves between
the formation of terraces and that of mountains, has not received more
frequent attention.

The older views of C. Darwin on the relation between the elevation of
the Andes and the formation of terraces and the alleged elevation of the
continent during certain earthquakes of comparatively recent date have
already been referred to in an earlier passage, together with the objections
which may be urged against them (p. 104).

As the significance of the tangential movements became more clearly
recognized, eminent authorities, such as Dana, saw in the Andes the result
of a lateral pressure exerted on the continent by the^subsideTice of the geo-
synclinal of the Pacific. This explanation is, however, hard to reconcile
with the deflexion of the chains towards Venezuela and Tierra del Fuego.

The assumption of considerable tangential movement ajso forms the
chief basis of Kolberg’s theory of ‘out-thrusting by thrust-wedges,* put
forward in explanation of the structure of Ecuador. It rests on the
supposition that, during the contraction of the outer crust of the earth,

^ T. Wolf, Ein Bcsuch der Galapagos-Inseln, 8yo, Heidelberg, 1879, p. 18 (Frommel
and Pfaff, Samml. v. Vortragen, I, pp. 259-300, map). A basaltic type is, it is true, also
not wanting in Ecuador; cf. Cliimbel, Sitzungsber. Akad. Munch., 1881, p. 865 et scq.

^ Lopez, Esploracion de las islas esporadicas al occidente de la costa de Chile, Anal.
Univ. Chil., 1876, pp. 649-673. The alleged island of Buchili (about lat. 28® 4' S., long.
95® 4' W.) was not to be found, nor was the island of Gray.



540


SOUTH AMERICA


[PABT n

planes of separation are formed inclirftd very obliquely to the surface,
thrust-planes as it were on a large scale, and the separated wedge-shaped
fragment is moved and overthrust. This supposition accords better with
views which might fairly be applied to certain European chains. But for
* Ecuador in particular Eolberg found it necessary to assume the existence
of two wedges opposed to one another, and in this way he actually arrives
at Elie dc Beaumont’s earlier theory of the formation of mountains by an
‘ ^crasemcnt transversal

The theory has repeatedly been put forward that the Aiides have
experienced a very considerable elevation in quite recent times, and a
number of facts are adduced in support of this view. The saline deposits,
which lie over 7,000, even 12,500 feet high, have been regarded as the
direct result of evaporation of enclosed arms of the sea. But as regards
the region to the east of the Andes many investigators since Woodbine
Parish, and in particular Bumieister, Zeballos, and Schickendorf, have
denied that the salinas of the Pampas are relics of this kind, and in
the west also Pissis, for example, has ijound good reasons for decisively
opposing this theory The fact that eight species of Allorchestes, a salt-
water genus of the Amphipoda, live in lake Titicaca, cannot in any way be
regarded as sufficient proof that the sea was connected with this lake in
recent times; that is to say, that the sea-level stood from 12,000 to 18,000
feet higher than at present, or that the land has risen to this extent. The
number of questions yet unsolved as to the means by which these animal
forms are distributed is too great to admit of conclusions so comprehensive
as this.

Orton’s report that Loomis had found, one day’s journey from Iquique,
an old sea-coast with mollusca of existing species, 2,500 feet above the sea,
has not as yet received confirmation of any kind

Nor does the discovery of corals at Tilibichein Peru, 2,900 to 8,000 feet
above the sea and about 30 kilometers from the coast, justify us in such
conclusions. '[IChese cprals, according to A. Agassiz and Pourtales, are
attached to the surface of the rocks on which they grew, are converted
into compact crystalline limestone, and have suffered almost complete
obliteration of the internal structure. Apart from a form allied to MUle-
pora alcicomis^ two species were observed which are both new. IsophyUia
duplicata belongs to a genus which is known in the Tertiary and in recent
seas, but does not occur on the present shores of the Pacific. Convexastraea

^ J. Kolberg, Nach Ecuador, 2. Aufl.,4to, Freib. im Breisg., 1881, pp. 209-221 et passim.

* A. Pissis, El desierto de Atacama ; An. Univ. Chil., 1877, pp. 585-588.

’ Orton, Andes and Amazon, p. 116. The theory of this author, based on a comparison
of older barometric measurements, that the Andes are at present subsiding has been
refuted by Reiss: Reiss, Sinken die Anden? Verb. d. Gesellsch. f. Erdkunde, Berlin,
1880, VII, p. 45 et seq.



CH. ix] ALLEGED EI^iVATION OP PERU 641

peruviana represents a genus whkh ua yet is only known from the Trias
and Jurassic^.

There thus appears to be no reason for assigning so extremely recent
an age to these deposits.

In the south of Chili the most recent members of the Cretaceous and
Tertiary formations are bedded against the Coast Cordilleras. They are
faulted, but do not appear to have taken part in the folding. On the
other hand, both in the north and south Cretaceous beds with Inoceramus
occur, which have been folded along with the Neocomian. Intense folding
occurs and also overthmsting towards the west, as for example in the
Carboniferous of lake Titicaca*, but overthrust outer borders, as in the
Alps or Himalaya, have not as yet been observed.

The frequent earthquakes of the west coast are the expression of some
great tectonic process the nature of which is unknown.

A. Agassiz and L. F. Pourtal^s, Recent Corals from Tilibiche, Peru, Bull. Mas. Comp.
ZooL, Cambridge, 1876, III, pp. 287-290 ; Am. Jonm. Sc., 1876, 3rd ser., XI, p. 499.

* D. Forbes, op. cit, p. 49.



CIIAPTEE X


THE ANTILLES

The three scries of islands. Cuba. Haiti. Jamaica. Puerto Rico to Barbados.
The Cordillera of the Antilles. Comparison with the border of the western Mediterranean.
Earthquakes.

In Central America the strike of the ancient formations does not follow
the course of the elongated isthmus between the northern and southern
continent, but runs transversely across it. This, at least, is the case where-
ever the strike has been precisely determined, and is particularly well
shown in Guatemala, where an important segment of a unilateral chain
occurs with a trend to the west-south-west (pp. CO-91). This chain
commences in western Honduras, and its direction is indicated more or
less exactly by the longitudinal valley of the Rio Motagua. Here we
shall depend chiefly on the accounts of Dollfuss and Mont-Serrat, since
Scebach’s observations have only been published in abstracts

The most southerly zone consists of several fairly extensive exposures
of granite, which have been observed to the north and south of the town
of Guatemala, and south of the Rio Motagua to far beyond Zacapa. This
is succeeded towards the north by a broad zone of mica-schists, further on
by another of talc-schists, and these, passing to the south of the Golfe
Dolce, reach the sea at the Amatique bay and near Omoa in the gulf of
Honduras. Conglomerate and sandstone of trifling thickness overlie them
on the north, and these are followed, beyond the Golfe Dolce, on the Rio
de Cajabon and further towards the north and north-west by a broad
limestone range, the limits of which are unknown. The scanty fossil
remains, which have been supposed to indicate the existence of Jurassic
limestone, do not seem to me to afford sufficient proof of its presence.

Thus then* a segment of a chain exists, which runs transversely across
the isthmus from west-south- west to east-north-east; its most ancient
component lies in the south-so7ith-cast, and is succeeded by the more recent
zones towards the north-north-west. Durocher has named it the * Systfeme
de Segovia V

^ A. Dollfuss et E. de Mont-Serrat, Voyage geol. dans les R^publiques de Guatemala et
de Salvador ; Miss, scientif. au Mexique, &c., 4to, Paris, 1868.

* J. Durocher, Recherches sur les syst^mes de montagnes de TAmdrique centrale,
Gomptes rend., 1860, LI, p. 44 ; also by the same, il^tudes sur Torographie et la gdologie
de TAmerique centrale, op. cit., 1860, L, pp. 1170-1175.



UNITY OF THE ANTILLES


543


These mountains are bounded or the south by a great mass of old
volcanic rocks of various kinds, which form the greater part of the
mountains of Salvador and all the more southerly chains of Guatemala.
An oblique line of fracture follows the Pacific coast from the bay of
Fonseca towards the west-north-west, and marks the principal line of the
recent, and in part still active, volcanos of this region (p. 93, Fig. 5). To
the west of the town of Guatemala it meets the direction of the mountain
chain at an acute angle, cuts the chain off, and proceeds towards Mexico.
Many of* the largest of the volcanos, and among them the great cones
of San Miguel, Acatenango, d'Atitlan, and others, rise within the region
of ancient volcanic rocks.

The Antilles are formed by the summits of a mountain chain which
separates the Caribbean sea from the Atlantic Ocean and the gulf of
Mexico. A second arc running from Honduras through Jamaica and the
south-west of Haiti appears to join the principal chain. Even the great
deeps which occur in certain places, as, for instance, between Virgin Gorda
and Anguilla, do not interrupt the continuous course of the mountain
chain.

This uniform structure has already been pointed out by many
observers; no one has done so more emphatically, or has given * greater
prominence to the relations of the Antilles with the continent of Central
America, than the most distinguished authority on these regions, Karl
von Seebach.

With the slopes of the Mexican plateau in the state of Oaxaca, says
Seebach, the compact northern continent terminates. To the south and to
the east of the isthmus of Tehuantepec, Central America commences, which
already belongs to the island world of the Antilles. ‘ . . . The mountain
series of the Greater Antilles, which further to the cast in Puerto Rico and
San Domingo — the eastern part of Haiti — forms a single main chain,
divides in the middle of the latter island, giving rise to a southern branch
which proceeds through the elongated peninsula of. JMcmel towards
Jamaica and Honduras, and a northern branch which extends beyond
Cuba towards Yucatan. ... Is it merely a remarkable accident that the
Sierra Maestra, consisting of crystalline schists and massive rocks and
situated in the south-east of Cuba (where the Greater Antifies reach their
greatest elevation of 2,338 meters above the sea), should run through the
Cayman group, the bank of Misteriosai the* Viciosas, and Swan island to
the depths of the gulf of Honduras, and that from the edge of this
mountain ridges similarly constituted should rise abruptly and proceed
with constant strike into the interior * ? '

f

’ K. V. Seebach, Central-Amerika und der interoceanische Canal, 8vo, Berlin, 1873,
p. 11 et seq. ; Sammlung gemeinverst. Vortr., published by Virchow and Holtzendorff,
viii. Ser., Heft 183. The transverse course of the mountains has also been observed by



644


THE ANTILLES


[part n

If, with Seebach, we now considej* thr two mountain ranges of Yucatan
and Guatemala, which proceed to the north-east, simply as ‘the most
westerly excurrent processes of the mountain system of the Greater
Antilles,* not only do the foregoing observations on the structure of
' Guatemala attain their full significance, but the truth of the view,
indicated by Humboldt and strongly supported by Ritter, stands clearly
revealed; and North and South America must be considered as two
continents of fundamentally different structure, between which lies a third
element, the region of Central America and the Antilles. —

The Antilles may be divided into several zones.

The jird, innermost zone, which lies within the concavity of the arc,
only appears in the eastern part, in the Lesser Antilles. It is wholly of
recent volcanic origin. This zone is formed by the islands of Saba,
St. Eustatius, St. Christopher (St. Kitts), Nevis, Redonda, Montserrat, the
western half of the deeply incised Guadeloupe, Dominica, Martinique,
St. Lucia, St. Vincent, the Grenadines, and Grenada. These islands form
a continuous circular arc, and some of them include three to four eruptive
centres — Martinique, according to Jonnfes, even six.

The next zone comprises the great and rich mountainous islands of
the Greater Antilles and the narrow but well-characterized border of the
Lesser Antilles. The mountains are formed in complete accordance with
the type of the Coast Cordilleras of the south and of the mountains of
Venezuela. The oldest organic remains belong to the lower Cretaceous,
and these are only represented by a few traces ; on the other hand, purer
and highly fossiliferous limestone deposits of the Tui’onian are present
in this region, as in Trinidad and in north Venezuela. The Cretaceous
system is followed here, as in Trinidad, by a largely developed series of
Tertiary deposits, some members' of which present an astonishing resem-
blance to their representatives in Europe. These deposits form the
connecting link with the third zone.

To this second zone telonff Cuba and Pinos island, Haiti Puerto Rico,
the Virginian islands with St. Croix, Anguilla, St. Bartholomew, Antigua,
the eastern half of Guadeloupe and a part of Barbados, and further the
southern arc ^ which runs through Jamaica. That part which lies in
the Lesser Antilles forms a girdle running outside the volcanos.

The third and outermost zone comprises only middle Tertiary or even
more recent deposits. It nowhere ‘rises in mountain ranges, which can be
properly so called, and is, indeed, as a rule quite flat, broader towards the
north-west, narrowing away to the south-east. It includes the Bahamas,
all the banks of trifling heiglit which succeed as far as Natividad, then
Anegada, Sombrero, Barbuda, and a part of Barbados. I should, however,

M. Wagner, Physisch-geographische Skizze dcr Provinz Chiriqui, Petermann’s geogr.
Mitth., 1863, pp. 281-299, pi. ii.



CH.x] CUBA, SUilRBA MAESTRA. 646

•

be inclined to include in this ZG«ie the whole peninsula of Florida, and
perhaps even the level part of Yucatan.

This regular arrangement of the islands was already clearly recognized
in its main feflures by Leopold von Buch. ‘All the volcanic islands of
the Antilles/ wrote the great geologist more than sixty years ago, ‘ follow
one after the other in a continuous chain, uninterrupted by any islands
which are not volcanic. On the other hand, there appears to the east of
these islands, lying outside them next the great ocean, another series of
islands, somewhat less clearly marked, which exhibits only a few traces
of volcanic phenomena, and contains no active volcanos. This is an
extremely remarkable fact^/

The region which I propose to discuss in somewhat greater detail is
the second or median zone.

Cuba, as we have already seen, attains its greatest elevation in the
Sierra Maestra in the south-eastern part of the island, between Cabo do
Cruz and Santiago de Cuba. The Pico Tarquino measures 2,338 meters in
height. To the south the chain (Joscends steeply to the sea ; it runs from
west to east and east-north-east, and its strata dip to the north. According
to Cla, granite is exposed at several places along the south foot of the
chain, but higher up it consists of an alternation of thinly stratified
green sandstone with grains of felspar, dark shales, a breccia of linu^stone
and shale, and finally beds of limestone of no great thickness. This
series is followed by a thick breccia, the matrix of which is described
as dark diorite or diorite porphyry^. A dark amyg<laloid rock is asso-
ciated with this breccia. A rock of similar nature occurs on many of the
West Indian islands ; English geologists have named it ‘ blue-beach.* North
of Santiago de Cuba it extends to the east and west over the north flank
of the Sierra Maestra, and is succeeded in the valley of the Rio Cauto by
flat-lying Tertiary deposits which extend to the neighbourhood of Holguin.

Near Holguin we meet with an eruptive rock containing felspar and
amphibole ; at other places a true syenite occurs, an^ in ini/iicdiate contact
with these a band of serpentine, which, according to the concordant state-
ments of Cfa and Castro, extends from this point through the whole
island ; passing Puerto Principe it runs nearly as far as Hayana, and into
the most westerly part of the island, which trends west-south-west. This
long band of serpentine is accompanied, particularly on the nortli, by
a number of bands of light-coloured liArd limestone. It nowhere attains
heights of much importance, but nevertheless forms the watershed through
the middle of the whole island; it is the seat of the mineral treasures
of Cuba, and contains copper, chrome-ironstone, and gold: •sandstones

^ L. V. Buch, Physikalische Beschreiburg der canarischen Inselu, 4to, 1825, p. 4C0.

* Policarpo Cfa, Observaciones gcoldgicas de una gran parte de la isla de Cuba; Revista
mineral., 1854, V, pp. 365, 393, 420, 451.


80LLAB


N n



THE ANTILLES


546


[part II


resembling Flysch are not wanting, tand from Holguin as far as Havana
asphalt and petroleum are known to occur

The occurrence of the serpentine near Havana was observed by Hum-
boldt. The neighbourhood of this town has been described by Salterain.

* The north coast is here, as in so many other places, bordered^ by flat-lying
Tertiary limestone, which in some places presents a surface like the Karst,
and in others weathers into a layer of red earth. Within this border rise
long ridges of folded beds, consisting of glauconitic siliceous limestone, marl,
and sandstone devoid of fossils. In these rocks the asphalt occurs; by
their decomposition they form the soil of the richest and most fertile parts
of the island. The long low ridge of serpentine accompanied by ancient
eruptive rocks rises out of these glauconitic deposits; it is visible in the
harbour of Havana itself as a sombre mass, destitute of vegetation

According to Castro, gneiss, talc schists, and dark limestone of an earlier
period crop out to the south of the long ridge of serpentine in the Sierra
do Cumanayagua, west of the port of Trinidad. —

Various opinions have been expressed,as to the age of the sediments of
Cuba ; the black clay-slates and the quartzites of Mantua in the west of
the island, on the north side of the Sierra de los Organos, have been
attributt'd to the Palaeozoic, but up to the present I know of no fossils
either from Cuba or any other of the West Indian islands which would
indicate with certainty deposits older than the Cretaceous. Hippurites
have been found in many places in the light-coloured limestone of Cuba :
among the more recent horizontal beds the Orbitoides limestone must be
mentioned, which occurs also in Florida and in many of the other islands ;
its age has already been pointed out (p. 282).

Haiti. The west of Haiti is but little known, but for the middle and
the whole eastern part of the islknd we have the excellent monograph by
Gabb on the structure of San Domingo

Within the dominion of this Republic the direction of the mountains is
also to the oast-south-past, and the elements which enter into their com-
position are the same as in Cuba. The Flysch-like shales, limestones, and


' M. F. de C9siro, Fruebas paleont. dc que la isla de Cuba ha estado unita al
continente americano y breve idea de su constitucion geologica ; Bol. Com. Mapa Geol.,
1881, VIII, pp. 357 372. For the more recent deposits see W. 0. Crosby, On the Elevated
Coral Reefs of Cuba, Proc. Boston Sbc. Nat. Hist., 1882, XXII, pp. 124 et seq.

* P. Salterain, Apuntes para una descripcion iisico-geoldgica de las jurisdicciones de
la Habana y Guanabacoa; op. cit., 1880, VIl, pp. 161-225, map. The fossils from the
neighbourhood of Havana, which were described some time ago by Lea, show that
Mesozoic remains arc not wanting; these do not, however, prove the presence of the
Jurassic system : 1. Lea, Notice of the Oolit. Formation in America, Trans. Am. Phil.
Soc., 1840, 2nd ser., VII. pp. 251-260.

’ W. M. Gabb, On the Topography and Geology of Santo Domingo ; Trans. Am. Phil.
Soc., Philadelphia, 1873, new ser., XV, pt. i, pp. 49-259, maps.



c?H.x] SAN DOMINGO, JAMAICA 647

sandstones, the ‘ Sierra Group ’ of Qstbb, form several parallel ranges ; they
have furnished only a few badly preserved fossils (Ammonites, Trigonia,
and others) which have a Cretaceous appearance, and at one locality west
of San Dominjjo, near Azua in the bay of Ocoa, some petroleum is found.
Bands of rock resembling serpentine appear in these deposits, and Castro*
observes expressly that he has met on Haiti with the continuation of tlie
serpentine of Cuba. Several ridges of syenite and other massive rocks
form the heights of the Cibao mountains, which arc said to reach an
elevation of 8,000 feet.

The general structure of the Republic of San Domingo is somewliat as
follows : — On the extreme north-east coast sandstones and sliales crop out,
especially near Cabo Frances and in the peninsula of Samanfi, where they
attain a greater development. We may probably regard them os forming
the northern side of a synclinal with an east-south-cast strike, since the
Sierra of Monte Christi, which follows towards the interior, is entirely
Tertiary, as is also the great loiigitudinal valley which runs right across
the island from the bay of Man;;anilla to the bay of Samana. At the foot
of the lofty Cibao mountains, which now follow towards the south, we still
find Tertiary deposits.

The first heights of the Cibao mountains consist again, at Ifeast from
Sabaneta eastwards, of sandstone and shale, and it is these alone which,
advancing eastwards, form the mountain chain of the peninsula of Seybo,
while the massive rocks which crop out from beneath them terminate
towafds the east above tlic town of San Domingo. Dykes of the massive
rocks are intruded into the sediments, and fonn the upper parts of the
Cibao mountains. Towards the south, near the bay of Ocoa, sandstone and
shales again appear ; the greater part of the south coast probably consists ot
these, and so do the two peninsulas which project to the west, i. e. towards
Cuba.

Jamaica is now very well known, thanks t^ the efforts of the earlier
English explorers, and in particular to the surveys made, by bawkins and
Browne The Tertiary deposits here occupy a larger part of the surface
than in Cuba or Haiti. The strike is very nearly the same. The west of
the island is hilly and formed of Tertiary beds; the greater l^ughts, however,
are found in the eastern part, where the Blue mountains rise to more tlian
7,000 feet. They consist of the same rocks as the Cibao mountains of Haiti ;
syenite, granite, and diorite are exposed chiefly on the south-west side. The
‘ Metamorphosed Series,’ which is nothing else than the Flysch-like deposits

* J. G. Sawkins, Reports on the Geology of Jamaica, or Part II of the West Indian •
Survey, 8vo, bond., 1869, in particular pp. 26 et seq. ; also L. Barrett, On some Cretaceous
Rocks in the South-Eastern Portion of Jamaica, Quart. Journ. Gcol. Soc., 1860, XVI,
pp. 324-326 ; M. Duncan and G. P. Wall, A Notice on the Geology of Jamaica, op. cit.,
1865, XXI, pp. 1-15.



548


THE ANTILLES


[part n

of the other islands, constitutes the upper ^arts of the chain. This series is
folded and crops out again towards the centre of the island from beneath
the younger deposits, but with a mueh diminished height. Above it lie the
already mentioned fossiliferous beds of the middle Cretaeeous. Sawkins
'estimates their thickness at from 500-600 feet. According to ^his observer,
the remains of very large Eadiolites, firmly incorporated with the limestone,
and Barrettia, a remarkable genus of Rudistes, are confined to the lower
part of the series, while the fauna with Actaeonella and Hippurites, which
so strongly recalls the Gosau beds in the eastern Alps, is found above.

Our knowledge of Porto Rico is unfortunately restricted to a very
short note, which Clove has included in his instructive description of the
structure of the islands which follow to the east.’ The strike here appears
to be directed more towards the cast ; the same rocks, which have been
already discussed in Haiti, again crop out here \ They lie within a narrow
selvage of recent deposits which border the north coast, and continue
onwards to the Vinjin islamls.

Th(ise islands are separated from one a/iother and from Porto Rico only
by shallow sea, and Cleve has clearly shown how the several zones of rock
are continued with an east to west strike through the various islands of
the group, thus proving its tectonic unity. In the south we find a zone
extending from St. Thomas and St. John through Norman and Peters
islands, composed of older eruptive rocks, which are described as ‘felsite
with subordinate blue-beach.’ A similar zone runs in the north of the
archipelago to the north of Tortola and through the northern half of Virgin
Gorda. Between these two lie zones of ‘ blue-beach ’ with the same strike,
which are accompanied by shales, quartzite, and limestone altered and
steeply upturned.

In a zone which appears to occupy a more or less median position we
meet near Coki Point on St. Thomas with Actaeoiiella laevis and other
fossils of the middle Creta,peous. We might almost suppose that the entire
archipelago represents a single great synclinal, the most middle and recent
member of which would be the strata with Actaeonella

Anegadd, the most northerly of the Virgin islands, is an exception,
and does not form part of the synclinal ; we have already mentioned that
it is quite flat and belongs to the outer zone. —

To the south of the island of Vieque and the southern Virgin islands
the sea lx)ttom suddenly descends to a profound depth. The island of

* P. T. Clove, On the Geology of the North-Eastern West India Islands, Svensk.
Vetensk. Ak. Handling. 1870, ny fold, IX, 57 pp. and maps ; Puerto Rico, pp. 14, 15 ;
also Annals N. York Acad. Sc., 1882, II, pp. 185 et seq.

* Cleve, op. cit., pi. ii, fig. i. Woodward also mentions Actaeondla laevis from St. Thomas
in Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1866, XXII, p. 570. For the island of Culebra see also D. C.
de Guillerna, Memoria del rcconocimiento del interior do la isla de Culebra, Bol. Soc.
geogr. Madrid, 1880, VIII, pp. 23-47, in particular p, 35.



549


CH. x] THE CORDILLE^ OF THE ANTILLES

Sainte-Croixy which lies close ta> these islands, is said to be separated from
them by depths of more than 12,000 feet. Nevertheless the same rocks
reappear here. They occupy chiefly the north part of the island, and
appear to descend along the coast abruptly into the sea to a depth of about
6,000 feet ; the south of the island is Tertiary. •

To the east of Sainte-Croix begins the great volcanic arc which runs to
the south. The ash cones rise here to a height of 4,000 feet. The next series
of islands on the east, through which the rocks of Cuba and Haiti are
continued, rises to a height of 1,400 feet in a single instance only; for the
rest the height varies between 200 and 500 feet.

On the west coast of Anguilla the older eruptive rocks and the
stratified deposits of the great islands make their appearance over a trifling
area only ; they contain copper, and form some of the surroumling reefs b
These rocks likewise form the south part of SL Martini crop out on
St Bartholomew near the town of Gustavia, and form the higher parts of
the island^. On Antigua also tl o highest ridges are formed of greenstone,
amygdaloid, and porphyry

It has long been known that on Barbados, as on Trinidad, ])etroIeum
wells up from the ground in great quantity. —

It follows from the preceding observations that the whole of ttie middle
or principal zone of the West Indian islands, from Cal )0 San Antonio at
the western end of Cuba, through Jamaica, Haiti, Porto Rico to Barbados,
is composed of the same rocks. Granite and in places gneiss-like rocks,
older eruptive rocks, the peculiar blue-beach, serpentine, glauconitic sand-
stone, and then light-coloured limestone, the age of which, so far as it can
be definitely determined by organic remains, is (h'ctaceous, form the visible
remnants of a once continuous mountain range. It is the same sei*ies of
rocks as that which forms the island of Trinidad, the northern chain of
Venezuela, the chains of Merida and Bogota with their southern continuation,
and finally the whole series of the Coast Cordilleras down to the southern-
most point of the South American continent. ^ •

It is the same series of rocks which. we meet with in many parts of
Greece, in Crete and Cyprus, in many parts of the Tauric Armenian
syntaxis, in the east of Afghanistan, on the Andaman and^Nicobar islands.
At the same time the striking resemblance to certain regions of tlui

European Flysch is very remarkable. T. Wolf says that they are ‘ rocks

•

^ Sawkina, Reports, &c., Append. I, Geological Report on the Island of Anguilla,
pp. 257-261. Of several older descriptions 1 will only mention one' treatise, which
however is admirable for its time: W. Maclure, Observations on the Geology of the
West India Islands from Barbados to Santa Cruz inclusive, Journ. Acad.iNat. Sc iences,*
Philadelphia, 1817, 1, pt. i, pp. 134-149.

* Cleve, op. cit., pp. 22 et seq.

3 F. M. Duncan, On the Fossil Corals of the West India Islands, pt. i ; Quart. Journ.
Geol. Soc., 1863, XIX, pp. 408-410.



550


THE ANTILLES


[part n

like Flysch and Nagelflue/ which, toethe^ south of Chimborazo as far as
Alansi, form the western Cordillera of Ecuador from foot to summit The
petroleum springs recur in the lower Cretaceous Flysch of the Carpathians,
and the long ranges of serpentine reappear in the Flysch of the north-east
of Bosnia, in Euboea, and very many other places.—

We may lienceforth speak of this series of islands as the Cordillera of
the Antillef:?. Its course describes an arc. Towards the west it appears to
divide into several branchas in virgation, as has been shown by Seebach.
One branch runs from the south of Haiti through the peninsula of Jacmel
and the Blue mountains of Jamaica towards Honduras, another from the
(^ibao mountains of Haiti, across the Sierra Maestra of Cuba, towards
the Amatiquc gulf in Guatemala, and thence crossing the isthmus reaches
the line of the great volcanos. It is possible that a third branch is indi-
cated by the Sierra de Cumanayagua in the centre of the island of Cuba.

The Cordillera is bordered on the north-east and east by Tertiary and
even younger marine deposits, among which we have already mentioned in
an earlier passage (p. 282) the coral bqds of Castel Qombcrto and the
Orbitoidcs limestone, which corresponds to the lower limestone of Malta.
Which of these members have shared in the folding, I have not been in
a position to determine with complete certainty from the accounts at my
disposal ; but in any case, the recent deposits end abruptly against the
slopes of the folded range and lie flat upon them, and their arrange-
ment is similar to that of the descending series near Suez, that is to say,
the younger deposits lean against the older at a diminishing height above
the sea. These horizontally stratified sediments of recent age, mostly lime-
stone, form not only the border of the great islands, but also some small
flat islands with very steep clifT-like margins lying between the fragments
of tluj Cordillera, as for instance the island of Mona between Haiti and Porto
Rico - ; of these sediments also the whole outer series of low islands con-
sists, namely a part of I^arbados, Barbuda, Sombrero, Anegada, and the
fragments of tha gi*eat Tertiary * plate ’ as far as the peninsula of Florida
(p. 283).

Tlie arrangement of the volcanos on the inner side of the Cordillera
precisely corresponds to that of the volcanos of the Apennines and the
Carpathians ; it is the result of in-break on the inner side of the arc. The
border of the Caribbean sea presents a structure similar to that of the
western Mediterranean, in complete contrast to that of the South American
continent. We may oven assert that the Caribbean sea as regards the
nature of its border stands in a relation to the Mexican gulf, which

‘ T. Wolf, Neucs Jahrb. f. Min., 1880, 1, p. 268.

D. I. Nunez Zuloaga, Memoria descriptiva de la isla de la Mona, Bol. Soc. geogr.
Madrid, 1879, VII, pp. 226-238, map; and Tejada, Reconocimiento de la isla dela Mona,
op. cit., 1880, IX, pp. 81-93.



551


CH. x] THE CAEIBBEAN SEA •

presents a remote resemblance to th^at existing between the western and
south-eastern parts of the Mediterranean. The Caribbean sea is framed to
north and east by the broken inner side of. a mountain range, which in
the east has allowed a series of volcanos to appear on its fractured border.
Although a bending round of this chain from Barbados to the east-west,
direction of Trinidad and the mountain chain of north Venezuela has not
been demonstrated, yet we find that this latter chain also turns its broken
inner side to the sea. It is the same in Italy, in the north-west of Africa,
and on’ the south coast of Spain. The gulf of Mexico lies outside the
Cordillera of the Antilles ; it has been produced by collapse in the fore-
land ; its outline is not influenced in any visible manner by the course of
the mountain-folds, unless perhaps in the west by the approach of the
Mexican ranges to the coast of Vera Cruz. In like manner the southern
part of the eastern Mediterranean has been produced by collapse in the
desert table-land, although its outline is not indicated in advance by
mountain ranges. It is true tl:at in the northern part of the eastern
Mediterranean another circum.s lance is added ; the Tauric arc has broken
down, and strange to say it is precisely in this region that we find two great
islands, Crete and Cyprus, which present a striking resemblance to the
fragmentary arc of the Cordillera of the Antilles. These two inlands are
also fragments of an arc ; this fact is as clearly manifest in their outlines
as in Cuba or Haiti, and they consist mainly of the same rocks as the
Greater Antilles, namely of serpentine with chrome-ironstone, Flysch, and
Cretaceous limestone, while granite furnishes the foundation.

Just as the shores of the western Mediterranean in Calabria, at Cabo
di Gata, and other places are frequently visited by eartluiuakes, so too is
the neighbourhood of the Caribbean sea, Caracas and Cuinana on the
north coast of Venezuela, Guadeloupe among the volcanic islands, Port
Royal in Jamaica have attained a lamentable celebrity. Numerous
treatises have already been published on this subject, but up to the present
I have been unable to recognize any relation between the phenomena.
Salterain has shown that two distinct seismic regions are present in Cuba
The first, distinguished for many centuries by great earthciuakes, lies near
Santiago de Cuba and belongs entirely to the cast side of the island.
A second is indicated by the earthquakes of the Cordillera of Vuelta-
Abajo; these began in the night of the 22nd to 23rd of January, 1880,

^ P. Salterain, Ligera resena do los temblores do tierra ocurridoB en la isla de Cuba ;
Bol. Com. Mapa GeoL, 1883, X, pp. 371-385. It was the earthquakes of the east of Cuba
which suggested Poey’s remarks on the connexion between earthquakes and cyclones,
the importance of which has been pointed out above in discussing the Deluge : A. Poey^
Sur la force ascensionnelle qu’exercent Ics ouragans a la surface du sol, comme pouvant
donner lieu a la production dcs tremblements do terro, in Pooy’s Supplement au tableau
chronologique des tremblem. de terre ressentis k Tile de Cuba, from the Nouv. Ann. d.
Voyages, 8vo, Paris, 1855, pp. 10-21.



562


THE ANTHiLES


and continued until the month of May 9 f tlv) same year. The shocks travelled
across the most westerly part of the island, which is very narrow, and in
a direction from south-west to north-east or west-south-west to east-north-
east, over a fairly well-defined area which is bounded by the meridians of
• Las Mangas and Sta. Cruz de los Pinos. About the same time^a new crater
formed far from the island of Cuba in lake Ilopango on the great line of
volcanos, which runs along the Pacific coast through San Salvador (p. 91).
Bockstroh’s account shows that the concussions began there in the last days of
1879, and on the 20th of January, 1880,at 11 p.m., during violent explosions
a great column of vapour rose from the lake, and on the following
morning the new island began to appear in its midst ; on the afternoon of
the 23rd of January the activity increased, and in February the new
volcano had built itself up. It is composed of rhyolite ; the concussions
continued for a long time subsequently.

From the close correspondence in time and direction Salterain and
Vines concluded that some causal connexion existed between the eruption
in lake Ilopango and the transversal^ shock of Vuelta-Abajo. The
confirmation of this opinion must depend on future observation.

On the transverse fissures of the great volcanic line, which extends from
Costa Rica to beyond Guatemala, the eruptive activity advances in the
direction of the Pacific Ocean. As we mentioned above the movement
takes place rather rapidly, and several new volcanos have been formed
even during the last century.


CHAPTER XI


NORTH AMERICA ‘

The foldings in the east. Prairies and Black hills. Division of the mountain ranges
of the west. Rocky mountains. Uinta mountains. Wahsatch and mountain chains on
the Snake river. Colorado plateau. The table-land of Utah and the grand canon of
Colorado. Basin ranges. Sierra Nevada. The Coast Cordilleras and lower California.
The west of Canada. Summary.

The Folding in the East The east of the North American continent,
from the mouth of the St. Lawrence down to Alabama and Georgia, bears
witness to great processes of folding, which at different times, but chiefly
during the Palaeozoic period, h?\ve affected this important part of the
earth’s crust. The course of the f >lds, apart from deviations to be discussed
presently, is directed generally from north-east to south-west^ and the tan-
gential force has always acted from the Atlantic Ocean towards the existing
continent. Great faults have ensued; especially great longitudinal fnic-
tures which follow the strike of the folds, and, with a throw of vast extent,
attain an extraordinary length. The geologists of the Pennsylvanian
survey, who have traced the course of these disturbances with great
precision, on account of their importance in relation to coal-mining, have
estimated the subsidence produced by them at 20,000 feet in some cases, and
in others at even much more. These subsidences do not, however, modify
on the whole th^' picture so faithfully drawn by Henry Rogers many
years ago, which represents Pennsylvania and Virginia, together with parts
of Tennessee and other neighbouring states, as a vast folded region, a great
fragment of the earth’s crust impelled in one direction, which may be aptly
compared with the Jura in Europe. And indeed each timo we return to
the works of this distinguished investigator we are filled anew with

' The little map of PL VI is only intended to depict approximately the relative
position of the most important parts of tho Rocky mountains, and the (distribution of the
sediments on the Colorado plateau. On account of the small scale it was impossible to
attempt a correct representation of the Wahsatch range, of the narrow folded chains to
the north of the Bear lake, or oven of the edges^of the flexures. The Laramie is through-
out assigned to the Cretaceous. The region of lake Utah has not been coloured.
For the northern part, as far as 42*’ 15', the map drawn up by Peale, St. John, and
Endlich, and edited by Hayden, has been followed ; for the next zone, to the north
boundary of Colorado, and for the western part of the Uinta range to the Salt lake, the •
maps of Clarence King; for the eastern part of the Uinta, Powell; for Colorado,
the map by Hayden ; the high table-land of Utah, together with the neighbourhood of
the canon, has been represented accoiding to Dutton, and north Mexico according to
Stevenson.



554


NORTH AMERICA


[part II

astonishment, that ho should have Ij^eeniable, at such an early period, to
arrive at so correct a conception of the structure of mountain regions of
this kind •

A great number of saddles and basins of great length are present. The
• felsitic rocks, which on the cast coast of Nova Scotia extend along the
Atlantic Ocean in the middle of the anticlinals, are Archaean, as is shown by
the superposition of strata containing the primordial fauna. On the island
of Scatari, which may be regarded as the furthermost extension of cape
Breton towards the ocean, the strike, according to Fletcher, is S. 82® to 88® E.;
near Rochford on the south-east coast of cape Breton, N. 74® E. ; further
to the south on the same coast near cape Gabarus, N. 46® E. — as though
the general strike of the anticlinal folds, directed approximately south-
soutli-west or south-west, tended, on approaching this part of the ocean, to
turn more towards the east. Even, however, in this remote portion of the
great system of folds, sediments of the Carboniferous period lie transgres-
sivcly over the anticlinals of the Archaean— a proof of the remoteness of
the period during which the movement of folding took place \

On the north coast, immediately to the north-west of Scatari, other
anticlinals strike in a north-easterly direction out to sea; this direction
also determines the outlines of Nova Scotia and cape Breton.

The folds now proceed across the whole breadth of New Brunswick as
far as the eastern shore of the lower St. Lawrence, the direction of which
is determined by their course, but on the island of Anticosti they flatten
out to so great an amplitude that the stratification along the coast appears
to be horizontal over intervals miles in length, and the straits of Belle
Isle, which separate Newfoundland from the continent, are lx)unded by
horizontal strata on both sides. Prince Edward island consists, as we shall
sec directly, of much younger rocks, and the strait of Canso, which
separates cape Breton from Nova Scotia, is a transverse furrow, cutting
across the folded region Ijke Matyushin Shar in Nova Zcmbla (p. 504) \

• * * •

^ H. D. Rogers, Rep. Brit. Assoc., 1856, Cheltenham, and The Geology of Pennsylvania,
4to, 1858 ; in particular. On tho Laws of Structure of the more disturbed Zones of the
Earth’s Crust, and Classification of the several Types of Orographic Structure visible in
the Appalachian? and other Undulated Mountain Chains, op. cit., II, pt. ii, pp. 885-
941. Subsequently an attempt has even been made with the help of more exact ob-
servations to express the extent of the lateral contraction in figures. Attempts of this
kind are accompanied by great difficulties and a high degree of uncertainty ; Clay pole
quotes the figures 65 : 100 as representing the proportion of the present to the original
breadth: Nature, 1884, p. 531.

* H. Fletcher, Report on the Exploration of Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, Rep. Geol.

‘ Surv. Canada for 1875-1876 F, 1876-1877, pp. 454-513, 1877-1878 F, pp. 9 et seq., maps ;
and by the same author. Report on Part of the Counties of Richmond, Inverness,
Guysborough, and Antigonish, Nova Scotia, op. cit., 1879-1880 F. A sketch map in
Dawson, Acadian Geol., 8vo, Lond., 1868.

’ J. Richardson, Report, map showing the distribution of the lower Silurian rocks



appai:a.chians


655


OH. xi]

A great part of the anticlincis apd synclinals, which extend through
New Brunswick as far as Gaspe, has been mapped during the last few
years by the Geological Survey of Canada ; •! must content myself with
observing that Lheir strike is directed to the south-west and south-soutli-
west, and thaj^ they are continued towards Maine. Particular difficulty has
been found in deciphering the structure to the south of Quebec ; but the
investigations of Selwyn on Cianadian territory and tliose of Wing and
Dana in Vermont, and as far south as the neighbourhood of New York,
have shown that over the whole of this great distance the tectonic features
of the country strike almost precisely due north and soutli \

While, however, these meridional lines, which appear to bo partly folds
and partly longitudinal fractures, nin to the south on the cast of lake
Champlain and the valley of the Hudson, a series of folds soon comes
in, which begin with the CatskiP mountains, north-north-west of New
York, and take a direction to the south-south-west; on the north-west of
Philadelphia, near Pottsville and Harrisburg, we see these folds, in ever
increasing development and witi'* a rich accompaniment of Carboniferous
sediments, pass in a great sigmoid flexure from south-south-west and south-
west, first to nearly due west, and then after some distance back to
south-west. With this strike they form the Alleghany mountffins, and
are continued into Alabama and Georgia. This deflexion of the strike
takes place in Pennsylvania, and in this n^gion the folds are cut across by
most of the tributaries of the Susquehanna ; it was here that H. D. Rogers
pursued his investigations into the formation of mountain chains by
unilateral folding. The new surveys made under Leslie's direction have
furnished a treasure-house of observations on the details of the form
and the course of the folds, on the thrust-planes in the over-folds, the
longitudinal fractures, and in general on all the details of the structure of
the country. In the south-eastern district situated on the inner side of
the folded system, the coal is converted into ganthraci^e; in the outer
folds, as on the flat-lying beds of the western regions; iu is bituminous.
A similar phenomenon, as is well known, is met with in Belgium.

Without following the further coursti of the folds through Virginia,

between Chaudiere and Trois-Pistoles, Rep. Oeol. Surv. Can. for 1866- >869, ]>p. 133-157 ;
W. E. Logan, Geol. of Canada, 8vo, 1863, pp. 2, 287, 864 et passim ; for Anticosti,
J. Richardson, Rep, for 1853-1856, pp. 191-245 et j^assiin.

' For North Brunswick I will only mentiem R. W. Ells, Report on the Geology of
Northern and Eastern New Brunswick and the North Side of the Bay of Chaleurs, Rep.
Geol. Surv. Can., 1880-1882 D, map ; and by the same, Report on the Geology of Gaspo
Peninsula, op. cit. DD ; further, for the region Quebec — New York, A. R. C. Selwyn,
The Quebec Group in Geology, Proc. and Trans. Roy. Soc. Canada, I, Montreal, 1883, ‘
sect, iv, 1882, pp. 1-13; and J. D. Dana, An Account of the Discoveries in Vermont
Geology of the Rev. A. Wing, Am. Journ. Sc., 1877, XIIT, pp. 332-347, 405-419, and XIV,
p. 36, and by the same author, On the Relations of the Geology of Vermont to
that of Berkshire, op. cit., 1877, XIV, pp. 37-48, 132-140, 202 et seq.



556 NORTH AMERICA [pabtii

I will briefly describe, according to^ ElKott's observations, their southern
termination, although it is precisely in this region that many problems
present themselves, which appear to still await solution^.

The Blue range extends to the south-west as an important chain of
heights ; in the west of North Carolina it rises to 6,700 feet in the Black
Dome, exceeds 4,000 feet in Caesar’s Head on the north-west boundary
of South Carolina, and disappears between Jasper and Cartersville north-
west of Atlanta in Georgia. A second chain, the Smoky mountains,
runs on the west, nearly parallel to the Blue range, but bends to the
south on reaching the northern boundary of Georgia; it forms in this
state a number of important summits, as for instance Sharp mountain,
and its last peaks rise between Cartersville and Alatoona. In this region
the ramifications of both chains unite, and in northern Georgia a wedge-
shaped more elevated area remains enclosed between them. These chains
consist of gneiss and of primordial and lower Silurian deposits. The
enclosed area is synclinal in structure. The eastern border, the Blue
range, is a monoclinal; its beds dip to, the west, while on the east it is
bounded by a scarp, which probably corresponds to a fault, for strata of
lower Silurian age also crop out in the lower-lying ground on the east,
as though this had suffered a considerable subsidence. The strata of the
Smoky mountains west of the enclosed and elevated area dip beneath
the latter, but they are followed further to the west by a number
of other folds, which include younger members of the Palaeozoic series,
and continue their course to Alabama, where they disappear beneath
the great Cretaceous transgression. —

In this vast folded region of eastern America the transgressive posi-
tion of some of its members— especially well exhibited in the north —
shows that it had already commenced to acquire its existing structure
during the Silurian aera, and that the movements then in progress must
have continued to act for a very long period, or else have been several
times repeated.^ on this ancient folded complex are long bands

and isolated masses of a red or grey sandstone of Mesozoic age, which, on
the evidence furnished by the plant remains it contains, is usually assigned
to the Trias. ,

This formation is accompanied for the greater part of its extent by
sheets and dykes of eruptive rock. It occurs near Prince Edward
island, along the shore of the bay of Fundy, in the valley of Connecticut,
through Massachusetts down to the neighbourhood of the sea, then in an
exceptionally long strip from the lower Hudson through New Jersey,
Maryland, and Virginia to North Carolina, and in other isolated localities.

* J. B. Elliott, The Age of the Southern Appalachians ; Am. Journ. Sc., 1883, XXV,
pp. 282-298.



CH.XI] CINCINNA*n UPLIFT 657

The strata maintain a unilateral inclination for long distances, but folding
does not appear to have been yet observed

Towards the west the folded region in the east of North America is not
separated by ai' overfolded border from an alien foreland, but the foreland
is of the same ^nature as the mountains themselves; the folding flattens out
towards the west very gradually, and Rogers believed, many years ago,
that its last traces might be recognized even as far as the Rocky moun-
tains. In front of the folds of the Alleghanies and running parallel to
them from lake Erie far to the south-west, there rises an independent
anticlinal, the Cincinnati Uplift, which is comparable in all essential
features to the ‘ Parmas ’ of the Ural. It extends from the shores of lake
Erie into Tennessee, and, according to Safford, it reveals the Devonian
resting immediately upon the lower Silurian, Further to the west the
folding completely dies away. In Michigan only a very slight inclination
of the strata towards the middle of the great basin, which separates the
lakes, is to be perceived, and the Coal-measures of Illinois and Missouri
lie flat; in Kansas they dip to fc^ie west with a very sliglit inclination
beneath marine deposits of Permian age.

The Prairies and the Black Hills. A vast inhospitable region, pre-
senting all the signs of extensive denudation, devoid of considerable*hcights
and continuous ridges, without any definite river system, an<l covered with
numerous lakes of irregular outline, extends from lake Superior to the
north-west, north, and north-east ; it includes Hudson’s bay, and is continued
into the Arctic Archipelago. It is formed of Archaean rocks, supporting
here and there flat-bedded Palaeozoic rocks. Bell has explored many
parts of this region ; his descriptions recall the Archaean ‘ platform ’ of
Lapland

Towards the west this extensive mass of ancient rocks is covered over by
transgressive Cretaceous deposits, which form all the level country, extending
onwards to the foot of the Rocky mountains, and through the whole centre
of the continent down to Texas, and even beyond it ^3 far Mexico. The
transgression begins, as in so many other regions, in the middle of the
Cretaceous system. The members of this system, which have been
distinguished in the plain, boar the following names : Dakota, Fort Benton,
Niobrara, Fort Pierre, Fox Hill, and Laramie ; the order being taken from
below upwards. The lowest division, or the Dakota beds, frequently con-
tains terrestrial plants, lignite, and remAins of reptiles, but marine deposits
are also present ; most authors regard it as the equivalent of the European

' W. M. Davis, The Structural Value of the Trap Ridges of the Connecticut Valley ;
Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., 1882, XXII, pp. 116-124.

* R. Bell, Report on Hudson's Bay, Rep. Geol. Surv. Can., 1877-1878 C, and 1879-
1880 C ; Report on the Geology of the Basin of Moose Rivei*'; Report on the Geology of
the Lake of the Woods, op. cit., 1880-1882 C and CC, with maps, and other publications.



658


NORTH A'MERICA


[part II

Cenomanian ; the Fort Benton beds ^lsoi»afford in many places lignite and
reptilian remains. The beds of Niobrara, Fort Pierre, and Fox Hill are
exclusively, or at least chMy, marine. The Laramie are frequently
accompanied by coal beds and by the remains of Dinosaurus, but also by
• a poverty-stricken marine fauna, possessing but few species, some of which
point to the influence of brackish water ; true fresh-water deposits are also
present. This stage is assigned by a few eminent authorities to the lowest
part of the Tertiary; we place it on account of its Dinosaurus in the
Cretaceous.

It is a very remarkable fact that in the whole of the North American
continent^ with the exception of a few littoral districts and the basin of
the lower Mississippi, no trace of a Tertiary marine submergence has been
observed, A long series of varied Tertiary deposits rests upon the Laramie
stage, particularly to the west of the Rocky mountains, but they have
been formed without exception in fresh water. Not less surprising is the
vast extension of the inland waters of Laramie, for we find the deposits
of this stage in the north on the Saskatchewan, and again in the south
far below Santa F6 in New Mexico on the Rio Grande^.

J. Richardson, Selwyn, J. W. Dawson, and G. M. Dawson have
dcscribcJd the structure of the Cretaceous plain in the north.

The boundary of the Cretaceous region on the north has not yet
been determined. G. M. Dawson informs us that from the upper tribu-
taries of the Peace river, the Rocky mountains appear to trend almost
due north, so that they meet the bend of the Mackenzie below its con-
fluence with the Liard. At the same time remains of Devonian and
perhaps Silurian deposits arc known, which extend from the Clearwater
and Athabasca towards the north-west as far as the western end of the
great Slave lake. It would therefore appear that the Cretaceous deposits
are considerably restricted or interrupted in this region *. But we shall
probably never know how far they once extended over the denuded region
to the cast and porth-e^t.

Lake Winnipeg lies entirely within the region of ancient rocks, but the
Red river, shortly before discharging itself into this lake, appears to form
a remarkable boundary, for, according to J. W. Dawson, the right or eastern
bank of its broad marshy basin consists of Silurian limestone, the western,

* J. Stevenson, Note on the Laramie Group of Southern New Mexico ; Am. Joum. Sc.,
1882, XXII, pp. 370-372. On the east side of the Rio Grande to 150 miles below Santa
Fe, with Ostrea, Corbula, and others, and with coal. Also White, Geographical Extent
of the Laramie Group, op. cit., 1882, XXIV, pp. 207-209, and in particular op. cit., 1883,
XXVI, p, 120.

* G. M. Dawson, Report on an Exploration from Port Simpson on the Pacific
Coast to Edmonton on the Saskatchewan; Rep. Geol. Surv. Can., 1879-1880 B,
p. 130.



ch.xi3 BLACk HILLS I 669

however, of Cretaceous beds, ov^ which we ascend by two great steps to
the plain of the Prairies

Further to the south, in Nebraska and Ka/isas, the Dakota beds lie flat
on the Penni‘m: the latter, also approximately horizontal, approach
from the east, as the covering of the Carboniferous deposits, and with ^
a scarcely noticeable inclination disappear beneath the Dakota beds. —
From the midst of the Cretaceous plain there rises between the two
branches of the Cheyenne river a strange orographic mass, the Black hills
of westehi Dakota. Its structure is of singular regularity. The highest
point, H*amey’s Peak, 7,403 feet high, is situated to the south-east and a little
to one side of the centre ; it is a bold rugged mass of intrasive granfte, and
rises, surrounded by smaller intrusive masses, out of a region of Archaean
niica-schist and clay-slate, which extends chiefly to the north-north-west.
The Archaean rocks are steeply upturned and abraded ; above them, in an
encircling zone lies the primordial Potsdam sandstone, only 200-300 feet
thick. Upper and lower Silurian, .is well as Devonian, are entirely wanting,
and the Potsdam sandstone is succeeded, with a deceptive appearance of con-
cordance, by the Carboniferous limestone. This forms a second concentric
zone, narrow in the east, broader in the west. Towards the interior it rises
together with the sandstone in a scarped outcrop above the soft Archaean
schists, and towards the exterior it descends all round in a flexure which
is particularly steep towards the east. Newton and Jenney, from whose
monograph on the Black hills the foregoing has been borrowed, lay particular
emphasis on the fact that the top of the Carboniferous limestone forms
a broad plateau, in which the strata are much less steeply inclined, while
around the margin the dip is considerably increased ; in this respect the
structure is comparable with that of the Kaibab plateau (p. 130). The
elongated space which is surrounded by the belt of Carboniferous lime-
stone is about 140 kilometers long and more than 60 kilometers broad
This great ellipse of Carboniferous limestone is surrounded by a depres-
sion formed of readily disintegrating red-coloured A’oeks.^ The first zone
is red sandstone with gypsum, belonging perhaps to the Trias ; the second
consists of variegated sandstone and shale with fossils of the upper Jurassic.
Thus we have here a marine member which is completely absent in the cast
of the continent. It becomes visible at a low level as we approach the Rocky
mountains, just as the Mesozoic series is seen to become more complete in
the Salt range of India as it proceeds towards the high chains beyond.

The hollow formed by the red rocks is surrounded by the rising scarp
of the Cretaceous outcrop.

I

* J. W. Dawson, Observations on the Geology of the Line of the Canadian Pacific
Railway ; Quart. Journ. Gcol. Soc., 1884, XI. pp, 378, 379.

* H. Newton and W. P. Jenney, Report on the Geology and Resources of the Black
Hills of Dakota, 4to, Washington, 1880, atlas.



660 I


NORTH AMERICA


[PABT n

The axis of the great ellipse is not a straight line, but somewhat convex
to the east ; this is indicated by traces of prolongation of the mass towards
the north-west and towards the south : in the first case these are accom-
panied by several outcrops of trachyte. The border of the Rocky mountains
• sufiers a similar deflexion in the same latitude.

The plateau of the Carboniferous limestone appears to me too nearly
horizontal to be described as a simple anticlinal or as a Parma of the
Rocky mountains. After reading the description we are left rather with
the impression that here too the surrounding plain has dropped along the
flexures. — *

We* now return to the Cretaceous plain which gradually ascends towards
the west, and approach the border of the Rocky mountains. We will,
however, first cast a brief glance at the great mountain ranges of the west.

Classification of the ranges of the west. The vast mountain region of the
west of North America is bounded on the east by the sharply defined foot
of the Rocky mountains, and on the west by the Pacific Ocean, which
penetrates in the gulf of California deep into the mountainous country, and
towards the north even isolates considerable parts of it, such as Vancouver
and the Queen Charlotte islands.

In thb extreme north the eastern border of the Rocky mountains is very
little known; from the upper Mackenzie to the upper tributaries of the
Peace river it appears, as we have said above, to run nearly north and
south ; it then proceeds for a considerable distance far towards thb south-
south-east; in the west of Montana, beyond that point at which the
Missouri leaves the mountains, it assumes a south-easterly direction,
including the Big Horn mountains ; then between latitude 44® and 43® N.,
in the south of Wyoming, it again turns due south. It follows this
meridional course throughout the whole of Colorado along the meridian of
105® approximately, and in New Mexico, in lat. 35® 30' N., between
longitude 105® and 106® W. the chain disappears, having first been
deflected a little to. the. south-south- west.

Recent volcanic rocks take part in the formation of these mountains ;
not only are they visible in all the more important parts of the chain, but
in places they, even advance towards the east beyond the foot of the
Rocky mountains. In Oregon and Washington they cover particularly
large areas.

Within the region of the United States three natural lines may be
distinguished which divide the whole mountainous country into four
more or less independent regions.

’ The first of these lines runs with a slight deflexion to the south-south-
w^est from the fractured western border of the Wahsatch mountains, that
is, from the eastern border of the Great Salt lake, towards the extremity
of the Canon of Colorado. The second line is marked by the abrupt



661


OH. xi] MOUNTAIN RAl^GES OF THE WEST

eastern border of the Sierra Nevada of California. The third lino corre-
sponds to the longitudinal valley of Csdifornia, through which the Sacramento
and the San Joaquin flow, and to the gulf o4 California.

The first region includes the Rocky mountains, the transverse chain of
the Uinta, the Wahsatch mountains, and between these chains two great*
table-lands, that of the Green river north of the Uinta mountains, and
the great Colorado plateau to the south of them.

The second region is that of the Basin ranges. A number of shorter
folds rutining nearly in the meridian, and intersected at acute angles by
mighty fractures, characterize this region. It comprises the numerous
smaller regions of the west which have no outlet, but extends, though with
some alteration in the strike, far beyond their borders.

The third region comprises the Sierra Nevada with its western
foot-hills.

The fourth region is formed by the Californian Coast ranges with
lower California, and here we .^hall again meet all the essential charac-
teristics of the Coast Cordilleras of South America.

To this method of grouping, which has been proposed by distinguished
American geologists, the objection may perhaps be raised that the Wahsatch
mountains already exhibit in all essential features the structure of the Basin
ranges, and must therefore be included with them ; but there is an obvious
convenience in bringing together the regions which surround the Green
river and Colorado table-lands, and this probably suggested the classifica-
tion, which will therefore be retained in the following pages.

Rocky mountains. Throughout the regions lying to the east of the
Great Salt lake the succession of the strata is nearly identical with that of
the east, and still more closely approaches that of the Black hills. The
primordial sediments are known in many places. The Silurian deposits
which rest upon them arc, it is true, only represented, so far as we know at
present, by isolated members. Still more scanty are the traces of the
Devonian, which with comparative certainty nqay be, assumed to be
absent even over large areas. The deposits of the Carboniferous period on
the other hand are present in great thickness, and the marine equivalents
of the upper coal-bearing group of the east arc particularly, well developed;
passage beds of Permian character also are not wanting.

The Trias is represented by red sandstone and gypsum, but in the
north-western part of this region *a fossiliferous marine group (the
* Meekoceras Beds *) is intercalated into its lower part, which in the south-
east of Idaho attains a thickness of some thousands of feet. The fauna
recalls certain members of the Alpine Trias, but species also 'occur which*
have hitherto been regarded as Jurassic \

* A. C. Peale, Report on the Green River District, in Hayden, XI, Rep. U.S. Geol.Surv.
for 1877, pp. 622-629, and Jura-Trias Section of South-East Idaho and West Wyoming,

O o


BOLLAI



662 NOBTH AlttEKIGA [pabtu

The Jurassic formation corresponds t? that of the Black hills ; up to
the present only a single subdivision, evidently upper Jurassic, has been
recognized. Its resemblance ( to the Russian Jurassic will be considered
later.

• The Cretaceous system attains great importance, but its members are
essentially the same on both sides of the Rocky mountains, beginning with
the Dakota and concluding with the Laramie ^ds. In the interior of the
mountains the whole of the Tertiary period is represented by fresh-water
deposits only. Several divisions may be distinguished by means of the
rich terrestrial faunas which they contain, and the presence of Cor^hodon
shows fhat the fresh-water deposits begin even in the earlier stages of the
Eocene.

Thus between the Rocky mountains and the land to the east there
exists no such difference as that between the Alps or Himalaya and
their foreland. The stratified series of the east, from the Black .hills
onward, is increased by the introduction of a single . member only of
the Jurassic, to which is added in th^ north-west a marine member
of the Trias. Yet it is noteworthy that the intercalation of these two
marine formations takes place precisely in the same gap, between the
Permian Hnd Cenomanian, as that which, in the Alps and the Him&laya,
receives the most important accession of marine formations foreign to
the foreland.

We will now endeavour, with the assistance of Hayden’s map of
Colorado and the numerous treatises which exist on this subject, to trace
the course of the Rocky mountains within the region of the United States ^

Travelling across the prairie from the east towards the mountains we
ascend very gradually over the surface of the Cretaceous beds to the
considerable height of about 6,00G feet (Denver, 5,197 feet); the beds,
which have so far lain horizontal in the plain, are now suddenly turned
steeply upwards; the outcropping edges project in long ‘hogbacks,’ and
forthwith there rises from them the great front range of Colorado, many
peaks of which attain a height of more than 14,000 feet. These lofty
masses are formed of Archaean rocks; the steeply upturned outcrops at
their foot reveaj a stratified succession, which in its main features is the
same as that of the Black hills : there is here nothing to recall the zone of
Molasse, of Flysch, or limestone which lies in front of the Alps. This
absence of transitional foot-hills strikes every European geologist with
surprise*.

.Bull. n. S. Geol. Surv., 1880, V, pp. 119-123 ; C. A. White, Foesils of the Jura-Triae of
Southern Idaho, op. cit., pp. 105-117.

’ F. V. Hayden, Geological Map of Colorado, in Hayden, X, U. S. Geol. Surv. for 1876.

* I will here refer the reader to the inetructive description by G. v. Rath, Sitzungsber.
Niederrhein. Ges. Nat. Heilk. Bonn, Sitzungsb. v. 7. Jan. 1884.



563


CH. xi] THE BOCK?y MOUNTAINS

The chain consists of a con%ide3;able number of isolated masses or of
great ridges of ancient rocks, which at the first glance recall the so-called
^ central masses * of the Alps, or the mountain cores of the Riesengebirge.
The arrangement of these features diifers, however, from that met with
in the European mountains (PL VI).

Already even in the extreme south the peculiar structure of the chains
is known to occur as has been shown by Stevenson \

We have seen on the other side of the Atlantic how the branches
of the, Thian-shan, trending to the north-west, and the Mugodjars
running north and south, all arise independently of each other from the
table-land of the Ust-Urt: and now we find north-west and meridional
chains similarly arising from the table-land formed by the great plains of
the Llano Estacado, which extend from Texas towards New Mexico.
Near Galisteo in lat. 35° 25' N. thesj chains approach each other very closely,
without, however, coming into actual contact. The most extreme north-
westerly chain is that of the Ilacer mountains, south-west of Qalisteo;
but this belongs to another groi\p of ranges, which will be discussed later.
In this region we include none but the meridional ranges in the Rocky
mountains.

Here, in the south, there are three principal ranges, which afl begin in
lat. 35® 30' N. and trend to the north or north-north-east. The first of these,
starting from the west, is the Sierra of Santa ; the second, which is the
longest, bears successively the names Sierra de las Vegas, Sierra Mora,
Sierra Taos, and Sierra Culebra — the last of these unites in Colorado with
the great Sierra Sangre de Cristo ; the third range, finally. Sierra Cimarron,
is much shorter and buried to no small extent beneath the younger lavas,
which make their appearance in the east. The first two of the ranges rise
rapidly to a height of 12,000 feet; somewhat further north Culebra peak
attains an altitude of 14,049 feet.

These mountains consist of gneiss, hornblende schist, and other Archaean
rocks, on which rest Carboniferous deposits, begipning vrith a very thick
conglomerate formed of Archaean boulders ; the Carboniferous is followed
by a series of Mesozoic strata, such as are generally exposed in the Rocky
mountains, and these extend to the top of the Laramie; finally, there
occurs near Galisteo a peculiar patch of Tertiary beds.

The Sierra de Santa Fd is bordered on .the east side of its southern part
by a fault which extends for some distance to the south beyond the
extremity of the Archaean range ; the Sierra de Las Vegas is also continued
in the same direction, Wit in the form of an anticlinal fold.

Towards the east the c^ns are accompanied by trachytlc flows, and

^ J. J. Stevenson, Geological Examin^ions in Southern Colorado and North New
Mexico ; G. M. Wheeler, Rep. U. S. Geograph. Surv. West of the 100th Merid., Ill,
1881, 4to, maps.


o o a



664 NORTH AlftERIOA [partij

especially by extensive basaltic sheets, Tzhich spread over the adjacent
plain. The Laramie beds are still involved in the folding; but these
volcanic formations are of miv^h more recent age. Even well-preserved ash
cones occur ; one crater lies on the basalts of the Ocate-Mesa, and a second
•on the south-east side of the Turkey tnountains ; from the latter a lava
stream has flowed into the previously excavated cafion of the lilora river.

Further to the north the short Sierra Cimarron disappears, and the
lofty Sierra Culebra forms the outer border ; the eastern foot of the latter
is accompanied by a long rocky ridge known as the ‘ Stone WalL It is
formed by the basset edges of steeply upturned Dakota sandstone. For
a certain distance its strata are inverted and inclined to the west, then
they become vertical, and finally dip to the east at a moderate angle
beneath the plain.

Still further to the north, in about 37® 20', the outcrop of the Dakota
retires to the east, the Carboniferous zone becomes broader, and in front
of the border of the Rocky mountains there rise two lofty summits, the
Spanish peaks (13,620 and 12,720 feet), Ipng ago the boundary marks of
Spanish rule. These are the two great laccolites which have been discussed
in an earlier passage (p. 149) b

Here, •'where the Sierra Culebra proceeds to the north-north- west to
join the Sierra Sangre de Cristo, that very peculiar arrangement of the
Archaean chains begins which characterizes the Rocky mountains. Plate VI
only gives a very incomplete representation of it. In using this map we
must carefully distinguish the Archaean rocks which form the high chains
from those which are more deeply seated and exposed only by erosion,
such as are found at the bottom of the Grand cafion of Colorado, to the
west of the Sawatch range, and near the sources of the Rio Grande, as
well as to the west of this river, Where they make their appearance from
below sheets of volcanic rocks.

From the combined labours of Hayden, Clarence King, Hague, Marvine,
Stevenson, and other iny^stigators, we arrive at the following results * : —

Each single range of Archaean masses runs from south to north, with
a tendency to deviate to north-north-west or north-west. At the same
time these varipus ranges or branches are so arranged side by side that
they diverge from one another towards the west in virgation, while
towards the east a nejirly straight north to south line forms the common
outer boundary of the mountains.

^ My authority here is Endlich’s map in Hayden, IX, Ann. Rep., 1875, pi. xvi.

® Hayden in Geol. Surv. Rep. for 1873, p. 19 ; A. R. Marvine, op. cit., pp. 131 et seq.,
•pL ii’; C. King, U. S. Geol. Exploration of the Fortieth Parall., I, System. Geol., 1878,
pp. 15 et seq. ; A. Hague, op. cit., II, pp. 2 et seq. ; J. J. Stevenson, Structure and Age of
the Rocky Mountain System, in Wheeler’s Report, 100th Parall., Ill, pp. 488 et seq. ;
further, A. C. Peale, Notes on the Age of the Rocky Mountains in Colorado, Am. Joum.
Sc., 1877, XIII, pp. 172-181, 388 ; Stevenson, op. cit., pp. 297-299 et passim. .



CH. xi] VIRGATION OF THE BOCKY MOUNTAIN^ 666

The first branch runs to the^ north, from the Sierra las Vegas, trough
the Sierras Culebra and Sangre de Cristo to the extensive mass of the
Sawatch. The western half of Sangre de Cyisto is faulted down, and the
broad alluvial plain of San Luis extends here in its place ; to the west of
this lies the volcanic region of the San Juan mountains. Close to tho
north*west border of the Sawatch mountains lie the Elk mountains,
which are completely overfolded to the south-west ; the structure of these
mountains has already been discussed (p. 164).

The 'second branch is formed by the Wet mountains, which rise to the
east of Sangre de Cristo, then by the South Park range and Park range.
The isolated anticlinal of Rawlin’s peak appears to lie between this*branch
and the next.

On the long band of Palaeozoic deposits, which separate this branch
from the preceding, lie the important galena mines of Leadville, and the
surveys made by Emmons show that this band is traversed* by great
longitudinal faults with a downthrow to the west, i.e. towards the Sawatch
mountains. Along the Mosquito fault in Leadville the downthrow amounts
to 5,000 feet, along the London fault which follows it to 2,500 feet, and the
same on the Weston fault ; to the south of Leadville these fractm-es pass
into flexures \ •

The third branch of the Rocky mountains consists of the broad and
lofty Front range or Colorado range and Medicine-Bow range.

The fourth branch is formed by tlie low and flattened arch of the
Laramie mountains, which strikes due north. —

The eastern border of these lofty mountains emerges, as we have
already said, unexpectedly from the plain, and the sediments of this plain
outcrop in steeply upturned edges at tlieir foot, like the Stone Wall on
the east of the Culebra. A closer consideration of this eastern border
shows that the southern extremities of the several branches are not joined
continuously to one another, and thus there^ arise within the border
a number of re-entrant angles all turned to the nprth%weot, each of which
marks the syntactic union of a new branch. The upturned basset edges
then bend into these angles, as is particularly well seen in the outcrop of
the Cretaceous formation ; and Marvjne has shown in connexion with this
that in each of these branches the inclination of the strata is steeper on
the west side than on the east, and, indeed, that the west side frequently
passes into a fault.

A fine example of one of these re-entrant angles is afforded by
Huerfano park between Sangre de Cristo and Wet mountains, that is
between the first and second branch. The ernbayment of Cafion City?
from which the Arkansas river issues, between Wet mountains and Front

^ S. F. Emmons, Abstract of Report on Geology and Mining Industry of Leadville,
Colorado ; Powell, 2iid Ann. Rep. U. S. Geol. Surv. for 1880-1881, pp. 211 et seq.



566 NOBTH AMEBICA [part ir

range, ik a second example ; several others B,je known north of Denver, which
correspond to the branching off of subordinate parts of the Front range. —

This part of the Rocky mojintains is continued to the north-west in the
Seminole, Sweetwater, and Wind River mountains until in 43'' 30^ N. the
Qros Ventre range, also trending to the north-west, approaches the T^ton
chain, which runs from north to south. *

According to Endlich’s account these mountains present the following
arrangement. A long band of Palaeozoic and Mesozoic strata, compressed
in the form of a trough, runs to the north-west ; the Archaean mass of the
Seminole lies to the north, that of Sweetwater to the south of thil band ;
and sinbe these two larger masses find their continuation in several smaller
ones we may fairly suppose that two Archaean branches are at present
separated by the sedimentary zone. The much more important Wind River
range, which rises in several points to over 13,000 feet (Fremont’s peak,
13,790 feet), is a great Archaean chain; its southern part presents an
extremely steep slope to the east. This is the continuation of the Sweet-
water mountains, and only its eastern flank is accompanied by a sedimentary
zone^. —

The anticlinal of the Uinta range, in many parts over 13,000 feet
high, is according to the detailed descriptions of Powell very flat and
broad on the summit, and terminates on the north in a great master fault,
which for certain distances passes into a steep flexure and divides towards
the west into two branches. On the south side the subsidence is brought
about by numerous fractures and flexures, which follow approximately the
same course in a gentle arcuate curve ; these we shall have to consider in
greater detail *.

The anticlinal consists chiefly of beds of Carboniferous age, which here
attain an imposing thickness ; on the northern flank, which is much steeper
than the southern, ancient crystalline schist is exposed in one place ®. The
depression of Brown’s park, which is let into the northern border and cuts
off the 0-wi-yu-ku|« plat*eau, appears to have been caused by collapse.
Powell estimates' the extent of the downthrow on the northern side at
20,000 feet. The southern slope is gentler, and the Yampa plateau joins
the range on the south-east as a subordinate anticlinal.

To the east of the great anticlinal of the Uinta two isolated Palaeozoic

^ F. M. Endlich, Report on the Geology of the Sweetwater District, in Hayden, Geol.
Surv. Rep. for 1877, pp. 3-141 ; 0. St. John, Report on the Geology of the Wind River
District, op. cit., 1878, 1, pp. 175-269 ; Peale, St. John, and Endlich, Geological Map of
Portions of Wyoming, Idaho, and Utah, op. cit.

^ * J. W. Powell, Report on the Geology of the Eastern Poi-tion of the Uinta Mountains,
&c. ; U. S. Geol. and Geogr. Surv. of the Territ., II Divis., 4to, atlas, 1876.

^ Zirkel compares it with the Paragonite-schist of the Gotthard ; C. King, Rep. 40th
Parall., Microsc. Petrogr., VI, 1876, p. 28. According to Wadsworth it is mica-schist:
Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., 1881, XXI, p. 251.



OH. XI] THE UJNTA RANGE 667

masses arise, Yampa peak and J^unction peak ; these appear to be s^pnents
cut off by transverse faults from a common anticlinal which indicates the
continuation of the Uinta towards the Sawatch mountains.

A great flexure, the Midland flexure, with a drop to the south and
south-west, runs in an arc from the southern foot of the Uinta and of thq
forelying Yampa plateau to the prolongation of the Sawatch, and so
completes the union with this branch of the Rocky mountains. In t.hia
way the Uinta joins in the great virgation, and we are led to the opinion
expressed by White that the Uinta and the above-mentioned parts of the
Rocky \aountains must bo regarded as the result of uniform and mutually
connected dislocations which possess a common history •

The virgation is certainly very different in its nature from any which
we have hitherto encountered. In the few cases, as in the Elk mountains,
in which lateral movement can be traced at all, it occurs on the concave
side and is directed towards the interior, as in the sunken area of the
southern Alps. The upturning of the strata, on the edge of the great plain,
as a rule simple and confined to a narrow border, presents a much greater
resemblance to dragging along & fault, which may in places be overfolded,
than to a general tangential movement. The contrast to the great folds of
the Appalachians is undeniable and generally recognized. The knowledge
we have acquired from observations made in folded chains can therefore
hardly be applied here.

In North America various opinions have been expressed as to the
formation of the Rocky mountains. They were at first regarded as folded
chains. Then they were believed to represent a primaeval coast region, and
in support of this the fact was adduced that in different parts of the outer
border different sediments come into contact with the Archaean rocks, and
the Palaeozoic series in particular is w'anting wholly or in part over
long intervals. Finally they were explained as broad ‘ platforms ’ which
had been respectively elevated between two fractures or two flexures. The
last view has been maintained by Dutton, on6 of the most clear-sighted
authorities on mountain structure * *

‘The width of these platforms varies from ao to 45 miles. . . . The
lifting of these platforms has no significance corresponding to an anticlinal
fold. It is expressed by the conception of a block of strata having a fault
or equivalent monoclinal flexure upon both sides. . . . In the Uintas we
find a repetition of the Park Mountain type upon a grand scale. ... It
consists of a block somewhat broader than Colorado range, but otherwise
the type presents no essential modification.’

* C. A. White, Report on the Geology of a Part of North-West Colorado { Hayden, Geil.
Snrv. Bep. for 1876, pp. 3-59, in particular pp. 41, 46, and 51.

• C. E. Dutton, Report on the Geology of the High Plateaus of Utah ; Powell, U. S.
Oeogr. GeoL Surv. Rocky Mount., 4to, 1880, atlas, pp. 47 et seq.



NOETH AMEEICA


608 NOETH AMEEICA [partii

It fas been believed that these masses^or blocks must have been thrust
vertically upwards. I shall return to^this question later. —

Towards the west the hcij^ht of the Uinta mountains decreases; the
crest of the anticlinal, which in the cast lay towards the north, moves
.towards the middle of the chain ; the basset edges of the north and south
border gradually join each other in a curve, as though the whole arch were
about to flatten out, and where the curved outcrop of the Jurassic forma-
tion, approaching from the north and south, would become complete on the
summit, a band of trachyte lies transversely across it and conceals its
further course. This is the trachyte of the Provo valley ^ — *

We •now reach a fundamentally different chain, the Wahsatch^ the
western escarpment of which borders the east side of the Great Salt lake
and lake Utah.

As regards the structure, three different mountain masses may be
distinguished in the Wahsatch : the first forms the northern part of the
chain, extending southwards about as far as Salt Lake city ; the second is the
group of Lone peak, north of lake Utah, together with the heights which
follow to the south ; the third, different in structure, is that of mount Nebo.

The northern Wahsatch consists of a much disturbed mantle of Palaeozoic
strata, which slopes to north-east, east, and south-east ; beneath it gneiss and
other Archaean rocks appear along the line of fracture for considerable
distances. These ancient rocks also form the outlying islands in the
Great Salt lake. The second group is distinguished by the granite mass
of Lone peak, over 11,000 feet high, which is surrounded by Archaean
and Palaeozoic strata, and, like the northern Wahsatch, terminates in an
escarpment towards the west. The Palaeozoic strata are continued to the
south along lake Utah, forming a chain of peaks over 11,000 feet in
height : the fault here divides inta two parallel branches. To the east of
Lone peak another lofty granite mass, Clayton peak, rises out of the
Carboniferous strata. Finally, the third part of the Wahsatch, Mount
Nebo, is an anticlinal, of wbich, in contrast to the northern Wahsatch and
to the group of Lone peak, not the western but the eastern half is broken
off and downthrown, so that the steep side faces the east

The granite mass of Lone peak has been the subject of important
discussion. It was originally regarded as an eruptive mass, and the rock
composing it was described by Zirkel as a recent eruptive granite The
manner, however, in which the several members of the Palaeozoic series
abut against the steep granite surface led Clarence King, the leading


* S. F. Emmons, Green River Basin, in C. King, Rep. 40th Parall., II, pp. 191, 254 ;
West Uinta Range, pp. 311 et seq., atlas, fol. ii.

‘ ^ An instructive description of the first two groups has been given by C. King, Rep. 40th
Parall., Atlas, sheet III, eastern half, and Vol. I, pp. 44 et seq., 154, 745 ; then Emmons,
op. cit., II, pp. 340 et seq., and Howell in Wheeler, Rep. 100th Merid., HI, pp. 233 et seq.
^ F. Zirkel, Microsc. Petrogr. ; C. King, Rep. 40th Parall., VI, pp. 50, 58.



LONE PEAK


669


CH. Xl]

investigator of these mountains, ^to regard this granite mass as the ^mains
of an extremely ancient pre-Palaeozoic continent or island, and this view
has influenced all later conceptions of the formation of this lofty range.
According to Geikie, who has visited the spot, Lone peak must really
be regarded as an eruptive mass of more recent age, certainly post-*
Carboniferous — a view also adopted by Whitney \ Geikie points to the
absence of granitic fragments or pebbles in the sediments alleged to be
deposited over it, and above all to the conversion of the limestone into
white marble and the numerous dykes of granitic porphyry which appear in
the neighbourhood of the granite. The aureole of ore deposits of precious
metals which surrounds the second granite mass, Clayton peak, certainly
supports this latter view, and Professor Reyer informs me that in this
region he has met with vesuvian in the zone of contact : Lone peak and
Clayton peak, on the Salt lake, would thus appear to be homologous with
the Adaniello or Predazzo. —

The northern part of the Wuiisatch mountains is followed to the north-
east first by a broad Palaeozoic synclinal, which forms Cache valley, then
by a closely crowded series of Mesozoic chains (only very inadequately
represented on PI. VI), which extend as far as the T^ton mountains. These
remarkable ranges have been described by St. John and by Peate They
are folded ranges, indeed true anticlinals and synclinals, traversed by several
longitudinal fractures. Each of these folds runs at first meridionally from
south to north, bends to the north-west, and then disappears beneath the
broad basaltic sheet of Snake river. These sedimentary folded ranges thus
describe precisely the same kind of curve as the great branches of the
Rocky mountains in their virgation, and the most northerly of them. Snake
River range, joins south of the T^tons the south-west side of Gros Ventre
range, which, as we have seen before, is connected with Wind River range.

In the Caribou range running to the north-west, which immediately
follows the Snake River range on the south-west, an overfold actually
appears, such as is usually produced by tangential movement ; as in the
Elk mountains, the structure of which is otherwise so different, the
movement is directed to the south-west.

Colorado 'plateau and the High plateaux of Utah.^ The Colorado
plateau is bounded on the east by the Rocky mountains, on the north by
the Uinta; to the west it is immediately followed by the remarkable
fractured table-land of Utah, with its network of faults w’hich have already

‘ A. Geikie, On the Archaean Rocks of the Wahsatch, Am. Journ. Sc., 1880, XIX,
pp. 363-367 ; J. D. Whitney and M. E. Wadsworth, The Azoic System and its proposed
Subdivisions, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool,, Cambridge, 1884, VII, pp. 499-511.* •

* 0. St. John, Report on the Geological Field-Work of the Teton-Division, in Hayden,
Geol. Surv. Rep. for 1877, pp. 323 et seq. (lat. 43°-44° 15' N., long. 109°-112® 15' W.) ;
A. C. Peale, Report on the Geology of the Green River District, op. cit., pp. 509 et seq.
(lat. 41" 45'-43" N., long. 109" 30'-112" W.) ; Geol. map in Rep. for 1878, 1.



670 NORTH Al^CERICA [pAran

been ({^scribed. This table-land is bonneted on the west by great faults ;
on the Hurricane fault (p. 130, Fig. 13) the dislocation above the Yirgen
river amounts, according to Dutton, to at least 12,000 feet; to the south
the extent of the throw diminishes ; but on the west it is replaced by the
•Grand Wash fault, which crosses the Colorado river at the mouth of the
Grand canon, and there presents a throw of over 6,000 feet. ^

The cliff of this fault facing west turns south of the Colorado to the
south-west towards the Aubrey cliffs. Further on we may regard the
southern boundary of the region we are about to discuss as formed by
those extensive lava fields, which from the range of Mimbres* to the
Mogollftn mountains occupy the border region between Arizona and New
Mexico; they send off one branch to the north-north-east, to Mount
Taylor beyond Fort Wingate, and a second to the north-west which
proceeds far beyond the Mogollons and the volcanic group of San Francisco
(13,000 feet in height), towards the end of the Grand canon.

In this region the waters of the Colorado unite, and the river
sinks its bed more and more deeply into the nearly horizontal beds of
a series which is for the most part Car^niferous, until, to the south of
the Eaibab, about 6,000 feet below the surface of the plateau, it fiows
through the grandest erosion valley of the world. The Grand cailon
terminates on the Grand Wash fault, and the country beyond it lies several
thousand feet lower.

The explorations of Marcou, Newberry, Powell, and above all the
admirable investigations of Gilbert, have made this country familiar to us ;
for the High plateaux of the west and the Grand canon we have besides
the two comprehensive monographs with which Dutton has enriched
geological literature

The table-land of Colorado and the adjacent highlands of Utah are
distinguished by excessive dryness ; over wide areas every trace of
a humus layer is absent, and only the most impoverished vegetation
occurs or next to none, at*all. We are here afforded a deeper insight into
the structure of Ihe land than in almost any other part of the earth’s
crust. At the bottom of the Grand canon, sharply inclined Archaean
rocks and Silurian beds are exposed to view ; they have been worn down
by abrasion to a uniform plain which can be traced for many miles;
upon this eroded surface there rest in transgression the thick deposits
of the Carboniferous period lying •^horizontally, and thence upwards all
the succeeding sediments follow one another conformably as far as the

' G. K. Gilbert, The Colorado Plateau Province as a Field for Geological Study, Am.
Joum. Sc., 1876, 3rd ser., XII, pp. 16-24 and 85-103, and in particular the accounts of
Gilbert, Marvine, and Howell, in Wheeler, Geogr. Surv. 100th Merid., 1875, III ; further,
C. E. Dutton, Report on the Geology of the High Plateaus of Utah, Powell, U. S. Geogr.
Geol. Surv., Rocky Mountain Region, 4to, 1880, and Tertiary History of the Grand
Canon District, op. cit., 4to, 1882, atlas.



OH. xi] ORIGIN OP THE, UINTA MOUNTAINS 671

lacustrine deposits of the Tertiaiy period. Gaps there are in the ser‘^es cer-
tainly, but above the base of the Carboniferous no discordance in the lie of
the beds again occurs. The series resembles in all essential respects that
which we have already met with in the west. The Cretaceous deposits
extend from the High plateaux of Utah, past the Moquis Pueblos and Port,
Defiance, towards Texas, and Dutton even suspects that between latitudes
84® and 37® N. they extend across the continent from the Atlantic to the
Pacific Ocean. —

Bearing in mind what has been said above with regard to the opinions
of the tnost distinguished American geologists on the formation of the
Rocky mountains, I will next attempt to compare the views held regarding
the structure of this most instructive region with those which have arisen
in Europe as a result of the investigation of those mountains which in my
opinion show the greatest structural resemblance to the chief parts of the
Colorado plateau and its bordering masses.

For this purpose we will retrace our steps to the north and north-
east, and return to the structure of the Uinta mountains.

The arch of the Uinta rises* to a height of 10,000 to 11,000 feet, in
its highest point to 13,694 feet. It is cut through by the Green river.
Where the river enters the mountains from the north, the foot of the
slope lies at a level of not quite 6,000 feet ; where it leaves the mountains
the level is somewhat over 5,000 feet. The arch consists of Carboniferous
beds ; but if we could produce from north and south the upturned beds
which crop out at its foot over the summit, they would attain an altitude,
according to PowelVs estimate, of about 30,000 feet. Nevertheless, as
Powell expressly declares, several important dislocations, such as those on
the Yampa plateau and in Brown s park, arc true subsidences \

The decisive question, however, is whether these mountains have been
elevated, or the surrounding country depressed.

Let us first consider White’s account of the relations between the
Uinta and the Rocky mountains^.

Between the Uinta and the end of the Sawatch i?ange rise as con-
necting links the two Palaeozoic masses of Junction peak and Yampa
peak. The eastern extremity of the Uinta is surrounded by a rampart
of upturned basset edges, but at a trifling distance the strata again become
horizontal; a second rampart of the same kind surrounds Junction peak,
and a third Yampa peak. These mountain masses are, like the Uinta, of
Carboniferous age; their upturned borders are Mesozoic. Junction peak is

^ Powell, Geology of the Uinta Mountains, pp. 176, 203, 208.

* C. A. White, Report on the Geology of a Portion of North-West Colorado, in Haydeiv
Geol. Surv. Rep. for 1876, pp. 5>60, in particular pp. 40-51. In a note, p. 41, he says:

^ By making use of the expressions uplift and upthrust I do not intend to express any
opinion as to the* actual movement in the dislocation of the strata, whether it was
upwards or downwards.*



672 NOETH AMEEICA^ [pabth

nearly/20 kilometers long, and 6*5 kiloyieters broad; the extent of the
dislocation from summit to base is estimated at 8,000 feet ; Yampa peak is
somewhat smaller, the dislocfi^Jbion possibly greater. White compares them
with iron bolts which are hammered through sheet iron and draw up
•the edges, without, however, intending by this to express a definite opinion
as to whether the dislocation took place from below upwai^ds, or in the
opposite direction.

To the south of these mountains, several dislocations run in a direction
which indicates the connexion between the Uinta and the Sawatch range ;
the most important is the great Midland fiexure, already mentioned above ;
it is this which surrounds the southern border of the great Uinta plateau,
sweeps round the Yampa plateau, which follows on the south, and then
crosses the White river in a vast unbroken curve; continues under the
name of the Great Hogback fiexure along the west side of the foot-hills of
the Sawatch, and finally reaches the reversed south-west side of the
great overfold of the Elk mountains (p. 164, Fig. 22).

This flexure, which in its course from the south border of the Uinta to

«

the Elk mountains measures over 300 kilometers, thus embraces within its
great aix: the whole north-east part of the Colorado plateau ; its beds dip
to the south, south-west, or west, i. e. from the mountains towards the lower
lying land, and it is accompanied for almost its entire length by hogbacks,
i. e. % long ridges formed by the outcrop of steeply inclined beds.

After what has been said above (p. 124 et seq.) with regard to the
movements of the outer crust of our planet, 1 cannot consistently regard
this flexure as anything else than an indication of the subsidence of the
whole vast region which lies to the south, south-west, and west. The
inversion of the Elk mountains must then be classed with those cases of
overthrust in which the movement^ has been directed towards the subsi-
dence, and of which we have given several examples in Europe. The
circumvallate outcrops of upturned beds, which in closed curves surround
on all sides Junction, peak, Yampa peak, and each of the other great
mountain masses, do not admit moreover of any other explanation ; these
also represent borders of flexure. The mountains themselves must then be
classed with the,hor8ts of Europe, the Schwarzwald, Morvan, and the Cima
d’Asta. The hogbacks with their upturned beds are thus only the result
of flexure along the fault, and T, should not hesitate to compare the long
Midland flexure with a peripheral liilc, in the sense in which this term has
been already defined. Instead of White’s comparison of the bolt which is
driven through sheet iron I would propose another. A stake is driven in
at the edge of a pond, so that its upper end stands just below the level of
the water. The water becomes covered by a sheet of ice ; the level of the
water falls ; the covering of ice gives way and the stake is exposed to
view. Great plains may sink ; as soon as their foundation gives way they



673


OH.XI] COURSE OP TUE GREEN RIVER

follow the force of gravity. Bpt we know of no force by which related
mountain masses could be elevated 'side by side and independent of each
other. ^

As a consequence of this explanation it follows that the whole country
once stood 80,000 feet above the existing sea-level ; a result which may,
well occasion surprise, but without invalidating the argument. If we were
to pile upon the European horsts the succession of strata which once
covered them, if, for instance, we could extend the sedimentary series of the
southerti Alps on to the Cima d' Asta, we should obtain figures equally
extraordinary.

In concluding our consideration of this region I will add the follow:ing
acute observations by Emmons, which are of great importance in the inter-
pretation of certain peculiarities in the behaviour of the river courses

The Green river leaves the Tertiary land in the north to enter the mass
of the Uinta at right angles, and follows a tortuous course along a channel
which is excavated in the midst of hard quartzite to a depth sometimes
of 8,000 feet. After traversing the Red canon the river reaches the plain
in the sunken area of Brown's park ; it does not fiow through this region,
however, but again enters the mountains and crosses the south part of the
Uinta in the cafton of Lodore. Emmons has shown that the sixore lines
of the later Tertiary lakes may be traced on the north side of the Uinta to
a height of 10,000 feet. Just as the Uinta is cut through by the Green
river, so is the isolated Junction peak by the Yampa, which traverses it in
a deep cafton, and the same river also intersects the northern part of
Yampa peak. It will at once become apparent why the rivers do not
prefer the Tertiary plains. Horizontal strata of Tertiary age also lie on
Yampa peak. The course of the Green river across the Uinta was already
marked out at the time when the Tertiary lakes stood at their highest level,
and the river must once have flowed at a height of more than 9,000 feet
above the sea ; it is also clear, says Emmons, that the course of the river
across Junction peak and Yampa peak was chosen at a time when these
hard rocky masses still lay buried beneath the Tertiary strata. —

Now at last we descend from the foot-hills of the Uinta to the lower
country and find it surrounded by a long series of continuous walls. Each
of the principal groups of the stratified rocks becomes horizontal at no
great distance from the flexures, and so extends towards the lower country
to terminate in a long wall-like cliff. ‘These cliffs have not been produced
by fracture, but by a particular kind of erosion. The outcropping edges are
attacked and destroyed; they retire further and further away, and thus
a great terraced country arises, characterized by long continuous wall-lik«
steps, resembling those of the eastern Sahara. The lowest strata crop out

^ S. F. Emmons; The Green River Basin ; in 0. King, Report Geol. Exploration of the
40th ParalL, II, 1877, p. 197.



674 NORTH AMERICA, [pAwrn

near tKe Colorado. Dutton estimates^ the «%verage thickness of rock which
has been destroyed and carried away at 10,000 feet.

From this plain there rise in the south the laccolite mountains of the
Sierra San Miguel, Sierra Carriso, Sierra Abajo, and, further to the west,
*the Henry mountains (p. 149) ; but if we approach the western edge of
this low-lying region we shall meet first an oval abraded dome, not wholly
unlike that of the Black mountains of Dakota, situated in front of the
Rocky mountains, but on a smaller scale. It lies on the Waterpocket
fiexure, the first flexure leading to the more elevated country (16,‘Fig. 18,
p. 130).

The flexure marks the commencement of the High plateaux of Utah,
the southern part of which is traversed by the Grand cafion. The
geologists who have explored this country describe it as a land of wonders,
such is the unparalleled magniflcence of the scenery, the clearness and
simplicity of the structure, and the variety of colour in the rocks, which
produce a landscape with most unusual effects ; certain it is in any case
that there are not many regions of vfhich we possess such masterly
descriptions. It is precisely the excellence of these accounts, which bring
the simple features of its structure so plainly before the eye, which must
be my exiuse if, though I have not myself visited the country, I venture to
draw other conclusions from them than those set forth in the accounts them-
selves. In his latest works Dutton, like most of his predecessors, explains
the isolated blocks between the faults, the horst of the Eaibab for example
(between 6 and 7, 8, Fig. 13), as devoted, I consider, on the contrary, that
the present condition is the result of unequal subsidence.

The manner in which these great lines of dislocation proceed from the
Wahsatch mountains and Mount Nebo has already been described (p. 129):
Dutton emphasizes the fact that all the lines are more or less convex
towards the west; that many circumstances, particularly the nature of
certain Mesozoic sediment^, point to the existence of a Mesozoic continent
in the west, on tl^e ^sitc pf the existing Basin ranges in the west of Utah
and parts of Nevada ; and that the lines of disturbance correspond on the
whole to the border of this continent. At the same time, however, their
course is so clearly concordant with that of the Midland and Great Hogback
flexure at the foot of the Uinta and the Rocky mountains, that we may
fairly regard the whole of these flexures which surround the Colorado
plateau, from the Grand canon as far as the Elk mountains, as a system
of peripheral lines of dislocation, in the same sense as we have spoken of
a peripheral line in the case of the Tyrrhenian sea. The horsts, such as
Che Kaibab, may possibly be wedges caught between two faults.

As regards the manner in which the several plateaux and fractures are
related to one another, I must refer the reader to the discussion of this
subject in Part I ; it has already been observed that the Hurricane fault



CH.XI] TOEOWJIAP FAULT 676

(2, Fig. 18) produces a great 'downthrow on the Virgen river ^which
diminishes towards the south as it* approaches the Grand cafion, while
correspondingly the throw of the Grand Wa^ fault (1, Fig. 13) increases —
a phenomenon frequently observed by Mojsisovics in the subsidence faults
of the southern Alps. A zone of smaller fragments of the plateau lying,
between two* principal fractures, an instance of fragmentation in a fault
trough, has been represented on p. 132, Fig. 14.

The faults are not all of the same age ; some of them have experienced
different movements at different times. The East Kaibab fault, according
to Dutton’s data, is.probably one of the oldest.

The observations made on the manner in which the fault *of the
Toroweap (3, Fig. 13) crosses the Grand cailon are very instructive.

In this region the Grand cafion consists of two stages. The upper
ravine, 8 to 9 kilometers broad, is bounded by cliffs about 2,000 feet high ;
at their foot lies a plain named by Dutton the ' Esplanade,’ and in this the
second ravine, the inner cafion, is excavated ; this is 3,000 feet deep, and
from edge to edge only 8,500 to 4,000 feet broad. On the top of the
table-land cut through by the Arand cafion, numerous basaltic eruptions
may be seen; ancient lava sheets are present, and considerably over
a hundred much younger ash cones, both great and small. These cones,
however, occur not only on the table-land, but in isolated cases also within
the cahon on the esplanade, and here and there the black scoriaceous
mass of a recent basaltic flow has tumbled over the battlements of the
great rocky walls into the inner abyss *.

The eruptive cones stand on the Palaeozoic ‘ plates,' arranged according
to no recognizable law in longer or shorter rows ; their occurrence on one
of the great lines of dislocation is a rare exception. A case of this kind
is furnished by the ash cone, 580 feet high, named by Dutton ‘ Vulcan’s
throne’; it stands on the edge of the esplanade towards the inner cafion
just at the point where the dislocation of the Toroweap cuts across it.
The throw of the Toroweap is towards the west, anci aiqounts to 600 to 700
feet; the great ravine suddenly loses an equal amount in depth, a con-
sequence of the fact that the whole surrounding country is equally
diminished in height. Of the dislocation Dutton says, ‘ Alj looks as clean
and sharp as if it had been cut with a thin saw and the smooth faces
pressed neatly together ^.’ With equal sharpness it cuts through a number
of basaltic flows on the esplanade. Th^ sequence of events is unmistakable.
So nature writes her own chronology, and we may well envy the observers
who are called upon to read this history in the original.

•

< Dutton, Tertiary History of the Grand Cidion District, pi. zix. In one case streams
of this kind caused the Colorado to rise 400 feet, until it had again forced a way for
itself : op. cit., p. 95.

* Dutton, op. cit., p. 93.



576 . NORTH Al^ERICA [pakth

#

Th^ manner, however, in which the basalts have ascended in the narrow
fissures, often exposed to a great height in the canon and without cooling
along the walls, have piled up their ash cones, and poured out their lavas
far above, can hardly be compared with what happens in the normal
.eruptions of Aetna or the Lipari isles. It rather recalls the injection of
a great anatomical preparation, and suggests the opinion already more
than once expressed in the presence of such phenomena, that the subsidence
of great mountain segments in itself produces an injection of this kind, or
at least greatly facilitates it

This, however, presupposes that the great orographic blocks have
really subsided, not that the horsts have been elevated by an unknown
force. That the dislocations have as a whole been regarded by the
observers as elevations is explained in this case by further deduc-
tions. Kaibab plateau, composed of Carboniferous deposits, attains
a height above the sea of 9,300 feet; the whole thickness of the
Mesozoic, and perhaps too of the oldest part of the Tertiary formation
piled upon it, gives figures not much smaller than those which Powell
obtained from his imaginary restoration of the Uinta mountains. Then,
or so at least it appears, we lose all means of forming an opinion as to the
state of things on the south and east, and the level of the water will stand
high over all the existing mountains. We shall return to questions of
this kind later, when I hope to be able to show that many generally
accepted views as to the position of the sea-level in past epochs of the
earth's history require revision; in the present case, however, we may
observe that several assumptions are permissible — for example, the con-
ception of a vault of great amplitude, brought about by tangential stress
detached from its biise so as to leave a very wide cavity, which fills
with lava thus relieved froin pressure, a nniacula to use Dutton’s expression
(p. 175) ; the roof of this then collapses, and the various fragments subside
to different depths. It is impossible, in any case, to ignore two facts : the
first, that in other regions large masses have subsided along similar
fractures and flexures '^solely under the influence of gravity; and the
second, that no force of any kind is known which would be capable of
pushing up, singly and between smooth surfaces, a number of mountain
blocks, great or small, and of maintaining them persistently in position,
in opposition to the force of gravity.

^ F. Posepny, Geologisch’inontanistische Studie der Erzlagerstiltten von Rezbdnja,
published by the Ungar. geol. Gesellsch., 8vo, 1874, p. 190: 'How could one othei'wise
explain the presence of comparatively thin but long dykes of greenstone which penetrate
every fissure of the rock and include thin pointed fragments, except by the supposition
fhat the soft mass of rock was pressed into the already existing fissures by the weight
of rock resting upon it ? Each of the ore*bearing districts . . . has its large mass of
eruptive rocks . . . which have been pressed out during the subsidence, and indicate, so to
speak, the extent of the subsidence.* Also Dutton, Geology of the High Plateaus, p. 130:



677


OH. xi] .. :^;he basin ranges

Basin ranges. This region*^is very different from the preceding.* It .
is bounded on the east, along the Great Salt lake, by the fault of the
Wahsatch, and on the west by the east flank of the Sierra Nevada, and
measures 600 to 700 kilometers in breadth. Numerous comparatively
short mountain ranges, more or less meridional in direction, rise in remark-*
able isolation out of its desert plains. Their slopes are buried up to a great
height imder their own ddbris ; a consequence of the absence, in a great part
of this region, of outflow to the sea. Between these chains extends salt
desert jr barren steppe. Its exploration is a brilliant testimony to the
devotion and endurance of our colleagues in America.

The south part of the Basin ranges consists, so far as wo are acquainted
with it, of Archaean rocks and Palaeozoic strata poor in fossils. In the north,
where its direction is nearly meridional, the range is much more diversified;

I follow here the descriptions by Clarence King, Hague, and Emmons ^

‘ The geological province of .the Great Basin,* writes King, ‘ . . . has
suffered two different types of dynamic action : one, in which the chief
factor evidently was tangential compression which resulted in contraction
and plication, presumably in post- Jurassic time: the other of strictly
vertical action, presumably within the Tertiary, in which there are few
evidences or traces of tangential compression *

Hitherto we have seen in the region of Colorado the collapsing table-
land ; now we reach the collapsed folded ranges. We have, howevei’,
already encountered a troop of true folded ranges extending from the
Wahsatch range past Bear lake towards the Tdtons ; these were found to
disappear beneath the basalt flows of the Snake river; the Wahsatch itself
presents an unmistakable resemblance to the chains which we arc now
about to discuss. In the Great Basin the folding force manifested
itself with particular intensity on the west side of the region, where, as
we shall see directly, it has determined the form of the entire Sierra
Nevada. Some of these folded ranges, which ijiay even still be followed
for more than 150 kilometers, were originally c(jwe» towards the west.
The faults by which the folds are traversed strike in different directions,
but the majority would appear to run nearly north and south ; they cut
the folds at all kinds of angles. Such is the origin of tliose abrupt and
isolated fragments of chains, which trending more or less with the meridian
at present occupy this broad space ; the course of the sharply broken off
edges would be still more striking if it were not for great masses of

* A close examination of the details of volcanic discharges leaves an impression that they
are pressed forth by the weight of the rocks covering their reservoirs, arid that theif
emergence is only a hydrostatic problem of the simplest kind.’

' C. King, U. S. Geol. Exploration of the 40th Parallel, I, p. 742 et passim, and the
accounts of Hague and Emmons, op. cit., II, pp. 469 et seq.

* C. King, op. cit., I, p. 744.


. 80LLA8


pp



678 NORTH AMERICA. [pAurn

eruptive rocks, chiefly rhyolite, which corfuse and conceal the orographic
purity of their form. On closer observation we may recognize in one of these
ranges the fragment of an anticlinal, in another a monoclinal ridge flanked
with great volcanic flows, in others again two anticlinals with the inter-
vening synclinal obliquely cut across, and so on ; we have indeed before us
a mighty folded range, thoroughly hewn up, broken into pieces and founder-
ing into the depths. In certain cases horizontal displacements have taken
place along the fractures ; in West Humboldt range, for example, the anti-
clinal is cut through by a transverse fracture, and the southerri half is
heaved^ about 8 kilometers towards the south-east^. The two great
principal faults which bound the Basin ranges on the east and west are
regarded as ‘ lines of weakness * along which repeated movements have taken
place; against each of these lines a great inland lake accumulated at
a quite recent period — at the west foot of the Wahsatch range, lake
Bonneville of Gilbert, and at the east foot of the Sierra Nevada, lake
Lahontan of King ; the last remnants of these lakes are the Great Salt
lake, Utah lake, and Sevier lake in thq cast, and the sheets of water
between Pyramid, Carson, and Walker lake in the west. The terraces
left by the subsiding water encircle in regular lines the slopes of the
broken chains, which rose as elongated islands out of the two lakes in
much the same way as Antilope and Stansbury islands now rise from the
existing waters of the Great Salt lake.

A thousand feet above the present level of the Great Salt lake lies,
according to Gilbert, the highest shore line of lake Bonneville ; a second,
very clearly marked, occurs at a level of 600 feet, the Provo beach ; lines of
less importance lie between and below these ; the waters of the lake flowed out
to the north through Cache valley, and the sharply cut terrace of the Provo
line corresponds to the level of a reef of rock crossing the line of discharge,
which withstood the erosion of the stream for a longer time than the less
resistant rocks above it. At the bottom of the ancient lake stand ash cones
of basaltic tuff, sonic engirdled by the ancient terraces of the lake, some of
more recent age than these terraces. Gilbert has shown that the strand-
lines are at present neither parallel to one another nor horizontal. They
lie lowest on thQ fault of the Wahsatch, and then rise considerably towards
the middle of the lake, on the north side reaching a height of about
100 feet, and on the south even more. These highest points lie in the north
on the meridian of 113^ in the south* between long. 113® and 114° W. ^

^ Hague, op. cit., II, *p. 736. Here the question would certainlj^ be permissible, whether

might not be a matter of a dislocation produced during the folding, such as is by no
means uncommon in Europe.

^ O. K. Gilbert, Contributions to the History of Lake Bonneville ; Powell, II, Ann. Rep.
U. S. Geol. Surv. for 1880-1881, pp. 167-200, with maps of the deforlnation of the lake.
In addition to the inclination of the terraces Gilbert also describes an evidently recent



679


CH. XI] yHE BASIN EANGES

Further to the west we posses only a single measurement of theiheight,
and this indicates a descent ; when these instructive researches are extended
towards the west we shall learn whether a •new anticlinal is being formed
in the axis of the ancient lake between the meridians of 113° and 114°, or
whether the’ western side of the fault of the Wahsatch is continuing to
subside. — *

• The distribution of the sediments within the Basin ranges is scarcely
less remarkable than the structure of these mountains. The last marine
deposit^ of the eastern mountains, the Cretaceous formation, does not pass
beyond the fault-line of the Wahsatch in this latitude. The same may almost
be said of the lower Mesozoic deposits, the equivalents of the Jurassic and
Trias ; they are not represented beyond this line for a long distance except
by a few fragmentary remains. The Palaeozoic series, of such trifling thick-
ness on the eastern border of the Rocky mountains, but swollen out through
the Uinta to the Wahsatch to many thousands of feet, forms, together with
Archaean rocks and recent lavas, the whole of the eastern half of the Basin
ranges. Beyond the meridian of 117° the composition of the mountains
completely changes. In the ranges of Toyabe and Shoshone and in the
Battle mountains, not far from 117° 15', the maps show outcrops of the
upper Carboniferous in proximity to granite and Archaean roftks, rising
singly from the plain or surrounded by rhyolitic flows. Already in the
next chains to the west, in the Desatoya and Havallah range, the succession
is again entirely different ; the whole Palaeozoic series has disappeared, and
immediately upon the granite lie thick deposits containing Arcestes,
Trachyceras, Cassianella, Daonclla, and other forms characteristic of the
marine development of the Trias as it occurs in the eastern Alps. Thus
an important line of demarcation in the distribution of the formations lie?#
somewhat to the west of the centre of the Basin ranges ; westwards from
117° 15' to the Pacific Ocean, deposits of the Palaeozoic period are unknown,
with the exception of a band of Carboniferous^ limes ton o in the northern
part of the Sierra Nevada h ^ ^

The boundary of the Palaeozoic deposits in the Basin ranges runs from

‘ fault-scarp ’ close to the west foot of the Wahsatch ; it is 30 to 40 feet high, and is
regarded by Gilbert as a proof that the Wahsatch is rising ; this assumption is hard to
reconcile with the inclination of the terraces. The fault-scarp may also have arisen
through the subsidence of the west wing. These are questions the solution of which
may be hoped for from the further prosecution of these researches. Gilbert, A Theory
of the Earthquakes of the Great Basin ; Am. Journ. Sc., 1884, XXVII, pp. 49-53.

' Gabb has described a number of remarkable fossils from Volcano, south-east of
Walker Lake, Nev., from the western part of the Basin ranges, which partly belong 'to
the Trias with Arc, Ausseeanus and Ccisaianella lingulata, partly to a highter stage whith
Gabb includes in the Lias. Arietites Nevadanus does indeed strongly recall the European
Lias ; Gabb even places all the slates of the Sierra hitherto assigned to the Jurassic in
the Lias. Gabb, Description of some Secondary Fossils from the Pacific States ; Am. Journ.
of ConchoL, 1870, V, pp. 6-18, pi. iii-vii.


P p a



680 NOETH AMERICA ^ [part ii

the above-mentioned outcrops in the Battle^ountain, Toyabe and Shoshone
ranges towards the south, with a slight deviation to the west, so that
south of Owen’s lake it approaches the border of the Sierra Nevada, and*
^ there the whole breadth of the Basin ranges lies within the Palaeozoic
region.

The Trias formation and a series of Jurassic limestoneb and slates
which accompany it attain their greatest development in the Havallah,
Pah-Ute, and West Humboldt chains; in the Eugene mountains and
Montezuma range the Jurassic deposits again acquire great importance;
then follows, from the meridian of about 119®, a region almost excfusively
granitic, with a development of Jurassic slates, until, in the Sierra Nevada,
the structure of the Havallah range and of similar chains is repeated. —

Before proceeding to the description of tliQ Sierra Nevada, a few
observations may be added as to the manner in which the Basin ranges
are continued towards Mexico.

The nature of these prolongations differs in many respects from that of
the ranges themselves. The Carboniferous limestone appears in imposing
thickness along the Sierra Madre. Beds of quartzite and conglomerate
occur, which Esmond regards as representative of the Trias ; these contain
coal and & flora rich in ferns, recalling in many of its characters that
discovered by Newberry beneath Cretaceous beds on the Colorado plateau,
near the Moquis Pueblos. The occurrence of Jurassic is doubtful. On the
other hand, the Cretaceous deposits of Texas with Ammonitea pederimlia
and many other characteristic species extend as far as Arivechi, on the
west side of the Sierra Madre. The comparatively recent eruptive rocks
found between the chains and beside them, appear to. possess a similar
significance in Sonora as in the United States^.

Those chains in western Texas which extend further to the east
between the Rio Grande and Rio Pecos, such as. the Sierras Los Organos
Hueco, S. Sacramenti, and Guadelupe, must be regarded as the continuation
of ridges which, lik^ thfi^Zuni range, rise in the south of Colorado, and of
those which have already been mentioned to the south of Galisteo. They
have been investigated by Jcnney, and shown to consist of Palaeozoic
deposits which ^rest on granite ; the Cenomanian beds of the Llano
Estacado are also visible here along the Rio Grande

^ A. Rcmond, Notice of Geological *Exp]Dra.tions in Northern Mexico (prepared for
publication by J. D. Whitney), Proc. Calif. Acad. Nat. Sc., 1866, III, pp. 243-257 ;
W. Gabb, Notes on some Mexican Cretaceous Fossils, Geol. Surv. of California, Palaeon-
tology, II, 1869, pp. 257-276 ; by the same. Notice of a Collection of Cretaceous Fossils
fsom Chihuahua, Mex., Proc. Acad. Nat. Sc., Philadelphia, 1872, .pp. 263-265. Gabb
also describes Cretaceous fossils, such as Amm. Guadeloupae, Exog. costata^ and others,
collected by Kimball at Nugal, Chih., in the region of the silver mines.

W. P. Jenney, Notes on the Geology of West Texas near the 82nd Parallel; Am.’
Journ. Sc., 1874, 8 ser., VII, pp. 25-28. The Llano Estacado here exhibits red sandstone



681


OH. XI] THE SIEPRA NEVADA

Towards the east there now^ follows the vast region of central ^Texas ;
its horizontally stratified Cretaceous and Palaeozoic beds were long ago
made known to us by F. Roemer^. ^

Sierra Netnxda, The Sierra Nevada is a mighty mountain mass
extending continuously through more than six degrees of latitude in a dirccy
tion from ndtth-north-west to south-south-east : in twenty peaks it rises to
over 14,000 feet. Towards the east it descends in a steep slope to the
desert region without outfiow, which marks the limit of the Basin ranges ;
but although this descent amounts to more than 6,000 feet, yet on account
of the height of the socle, on which the Basin ranges stand, it is by no
means so great as that of the western slope, which descends by thrf valleys
of the Sacramento and Joaquin (that is in its middle region) to a trifling
height above the sea. The exploration of this great range redounds to the
lasting honour of Whitney

On the south the chain is lofty and less broad, very steep towards the
east, and formed almost entirely of granite: Jurassic slates form a narrow
belt on the western side. Further to the north, beyond lake Mono, great
masses of volcanic rock appear on the east side: the boundary between
these and the neighbouring Basin ranges, which are also granitic in this
locality, is thus less striking : further to the north it again bedomes more
clearly marked. The line which thus cuts off on the east this great
fragment of the earth’s crust marks a gigantic fault.

The Jurassic slates on the west side increase rapidly in breadth to the
north, or towards the boundary of Mariposa, and finally on the north of
the America river they form almost the whole slope, the granite being
exposed only in isolated masses ; towards Pyramid lake they even extend
over to the east side. At one locality in the north, Genesee valley, Plumas,
these slates are accompanied by Alpine Trias, and in several places by
a zone of Carboniferous limestone; they finally disappear beneath the
broad sheets of recent lavas which cover the most northerly part of
California, as well as a large region in the south o^ O^e^u and beyond it.

These Jurassic slates are very poor in fossils; thej’^ contain intercala-
tions of diabase tuff, and include, in association with serpentine, the gold-

which is believed to be Triassic, some brown sandstone possibly Cretaceous, and then
the beds with Exogyra Texana^ Caprina crasmfibra^ and Ammonites pedemali8\ finally, hard
limestone about 30 feet thick. ,

^ F. Roemer, Die Kreidebildungen von Texas und ihre organischen Einschlfisse, 4to,
Bonn, 1852.

* J. D. Whitney, Geological Survey of California, Geology, I, 1865 ; I follow in par-
ticular the last description by Whitney in The Auriferous Gravels of the Sierra Nevada
of Calif., Mem. Mus. Comp. Zool., Cambridge, VI, 1879-1880,. pp. 27-52, 305 et seq. For
all the details of the occurrence of coal, quicksilver, and petroleum, see the accounts of
Goodyear and Peckham in Whitney, Geological Survey of California, II, 1882, The Coast
Ranges, Append.* Further, J. Leconte, On the Evidence of Horizontal Crushing in the
Formation of the Coast Range of California ; Am. Journ. Sc., 1876, 3 ser., XI, pp. 297-304.



582 NORTH AMERICA ^ [pakt n

• bearing quartz dyke, 120 kilometers in length, which is known by the
name of the Mother lode. These aife the chief gold-bearing rocks of
California. They are steeply upturned and almost always inclined to the
north-east, exclusively so in the south ; the dip is therefore reversed.

• . In the ‘ foot-hills ' on the west of the Sierra, a second zone of granite
makes its appearance, and here the chain is bordered along its v^ole length,
except where interruptions occur due to denudation, by a long belt of
horizontal marine beds, which belong to the Cretaceous and Miocene periods.
Although the Cretaceous deposits which extend from the north towards
this- region are only known as far as Folson, yet it follows from this that
the chief disturbance of the Jurassic slates, to which they owe their dip, is
probably of pre-Cenomanian age. Beds representing the Neocomian and
Gault are not known in the foot-hills.

The elements which compose the Sierra Nevada are .thus the same as
those which are met with in the Basin range near the meridian of 117°.
We may thus include this lofty Sierra among the Basin ranges, and regard
it as the outer border of the whole structure.

The vast size of this orographic segment, the high dip of the slates to
the north-east into the interior of the mountains, the fact that the granite
appears ncA only at the foot and on the crest of the chain, but also in
isolated masses within the slates, arc all very remarkable facts, and we
can readily understand the reserve with which Whitney, even after his
long-continued and earnest investigations, expresses himself on the forma-
tion of the Sierra, only indicating in explanation of the great thickness
of the slate that it has probably been folded back upon itself \

These features recall the northern border of the Finster-Aarhom mass.
The inversion of a thick stratified complex along the outer border of great
mountain segments is a phenomenoii widely distributed in the Alps. In
west America it appears to occur far more rarely, and this may be
connected with the fact that extensive overthrusting in this region appears
to be restricted to a few isolated zones. Among all the mountain ranges of
western America, the western slope of the Sierra Nevada appears to me
to present, apart from the horizontal deposits at its western foot, the
greatest resemblance to Alpine structure, particularly to the outer side
of the Swiss Alps.

The broken chains of the B^^in ranges show convexity to the west;
I regard the Sierra Nevada as having been overfolded in the same
direction.

The steep eastern slope was the scene of the earthquake of March 26,
1872, on which day, according to Whitney, the shock occurred simul-
taneously over the whole distance between the latitude of 34° and 88°
(P- 74).

' Whitney, loc. cit,, in particular Auriferous Gravels, p. 506.



683


CH. XI] COAST EANGES OP CALIFORNIA

• •

The Coast ranges. To the west of the longitudinal valley of California
rise the CoaM ranges^ which in%ai*y places attain a height of 5,0t)0 feet,
and often present steep defelivities towards the Pacific Ocean. In the study
of this group Whitney is again our guide \ *

The Coast ranges present no continuous crest, or principal chain, j
A number of separate chains with a common general direction and com-
posed of similar rocks run beside one another and replace each other, to
some extent . recalling the chains of the Swiss Jura. Their structure,
however, is less regular than that of the Jura, and may be described as
the reSult rather of crumpling than folding. Anticlinal chains alternate
with monoclinal ridges and merge one into another. In the south these
independent chains are especially numerous, and they have received many
names which date from the time of the Spanish mission, e.g. Sierra de
Santa Monica, de Santa Inez, de Sa i Rafael, and others.

The northern spurs of the Sierra de la Santa Cruz close the large
and remarkable bay of San F’^ancisco, while towards the interior the
group of Monte Diabolo sepaic.tes this bay from the principal valley of
San Joaquin. Further to the ^orth, nearly as far as the river Klamath,
the structure is more uniform and the special names disappear. In the
whole region of the Coast ranges no member of an older Mesozoic or
Palaeozoic deposit is known, with the exception of a bed containing
Aucella, which in all likelihood belongs to the upper Jurassic.

In the south, in the neighbourhood of Los Angeles, on the sea-shore
near Santa Barbara as far as Punta Concepcion, and in many other places
in the interior of the mountains, finely banded, much folded shale,
apparently of middle Tertiary age, occurs, which contains large quantities
of asphalt and petroleum. It is covered by Miocene sandstone, which has
likewise shared in the movements of the mountains.

Beneath the bituminous shale no representative of the Eocene period
is known to occur: the next oldest deposits belong to the Cretaceous
system. Beneath this, but in places, as it Vould appoar, immediately
beneath the Tertiary beds, granite, hornblende? schist, and metamorphic
schists appear : these rocks form the highest parts of the chains.

Some observers seem to incline to the view that these rocks, and
particularly the granite which forms the basement of Ihe southern part
of the Coast ranges, are the same as those of the Sierra Nevada, on the
other side of the T^jon pass ; Whitney! on the other hand, disputes this
identification and strongly advocates the Tertiary age of the, granite of the
Coast ranges ; some go so far indeed as to assign some of the mica-schists
to the Miocene period. There is a general agreement that tl^e Cretaceous

^ Whitney, Geology of California, I, pp. 1-197, and Auriferous Gravels, pp. 15-26.

* Whitney and Wadsworth, The Azoic System; Bull. Mus. Comp. ZooL, Cambridge,
1884, VII, p. 550 et passim.



584


NOETH AMEEIOA [part n

which lies beneath the bituminous shales has suffered considerable altera-
tion, and that the numerous bands of* serpentine of the Coast ranges are
included in it. Beds of impure red and green jasper, accompanied by
impure serpentine and hard unfossiliferous sandstone, are particularly
characteristic of these parts of the Cretaceous formation. Such rocks are
known far in the south, but only attain a great importance further to the
north; they contain rich stores of mercury, as the mines of New Idria,
New Almaden on the Clear lake, &c., bear witness.

In the south the Tertiary deposits predominate; towards the north
they lose in iipportance, and the Cretaceous outcrop gains in exteht. To
the noiih of the Clear lake the former have nearly disappeared. The
Cretaceous, except in a few localities, is very poor in organic remains, and
chiefly composed of shales and sandstone; intercalations of hydraulic
limestone increase its resemblance to the Cretaceous Flysch^.

Gabb has divided the Cretaceous of California into four series: the
Tijon group is the uppermost — in this region it is the only subdivision
which includes beds of coal: the Martinez group, of no great extension
and of doubtful independence : the Chico gi^iUp — this is the most important
of all ; it extends as far as Oregon and Vancouver and appears to be the
oldest meipber represented at the foot of the Sierra Nevada; one of its
characteristic fossils is Trigonia Evand; it is probably very nearly
equivalent to the Dakota group and the Cenomanian, including perhaps
higher stages : the lowest member is the Shasta group, which most likely
includes subdivisions of different age, such as the Gault and Neocomian ;
it is known as far as Puget sound in the north and contains species of
Ancyloceras, Crioceras, Helicancylus, Diptychoceras, and others. This is
the oldest fossiliferous horizon in the Coast ranges, with the exception of
a bed in the neighbourhood of the Clear lake containing Aucdla Piochi,
which is closely related to Aucdla Mosque'mis of the highest part of the
Jurassic deposits of Russia

Finally, recent volcanic formations are also present in these mountains.
The most importailt Iband lies to the north of the bay of San Francisco,
and runs from south^ to north past mount Saint Helena to the Clear
lake. —

A description by Gabb affords us an opportunity of extending our
comparative study to the peninsula of lower California. Gabb recognizes
in this the undoubted continuation of the Coast ranges, and, indeed, not
only are the rocks the same in both, but also the arrangement of the
chains

’ Whitney, Geology of California, I, pp. 12, 101.

* W. M. Gabb, Palaeontology of California, 1869, II, Preface, pp. xii-xiv.

^ Gabb, Notes on the Geology of Lower California, in Whitney, Geology of California,
II, Coast Ranges, Append., pp. 137-148.



CH.XI] LOWER .CALIFORNIA 686

An uninterrupted band of gyanite extends from the mountains of San
Gabriel, into the Coast ranges of upper California, through the counties
of Los Angeles, San Bernardino, and San D^ego to the western half of the
peninsula, and appears to terminate to the north of the great bay of San
Sebastiano Vizcaino. On the west side it is accompanied in places by
older eruptive rocks, and bears isolated bosses and sheets of trachyte and
basalt. To the east of this granite range, in the northern part of the
peninsula, there emerges from beneath barren sheets of basalt a second
granite^range, which follows the east coast and extends still further to the
south as far as the neighbourhood of Santa Gertrudis. Between these
chains in the neighbourhood of Calamujuel, quartzite, mica-schiSt, talc-
schist, and beds containing jasper occur, which are regarded as the meta-
morphic equivalents of an extensive sheet of unfossiliferous sandstone;
this is the Mesa sandstone which corresponds to the Tertiary sandstone of
upper California.

The mountains of Santa Clara, which extend from the bay of San
Sebastian to that of Ballcnas, probably form a third independent granite
range.

Near San Ignacio stand some small ash cones of recent age, which arc
brought into connexion with the much higher but also volcanic cnountains
of the Cerro de las Virgenes by other recent volcanic deposits running
right across the peninsula.

From this locality to the neighbourhood of La Paz the peninsula
appears to possess a fairly regular structure. The Sierra Gigantea, about
8,000 feet high, extends close along the east coast, which for long intervals
is bounded by extremely steep slopes, while the descent towards the
Pacific Ocean is very gentle. The country is formed chiefiy of the Mesa
sandstone above mentioned; Gabb did not succeed in finding fossils in it.
In the west the sandstone lies approximately horizontal and is bfpjcen up
into Mesas, i.e. table-mountains; towards the east it rises up to the
summit of the Sierra Gigantea, where the bedding ijj disturbed, and near
Loreta the granite is visible beneath it. It contains numerous great
blocks of an older eruptive rock, which do not seem to have been derived
from the existing peninsula, but from somewhere in the east, or the region
at present occupied by the gulf of California.

The Mesa sandstone extends to the ^outh, until in the chain of the
Cacachilas, which separate the bay of La Paz from the Californian gulf,
granite again makes its appearance, associated with mica-schists ; the latter
rocks form the southernmost and loftiest part of the peninsula, where San
Lazaro rises to a height of 5,000 feet. * •

In addition to the deposits already mentioned, very recent marine
beds, described as post-Fliocene, are met with in several places up to a
height of 400-500 feet above the existing coast.



686 NOETH Al^CERICA ^ [part ii

X&nthus mentions the existence of an ancient and important quicksilver
mine, near Marques, not far from La Paz

The accounts at my disposal relating to the eastern side of the gulf of
California are very incomplete. Nevertheless we may discover.from them,
.especially from Weidner*s observations on Sinaloa that the mountains
maintain a trend to the south-east throughout their course and that in
fact it is the Basin ranges, bent into this direction, which are continued
as the chains of Mexico.

The boundary between the Coast ranges on the one hand and the Sierra
Nevada, the Basin ranges, and Mexican chains on the other thus*extends
from the sources of the Sacramento through the longitudinal valley of
California, past lake Tulare to the T^jon pass, to the mouth of the Colorado,
and finally through the gulf of California.

This recalls the line of depression which runs from the desert qf
Atacama through the longitudinal valley of Chili to the bay of Corcovado.
Indeed tlie correspondence between the Californian Coast ranges and the
littoral Cordilleras of South America both in structure and constitution is
very remarkable. Here, as there, granitieVhains form the basement : here
also as there the Palaeozoic and the whole lower half of the Mesozoic series
are absent, not a trace of them occurring above the granite.

Some remnants attributed to the Jurassic are known, but they are very
few in number. With the exception of these, and so far as our knowledge
extends at present, the stratified series from California down to cape Horn
everywhere begins with the lower Cretaceous. Bands of serpentine are
visible in many places. The occurrence of quicksilver in the Californian
chains is repeated in Peru in the Cretaceous formation, though in this case
it is found in the Sierra which succeeds the Coast Cordilleras on the east.
Volcanos are superimposed on these chains in the south as in the north ;
and very often large masses of ancient eruptive rocks, which are perhaps
Cretaceous, make their appearance.

Immense as is the distance over which these chains extend, yet they,
and the Cordilleras of the Antilles with them, evidently belong to one and
the same type of mountain structure, arising from a common cause, and
recalling in many of its features the region of the Flysch in the mountains
of Europe.

While the mountains of California are continued in this way to the
south, they disappear towards the ftorth beneath a flood of more recent
lavas. The granite of the Sierra Nevada ends suddenly. Lassen’s peak
rises to a height of about 10,500 feet, and from this point the vast region
of lava stretches to the north for a distance of more than 800 kilometers.

^ J. XdnthuB, Reise durch die kalifomische Halbinsel ; Petermann’s geogr. Mitth., 1861,
pp. 133-143. ^

^ P. G. Weidner, Der mexikanische Staat Sinaloa ; op. cit., 1884, pp. 1-9, map.



687


CH. XI] LAVA FLOODS OP CASCADE RANGE

It. includes the whole of the Cascade range, covers very large surfaces in
Oregon, Washington, and Idaho, anc? penetrates far into the surrounding
states. Le Conte, who points out that the^area of this volcanic region is
equal to that of the whole of France, has shown that beneath the lava-
streams, which are nearly 4,000 feet thick, very recent Tertiary deposits^
with remains^ of oaks and conifers occur, as may be seen on the banks of
the Columbia river In the north of California, north-north-east of
Lassen’s peak, Mount Shasta attains a height of 14,400 feet and dominates
for a great distance the surrounding country, the mean altitude of which is
only about 3,000 feet : a long series of snow -covered volcanos follows,
resting partly on the summit of the Cascade range, which is built up by
their flows, partly to the west of this range, as for instance Mount Hood
(11,225 feet) in Oregon, and mightiest of all. Mount Rainier (14,444 feet),
in Washington territory. The latter bears a crater on its summit and
glaciers occur on its slopes. Hague and Idding have investigated the
rocks ; they found basalt, hypcrji thene-andesite, hornblende-andesite, and
in addition on Lassen’s peak, dacitc

In certain places at the fool of the Cascade range smaller masses of
granite and schist are exposed ; these are the remains of the buried range
submerged beneath floods of lava, which reappears to the north in British
Columbia. The lavas appear to extend without any important interruption
up to that part of the Snake river where the folded chains coming from
Bear lake disappear beneath the basalts (PI. VI). —

Towards the east, beyond the lava-sheets, lies so mucli unexplored
country that it is impossible to make use of the remarkable descriptions
by Hayden and Holmes of the volcanic region of the Yellowstone and
bring them into connexion with the accounts we have of adjacent
districts; we will therefore turn our attention to the regions further
north.

British Columbia. According to the observations of G. M. Dawson,
lake Winnipeg lies within the platform of flat-lying Silurian strata which
were probably at one time continuous with the corresponding deposits of
Hudson’s bay. To the west of the lake lies a fairly broad zone of
Devonian, which contains salt and petroleum, and is continued beyond
the Athabasca ; it lies almost horizontal and is overlaid on the west by the
Cretaceous deposits of the plain, which begin west of the Winnipegosis in
a well-marked scarp : this is a continuation of the scarp which has already
been mentioned as occurring on the left shore of the lower Red river.

The Cretaceous formation spreads over the plain precisely as in the

^ J. Le Conte, On the great Lava-Flood of the West and on the Structure and Age*of
the Cascade Mountains ; Am. Journ. Sc., 1874, 3 ser., VII, pp. 167-180, 259-267.

^ A. Hague and J. P. Iddings, Notes on the Volcanos of Northern California, Oregon,
and Washington Territory; Am. Journ. Sc., 1883, 3 scr., XXVI, pp. 222-235.



688 NOETH A]\[ERICA^ [part n

south ^ after fonning a gentle synclinal^ it again becomes level, with, a
slight inclination to the west. About 16-30 kilometers from the foot of
the Rocky mountains parallel, disturbances begin to appear; even inverted
folds occur, and on the border of the mountains, between latitude 49° and
,50° N., the Cretaceous formation dips in a reversed direction towards
the Rocky mountains. Dawson explains this by a great ^ault with a
downthrow to the east which follows the foot of the mountains ^

As tlie Laramie stage approaches the mountains, signs of the proximity
of land become increasingly frequent; in its lower part it contains coal.
Dawson suggests that the Rocky mountains themselves formed the coast-
line. it will be recollected that similar theories have applied to regions
more to the south, as far down as the north of Mexico.

Even much further north, in about latitude 55° 30', where the Pine
river, a southern tributary of the Peace river, has left the mountaima,
Dawson found similar conditions ; the Laramie stage contains a good deal
of sandstone and many pebbles, the Cretaceous beds are disturbed and
sometimes even inverted within about 25 kilometers of the foot of the
mountains. Here in the north, however, the exterior chain does not
consist of Archaean and Palaeozoic rocks, but of Palaeozoic and the marine
Trias witk Monotis suhcircularis

The lofty ranges between this outer border of the Rocky mountains
and the Pacific coast have been investigated by Hector, Selwyn, and
Dawson, and though their researches are restricted to a few traverses,
yet they have clearly shown that a fairly parallel strike to the north-west
prevails throughout, and the structure is consequently much simpler than
in the United States

Dawson distinguishes four parallel chains in British Columbia. The
first is formed by the Rocky mountaim, in the north of which the Devonian
beds again appear, which occur to the east of the Mackenzie in an approxi-
mately horizontal position. The second chain is the Oold range] it is

* G. M. Dawson, Preliminary Report on the Geology of the Bow and Belly River
Region, Geol. Surv. Can. Rep., 1880-1882 B, pp. 1-23, map ; by the same. Descriptive
Note on a General Section from the Laurentian Axis to the Rocky Mountains North of
the 49th Parallel, Ikoc. and Trans. Roy. Soc., Canada, 1882-1883, I, sect, iv, 1882, pp.
39-44. For a line situated somewhat more to the north, see J. W. Dawson, Observations
on the Geology of the Line of the Canadian Pacific Railway; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,
1884, XI, pp. 376-388. ‘ • •

’ G. M. Dawson, Report on an Exploration from Port Simpson on the Pacific Coast to
Edmonton on the Saskatchewan, Rep. Geol. Surv. Can., 1879-1880 B, p. 114; also
Selwyn, Report on an Exploration of British Columbia, op. cit., 1875-1876, p. 81 et seq.

J. Hector, On the Geology of the Country between Lake Superior and the Pacific
Ocean (between the 48th and 54th Parallels of Latitude), Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1861,
XVII, pp. 388-445, map. Further numerous accounts by Richardson, Selwyn, J. W.
Dawson, and G. M. Dawson in the Rep. Geol. Surv. Can., and Dawson, Sketch of the
Geology of British Columbia, Geol. Mag., 1881, 2 ser., VIII, pp. 156-162 and 214-227.



OH. xi] STRATIFIED SEQUENCE IN COLUMBIA' 589

bounded on the west by a bro^ plateau covered with recent lavas and
fresh-water deposits : beyond this pUteau rises the Coad or Cascade range,
which is here no longer buned beneath the lg,vas ; it must of course not be
confused with the Coast ranges of California : the fourth chain is the
Vancouver range ; it rises from the sea and the Queen Charlotte islands^
form part of ♦it.

The Rocky mountains are expressly declared by the same observer to
be the continuation of those Palaeozoic platforms which lie beneath the
great eastern plains. The Mesozoic deposits certainly exhibit important
modifications as to distribution. In the south the red sandstone with
gypsum, which represents the Trias, extends from the plains into the
Rocky mountains, and may even be traced as far as the Wahsatch ; then
the Trias disappears and is wanting over a fairly broad strip of country,
hut it reappears in the western Basin ranges as a marine deposit with
Meekoceras, Monotis subcircularis, and other fossils. In the north, how-
ever, the marine type of Trias spreads across the whole breadth of the
range ; deposits of this marine Trias with Monotis mhcircularis crop out in
the west on Moresby island (Queen Charlotte archipelago, lat. 53° N.), from
beneath Cretaceous beds of the Californian type ; and on the east side of
the range, on the Peace river and Pine river, the same marine deposits are
found in contact with Cretaceous beds of the eastern type, resembling those
of Dakota and of Colorado \

The Aucella-beds which have already been mentioned as occurring in
the Coast ranges of California again appear in several localities, and
particularly on Vancouver island, Whiteaves lays stress on the identity
of the Californian Aucdla Piochi with Aucella Mosquensis, and assigns the
whole series of beds to the lower Cretaceous ; I agree with Ncumayr in
regarding these beds as the deposits of a boreal sea, which at the close of
the Jurassic period penetrated to the south as far as California^.

Alaska and the Aleutian islands will be discussed in connexion with
eastern Asia. It would appear that no prolongation^ of the Coast Cordil-
leras can be traced into British Columbia.

Summary, Since the appearance of their classic work on the Geology

' J. Richardson, Report on Vancouver and Queen Charlotte Islailds, Rep. Geol. Surv.
Can., 1872-1873, pp. 38-101, map, and 1874-1875, pp. 78-91 ; G. M. Dawson, Report on
Queen Charlotte Islands, op. cit., 1878-1879 B, pp. 1-275, geological map ; and by the
same. Note on the Triassic of the Rocky Mountains and British Columbia, Proc. and
Trans. Roy.Soc. Canada, 1882-1883, 1, sect, iv, pp. 143-145 ; and Note on the Geology of
the Peace River Region, Am. Journ. Sc., 1881, 3 ser., XXI, p. 891.

® J. F. Whiteaves, On the Lower Cretaceous Rocks of British Columbia, Trans.
Proc. Roy. Soc. Can., 1882-1883, I, sect, iv, p. 85 ; M. Neumayr, Ueber klimatisdhe
Zonen wahrend der Jura- und Kreidezeit, Denkschr. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1883, XLVII,
p. 303. Meek was also inclined to identify Lima Erringtoni of the gold-bearing slates of
California with Auc, Mosquensis.



690 NOETH AJtfERICA^ [parth

of Pennsylvania by the brothers Rogers, a^d since we have become familiar
with the structural plan of eastern Afnerica, which has been established by
a long series of investigations /iiutually supplementing each other, attention
has been turned to the west, and in tliis region the united And zealous
.researches of a galaxy of distinguished observers have successfully revealed
the fundamental features of the structure of one of the mofit remarkable
and extensive mountain assemblages in the world. We who are thus
enabled to obtain a comprehensive view of these features cannot refrain
from an expression of gratitude to those who have paid for this Valuable
result with the labour of their best years.

FixJm Nova Scotia and even from Newfoundland great folds extend
through the east of the continent as far south as Alabama ; they are not
quite parallel, and they have come into existence at different times, but
they all follow nearly the same direction to the south-west, which is that
of the existing coast, and they reveal a long-continued or frequently
repeated tangential movement which is directed to the west and north-
west, i.e. towards the interior of the continent. The Atlantic Ocean thus
lies bn the back or inner side of these folds.

Further to the west these folds flatten out ; finally a great Cenomanian
transgression makes its appearance, traces of which are not wanting also
on the Atlantic coast, as in New Jersey.

The deposits of the middle and upper Cretaceous form the basement
of the Llano Estacado and of .the prairies extending from Texas far towards
the north ; they penetrate into the interior of the mountains, and in the
south they probably stretch uninterruptedly to the Pacific coast. The
central plain of the continent is formed by these deposits. The series
closes with a great brackish and fresh-water formation deposited in the
inland lake of Laramie, and extending from the banks of the Peace river
to those of the Rio Grande del Norte. The Mesozoic deposits of the plains,
horizontal over great areas, arc suddenly tilted up close to the foot of the
first chains of the l^ocky mountains, such as the Front range in Colorado,
as though they hacl been dragged along a great fault. Towards the south
in New Mexico they are to some extent inverted ; the movements attain
their greatest intensity in the north on the upper tributaries of the
Saskatchewan and the Athabasca, where a somewhat broader zone of
repeated dislocations is present.,

The Rocky mountains, from their commencement near Galistea in New
Mexico up to the mass of the Tdton, that is from 35° 30' to 43° 30' approxi-
mately, are formed of mighty ranges which rise one behind the other, along
a .straight line running with the meridian; each range shows a tendency to
diverge towards the north-west, so that even the broad ridge of the Uinta
which trends to the west takes part in this peculiar virgation. The
summits of most of these ranges are too broad to be regarded as true



SUMMARY


691


CH. Xl]

anticlinals, and the simple upturning of the edges of the Mesozoic sediments
around the larger masses is not pediliar to them, but also occurs around
the smaller cores, which protrude like pegi^ For this reason the country
surrounding the mountains, and particularly the Colorado plateau, has
here been regarded as let down, and the bordering great flexures, as,
the peripheral flexures of the sunken area. The mountains thus present
the characters of horsts, and even the high plateaux of Utah must bo
regarded as the result of unequal subsidence. It is into this region that
the Gallon of Colorado is sunk.

The sediments of inland lakes representing the various subdivisions of
the Tertiary formation are spread out over the sunken area ^of the
Colorado plateau, to the south of the Uinta and over the plateau of
the Green river, north of the Uinta.

• Along the Wahsatch and beyond the high table-lands of Utah begins
the region of folds broken down by subsidence, the Basin ranges ; they
are continued both to the north r,nd south. In this region only parallel
chains appear to be present, without any intercalation of other ranges to
recall the virgation of the Roefiy mountains or the plateau of the Green
river and of the Colorado.

The Sierra Nevada, formed of gneiss and Mesozoic slate;i has been
represented as a folded system, inverted to the west, similar to that of the
Finster-Aarhorn : at its western foot the middle Cretaceous lies horizontally.

Oregon and Washington are covered by the great lava-flood : it is only
in British Columbia that the rocks of the Cascade range reappear from
beneath the flows to form continuous chains, while more to the. south only
great volcanos surmount this range. In front of the Cascade range
fragments of another chain survive in Vancouver island and the Queen
Charlotte archipelago.

In California the Cretaceous zone at the foot of the Sierra is followed
by the great longitudinal valley, which is continued beyond the Tdjon
pass into the gulf of California. All that lies outside this line of depres-
sion, the Californian Coast ranges and the peninsula o*f lower California,
presents the same peculiar constitution as the Coast Cordilleras of South
America and the Cordillera of the Antilles. From the nojrth of California
to cape Horn, through nearly 95 degrees of latitude, the Pacific coast is
bordered by a series of short chains which replace one another laterally :
throughout their whole course they 'consist of rocks of Archaean stamp,
with many ancient eruptive rocks, and also of sediments. The most ancient
fossils these have hitherto afforded indicate traces of Lias in Bogota, and
in California traces of the highest horizon of the boreal Jurassic; every-
where else they point exclusively to the Cretaceous and Tertiary periods.

Darwin in the extreme south and Whitney in the north have expressed
their belief in the recent age of the granites of these chains.



592 NOETH AMERICA

Many indications exist to suggest that changes are still taking place in
our own time in the ranges of western America. A few years ago a great
earthquake was observed alon^ one of the prihcipal faults. Gilbert has*
traced the disturbances of the terraces on Lake Bonneville : . craters lie
between them. Other craters occur on the Esplanade, that ^reat step in
the Grand Canon of Colorado, and their lavas have flowed into the lower
ravine, which is certainly of no great age. In the Sevier desert the craters
and lavas of the Fillmore group look so fresh that Gilbert remarks there
is here no mere reason to suppose that the basaltic epoch is concluded
than that it has just begun ^

' Gilbert in Wheeler, Surv. 100th Merid., Ill, pp. 136, 141.



593


CHAPTER XII
THE CONTINENTS

Old New World. These expressions untenable. Age of the continents. America.
Separation of Indo*Africa and Eurasia. Folding of Eurasia. The Han-hai and the
depression of Turkestan. The Mediterranean seas. The Indian Ocean. The great
units. Multiformity of the mountains. Collapse of the lithosphere.

The preceding chapters contain a description of a number of the chief
ipountain chains of the earth, the largest table-lands, and the Mediterranean
seas. The’ treatment has differed according to the importance of the subject
and the existing state of our kiiowledge. Most of the outlines we have
sketched are conterminous; but in America, owing to the inadequacy
of existing descriptions, it was* not found possible to trace the Mexican
chains quite to their southern extremity, and consequently there was no
opportunity of referring to the transverse series of volcanos Mexico.
The Arctic lands, the north-west of Europe, the table-land of north China,
the whole of the eastern coast of Asia, and finally Australia with the Pacific
islands have not yet been discussed. These omissions will be remedied
in later chapters, and the regions forming the framew^ork as it were of the
two great oceans will be studied in a full and comprehensive manner.
Apart, however, from any intentional restriction of the subject, there is no
lack of involuntary defects, due to the fact that this method of description,
which aims at comparison, suffers from an almost entire absence of models ;
it therefore exhibits all the imperfections of a first attempt.

The treatise by Alexander von Humboldt, ‘ Geognostisclier Versuch liber
die Lagerung der Gebirgsarten in beiden ErdhSilften* (Geognostic Essay
on the Position and Arrangement of the RockS in Both Hemispheres),
appeared in 1823, and is now only of interest as a monument to the
intellectual greatness of its author. Even Ami Bout’s geological map of the
earth published in 1845 has become, owing to the rapid progress of research,
only of historic value; and J. Marcou's text to the second edition of this
map which appeared in 1875, though an invaluable summary, is devoted
like Boue's work rather to tracing the distribution of the various forma-
tions over the earth’s surface than to an investigation of the structure of
the mountains and ocean basins. . * •

The object of the present work is approached much more nearly by the
attempts, unfortunately still rare, to compare different mountain regions
together. As examples 1 may mention the comparison of the Alps and the

80 LLA 8 q q



594


THE CONTINENTS [part ii

Himalaya by Medlicott in 1868, and the comparison of the Pyrene^,
the Central Plateau, and the Vosges by Bleicher in 1870: an essay
which at once and in the most brilliant manifer showed the value of the
comparative method, since it fed the author to perceive that the Vosges
' must be regarded as a horst \ A general comparative orography, drawn
from the existing store of observations, has not yet been created, and he
who endeavours step by step to organize the elements of such a synthesis
must be content if he finds that the structure he has raised is open to
completion and correction, the means for which is provided year by year, nay,
almost day by day, by the zeal for this branch of study newly ai)^akened
in all parts of the world.

Notwithstanding much incompleteness, a certain number of general
results stand out so clearly from the preceding chapters that we will here
give a preliminary summary, chiefly with a view to facilitate in sonjp
degree the synthetic task reserved for later chapters. I have already
described the spiral arrangement of the several branches of the Alpine
system, and then, by tracing the virgation of the Thian-shan and the great
Roumanian curvature, have shown how to flistinguish and arrange the parts
of this spiral ; I will now briefly draw attention to some general features
on the face of the earth, leaving the exposition of their deeper significance
to a later page.

Even as we cannot form a judgement as to the existing condition of
a State unless we know how it has been brpught about, so we are just as
little able to arrive at a true view concerning that fragment of the earth’s
crust on which the State is situated' without a knowledge of the events
through which it has passed, and of the processes by which it has been
built up. In human affairs as in the physical world the present is only
a transverse section ; we cannot see'* the future which lies beyond, but we
may gain instruction from the past. Thus the history of the earth is of
fundamental importance in the description of the earth.

When we attempt to ftiake use of the knowledge gained in a study of
the past history of the ekrth in order to arrive at a generalized picture of
its surface, wc find ourselves at the very first step brought face to face with
a fact which shows how little this method has hitherto been employed.
Even to-day we speak of an Old World and a NeWy and the ‘ Old World ’ is the
only expression in general use to designate the mass of Asia, Africa, and
Europe. The incompatibility of this traditional expression with the results
of modem science has been recognized by American investigators, and in
works on zoogeography they have introduced in its place the name Eurema.

H. B. Medlicott, The Alps and the Himdlajas, a Geological Comparison, Quart.
Joum. Geol. Soc., 1868, XXIV, pp. 34-52; G. Bleicher, Essai de geologic comparde des
Pyrenees, du Plateau central et des Vosges, These pr^sent^ a la Faculte de Strasbourg,
8vo, Colmar, 1870.



595


CH. xii] OLD ANIJ NEW WORLD

As to the criteria by which^the age of a continent should be judged, it
is far from easy to decide, since* in most cases parts of different age
contribute to its formation; and, what ^ more, by ‘age* we sometimes
understand c- sharply defined date for the long-continued processes of
formation, sometimes the date of the last emergence of the continent fropi®
the ocean. •We shall probably approach most nearly to the general use of
the word, if we take it to mean the time when the great depressions of the
continent were finally abandoned by the sea.

Ndrth AmeHca was covered by the sea of the middle and upper
Cretaceous from the gulf of Mexico to the Mackenzie, and perhaps as far as
the Arctic Ocean, over all the region which lies between the mountahi ranges
of the east and west; some of these ranges even being themselves sub-
merged. The sea then disappeared ; an extremely large brackish and fresh-
¥water inland sea, lake Laramie, extended over the interior of the existing
continent from lat. 33° almost to lat. 60° N. Such was the condition of this
continent during the interval between the close of the Cretaceous and the
beginning of the Tertiary ; the deposition of extensive fresh- water beds then
commenced and continued throughout the whole of the Tertiary period;
since that time the ocean has never again advanced over the land, and
White has shown that the characteristic elements of the existing fauna of
the Mississippi, the Ganoids and the Unios, are directly descended from those
which have left their remains in the Laramie deposits ^ Looked at from this
standpoint North America must be regarded as having been in existence
since the time of lake Laramie ; it is consequently a fairly ancient continent.

The most recent traces of the sea in the interior of South America ’are
the brackish water deposits of Pebas on the Marafion, which Brown has
traced from the east of Peru down the river to San Paolo the most
easterly point at which they occur, though still more than 2,000 kilometers
from the Atlantic coast. The fall of the Amazon is, however, very gentle ;
and our knowledge is incomplete, since exploration has not made so much
progress in this country as in North America. * The .deposits of Pebas are
believed to be middle Tertiary. From the south-easi also the Tertiary
deposits advance far into the interior of the land.

If we attempt to make similar comparisons with regard to the united
mass of Asia, Africa, and Europe, it at once becomes evident that hetero-
geneous regions — the limits of which do, not coincide with the recognized

•

' C. A. White, A Review of the Non-Marine Fossil Mollusca of North America, U. S.
Geol. Surv., 1881-1882, in particular p. 73 et seq. ; by the same. Certain Phases in the
Geological History of the North American Continent : Presidential Address delivered at
the Fourth Anniversary Meeting of the Biol. Soc. of Washington, Jan. 25, 1884, Proc.
Biol. Soc., II, p. 24, and in other places.

• C. Barrington Brown, On the Tertiary Deposits on the Solomdes and Javaiy Rivers ;
Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1879, XXXV, pp. 76-88.

Qq a



696 THE CONTINGENTS ^ [part n

boundaries of these subdivisions— have here been welded together to form
one great continent. •

The first region comprises t^e southern and a great deal of the more
central part of Africa, then Madagascar and the Indian peninsula. The
•Ipfty table-lands of this region have never, so far as we know, been covered
by the sea since primitive times, or the end of the Carboniferous^eriod ; it is
only at the foot of the table-lands that marine sediments have been deposited,
which followed the encroachment of the Indian Ocean, as this was formed
by subsidence within the tabular mass. We call this mass Gondwfina-Land,
after the ancient Gondw&na flora which is common to all its parts; it
correspdhds to a large extent with the Lemuria of zoologists ; judged from
the standpoint we took before, this country is incomparably older than
North America.

Gondwfina-Land is followed on the north by other plateaux; theses
however, were submerged during the Cretaceous, and to some extent even
during a part of the Tertiary period ; they include the Sahara, with Egypt,
Syria, and Arabia.

This desert region, together with Gondwfina-Land, forms one great unit,
bound together in all its parts by common characters ; this is Indo-Africa,
distinguisted above all by the absence of folding since the conclusion of
the Palaeozoic aera.

That which remains of the collected mass of the three continents after
the abstraction of Indo- Africa may be called Eurasia,

The whole southern border of Eurasia advances in a series of great folds
towards Indo- Africa ; these folds lie side by side in closely syntactic arcs,
and for long distances they are overthrust to the south against the Indo-
African table-land.

There thus arises a very sharply marked line of separation. This runs
in the north-west of Africa from the Wady Draa to the east-north-east ;
passing somewhat to the north of the Shotts and the Syrtis Minor (gulf of
Gabes) it extends betyve^n Itfalta and Sicily towards the straits of Otranto,
then returns upon itself outside the Ionian islands, and next describes an
arc to the south of Crete and Cyprus into the region somewhat to the south
of the mouth of Orontes ; it continues thence along the same arc in the
direction of Djarbekr, then curves round to the south-east and follows the
foot of the mountains on the ^sast of the Tigris, is continued through
the Persian gulf and to the south of the coast of Makrfin to the mouths of
the Indus ; thence it runs to the north nearly following this river to above
Dera Ismail Khan, then in a sudden contortion curves through Ealab&gh
to«Jalalpur on the Jehlam, follows the foot of the Him&laya in a broad arc
into the valley of the Brahmaputra in Assam, then bends sharply round and
proceeds along the outer border of the chains of Arakan to. cape Negrais,
passes on the west outside the Andaman and Nicobar islands, and joins



0H.xn] ^ EURASIAN FOLDS 697

the zone of Tertiary land which appears as a chain of little islands to the
west of Sumatra ; finally it is continued still further to the south otVava.

The whole southern part of Eurasia, ^o far as we have hitherto con-
sidered it, is rii folded region. From the Himalaya to the mountains of
Mongolia the assembled folds, always pushed towards the south, extend*
over a breadth of 22° of latitude, and they run under manifold modifications
towards the west, appearing in the south as syntactic arcs, further to the
north as rod-like diverging branches. As they reach Europe, the part
which* extends furthest to the west, that is the branch which proceeds
from ^ke Paropamisus and is continued past Krasnovodsk and the Caucasus,
undergoes a complete reversal in the direction of the folding, and passing
through a mighty torsion in the Roumanian arc, is driven in the Carpathians,
and in the main body of the Alps towards the north. This circumstance
•distinctly indicates that the folding of the uppermost part of the earth’s
mass is, under certain conditions, only the expression of a forced adaptation.
To*the north of the great folded chains lies the Russian Platform, and
further on, beyond these, the numerous horsts and fragments of plateaux
appear which are characteristic of central and western Europe.

A great part of this folding is of recent age, or has been continued into
very recent times ; it is not certain that the movement has ended. The
first member of the Mediterranean deposits surrounds the whole principal
border of the Alps and is folded into the northern side; the saliferous
Schlier, which is somewhat younger still, embraces the Carpathian arc in
like manner. Very recent fresh- water deposits take part in the outer folded
ranges of the Hindu Kush and the Him&laya. It is extremely likely that
within the region of the existing folded ranges an uninterrupted sheet of
water at one time extended from the Han-hai, the ‘ dry sea ’ of the Chinese,
to the plain of Turkestan; and the very considerable heights at which
younger Tertiary deposits have been observed on the chains of the Thian-
shan by Russian geologists show, as Muschketoff justly remarks, that this
connexion was effected not only across the Dsuhgari^ passes, but also over
a good part of that region which is at present occupied by the great
ranges. The first extension of the Mediterranean appears to have been
restricted by the advance of the Swiss Alps towards the^north-west, which
destroyed the connexion between the seas occupying the lower valley of the
Rhone and the middle valley of the Danpbe ; a similar separation may also
have been caused by the movements* of the central parts of the Thian-shan.

As a consequence of these events Eurasia has acquired a remarkable
diversity of structure. In North America the homogeneous nature of the
region, and the continuity of the fresh- water faunas from that of the Laramie
to that of the existing Mississippi, have led to a clear and simple result as
regards the emergence of this continent from the sea and the unification of
its parts. In lake Tanganyika we meet with a highly remarkable molluscan



698 THE OONTENENTS [pakth

• «

fauna, distinguished by many features recalling marine forms; this, as
White and Tausch have shown, recalls m many of its species the fauna of
Laramie, and its great antiquity Jia beydnd all dohbt^ The African rivers
are distinguished by a great number of ancient forms of life;, we have
'already mentioned their fragmentary distribution and the occurjpence at the
present day of fishes from the Nile in lake Tiberias and of the Nile crocodile*
in Syria. Great fresh-water lakes have existed in several parts of Eurasia
during late Tertiary times, as, for instance, in the region of the Aegean sea,
in Slavonia, and Croatia. Their fauna resembles in many respects that of
the existing Mississippi, and Fuchs has shown from the collections of
Anderson and Heude ^ as Neumayr also from the mollusca brought home
by Szdchfey and Ldezi, that the same types have maintained their existence
in Nanking and Yunnan ^ down to the present day. In the middle of
Eurasia the withdrawal of the waters of the ocean has led to the forma-^
tion of a number of inland seas, the largest of which is the Caspian,
the direct descendant of the ancient continental sea. Here lie the
stunted and transformed remains of the ancient faunas, first of the im-
poverished Sarmatian, then of the lacustrine fauna; but since this
restriction of the waters occurred, the Aegean sea and the existing Pontus
have come tinto existence quite independently of the Caspian, as a conse-
quence of collapse ; thus it comes about that so many east European rivers
which are at present completely separated from one another contain so
large a number of corresponding species of animals.

This is the fundamental difference between the ancient Caspian and the
more recent Pontus.

The collapse of the Aegean and the Pontus is but one episode in the
series of events which have given to the Mediterranean its existing form.
We are now in a position to distinguish the following parts in the
Mediterranean region: —

The first is the western Mediterranean extending from Gibraltar to the
sea between Sicily and Msftta. This is surrounded by the Apennines, the
mountains of North Africa, and the Betic Cordillera ; it lies completely
within the great curve formed by these mountains, or enters its transverse
fractures, as in the straits of Gibraltar and between Dak’hela and Sicily.

The second part corresponds to the Adriatic sea. It lies on the
syntactic union of the Apennines and the Dinaric mountains, or rathei;

f

^ L. Tausch, Ueber einige Conchylien aus dem Tanganyikasee und’ deren fossile
Verwandte, Sitzungsbej. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1884, XC, and already indicated in White,
Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 1883, p. 98.

^ T. Fuchs, Ueber die lebenden Analoga der jungterti&ren Faludinenschichten und der
Melanopsis-Mergel S. 0. Europa’s ; Verhandl. geol. Reichsanst., 1879, pp. 297-300.

’ Neumayr, Ueber einige Susswasserconchylien aus China; Neues Jahrb. f. Min., 1883, 6,

pp. 21 - 26 .



699


ca. xn] ANALYSIS OP MEDITEERANEA'N

on the in-sunken western borcjpr of the Dinaric chains, and its marginal
fractuilte extend into the Alps as fir as Meran and Bruneck. It resembles
in many respects the valfey of the Brahiiiaputra in Assam. In that case
th^ Shillong piateau, a part of the table-land, is wedged in between the
foot of the Him&laya and the Burmese folds ; and it is an open questiqp*
whether this analogy might not afford a better interpretation of the
Apulian table-land.

The third part is bounded by the fragments of the Dinaro-Tauric arc,
in particular by Crete and Cyprus. It includes the Aegean sea and the
Pontus ; the marginal zone bordering the south coast of Asia Minor holds
a position similar to that of the gulf of Pegu. •

All these three parts fall within Eurasia ; only the fourth part is to be
assigned to Indo- Africa. This is a sunken foreland let down in horizontal
tabular masses ; it begins in the great Shotts, reaches the sea in the gulf of
Gabes, and extends to the meridional faults of Syria. Of all the numerous
islands of the Mediterranean only Malta and Gozzo are to be assigned to
Indo- Africa ; on the other hajid the mountain range of the north-west of
Africa belongs to Eurasia.

The American Mediterranean may be similarly resolved into several
parts. The Cordillera of the Antilles resembles in plan the^arc-shaped
border of the western Mediterranean with its downthrown inner side, and
the Caribbean sea occupies a position similar to that of the western
Mediterranean ; both also are beset with volcanos on their margin. The
gulf of Mexico, on the other hand, corresponds to the sunken tables of the
foreland, that is to the south-east part of the Mediterranean. The Bahamas
and Florida repeat on a larger scale the horizontal stratification of Malta ;
and volcanos are absent.

These differences also to no small degree find their expression in morpho-
logical characters, and we learn to distinguish sunken areas in folded
country from subsided table-land. The outlines of Cyprus or Haiti are
examples of the first case ; the outlines of broken table-lands are, if the
expression may be permitted, amorphous, or they take Ihe form of straight
lines as on the Syrian coast.

Furnished with these results obtained in the Mcditeryinean seas let us
now turn to an ocean, and first of all the Indian Ocean. Here only the
gulf of Pegu and the Sunda sea lie within the folds of Eurasia. We may
regard the gulf of Persia as a zone of sunken foreland; the Red sea
resembles a great trough-subsidence in the table-land; all the rest of the
vast surface from the Cape to the coast of Arakan is to be regarded —
judging from the structure of the coasts and islands and the Successions of
their strata — as subsided table-land. This is the in-sunken part of Indo-
Africa.

The preceding remarks furnish us with a basis for the consideration of



600


THE COlrfllSfENTS ^ [pAKt n

that fundamental difference which exists^ between the outlines of the
Pacific^and of the Atlantic Oceans. Several portions of these coasts have
already been discussed in the fo^pgoing sections : we have* pointed out the
remarkable similarity both in structure and stratified sequence which is
^presented by all the Coast Cordilleras, from Staten island and. cape Horn
onwards to the north, through Patagonia, Chili, Peru, and the tropical
region of South America, and again through lower and upper California,
i.e. through more than a quarter of the earth’s circumference. After having
descril)ed the manner in which the syntactic arcs of the great chains push
forward against the north of the Indian peninsula, we observed that
a similar advance of syntactic arcs takes place towards the north of the
Pacific Ocean, and that a special tectonic homology exists between that
fragment of ancient table-land and this part of the ocean. In the Atlantic
Ocean, on the other hand, we found ourselves, along the east coast of North*
America, on the inner side of a folded system, the Appalachians, moved
towards the interior of the continent. A comparison of the contour^ of
each ocean as a whole will be the task of a special chapter. —

We are now able to distinguish among tne continents which rise above
these oceans several units.

The first of these is Indo-AfHca, the greatest table-land of the earth,
limited on its northern lK)rder, from the point where the Wady Draa
discharges into the Atlantic Ocean to the mouth of the Brahmaputra, by
the folds of Eurasia advancing to the south, but elsewhere, as far as it is
known to us, surrounded solely by faults and divided in two by the Indian
Ocean.

The second unit is South America, a shield, as it were, girdled on three
sides by mountain ramparts; broken off without perceptible trend-lines
on the east and north-cast, and with open virgation of the branches of the,
mountains to the south-east between Cape Horn and Cabo Corrientes.

The Cordillera of the Antilles shows a closer affinity to South than to
North America. , ,

« ^ f

The third unit is North America ; so far as folding is known in this
continent it appears to be everywhere directed to the west, with a few
exceptions caused perhaps by local overthrusting on to the subsidence at
the outer border of the Rocky mountains ; this westerly movement began
in extremely ancient times, and manifests itself from the Atlantic coast to
the Pacific, from the Appalachians the Sierra Nevada and the Coast
chains. Towards the north, however, a very extensive ‘plate’ without
folding appears, which stretches nearly to the Arctic archipelago, and
which still remains to be discussed.

Least obvious as an organic whole, notwithstanding the extraordinary
magnitude of the folded area on its southern border, is the unit of Eurasia.
Here we are in presence of much greater complexity and diversity; the



601


OH. xn] MIEiTIFORMITY bF THE MOUOTAINS

# •

description of its various parts is not yet advanced far enough to enable
us to Ifring it into comparison with the other continents. For thb same
‘ reason I must provisionally pass over Au^^ralia in silence. —

The movei ients of the earth’s'crust have given rise to a great variety
of structural features. We see great horizontally stratified platforms*
. such as those of Russia, Brazil, and the Sahara; lofty ancient table-lands,
as on both sides of the Indian Ocean, bounded by abrupt scarps like the
Quathlamba in Natal and the Sahy&dri in India; and isolated table
mountains like that at the cape of Good Hope, and Boraima in the
south of Guiana. There are the horsts which stand out in relief owing
to the subsidence of the surrounding country, such, for instance, as
the Morvan, Vosges, Schwarzwald, Frankenwald, the granite mass of
Madagascar, and probably also a large part of the Rocky mountains with
Jihe Uinta; beside the horsts we see the sunken areas, such as that of
Franconia and Swabia, and the plateaux of Colorado. Troughs are let
do^n between parallel faults, such as the Rhine valley near Strassburg,
the Dead sea, and probably also Tanganyika and the entire Red sea. —
In ancient primitive formations, completely levelled down, the traces of
great folded ranges are in many places visible, the outward form of which
has been entirely lost, as, for instance, in the region of the greaii American
lakes as far as lake Winnipeg, and in the south part of the Russian plain.
Other primitive folded ranges, still preserving in a few fragments their
original form, are revealed by the destruction of the sediments which had
buried them — such are the Arvali mountains in India and the Lange
Berg on the eastern border of the Kalahari desert; so too the Mugodjars in
south Russia have been washed out of the Cretaceous marl of the Ust-Urt
which once covered them. We see great folded chains merge with gradually
flattening undulations into the similar foreland, where they form secondary
folds, or *parmas' — this is the case in the Urals and the Appalachians;
then again others which with numerous more or less parallel arc-shaped
folds, like the surface of troubled water, rise \ip within a second folded
region, moved in the same direction — such are tfle long and mighty folded
ranges of the Thian-shan. Others present overfolding and overthrusting
and are checked by an alien foreland: — such are the Himalaya and the Alps ;
and between the points of obstruction mountains appear, not unlike a parma,
as for example the Jura. There are chaii^p which have been pushed onwards
over their foreland, such as the Carpathians ; many others of which the fore-
land is covered by the sea, as the Andes, and still others which advance into
the sea, such as Vancouver and the Queen Charlotte archipelago. Some
fragments of folded ranges have been completely crumpled up and broken
along the strike by the lateral pressure of other folds, as in the step-like
Salt range, with its overthrust segment, the Sheich Budin; others have
been completely overwhelmed by transverse folds, like the Sudetes by the



602


THE COnIiNENTS

f

Carpathians, and some have been twisted in the strike itself, like the
Bonmanian arc which runs from tfie Balkans to the Carpathians.* In the
Himalaya the direction of the ;^lding .cdong the BraJhm&pUtra is directly
opposed to that of the Burmese chain^, which lie on the other side of
^he river, and the Harz has experienced two different successive movements
of folding. Folded ranges may be seen bearing volcanos on their crest,
the Albourz, Caucasus, and the South American Andes, ,for example ; in
some great arc-shaped folded ranges the backland has completely foundered,
leaving behind a range much reduced in breadth on the inner side, and
sometimes also interrupted, as in the Carpathians, the border ‘^of the
westenf Mediterranean, the Cordillera of the Antilles, and the chain
of Arakan with the Andaman and Xicobar islands. In this case
the volcanos stand on the inner side. This is the situation of the
Hungarian trachytes, the volcanic series of Italy, the volcanos of th^
south coast of Spain, of the Lesser Antilles, and of the volcanic series
which extends from the Pupp&doung on the Irawadi to Barren ishuid.
Other folded ranges are cut through by rectilinear fractures, hacked to
pieces, sunk down in strips, and surrounded by recent lavas, so that it
is not the course of the folds, but that of the faults and volcanic flows
which determines their outlines, as in the Basin ranges ; the fractures may
also cut across the folds at right angles, so that the outlines follow a direc-
tion transverse to that of the folding, as in the east of Thessaly and in
the island of Euboea, and under another form also in Guatemala and the
Honduras ; others again have sunk down along arc-shaped fractuite lying
in the strike, and are also in great part buried beneath ashes and lavas,
as is the case with the Iranian-Tauric syntaxis of upper Armenia; in
others only the volcanic cones which stand on strike faults are visible, as
in Java, and here we seek laboriously before we find even slight traces
of the mountain basement. Of other chains nothing but a fragment is still
to be seen, as in the Crimea. There are important mountain masses, such
as the Spanish peaks in ‘tront of the Rocky mountains, and the Henry
mountains on the wbstern‘ border of the Colorado plateaux, which are only
lenticular intrusions of volcanic rocks, and many similarly dieposed granitic
masses perhaps only represent the filling in of cavities which were pro-
duced by a splitting of the crust under tangential pressure. ^

Many classifications might be, proposed, but for the development of the
argument it is only necessary to distinguish four principal groups; these
are the table-lands, the horsts, the folds, and the volcanic mountains. This
distinction will be of importance when we attempt to discover the nature
of oceanic transgressions. —

The great volcanic cones, Chimborazo, mount Rainier, Aetna, the lava-
fields of the Deccan or those of Oregon and Washington^ which cover
many hundreds of square miles, tremendous eruptions, such as that of


[pABirn

C:



603


OH. xn] EESOLUnONsl^F THE STRESSES

Krakatoa^ causing oscillations of the whole atmospheric envelope of /the
planeV recorded hy the self-xiristeriag barometers all around th!& globe,
are only secondary maiilfestlat^s oi^ ij^ose great processes to which the
earth owes i*t^ form. They are indications of the temporary opening of
little joints, nothing more. ?

The deluges, in which mountains of water arise and pour in a devas-
tating flood over the land, are also merely secondary phenomena. The
Anunnaki, as the ancient Deluge story calls them, the powers of the *deep,
have 4iot retired to rest. A quivering of the earth’s mass on the Chilian
coast Causes the whole Paciflc Ocean to oscillate in its bed ; its waves break
on the Marquesas, Apia, Honolulu, sweep over the flat coral islands, and
overflow its shores from Japan to New Zealand and Australia.

The stresses which result from, the contraction of the outer part of the
^ body of the earth are transformed, as we have said, into tangential folding
and vertical subsidence. By the tangential movement those long folded
ranges are produced which tra . erse the continents from end to end ; by
this the greatest mountains of the earth, Gauris&nkar (Mount Everest), the
unnamed summit of the Mu^ufLgh, K 2 , and all the giants of the great inner
Asiatic ranges have been piled up ; by this Jurassic limestone and gneiss
have been kneaded together on the north side of the Finsten-A&i*born, and
the gneiss has been carried over the folded Jurassic on to the summit of the
Jungfrau. In very many cases this movement may have been preceded
by subsidence ^f the foreland, by which the tangential movement was as
it wei^ compensated^ so that the folding or overthrusting force became
free, as in the Belgian coal-flelds. The process is less clear when the
folding afTects a homogeneous foreland, and folds, or great parmas, are
formed in front, such, for instance, as the Timan mountains in front of
the Urals and the Cincinnati uplift in front of the Appalachians. But the
frequent checking of the folds by exterior obstacles, the complete over-
folding and reversal of the beds in the face of the obstructing masses, the
mutual crowding and crowding out which ma^be seen ii^ certain syntaxes
of mountains, the opposition in the direction* df the folding along the
Brahmaputra, and the torsion in the strike along the lower Danube clearly
indicate that in spite of the extremely great length of the folded ranges
they have been obliged in their local development, and especially on their
outer border,, to accommodate themselves to pre-existing conditions.

A great number of regions, sucfi as Indo-Africa, have experienced no
kind of folding movement for a long time ; the part they play is to check
the folds or to subside in front of them. Movement in the second direction,
i.e. subsidence or collapse, has on the contrary left its traces every w]^ere.
Sometimes it produces great troughs in the midst of the table-lands, some-
times subsidence of plateaux along peripheral lines, at others caldron-
shaped in-sinkings on the inner border of folded mountains, and at others



604 ^

• ■ ' •• ■ 4^- • ■ : v ' ■• " ' •.^v*''-::..'«fv.''

again the sabaidence of folded mou#iaiins along longitndinid or
ftactni^s. Hie diveraiy in chturw^ o&tl^ effects piodnoed d<HfiiWM^.; ;

movement is eisti^utfdjikry, and mn|,'m|p|^ extremely groat.' ,It is fo;^'
snbb/dence and coUa^ ’that the. Meditertanesn seas and the iatgj^t'nteaiis;^
owe their origin and ehlaxgement. . *

' The breaking up of the terrestrial globe, this it is we Mdth^ V%c
doubtless b^an a long time ago, and the brevity of human life enables
ns to contemplate it without dismay. It is not c^y in the great
moimtain ranges that the traces of this process are found. QrCat segments
of the earth’s crust have sunk hundreds, in some eases even thousafids; of
feet deep, and not the slightest inequality of the surface remains to .
indicate the fracture ; the different nature of the rocks and the discoveriro
made in mining alone reveal its presence. Time has levelled all. , In
Bohemia, in the Palatinate, in Belgium, in Pennsylvania, in many other ^
places as well, the plough quietly traces its furrows over the mighti^
fractures. •

If the tangential stresses in the outer crust of the earth completely
balanced each other, and if the crust. cojqld‘'iiustain itself like a free arch,
independent of all the processes which afiect the interior, then neither ;
collapse nor folding would take place; and the surface of the earth would: '
probably present the form of a fairly regular spheroid, eyeijwhei^ doyerod^^' ''
by a continuous ocean. It is the subsidences wUch^have ocdleCt^ tbgethj^:
the waters* in the deep oceans; ihus abne have the ccntinents ari^;ji^d . '
beings which breathe by means of lungs become possible!


•'THE END OF VOl. I

a A


Oxford : Horaob Hart^ M.A.| Printer to the University
